B3380 12266003 58074
CARENT NIHILO CARI DEO Hen: Do: Cary Baro de Leppington Comes Monmouthensis, et Honmi: Ord: Balnia Eques. portrait Guil: Faithorne fe:
I RAGGVAGLI DI PARNASSO: OR ADVERTISEMENTS FROM PARNASSUS; IN TWO CENTVRIES. WITH THE POLITICK TOVCH-STONE. WRITTEN ORIGINALLY IN ITALIAN By that Famous ROMAN, TRAFANO BOCALINI; And now Put into ENGLISH By the Right Honourable, HENRY EARL of MONMOUTH. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St Pauls Church-Yard, and Thomas Heath in Russel-Street, near the Piazza of Covent-Garden, 1656.
THE TRANSLATORS EPISTLE TO HIS COUNTREYMEN THE READERS. THe Spaniard Mendosa may seem to have reason on his side, when he saies, El Ambition de la Emprenta es una Colpa que no basta arrepentirse: Ambition to be in Print, is a fault past repentance. Which he goes about to make good, by asserting, that, Una dia es siempre Maestro del otro; y contra lo que si scribe oy, estarà Manana quien sabe mas: One day is Master of another, and whatsoever is writ∣ten to day, there will be somebody who will know more to morrow. And this he likewise seeks to prove, saying, Y quien no supo menos Ayer? And who knew not less yesterday? But all this is but a seeming truth, and nullum simile est idem. For, as for his first Position; If Knowledge be the thing of this World which is most to be aspired unto, (as certainly it is) to impart this Knowledge unto others, is so far from being a fault, as it is rather a great piece of charity, which is truely said to cover a great many faults. Does not our Saviour say, No man lights a Candle to set it under a Bushel? And if monopolizing any earthly commodity, be an adjudged grievance; to monopolize Learning, is questionless the worst of monopolies. In the next place, what he brings for proof of this his position, may
receive this answer: That if nothing should be written to day, there would but few know more to morrow. And so likewise for answer to his question of our yesterdaies knowledge, it would be as much as that of this day, had nothing been either said or done yesterday. But alas! I am not so happy as to be concern'd herein; who not having any thing of mine own worthy of my Countrey∣men, doe but present them with that in English, which was written many years ago in Italian; and part where∣of (though not above the fourth part, and some of that but in part also) hath been formerly Printed in our Lan∣guage by some others, who may peradventure have for∣born publishing the rest of the Ragualia's, or Advertise∣ments, which you have fully and faithfully here laid down before you; as not thinking them all so highly sea∣soned, nor so full of salt, as those which they have pickt out, and which belike made more for their then present purpose. But as for my part, I must confess, that after ha∣ving at the desire of some friends, fallen upon this Trans∣lation, I found so much Gusto in it, and not any thing that without injury to my Author, I thought I could leave out; as I shal believe them to be of a queasie and deprav'd sto∣mack, who shall not find enough therein to please their palats: For my Author is an Ambodexter, plaies rarely well at the Back-Sword, gives sometimes very home and sharp Stockadoes; and in fine, laies about him hard on all sides, without any fear (Marry I cannot say as usually it follows) or Wit: For believe me, you will find no lack of that in him, but sufficient to please all Parties, howsoe∣ver they stand affected. And having said this, I leave him to your further perusal, hoping that the more you read him, the better you will like him, as did, and doth, Your Compatriot, MONMOUTH.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST CENTURY OF ADVERTISEMENTS. ADVERT. 1. THe Society of Polititians open a Ware-house in Pernassus, wherein are sold divers sorts of Merchandize, very use∣full for the vertuous living of those that are Learned. 1 Advert. 2. The usual Guard of Pernassus having ta∣ken a Poetaster, who had been banished Pernassus, upon pain of death, found a paire of Cards in his Pocket; which when A∣pollo saw, he gave order that he should read the Game of Trump in the publick Schools. 4 Advert. 3. Apollo having notice how Henry the fourth, that Potent King of France, was most wickedly assassinated, ordered for the in∣dempnity of his beloved French, that powerful succour should be sent from Arcadia into France. 5
Advert. 4. Whilst Michel Angelo Buonaroti was copying forth the il∣favoured fore-front of Anneus Seneca's House, he was asked by Pieri∣us Valeriano, wherefore he did so? And Buonaroti gives him the reason. 7 Advert. 5. The contention which arose between many Learned men, touching which is the best Political Law, which the most praise-worthy Order in the flourishing Commonwealth of Venice, is decided, and ful∣ly ended by the very Venetian Liberty, which with the joynt agreement of all the Learned men, was chosen Umpire. 8 Advert. 6. A learned Laconick is severely punished by the Laconick Senat, for not having used requisite brevity in his discourse. 14 Advert. 7. The Censors of Learning do severely punish one of their As∣sociates, who in his more mature years, seemed to be pleased with Itali∣an Poetry. 15 Advert. 8. Apuleius his Golden Ass, and Plautus his Asinaria, com∣plain to Apollo of their Masters great severity, and receive no very pleasing answer. ib. Advert. 9. A Summary of what the Learned in Sciences have sowed and reaped. 16 Advert. 10. Menante comes into the Politicians Ware-House, and by the Merchandizes which the Learned buy there, he studies how to know the quality of their Wits. 17 Advert 11. The excellent vertue of loyalty and faithfulness being secretly departed from Pernassus, Apollo, when he knew where she had hid her self, sent the Muses, Melpomene & Thalia, to perswade her to return. 21 Advert. 12. In the General Diet of the Learned, appointed by Apollo to be held in Helicon, his Majesty, contrary to all mens expectations, de∣crees Eternity to the name of Vicenzo Pinti, called in the Court of Rome, the Knight of the Lute. 22 Advert. 13. John Francisco Peranda with much ado gets leave of A∣pollo to be admitted into Pernassus, and despiseth Jerolomo Fracasto∣ro's proffer, who would have restored him to his eyesight, which he had lost. 23 Advert. 14. The Italian Academies send Commissioners into Pernassus to obtain some remedy from Apollo for their corruptions; and find the business impossible to be effected. 25 Advert. 15. Anneus Seneca being accused before Apollo of two fowle Vices which were commonly found in all the Sects of Moral Philoso∣phers, doth excellently well defend his own Cause, and the like of his Associates. 26 Advert. 16. Ambassadors are sent from the College of Gardners, to A∣pollo, to obtain some Instrument from him, whereby they might with∣out any cost or charge, cleanse their Gardens of all improfit able hearbs, and are laught at by his Majesty. 27 Advert. 17. A doubt arising upon the truth of an usual saying, That a man must eat a peck of salt with another, before he can perfectly know him. Apollo makes the point be argued in a general Assembly of Learned men, which he causeth to be called for that purpose. 28 Advert. 18. The Hircanians send Ambassadors to Apollo, to be resolved by his Majesty in the Important Article, Whether it be lawful for the people to kill a Tyrant? 29
Advert. 19. Nero the Emperor, for a very singular commendation given him by Cornelius Tacitus, rewards him with a gift of 25 Mules laden with Crowns of Gold. 30 Advert. 20. The Vertuosi visit the chief Church in Pernassus, and begg of God an important favour. 31 Advert. 21. Apollo, to encourage Senators of Free Countries, to cul∣tivate Liberty, without affecting Tyranny, causeth an exceeding wofull spectacle to be shewn in Melpomene's Amphitheatre. 32 Advert. 22. The Inthroned cademians, having admitted the chief she-Poets, or Poetesses into Pernassus, Apollo commands that they be taken from thence. 34 Advert. 23. Justus Lipsius being solemnly admitted into Pernassus, the next day after his entrance, did, contrary to all mens expectation, accuse Tacitus for being impious, and reaps but little credit thereby. ib. Advert 24. A mournful day in Pernassus, in commemoration of the un∣happy Introduction of the Grace-Cup. 40 Advert. 25. The principal Monarchies abiding in Pernassus, ask the Il∣lustrious Venetian Liberty, by what means she obtains the benefit of so exquisite secrecy, and such exact obedience from her Nobility? And received from her their desired satisfaction. 41 Advert. 26 Francis the first, that Potent King of France, meeting the Lady Philosophy naked, profered her his Royal Mantle; which would not be accepted. 43 Advert. 27. Apollo complains bitterly of the muses, for that they in∣spire many mean wits with Poetical fury; and they defend themselves excellently well. 44 Advert. 28. Torquato Tasso presents Apollo with his Poem of Giuru∣salemme Liberata, or Godfrey of Bullen; For which Lodovico Ca∣stelvetro and Aristotle, are severely reprehended by his Majesty. 45 Advert. 29. Cornelius Tacitus is chosen Prince of Lesbos; whither be∣ing come his success proves not good. 47 Advert. 30. Apollo being aware of the great disorder occasioned amongst men by the flight of Fidelity; By assistance of the Muses, and of the sub∣limest heroick vertues, procures her return to Fernassus. 51 Advert. 31. In the time of Carneval, the Vertuosi in Pernassus run Races, an make other demonstrations of mirth and jollity. 52 Advert. 32. The Militia of Ianisaries, seeing one of their souldiers ill rewarded, mutiny in the Ottoman Monarchy, and are by Apollo qui∣eted. 56 Advert. 33. Apollo fees Carlo Sigonio, and Dionigi Atanigi, the first being accused of Ingratitude by Pietro Vittorio, and the other by Ha∣nibal Caro. 58 Advert. 34. Publius Terentius being by Order from Giasone del Mai∣no, an Urban Pretor, charged with Fornication, is by Apollo freed, with much derision to the Pretor. 60 Advert. 35. Publick Audience is given by Apollo, wherein by wise an∣swers, he decide▪ many affairs of his Vertuosi. 61 Advert. 36. Harpocrates being found by Apollo to be ignorant, is dri∣ven out of Pernassus. 73 Advert. 37. A Learned Roman desires a Receipt from Apollo, to make him forget certain great injuries which he had received at a great
Prince his Court. His Majesty gives him some of the water of Lethe to drink; but with bad succes. 74 Advert. 38. The Duke of Laconia is accused before Apollo to have Ido∣latrized a Favorite of his, for having advanced a faithful Secretary to the highest State-preferments; and he defends his cause excellenly well. 75 Advert. 39. The people of the Island of Mitilene, their Prince being dead without issue, argue whether it will be better for them to chuse a new Prince, or to set up Liberty in their Countrey. 78 Advert. 40. James Creyton, a Scotchman, having incenst the Vertuosi in Pernassus, by a proud defiance, was so shamed by them through a bitter jest, as without ending the dispute, they forced him to forgo Per∣nassus. 82 Advert. 41. After strict examination of such as were to be chosen, the List of Governors is filled up in Pernassus. 83 Advert. 42. Argus makes proffer of himself to the Duke of Venice, to guard the Virginity of their Illustrious Commonwealth; and his offer is not accpted. 88 Advert. 43. The Florentines in their Pastime called the Calcio, admit of a spruce orreign Courtier, who wins the Prize. ib. Advert. 44. Batista Platina being bastinadoed by Agustino Niso, com∣plains to Apollo (little to his reputation) of the injury received 90 Advert. 45. Apollo knowing what mischief over-much riches causes to Poets, exhorts the magnanimous King of France, Francis the first, to moderate his profuse liberality which he used towards them. 91 Advert. 46. Apollo having found out the first Inventor of Guns, as he is about to punish him severey for his fault therein committed; the Artifi∣cer defends himself very well. 92 Advert. 47. The Roman Monarchy desire to be resolved by Cornelius Tacitus in a Politick Doubt; and receive full satisfaction therein by Melibeus, the Mantuan Shepherd, who was casually there. 94 Advert. 48. The Vertuosi of Pernassus, in the Assembly of Focide, de∣cide the mystery of an Host; and find the keeping of an Inn to be a No∣ble Heroick Vertue. 97 Advert. 49. A Literato severely punished for saying that Duels were somet necessary. 98 Advert. 50. The ukes, Marquisses, and other Titulati of Pernassus, complain grievously to Apollo, that their honorable Title of Excellen∣cy, should be given to Doctors of Law and Physick. ib. Advert. 51,  Marquiss who caused his Genealogy to be made by Scipio Ammerati, found himself so ill dealt with by him, as he re-demands the reward he gave hm. 101 Advert. 52. A dispute arising amongst the Vertuosi, touching the truth of certain sayings and speeches of wisemen, their true meanings were argued and resolved in the General Dyet celebrated in Helicon. 102 Advert. 53. Apollo at last grants admittance into Pernassus to Francis∣co Sforza, Duke of Millan, which he had long denied to do, upon a hard condition, which h accepted of. 105 Advert 54 A dangerous contention which arose amongst the Pedagogs in Pernassus, upon a very slight occasion, is appeased by Apollo. 107 Advert. 55. For remedy of many disorders which are found in History, a
General Assembly of Historians being summoned, Apollo publisheth a severe Edict against them, and many Historians are reprehended for their errors. 107 Advert. 56. Apollo, to secure the Rivers of his State from Piracy, makes Bernardo Capello General of the Ionick Sea, an gives him ex∣cellent directons. 112 Advert. 57. The Prince of Epire's first son being born▪ he is thereat so afflicted, as he forbids that any shews of joy be made for it in his State. 113 Advert. 58. Apollo erects a new Tribunal in Pernassus, for the punish∣ment of flatterers; but succeeds very unfortunately therein. 114 Advert. 59. Apollo being very far in love with Torquato Tasso's good conditions, creates him Prince-Poet, and Lord High-Constable of Ita∣lian Poetry. 116 Advert. 60. A Literato desires of Apollo, the Art of Memory, for which he is laught at by his Majesty. 118 Advert. 61 Juvenl refuseth a challenge given him by Francisco Berni, to contend with him in Satyrical Poetry. 119 Advert. 62. Domitio Corbulone being severely prosecuted by the Qua∣rantia Criminale (a Venetian Magistracy, consisting of forty men) for some words spoken by him in his Government of Pindo, which were formerly declared by Apollo's publick Edict, to be Tyrannical; is at last acuitted with much praise. 121 Advert. 63. The Chaire of private Tranquillity being void by Diogenes the Cynicks promotion to a higher degree, Apollo offers it to the fa∣mous hilosopher Crates; who refuseth it. 122 Advert. 64. Many people having wasted themselves in keeping great Tables, and going gloriously attired▪ desire their Princes to make a Pragmatical Law for the moderation of such expences; but obtain not their suit. 123 Advert. 64. Johannes Bodinus presents Apollo with his six Books of his Commonwealth; wherein it being found that he approves of Liberty of Conscience, he is sentenced to be burn'd. 124 Advert. 65. Apollo punisheth a Poet severely, for having been so de∣sperate as to blaspheme. 129 Advert. 66. The Vertuosi of Pernassus visit the Temple of Divine Pro∣vidence, whom they thank for the great charity which she hath shewn to mankind 130 Advert. 67. The most excellent Paolo Peruta, by order from Apollo, de∣clares in the publick Politick Schools, what the genuine signification is, of that Precept in Policy, That to Reigne securely, the people must be kept under. ib. Advert. 68. A Noble born Laconick Senator, having committed a great fault, the Duke of Laconia thinks it wisdom to pass by it. 132 Advert. 69. Andrea Alciati finding himself injuriously persecuted▪ in his place of Magistracy, flies for help to Apollo, but finds none. 133 Advert. 70. he Lady Victoria Colonna begs of Apollo in name of all the Feminine Sex, that such married men as are Adulterers, may suf∣fer the like infamy as unchast wives do. 135 Advert. 71. Cesar having taxed Marcus Brutus of ingratitude, in a full Assembly of great Personages, they challenge one another. 136
Advert. 72. Certain subjects desire their Princes that the infinite mul∣titude of Laws which they live under, may be reduced to a lesser num∣ber; and that the Governors of Provinces may be forbidden to pub∣lish every day new Proclamations. 139 Advert. 73. The Vertuosi of Italy beg of Apollo▪ that Philosophy may be treated on in the Italian Tongue, and are denied their request. 141 Advert. 74. Apollo shews unto his Literati the true meaning of the La∣tine Sentence, Homo longus, raro sapiens, A tall man is seldom wise. Advert. 75. The Ruota di Parnasso having decided a Point in difference between the Military men, and the Literation the Military mens be∣half, are aware of their error, and withdraw their Sentence. 143 Advert. 76. Aristotle being besieged in his Countrey-House by many Princes, is by them forced to revoke his Definition of a Tyrant. 144 Advert. 77. By Order from Apollo, a general Reformation of the world is published by the seven Wise men of Greece, and by the other Literati. 146 Advert. 78. Apollo hearing of the happy alliance of the two illustrious daughters of Charls Emanuel with the two Noble Princes of Mantua and Modena, commands that extraordinary demonstrations of joy be made throghout his whole Dominions. 162 Advert 79. The antient Commonwealth of Rome, and the Modern Ve∣neian Liberty, argue together, wat the true rewards of honour be, by which well ordered Commonwealths do acknowledge the worth of their well-deserving Senators. 164 Advert. 80. The people of Lesbos, after Cornelius Tacitus ran away from them, chuse Anna Momorancy, by Apollos appointment, for their Prince. 167 Advert 81. The excellent Blognian Physitian, Jovanni Zecca, sels in Pernassus the true Antidote again the French Pox. 168 Advert. 82. The Literati of Parnassus do with great solemnity, celebrate the Holy day dedicated to the laudable Lawrel-Leaves. 169 Advert. 83. Apollo having highly commended the King of Spains De∣cree, That no Advocates nor Proctor should go into the Indies: The Doctors of Law quarrel grievously with his Majesty for it. 171 Advert. 84. The chiefest Literati of Pernassus desire Apollo that Taci∣tus may re-compose those Books of his Annals and Histories which are lost. 172 Advert. 85. Apollo being advertised that ignorant men took up arms a∣gainst Learning, puts himself in posture to defend his Veruosi. 173 Advert. 86. Justus Lipsius, to make amends for his fault in having ac∣cused Tacitus, is so intent thereupon, as he is accused before Apollo to have idolatrized him; for which, after a seigned punishment, he is at last praised and admired by his Majesty. 175 Advert. 87. The Queen of Italy being much intreated by her chiefest Princes, and by Apollo's self to pardon the injuries done by those Itali∣an Commanders who took up arms against her, in assistance of Forreign Nations▪ denies to do it. 171 Advert. 88. The whole generation of sheep, send their publike Ambassa∣dors to Apollo, by whom they make their desires known, that they may be ad to have sharp teeth, and long horns, and their desire is laugh∣ed at by his Majesty. 173
Advert. 89. Nicholas Machiavel being banished Pernassus upon pain of death, was found hidden in a friends Library, for which his former sen∣tence of being burn'd was executed. 175 Advert. 90. Apollo visits the Prisons, and in his visitation dispatches the causes of many Literati accused of sundry faults, and imprisoned for debt. 177 Advert. 91. A great Prince in discharge of a Vow that he had made, carries a rich Vessel to the Temple; which the Priest receiving with shew of great sadness; the Prince desires the reason thereof; and re∣ceives satisfaction. 188 Advert. 92. Apollo forbids the Shepherds of Arcadia to fatten hogs a∣ny more; and being earnestly intreated to revoke that his Decree, de∣nies it. 189 Advert 93. It being observed that Pero Trasea, in company of his son in Law Elvidius Priseo, frequented the houses of the chief∣est Poetesses of Pernassus; he is severely reprehended for it by Apollo ib. Advert. 94. A chief Senator of Poland, whilst he corrects another Se∣nator, who is a friend of his, is made aware that he himself is he who goes astray, and needs amendment. 191 Advert. 95. A controversie arising between the Governors of Pindo, and of Libetro, in point of Iurisdiction: Apollo punisheth them both. 192 Advert. 96. Apollo sentenceth Hanibal Caro to pay his forfeited securi∣ty, for the wounds which he gave Castelvetro. 193 Advert. 97. Dante Aligieri being assaulted by night in his Countrey∣house, and ill used by some disguised Vertuosi, is relieved by the great French Ronsard. 194 Advert. 98. All the Princes of the world beseech Apollo that he will in∣sert into their people the love of their Countrey. 195 Advert. 99. Apollo makes a general hunting of Pismires and Tortoi∣ses, as being both of them beasts of evil example to mankind. 196 Advert. 100. Apollo refuseth to receive a Censure presented him by a Literato, which was made upon the Poem of an Italian Vertuosi.
A TABLE Of the CONTENTS of the Second CENTURY of ADVERTISEMENTS. ADVERT. 1. THe Province of Phosides, doth by her Ambassadors complain to Apollo, that his Majesties Officers do not any whit observe their priviledges; and are not only not listened to in what they do say; but receive a harsh answer. 199 Advert. 2. Apollo makes use of the unfortunate Count St Paul, to frighten the Nobility in Kingdoms from re∣belling against their natural Lords, at the pressure of forreign Princes. 200 Advert 3. Great Euclid, for having distasted some powerfull men, is cruelly beaten by their Bravoes. 201 Advert. 4. In a Duel which hapned between an Italian Poet, and a Ver∣tuosi of Spain, the Spaniard being wounded to death, did so gallant an action before he expired, as Apollo gave order that he should be so∣lemnly buried at the publick charge. ibid. Advert. 5. Apollo having used great diligence to come by any of the I∣dols of Princes, proceeds with severity against one, who fell in the Iudges power. 203 Advert. 6. All the Monarchies of the world, affrighted at the over-great power and successful proceedings of the German Commonwealths, con∣sult in a general Diet, how to keep themselves from being in time op∣pressed by them 205 Advert. 7 The people of Phosides, treating how they might rise in Re∣bellion, by reason of the Relation which their Ambassadors made unto them, who were formerly sent to Apollo, to pray hat their priviledg∣es might be observed: the remedy fittest to be applyed to such a dis∣order, is discussed in his Majesties Council. 219 Adver. 8. A great controversie arising in point of precedency, between the Prince of Bisagnano, and Dr. Juliano Corbelli of St Marino.
Apollo refers the consideration thereof to the Congregation of Ceremo∣nies, by which it is decided. 220 Advert. 9. Apollo publisheth a very severe Edict against some Li∣terati, who under a cloke of feigned picty, cover downright avarice. 221 Advert. 10. The City Pretor, or chief Iustice of Pernassus, complains bitterly before Apollo of the Triumviri; a Magistracy newly insti∣tuted by his Majesty, that in an Edict of theirs published against Mini∣us, and other Ministers of Princes obscenities, they have violated his Iurisdiction. 222 Advert. 11. The Inhabitants of Phocides fall into open rebellion, by reason that the Priviledges of their Country re not observed by Apol∣lo's Officers; they are pacified by a Senator, and send new Ambassa∣dors to his Majesty. 223 Advert. 12. Whilst some Poets paralleld the greatness of Rome with that of Naples, a dangerous dispute arose between them; Apollo, to the end that his Vertuosi might know what to say and believe in a busi∣ness of such importance, commits the cause to the Rota of Pernassus, who decide it. 226 Advert. 13. Theodoricus, that famous King of Italy, having oft∣times prest very much to be admitted into Pernassus, is a waies denied by Apollo, for a very important reason. 227 Advert. 14. Apollo, according to his usual custom of the first day of e∣very month, hears the Petitions of such as desire to be admitted into Pernassus. 228 Advert. 15. At a publick meeting, Force (contrary to the custom of the Plebeian Court) pretending to take place of Reputation; that beautiful Lady, with excellent resolution, finds a remedy for her reputation, which was in great hazard. 246 Advert. 16. Giovan Francisco Pico, Count of Mirandola, that he might the more quietly attend his studies, entreats Monsignor Dino da Mu∣gello, Auditor of the Exchequer in Pernassus, that the Reformers, by reason of the too great noise which they alwaies make in their pro∣fession, may be removed further from his neighbourhood; and is not heard in his desire. 247 Advert. 17. Tacitus being excluded from out of the most famous Com∣monwealths of Europe, makes a grievous complaint to Apollo; and is by them with much honour received again, and much made of. 249 Advert 18. The blindman of Forli, that famous Italian Mountebank, being, to the wonder of all the Senat of Vertuosi, admitted by Apollo into Pernassus, is by his Majesty put upon an imployment of impor∣tance. 250 Advert. 19. Luigi Alemanni having in an elegant Oration set forth the praises of the French Nation, repented that his action afterward, and desired leave of Apollo, to make his Recantation; but was not permitted so to do. 252 Advert. 20. Corbulone having with much honour ended his prefixt time of Government in Pindo, a Patent to continue the same Iurisdiction for one year longer, is graciously sent him by Apollo; which he refuseth to accept of. 253
Advert. 21 Sebastian Veneri, Duke of Venice, after his admittance into Pernassus, desires Apollo that he may have the precedency given him before Hereditary Kings and Monarchs; and obtains a favoura∣ble Decree from his Majesty 254 Advert. 22. Apollo being greatly moved to compassion, by seeing a poor souldier, who had lost both his hands in the Wars, go a begging, doth sharply reprehend Princes for their ingratitude to Military men. 256 Advert. 23. Apollo greatly compassionating the lamentable shipwrack which his Vertuosi make in great Princes Courts, to secure their Navi∣gation, commands some of the chief Literati of his State, to make a Card whereby men may sail by land. 257 Advert. 24. Ariadeno Barbarossa being driven by a sudden storm, splits upon the Scogli Cursolari, and Maturino Romagasso, Captain of the Guard of the Gulf of Lepanto, endeavours his escape, when he might have taken him prisoner. 262 Advert. 25. Epictetus, a Stoick Philosopher, who finding his Sect to grow much deformed, asks leave of Apollo to ground a new Sect of Reformed Stoicks; and is rather reprehended by his Majesty, then commended. 263 Advert. 26. The Nobility of the Commonwealth of Achaia, not being able any longer to indure the insolency of the Commons, who Governed the State, send Ambassadors to Apollo, to obtain a Prince, who may Govern them; and receive a gracious answer. 265 Advert. 27. Apollo having for a just cause removed Gulielmo Budeo from the Lord Treasures place, confers the aforesaid place upon Diego Covarruvia, a Noble Spanish Literato, and Dean of the Col∣lege of the Grand Sages of this Court, though he was much gainsaid therein by the French Monarchy. 266 Advert. 28. Monsieur Jovanni de la Casa having presented Apollo with his most useful Galateo, meets with great difficulties in many Na∣tions, in having it observed. 269 Advert. 29. Apollo finding that wicked men, by making use of the sword of Iustice to injure honest men, do make his Tribunals become very hatefull, to remedy so great a disorder, institutes a Committee of the greatest subjects of this State; but hath but bad success therein. 272 Advert. 30. Marcus Brutus desires Lucius Brutus, to shew him the per∣fections of the Conspiracy which he so happily brought to pass against the Tarquins; and the Imperfections of that Conspiracy which he so miserably executed upon Cesar. And receives desired satisfaction from him. 273 Advert. 31. Marcus Cato having, to the infinite dislike of Princes, writ the word Libera underneath the Motto, Pugna pro Patria, which was set upon his Gate, is commanded by Apollo to put it out. 275 Advert. 32. Socrates being found dead in the morning on his bed, Apol∣lo useth all possible diligence to learn the true reason of so sudden a death. 276 Advert. 33. The Hereditary Princes in Parnassus, do very much press Apollo, that the Emperor Tiberius may be removed from their Classis, and placed in that of Tyrants; and he defends his cause victoriously
before his Majesty. 277 Advert. 34. Hippocrates having advised Apollo how to prevent the fre∣quent deaths of sick folks, occasioned through the ignorance of Physici∣ans, and proving unfortunate in that his advice, is in great danger of being severely punished by his Majesty. 282 Advert. 35. Francisco Mauro, a Noble Italian Poet, having married the most vertuous Lady, Laura Terecino, is soon after jealous of her, and kils her. 284 Advert. 36. Thais, that famous Curtizan of the Comick Poets, is at last, though after much debate, admitted into Pernassus; who, much to Apollo's satisfaction, tels what good she hopes to bring to his Court. 286 Advert. 37. The Ambassadors of the Province of Marca being sent to this Court, in a publick Audience, complain unto his Majesty of an unfortunate affair which hath befalne his Inhabitants of that Pro∣vince; for which Apollo provides sufficient remedy, with singular demonstration of true love and affection. 289 Advert. 38. Gonzalvo Ferrante Cordova, desires Apollo that the Title of Magno, or Great, may be confirmed unto him; and instead of being granted his request, receves a very u satisfactory answer. 290 Advert. 39. Many of the French Nobility intreat their Monarchy, that according as the Nobility of Commonwealths doe, it may be law∣full for them to use Merchandizing; and are by her shamefully denied. 293 Advert. 40. The Honourable Title of Messere being faln into a misera∣ble condition, is shamefully driven out of the Kingdom of Naples; and not being received into Rome (as it is thought it should be) for its last refuge hath its recourse to Apollo, who assignes it a very satisfa∣ctory abode. 295 Advert. 41. The Censors of Pernassus, having by order from Apollo, published a rigorous Edict against Hypocrites, are forced to moderate it by reason of a weighty particular discovered unto them by Plato. 296 Advert. 42. The Immense bulk of the Ottoman Empire, which was thought by the wise men to be everlasting, doth now of it self so de∣stroy it self, as it threatens present ruine. 297 Advert. 43. The Prince of Helicon desires by an Ambassador of his, from Apollo, the priviledg of ordaining birthright amongst the Nobles of his State; which his Majesty denies to grant. 298 Advert. 44. The Duke of Alva being accused of cruelty, for having with exquisite deligence caused two of the prime subjects of his new Principality of Achaia, to be imprisoned, slain, and afterwards secret∣ly buried in their very prisons, defends himself stoutly before Apollo. 301 Advert. 45. A chief subject of the Province of Macedonia, being hired by the Prince of Epire at a great salary, when he came to know the right cause why that Pension was given him, doth magnanimously refuse it. 303 Advert. 46. The tenth of June is observed as a sad and mournful day in Pernassus, in memory of the unfortunate loss of the Decads of Ti∣tus Livy. 304 Advert. 47. Apollo having appointed Hospitals to every Nation, for
their fools, puts down that of Florence, by reason of the few fools that are found amongst the Florentines, and adds the revenue thereof to the Lombards Hospital, which by reason of the greater number of fools that flock thither, was run far in Arrears. 305 Advert. 48. Apollo's Sea-Captains, having in one of their Assemblies made many useful Decrees for their Militia, his Majesty orders that they be made known to Courtiers, and commands the punctual observan∣cy of them. 306 Advert. 49. Natalis Comes, an Historian, is severely punished by A∣pollo, for having said somewhat in an Assembly of the Literati, which did hainously offend his Majesty. 307 Advert. 50. The chief Monarchies of Europe and Asia, which now re∣side in Pernassus, fall sick at one and the same instant, and not being to be cured by Esculapius, Hippocrates, or any other able Physici∣an, they are restored to their health by a skilful Farrier. ib. Advert. 51. The Achaians being much incensed against the Duke of Al∣va, for his cruel proceeding against their two Chieftains, take up arms, and drive him out of their State. 309 Advert. 52. An Italian Gentleman, for having lost much bloud in the service of a great Prince, is honoured by him with a Noble Order of Knighthood, who being but slightly esteemed of by those of his own Countrey, asks Apollo by what reasons he may satisfie those his deri∣ders, that he was the more richly rewarded, in that he was paid in ho∣nour, and not in Gold or Silver. 311 Advert. 53. Apollo finding that his having allowed the use of the 80 part of one grain of hypocrisie to his Vertuosi, had wrought very bad ef∣fects, does not only recall that his favour by publick Edict, but thun∣ders out exceeding severe punishments against hypocrites. 312 Advert. 54. Guiccardine having spoken many things prejudicial to the reputation of the Marquiss of Piscara, in an Assembly of divers Ver∣tuosi, that renowned Commander doth sufficiently justifie himself before Apollo. 314 Advert. 55. The Duke of Alva being accused of cruelty, for having with exquisite diligence caused two of the prime subjects of his new Princi∣pality of Achaia, to be imprisoned, slain, and afterwards secretly buried in their very prisons, defends himself stoutly before Apollo. 301 Advert. 55. Giovan Francisco Pico, not being able to reconcile the dif∣ferences between Plato and Aristotle, Apollo commands those two great Philosophers to end the business in a publick Disputation; and being therein obey'd, they do not notwithstanding part friends. 319 Advert. 56. Gonsalvo Ferrante Cordua, not having obtained the con∣firmation of his desired Title of Magnus, from the reverend College of Historians, demands another place in Pernassus of Apollo, from whence he is likewise excluded. 321 Advert. 57. A Barque loaded with inventors of new grievances run∣ning shipwrack upon the shore of Lepanto, his Majesty treats them well, though he do greatly abominate such like men. 323 Advert. 58. By Letters intercepted, which were sent by an express from some Princes to the Lake of Avernus, people come to know that the enmities whch are seen to reign in the Nations of the world, are occasioned by the cunning of their Princes. 324
Advert. 59. The Prince of the Laconicks Nephew, bing after his Uncles death; to return to a private Fortune, shews no well compo∣sed minde in making so dangerous a passage. 326 Advert. 60. Antonio Perez of Aragon, having presented Apollo with his Book of Relations, his Majesty does not only refuse to receive it: but commands it to be presently burn'd. 328 Advert. 61. Apollo, to afford pastime to his Literati, makes two useful Scenes be represented upon Melpomene's Theatre: in one of which he shews the lesser Princes with what wariness they ought to preserve them∣selves from a greater Potentate; and in the other, lets Senators of Republicks know how ill advised they are, who through partiality, side with a subject of their own faction, who notoriously aims at Tyranny. 329 Advert. 62. Lewis de la Tremoglia, a Noble French Baron, renounceth his Nobility; and all the priviledges which he thereby enjoyed, in pre∣sence of the Monarchy of France. 332 Advert. 63. Don Ferrante Gonsaga being Governor of Corinthus, is exhorted by Domitio Corbulone, severely to resent a great excess, committed by a chief personage of that City: which Counsel Gonsaga wisely refutes. 333 Advert. 64. The Prince of Macedon accuseth the Nobility of A∣thens of Treason before Apollo, who are freed from that imputation, by his Majesties Councel of War. 335 Advert. 65. A Shop-keeper is condemned to the Gallies at the very in∣stant that he was seised on by the Serjeants, not being so much as exa∣mined. 37 Advert. 66. Bernardino Rota, a famous Neapolitan Poet, being great∣ly beloved by the Vertuosi of all professions in Pernassus, is accused be∣fore Apollo, for having purchased so general a good liking by some ill means. 338 Advert. 67. A Carpenter being cudgeled somewhat severely for having uttered certain insolent words against the most noble Scaliger, to his greater calamity, complains first of him to the Lord chief Iustice, and afterwards appeals to Apollo. 339 Advert. 68. The great Emperor Maximilian the first, having said in a great Assembly of the chiefest Princes of this State, that the Mahome∣tan Religion was nothing but Policy, proves by excellent reasons to the very teeth of the Ottoman Monarchy, who complained hainously there∣of to Apollo, that he had said nothing but truth. 341 Advert. 69. Anneus Seneca, after having read Moral Philosophy in the publick Schools of Pernassus, obtains a Writ of Ease from Apollo; and being desirous to endow the Philosophy-School with a rich Reve∣nue, is not suffered by his Majesty so to do. 345 Advert. 70. Diego Covarruvia, after having for a short space exercis∣ed the place of his Majesties chief Treasurer, betakes himself to the Stoicks Sect. 346 Advert. 71. Cornelius Tacitus being imprisoned at the complaint of some great Princes, for having made some Politick Spectacles, which were very prejudicious to their Government, is freed by Apollo. 347 Advert. 72. Many Carriers, who contrary to the Laws, brought great store of Beans into Pernassus, are taken prisoners by the scouts. 349
Advert. 73. Seneca having bought great store of Poultrey in a Coun∣trey-house of his, which lies in the Gnides Territories, those people come to the true reason of that his forestalling the Market. 350 Advert. 74. The Grand-child to the Prince of the Laconicks, asks coun∣sel of Apollo, what course he should take to live with reputation in La∣conia. 351 Advert. 75. Isabella of Aragon, Dutchess of Milan, being continually prosecuted by adverse Fortune, is brought to a very unhappy condition in the City of Ephesus. 352 Advert. 76. Many of the Literati who do much apprehend the severity of the Reformation, which by order from Apollo, is now in Treaty in Pernassus, do seditiously rise in rebellion against the Reformers; and his Majesty appeaseth the tumult by applying a fitting remedy. 353 Advert. 77. Many Princes believing that the disorder of their Courts, which were abandoned by Courtiers, proceeded from the injurious speeches used by Cesar Caparoli, in his Chapter Della Corte, desire Apollo that it may be remedied, and obtain their desire. 357 Advet. 78. Learned Seneca, seeing that his late Reformation of his former too splendid way of living, was ill taken by the Universality of Pernassus, distributes his immense riches in a work which was greatly commended by all men. 358 Advert. 79. Some Princes of Pernassus, having spent a great mass of wealth n a stinking sort of Merchaudize, and having thereby in∣curred great debts, are forced to confess themselves Bankrupts, and to leave Pernassus. 359 Advert. 80. Certain prime Politicians of Pernassus pray the Ottoman Monarchy to tell them the true reason why she makes short war with her enemies, and are by her satisfied. 361 Advert. 81. The Vertuosi of Pernassus, after having paid in the accu∣stomed Donative of a million of conceits to his Majesties Treasurer, ac∣cording to their wont, ask a favour of him. 363 Advert. 82. The Arcadians being up in arms against their Prince for cer∣tain new Taxes imposed upon them, he wisely appeaseth them by deli∣vering up unto them, him who had perswaded him thereunto. 364 Advert. 83. Marcus Portius Cato, whilst he reprehends Salustius Cri∣spus for flattering the Emperor Tiberius, is severely taxed by him for beingtoo obstinate. 366 Advert. 84. Apollo having by a new Edict inhibited Poets to make use of any fabulous creature in their Verses, at the fervent intreaties of the Poets, his Majesty revokes the said Edict. 368 Advert. 85. Giovangirolimo Aquaviva, having overcome a very great difficulty, is with much honour admitted into Pernassus. 369 Advert. 86. The Duke of Laconia, to revenge himself by way of Law, upon a chief Senator of State, for some private distastes that he had taken at him, commanded Fleminio Cartaro, his Iudge of Assize, to proceed severely against him upon some heads which he would give him and he denies to obey him. 371 Advert. 87. Some Princes of this State having presented Apollo with a Book of the Reason of State, the Vertuosi of Pernassus not approving of the definition of State therein given, publish a new one, which was very much displeasing to those Princes. 372
Advert. 88. Marcantonio Moreto desires Apollo that he may have leave to make an Oration in the publick Schools of Pernassus, in the praise of the lemency of the most glorious King of France, Henry the fourth; but is denied it. 375 Advert. 89. A Literato presents Apollo with an Oration made by him in praise of the present Age; which is laid aside by his Majesty, as not grounded upon truth. 377 Advert. 90. Christopher Columbus, and other famous discoverers of the new world, desire Apollo that Immortality may be aecreed them for their noble daring; but are denied it. 378 Advert. 91. Sigismond King of Polonia, prefers a Paladine to the prime dignities of his Kingdom, who proving persidious, the Polack Nobility, thinking the publick reputation was concern'd in this private Palatines misdemeanor, revenge themselves severely upon him. 382 Advert. 92. Apollo having a notorious hypocrite in his hands, punisheth him severely. 383 Advert. 93. Apuleius his Ass having given his Master two kicks in the breast, is severely punished by him. 384 Advert. 94. Paulus Jovius presents Apollo with his most elegant Histo∣ries, which give full satisfaction to his Majesty and the College of Ver∣tuosi; and notwithstanding some opposition that is made, he is admit∣ted with great applause into Pernassus. 386 Advert. 95. A very famous Literato, who was imprisoned by the Iudges of Assise for being a pratler, is freed by Apollo, as not guilty of such a crime. 388 Advert. 96. Philip the second, King of Spain, being offended at what the Duke of Alva had told Apollo, concerning his Government of Flanders, whilst he seeks to revenge himself upon that his Minister of State, is sent for by Apollo, who was acquainted with what had past, and is by him pacified. 389 Advert. 97. Pompey the great having invited many noble Lords of Rome to be present at the dedication of the magnificent Theatre which he had built in Pernassus, they refuse to come. 391 Advert. 98. Peter Aretine being again assaulted, Apollo, in respect of the lewd conditions of that Satyrical vitious Poet, commanded that no process should be made upon that Riot. ib. Advert. 99. Apollo having received news by an express Poet, whereas he was much rejoyced, communicates it to his Literati with great Iu∣bile. 392 Advert. 100. A more then usual sweet Odor issuing from the Delphick Library, Apollo goes himself in person thither to discover the miracle, and soon finds the occasion of so great a novelty. 394
A TABLE of the CONTENTS of the POLI∣TICK TOUCHSTONE. Why the Neapolitans are so strangely opprest, and hardly treated by the Spaniards. 395 Genua excuses her freedom in Pernassus. 396 The Spanish Monarchy complains that her falshoods are discovered. 398 The Spanish Monarchy comes to Pernassus, and desires Apollo to be cured of an Issue; but is dismist by the Politick Physitians. 400 A Secretary of Monsieur de Guise is punished for having spoken amiss. 405 The Spaniards endeavour the getting of Savioneda, but in vain. ib. Sir Tho. Moore, an Englishman, asks Apollo when Heresies will cease. 406 The French desire Apollo that he will teach them the true Spanish Per∣fume for Gloves. ibid. The Spanish Monarchy goes to the Oracle of Delphos, to know whether she shall ever obtain the Universal Monarchy of the whole world; and receives a negative answer. 407 Philip the second, King of Spain, after some dispute concerning his Title, enters in great state into Pernassus. 409 All Princes, Commonwealths, and States, are justly weighed in the scales by Lorenzo de Medici. 410 Why the Monarchy of Spain withdrew her self into her Palace. 417 The Duke of Alva being arrived at Pernassus, in complementing with Prospero Colonna, he falls to cuffs with him about Titles, whereof he had defrauded the Colonnesi. 418 Boccace is assassinaed by Salviati. 422 The Sicilian Ambassadors cannot obtain audience from Apollo; but are disgracefully driven away by his Majesty. ib. Sigismondo Battori hath learne the Latine Tongue. 424 The French are freed out of the mad mens Hospital by the Spaniards. 425 Some for examples sake are made a spectacle to the people. ib. A discovery made, that the Spanish Officers are wholly concern'd in their own profits. 426 Maximilian the Emperor is advertised of the tumults sprung up amongst his sons. 427 The Dogs in the Indies are grown Wolves. ib. The Spanish Monarchy visits the Queen of Italy, and there pass between them Complements full of kindness. 429 The Monarchy of Spain throws her Physician out of the window. 430 The Cardinal of Toledo's Summa is not admitted into the Library of Pernassus. 431 Almansor, that was King of the Moors, meeting with the Kingdom of Naples, they two fall a weeping, and rehearse their miseries brought up∣on them by the oppression of the Spaniards. 432 The Conte di Fuentes is admitted into Pernassus. 437 All the States of the world are censur'd in Pernassus for their errors. 439 The Spanish Monarchy invites the Cardinal of Toledo to be Secretary of State: who refuseth: and why. 450 Apollo detesteth the means that are recommended to him, for getting of monies. 451
THE FIRST INFORMATION. The Society of Polititians open a Ware-House in Parnassus, Wherein are sold divers sorts of Merchandize, very use∣full for the vertuous living of those that are Learned. THe Business so many Moneths in Agi∣tation between the Society of Poli∣titians, and the Ministri Camerali, touching the opening of a Publick Ware house in Parnassus, with large Priviledges for Polititians, was the last Week fully concluded; and they yesterday made a Glorious Shew in the Piazza, of all such things as men stand most in need of: Wherefore Menante thinks not much to acquaint you here with the chiefest of them, firmly believing, that all gallant men will be pleased with the notice thereof. In the first place, great store of Stuffing, or Bombast, not prized by the meaner sort of men, but highly esteemed by understanding Courtiers, is sold in this Ware-house: For those of great capacity, know that the shavings of those finest Clothes which wise men weave with the superfine Wool of forbearance, serves to stuff up the Pack-Saddles of Slavery, to the end that they may sit the more easily upon the backs of those wretch∣ed Courtiers, and not gall their lean sides so horribly, as the sides of some are seen to be, who though they be known to detest labour, are perswaded notwithstanding to go to Court, with assured hopes of spending their time there merrily, and to command others, though they themselves serve. It is very observable, that some young men, though they live at home in the. Fathers houses, have bought good store of this pretious Stuffing, to bolster up some smal Pack saddles, which they make use of in private houses, to the end that they may not come like raw Colts unto the Court, and
that when they shall first undergo that weighty Pack-saddle of Court servitude, they may not commit those senceless absurdities, which cause the Court Colt-breakers, to lash them with bitter distastes, the better to inure them to that toilsom slavery. There is likewise sold in the same Ware-house, store of Pensils, which are very excellent for those Princes, who upon urgent occasions are forced to paint white for black unto the people: And although this be a Mer∣chandize proper onely for Princes, yet do these false Cheaters provide themselves thereof, who setting their best leg forward, mind only mock∣ing and cosenage, and to feed the silly multitude with fair words, and foul deeds. They have also abundance of Spectacles, very wonderfull, and of great use: Some of them serve to give light to those libidinous men, who a∣midst their goatish lusts, grow so short sighted, as they cannot discern be∣tween honour and shame, not know a friend from an enemy, a meer stran∣ger from a Kinsman, nor any thing else to which respect ought to be given. So great is the riddance which these Polititians make of these kind of Spe∣ctacles, as it is evidently known that few men see well in carnal affairs. There are other Spectacles of a clear contrary operation, which keep men from seeing the light; and the Polititians affirm, that though they be generally good for all men, yet are they particularly more useful for Courtiers, then those which enlarge the sight. For many loathsom things present themselves often to the sight of worthy men; upon which, if you shall turn your back, you may peradventure draw upon you the ill will of Potent men; and to behold them, is to martyrize ones self. He who upon such an occasion puts a pair of these miraculous Spectacles upon his nose, shall thereby free himself from the trouble of seeing the naucious things of this wicked and corrupted world, and shall make the foolish rab∣ble believe that he eyes them very accuratly. Others serve to preserve the sight of unworthy men, who the very day that they have received any new dignity, lean towards ingratitude. The Masters of the Ware-house say that they are made of the tenacious memo∣ry of benefits received, and past friendships. But very miraculous is the workmanship of those Spectacles which make Fleas appear to be Elephants, and Pigmies Giants; these are greedi∣ly bought up by great Personages, who putting them upon the noses of unfortunate Courtiers, do thereby work such an alteration in the eye-sight of those wretches, as, if their Lord do but lay his hand upon their shoul∣ders, or do but cast an artificial smile upon them, they take it as accepta∣bly as a reward of 500 hundred Crowns a year. But the Spectacles lately invented in Flanders, are bought at the dear∣est rates by men of highest rank, which they give to their Servants, there∣by making rewards and dignities appear near unto them, which their sight cannot reach unto, and which peradventure they shall never arrive at as long as they live. There are sold Moreover in the same Shop (but at a very dear rate) Hu∣mane Eyes, which are of admirable use; for it is not to be beleived how much men better their own affairs, when they look upon them with the eyes of other men. Nay the very Polititians themselves affirm, that a man cannot arrive at that so excellent vertue so much endeavored by great men, of Nosce te ipsum by any other instrument better then by these.
There are certain Compasses also sold in the same Shop, not made of Silver, Brass, or steel, but of the purest interest of unspotted reputation, which is to be found in point of honour; and they are exceeding good to measure a mans own actions by: For it is known by experience, that Compasses made of the base materials of Capriciousness, and of sole Interest, prove not just to those who in all their affairs desire to draw para∣lel lines. These Compasses are excellently good for those who know how to use them exactly, to take the just latitude of those ditches which other men out of honour are forced to leap clean over, so to keep from falling into the midst, and from burying themselves shamefully in the mire of In∣discretion. Nor can Scapethrifts who have but the purse of a private man, yet will spend like a Prince, learn the requisite vertue of cutting their Coats according to their cloath, by any instrument better then by this. They do likewise sell Mathematical Instruments, used by Survey∣ors, which are very necessary perfectly to deliniate those with whom one hath to treat in great affairs, or to impart important secrets. The same Shop vents likewise great store of certain Iron Instruments, not unlike such as are used by Surgeans and Tooth-drawers; and they serve to enlarge the jawes of unfortunate Courtiers, who being to make vertue of necessity, are oft-times forced to swallow down great Pompi∣ons, instead of little Mastick Pils. They have likewise great store of Besoms, made of Circumspection, which the wariest Courtiers make provision of, diligently to clense the staires both morning and evening, from those dangerous beans scattered thereupon by such malignant people, who delighting more in spoyling o∣ther mens affairs, then in accommodating their own, practice nothing but how to break the neck of reputation of men of honour. There you may likewise have (but at the weight of Gold) very fine Ink, which being well made use of upon paper, by the labour of learned Writers, serves to imbalm and perfume the dead bodies of vertuous men; whereas the bodies of the ignorant cast forth a horrible stench, and are soon turned to ashes: and by this Ink only are the names of learned men eternized in memory, when the like of the ignorant, perish as soon as their eyes are closed: A Balsom certainly of more then humane ver∣tue, since those who anoynt themselves therewith, live after death, and parting only with their body from the world, abide there eternally in the memory of their Writings. These Polititians enrich themselves likewise much by an Oyle which they sell, which hath sundry times been experimented to be good for the strengthening of Courtiers stomacks, to the end, that without weaken∣ing the complexion of Patients, these unfortunate people may chearfully digest the bitter distastes which they are so often enforced to swallow down at Court. There is likewise sold in little Glass Viols (of which Menante, who writes these things, had the good fortune to come by some very cheap) odoriferous humane sweat, very admirable to perfume those, who by the fragrancy of the Musk, and Civet of their honourable labours, desire to appear amongst the learned with pen in hand. The same Shop vents much Pate-royal, very good to sharpen the ap∣petite of certain obstinate Stoicks, to the end that they may greedily swallow down the loathsom things of this world; which, though they nau∣seate
others very much, and go absolutely against the stomacks of good men; yet some, that they may not draw upon them the displeasure of powerfull men, and so disorder their own affairs, are forced to seem very desirous of them, and to hunger after them. There are moreover in this Shop many Boxes of perfumed Com∣feits, very good to sweeten the breath of such Councellers, Secretaries, and Senators, as are bound to suffer their secrets to putrifie in their bodies. In a room apart, they sell Horse. Trammels, made of Iron of maturity, which though they be abhorred by some foolish people, as Instruments fit for Beasts, yet advized men have purchased them so much credit, as they are bought at dear rates by those forward and precipitate Wits, who strangely apprehending the juditious maturity of the weekly Carrier, de∣light in speedily dispatching their affairs by the Post. But there is no Merchandize in this Ware-House which sels better, then certain Fans, not made of the Feathers of Ostriches or Peacocks, or any other better coloured Bird, but of Herbs and Flowres; and be∣cause Andrew Matthiolo, the Delfick Herbarist, found out amongst those Flowres and Herbs, the Infernal Wolfebane, the wary Vertuosi of Par∣nassus have clearly discovered, that those mysterious Fans serve not to coole ones self in the heat of Summer, but to drive those troublesome flies from ones nose, which some unadvised men indeavouring to chase a∣way violently with a Dagger, have shamefully cut their own noses. The Second ADVERTISEMENT. The usual Guard of Parnassus having taken a Poetaster, who had been banished Parnassus, upon pain of death, found a Paire of Cards in his Pocket; which when Apollo saw, he gave order that he should read the Game of Trump in the publick Schools. TO the end that the ignorant sort of people, by their sottishness of soul, may not profane the vertuous Habitations of Parnassus, A∣pollo sent many years agoe for two Companies of Riming Poets from Sicily, who were very fortunate in their Meeter, and had their con∣ceits at their fingers ends, whose Office was to scoure the Country, and keep the fields free. These some eight daies agoe took a Poetaster priso∣ner, who was banished from Parnassus upon forfeiture of life if he should ever return thether; and who, though he were interdicted the use of Books, or exercise of Pen, yet he was seen every day, in despite of A∣pollo, and in Scorn of the Soveraign Muses, to defile paper with Verses, and even to pretend to the sublime name of Poet. The misdements of this fellow were much aggravated by a pair of Cards, which the Serge∣ants, whilst they were searching him, found in his pocket; which, as con∣ducing only to vice, are capitally condemned: They being therefore
forthwith brought to Apollo, he was strangely astonished at the bruitish∣ness of the invention found out by vitious men, to spend their time, and waste their reputation and means: but his Majestie did much more won∣der, when he understood that the foolishness of these men was arived at that height, that they called that play, which is done in so very great ear∣nest, and that they thought it a delight, sport, and pastime, to hazard that money which is purchased with so much labour, and which serves for so many things, as without it, Aristotle would be thought ignorant by the modern world, and Alexander the Great, a Plebeian. Apollo asked this man, what Game he used to play most at? Who answering, Trump; Apollo commanded him to play at it; which when he had done, Apollo pe∣netrating into the deep mysteries thereof, cryed out, That the Game of Trump, was the true Court-Philosophy; a Science necessary for all men to learn, who would not live blockishly. And appearing much displeased at the affront done this man, he first honoured him with the name of Ver∣tuoso; and then causing him to be set at liberty, he commanded the Beadles, that the next morning a particular Colledge should be opened, where, with the Sallary of 500 Crowns a year, for the general good, this rare man might read the most excellent Game of Trump; and command∣ed upon great penalty, that the Platonicks, Peripateticks, and all other the Moral Philosophers, and Vertuosi of Parnassus, should learn so requi∣site a Science; and that they might not forget it, he ordered them to stu∣dy that Game one hour every day; and though the learneder sort thought it very strange that it should be possible to gather any thing that was ad∣vantagious for the life of man, from a base Game, used only in Ale-houses; yet knowing that his Majesty did never command any thing which made not for the bettering of his Vertuosi, they so willingly obeyed him, as that School was much frequented. But when the Learned found out the deep Mysteries, the hidden secrets, and the admirable cunning of the excellent Game of Trump, they extolled his Majesties Judgement, even to the eighth heaven, celebrating and magnifying every where, that nei∣ther Philosophy, nor Poetry, nor Astrologie, nor any of the other most esteemed Sciences, but only the miraculous Game of Trump, did teach (and more particularly, such as had business in Court) the most impor∣tant secret, that every the least Trump, did take all the best Coat-Cards. The Third ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having notice how Henry the fourth, that Potent King of France, was most wickedly Assassinated, ordered for the indempnity of his beloved French, that powerfull Succour should be sent from Arcadia into France. ON the two and twentieth of this present Moneth, late at night; Apollo heard by an express Post, sent with all speed from the Uni∣versity
of Paris, the sad news of the murder committed upon the glori∣ous King of France, Henry the fourth; which news did so afflict his Ma∣jestie, as in testimony of his inward grief, he presently vailed his face with a thick dark cloud, from which for three whole daies he showred down great store of tears: And all the Letterati, both Spaniards, English, Flemmish, Germans, and Italians, did with abundance of tears, bewaile the unfortunate mischance of so great a King. It must not be here forgot that Apollo amidst his deepest sighes, was heard to break forth into these words, That the world was come to the poynt of being ready to return to its first Principles, since the wicked perfidiousness of some was grown to that height of impiety, as they would expose their lives to the Hangmans hands, rather to purchase bad, than good Fame. Two daies after the Posts arival, solemn Obsequies were ordered for so mighty a Monarch; so as not only all Parnassus was covered with blacks, but every of the Letterati put on his long mourning Weede. And to shew to all the sacred Colledge of the Vertuosi, that the Father of Lear∣ning was departed this world, the Mecenas of the Vertuosi, and the ve∣ry Muses themselves, did with dishevel'd hair, assist at the Obsequies in widowy apparel: A piece of sorrow not seen in Parnassus since the death of Octavianus Augustus. The Learned of all the Colledges, and several Sects of Philosophers, made above two hundred mournfull Orations; and yet of all the vertues of so great a King, his more then humane Va∣lor was only praised; and tis very true, that by reason of the many sighs of the Vertuosi, the Orators were scarce heard: So as Apollo esteeming it a piece of cruelty to rub the sore of so bitter a wound by continual re∣membrance, as was done by Scollership, throughout the whole world, he commanded that the Obsequies of so magnanimous a King, should be no farther proceeded in, since such, and so great was the loss, as, lest the world might live in perpetual affliction, men should strive soon to forget it: and so much the rather, for that the Heroick Vertues of this invincible King, were arived at such a height of Eminency, as they stood no more in need of being praised by men. And for that the noble Kingdom of France may vie and weigh even with Greece it self in point of Learning (as is clear∣ly testified by the Delfick Library, so fully fraught with infinite Labours of the French Vertuosi) for the Indempnity of that florishing Kingdom, so dear unto his Majesty. And for the better safety of his beloved French, Apollo commanded that 60000 Pack-Horses should immediately be sent from Arcadia into France: Some of the Vertuosi wondred much at this his Majesties resolution, and told him, that France, which was furnished with so numerous and so noble a Cavalry, as that she did not only nor know nor fear danger, but did so farr despise it, as that she went in quest thereof even by night, with the Lanthorn of her undaunted heart, that having with her invincible Sword won so famous a Kingdom, she would be so well able to maintain her self in this her present misfortune, as not to stand in need of Arcadian Pack-Horses. To this Apollo answered. That his beloved French in this their Mo∣dern calamity, and for the better security of their flourishing Kingdom, needed no armed Cavalry; but that since the peace and quiet of the King∣dom did chiefly depend upon the unity of their Natives, that this peace and unity could not be better come by, by any other means, then by the perpetual remembrance of the miserable wasting of their Country, cruel
sacking of their Cities, of the woful loss they had undergon, not onely of means, but of reputation in their last 40 years civil wars; and that nothing was so good to put them still in mind of these so sad afflictions, as these Pack-horses, which by instinct of nature, did detest passing a second time by the same way, wherin formerly they had run hazard of breakng their necks. The Fourth ADVERTISEMENT. Whilst Michel Angelo Buonaroti was coppying forth the ilfavoured fore-front of Anneus Seneca's House, he was asked by Pierius Valeriano, wherefore he did so? And Buonaroti gives him this reason, ALthough the habitation of Anneus Seneca, for pleasantness of situa∣tion, beautiful Gardens, abundance of fresh and clear waters, mul∣titude of Lodgings, good both for Summer and Winter, and for all other exquisite delights which may be imagined for humane accommodation, may compare in all points to Neros famous house of Gold, yet the fore∣front thereof is like the rotten rack of a Carriers Stable: Yet did the famous Michel Angelo Buonaroti draw out the designe thereof the o∣ther day; which when Pierius Valeriano, as he was passing by, saw, he wondred very much, that so famous an Architecter should mispend his time in drawing so loathsome a thing; which made him ask Buonaroti, what singular thing he could see in that Frontispiece, which deserved the Pensil of so famous a man as himself? To which, as the same Pieri∣us told me, he answered in these words; Sir, The skilful do so clear∣ly discern in this Front which appears to you so ugly, all the rules of Do∣rick, Tomick, Corinthian Architecture, and of Composts which are, and yet appear not, as by the opinion of Vitruvius himself, it ought to be ad∣ded as the eight, to the seven Wonders of the world. My most ver∣tuous Iohnghirollimo Aquaviva, Duke of Atri, commanded me to draw this copy which you see, and told me, he intends to send it to Naples, to some of the Barons there, who are his good friends, and who being besotted with the vanity of seeming to be more then what they are, have very much need ocularly to discover in the workmanship of this fore-front, how wise men govern their affairs, who are, and doe not ap∣pear.
The fifth ADVERTISEMENT. The Contention which arose between many learned men, touch∣ing which is the best Political law, which the most praise∣worthy Order in the flourishing Commonwealth of Venice, is decided, and fully ended by the very Venetian liberty, which with the joint agreement of all the learned men, was chosen Umpire. THe gallant Dispute which arose some six dayes ago between some Letterati of the State, deserves to be written; who whilst they were discoursing of the famous Order, gallant Laws, and other rare Institutions, which maintain the Illustrious Republick of Venice in so great luster, there arose variety of Opinions between them which deserved the greatest commendation: and for that every one of these Vertuosie defended their own Opinion as the best; to the end that so great a difference might be qui∣etly decided, they joyned unanimously in this resolution; that they would all of them personally appear before the most Illustrious Venetian Liber∣ty, to whom they would first make known their several sences, and would afterwards acquiesce in her judgement. This was then made known to that Illustrious Lady, who was gratiosluy pleased to give those Vertuosi what satisfaction they desired. Peter Crenitus spoke first, and said: That since it was agreed upon by all men, that all sublunary things, are first born, grow, and increase after∣wards, and in process of time decay; it seemed very strange to him, that onely the Commonwealth of Venice, was seen still to flourish the more, the elder it grew; and that the Laws, Orders, and wholesome Institutions, which after a relaxation, are at last quite forgotten in other Principallities, were known to increase in vigour, and exactness, and to be more diligent∣ly, and readily observed only in Venice: which was the cause that in the Venetian Commonwealth those reformations of Government, those re∣assumings of State were never seen, which with infinite tumults the Ro∣man and Florentine Commonwealths had so often used: it being the pe∣culiar vertue of the Venetian Senate, to perpetuate her self in her flou∣rishing liberty, by the punctual observance of her ancient laws; and that those defects not being seen in Venice, which as it appears other Poten∣tates know not how to shun; and that all diligence though never so ex∣quisite, doth soon terminate in that supine negligence, which bereaves all Principalities both of liberty and life, he thought he might assuredly af∣firm that thorough such wisdome, the Republick of Venice should last as long as the world did. Next spake Angelo Politiano, saying; That he admired the wise Ve∣netian Commonwealth, for what Peter Crinito had related, and for a thousand other most excellent orders: but that he thought it to be a very rare thing, that an Aristocratical Commonwealth, the true foundation whereof was held by the most understanding Writers upon Common∣wealths,
to consist in the parity of means amongst the Nobility; could be so long maintained in so much peace and greatness, in that disproportio∣nable inequality of riches which was apparently seen in the Venetian No∣bility; in which though there were the two so hazardous extreams of immense wealth, and great poverty, yet that defect did not appear in Ve∣nice, which humane laws seem not able to inhibit, that the rich should trample upon the poor, who though they did greatly envy the fortune of the wealthy, yet either by reason of the immense charity which reigns in all the Venetian Nobility towards the publick liberty, or that the very great riches of those that possessed them were not made use of to the inju∣ry of inferiours; the poor as well as the wealthy did live peacefully and modestly together in that happy Country. After Politiano spoke Pierio Valeriano, and said, that the onely mira∣cle which was to be wondred at in the Venetian Commonwealth, was the rare and miraculous situation of her Metrapolitan City, from which he thought that the Venetians, ought immediately to acknowledge the great benefit of their glorious liberty, as that which hath still preserved them from the forces of many forraign Princes, who have endeavoured to put upon them the chain of servitude. Then said Iulius Scalager, that the stupendiousness of the Venetian liberty, which fild the whole world with wonder, was, that the very Nobili∣ty which sate at the Healm, did not only patiently pay the ancient grievous taxes of the publick Treasury, but with incredible readiness did oft times impose new ones upon themselves, which were afterwards rigorous∣ly exacted by the receivers: and that it had been often seen that the No∣ble Venetians, upon any urgent occasion of the Commonwealth, rather then to lay any new impositions upon the people, would open their own Coffers; and did this in so ample a manner, and with so strange ala∣crity for the publick liberty, as this action deserved the preheminence o∣ver all the miracles which were observed to be in the fortunate Venetian freedome; as that which made it appear clearly to the whole world, that they were fully indued with that excellent quality which doth eternise Republicks, of having their Nobility so hugely in love with living free, as they did chearfully prefer the publick interest before their own pro∣fit. Next said Bernardo Tasso, that he had lived long in Venice, where he found nothing to be more wondred at, then to see those very noble Ve∣netians, who did so much delight in pleasures, pastimes and Idleness, go∣vern the publick affairs with such gallantry, as they seemed to others to be men of exemplary lives, and Lords born to perpetual labour. When Tasso had done, Francisco Berny according to his wonted plea∣santness, which did much delight the Venetian liberty, said; That the rarest and most admirable thing, that great wits were to admire in the State of Venice, was that all the Channels of that City being full of Gud∣gins, the Venetian Senators did notwithstanding take so few of them, as they were deservedly held by all Nations to be the salt of the earth. Then Sabilico followed, and said, that whilst he writ the Venetian Histo∣ry, having diligently observed the excellent institutions of that glorious liberty, he found nothing more to wonder at therein, then that the pub∣lick Treasury should be so faithfully managed, even by needy Senators; as to have their hands greased with one penny of St. Marks, was held
by the Nobility not onely to be a capital excess, but great infamy. Iaccopo Sanazzarro said then, that it appeared strange to him in the Venetian Commonwealth, that there being many of the Nobility but of mean fortunes, they did notwithstanding with incredible patience tolerate their private miseries, not so much as in a thought, coveting the mass of publick wealth, by those seditious Frumentary, and Agrarian Laws, with which the famous Commonwealth of Rome was so much vexed by her Citizens; and that it was a thing praise worthy, and to be wondred at, to see that in Venice, the poor Nobleman strove only through vertue and worth to comfort himself amidst his miseries; studdying to make him∣self worthy to be imployed by his Country in advantagious imployments; which made that vertue, worth and honesty, served instead of a rich Patri∣mony to the poor Noble Venetian. Iovanni Ioviano Pontano added, that all that had been said was very miraculous; but that the greatest thing which he had alwaies observed in the Venetian Liberty was, that the immense wealth, which some of the Nobility possessed, did not puff them up with pride and vain glory, as ma∣ny were seen to be in other Commonwealths; that therefore it was a rare custome in Venice, that such Senatours who were as rich as Princes, knew how to live at home in their own houses like private Citizens, and did not differ at all in the Piazza's from the poorest men. And that the Venetians onely know how to separate the evils of ambition and pride, and the be∣ing attended by multitudes of the meaner sort of Citizens, from great riches, which the famous Roman liberty either could not, or would not prohibit in Caesar, in Pompey, and in many other wealthy Senators. When Pontano had ended his discourse, the Commendador Hannibal Caro said, that above all other stupendious things in the Commonwealth of Venice, he had alwayes much admired to see the mighty Prince of so famous a liberty, observed with so much obsequiousness, reverence, King∣like Majesty, and Citizen Authority; and that the coherence of so great ve∣neration, with limited Authority, the long extent of the Prince his Em∣pire, with modesty, was a temper not known to the wisdome of the anci∣ent Legislators of former Republicks, and which was happily practised onely by the Venetian Senate. Bartolomeo Cavalcanti replyed next, that as Pontano had observed it for a great rarity in the Venetian Commonwealth, that store of wealth did not make rich Senators wise, so was it a much greater portent to see, that the orders of that excelse liberty, the sacred laws of that eternal Com∣monwealth were such, as even the chiefest Places, did not fasten any thing of ambition or pride to them who did exercise them with great authority; a particularity the more worthy of observation; for that the like was never seen in whatsoever other Principallity, or well constituted Common∣wealth, as being a thing which did directly oppugne nature. And that when he was in Venice, he did not admire the rich Treasure of St. Mark, the Arsenal, the grand Cannale, with the stately Palaces of the Cornari, Grimani, Foscari, and other magnificent buildings, built at vast expence in that miraculous City, wonders onely obvious to the eye of ordinary men; but that it appeared marvelous to him to see Signior Sebastiano Vinieri, lately General of so powerful a Fleet, so famous for the glorious Naval Victory which he obtained against the Turks, to return a private man to Venice, and to walk the Piazza with that decent Modesty, as he ap∣peared
not to differ in any thing from those Senators who never stird from the City; and that it was a singular thing, that in the Venetian Common∣wealth, the Nobles therof could behave themselves so modestly and civilly at home, who when they were imployed abroad in important Magistracy, and great commands, could with splendid and Princely liberality make themselves known to the world, not to be barely Citizens of a well re∣gulated Republick, but men born to command those who were descended from Royal bloud; and that therefore he believed that there was no Na∣tion in the world that knew better how to obey modestly, and command gallantly, then the Venetian Nobility: A thing so true, that whereas in other states, they were forced for the honour of their publick Magi∣strates to put their Senators in mind with what magnificency of spirit they should make good the Majesty of their publick imployments; the Venetian Senate had several times been necessitated to make severe Laws to inhibit those who did exercise any authority or jurisdiction out of the City, the using of any splendid Magnificency. Thus said Cavalcanti, when Flavio Biondo added; That when he was in Venice, he was much amazed to see, that in a meer Aristocrasie, the Ci∣tizens and Plebeains lived with such satisfaction in that happy Country, as that for many months that he tarried there, he could never discern whe∣ther the publick Venetian Liberty was better beloved, and held dearer by the Nobility which commanded, or by the bare common sort of Ci∣tizens who obeyed. Then followed Paulus Iovius, who said, that not only to himself, but to many great Princes, with whom he had discoursed at large of the mira∣culous Government of the State of Venice, it seemed very strange that the Senat of that Commonwealth studied nothing more then peace, and yet with great vigilancy and asseduity did perpetually prepare for Warr; and that Armed Peace was only seen in the flourishing Venetian State. Iovius was followed by Iohn Bocatchio, who said, that the true Salt which preserved the Venetian Liberty from the putrifaction and corrup∣tion of all abuse, was that Supreme Queen of all Laws, that excellent Institution, so inviolably observed by her, that neither the greatness of Parentage, abundance of wealth, nor the merits of fore-Fathers were considered in the preferment of Senators to high places, but the sole worth of him who pretended to the Magistracy, was weighed: whence it was that there was many vitious and ignorant Gentlemen of Venice, but only the most vertuous and well-deserving commanded, and governed with that wisdom which was known to all the world. But Leonardo Aretine, after having much commended Bocatchios o∣pinion, added, that the excellent custom of the State of Venice, in not conferring places upon her Nobility by skips and leaps, but by degrees and gradation, was that sound Basis whereon the greatness and eternity of such Liberty was grounded; and that it was an excellent rule, that what∣soever Noble man would arive at the Supreme Dignities, he must even from his youth begin at the meanest Magistracies: A wholsom custom which produceth the important effect of maintaining that true and essen∣tial equality amongst the Nobles of an Aristocracy, which makes Liber∣ty long-liv'd: For with those that understand State Affairs, the parity of wealth is not that which equals Senators in a Commonwealth; but the making all the Nobles march on towards the grandeur of the highest Dig∣nities,
beginning at the meanest Imployments. A Law well worthy the Venetian Wisdom; which because the ancient Roman Commonwealth did want, her Liberty was but short-liv'd, and yet was still molested with dangerous infirmities, and tumultuous insurrections. For the base abuse of giving the Consulship of a Free Country, and the chief places in the Army, to Pompey and Cesar, and other rich Subjects in the prime of their youth, was no better then to deal with them rather like men born of Roy∣al bloud, like Lords and Masters of their Countries Liberty, then like Senators of a well regulated Republick. For since it is a certain truth, that that is a well ordered Commonwealth, where the hopes of some yet higher dignity remains, even to the worthyest Senators, and men of great merit, which may serve for sharp spurs to such as are ambitious of glory, to make them make haste in the streight path of Vertue, that they may the sooner arive at the Gole of the desired Magistracy; what greater preferment remained to be hoped for in their age, by Cesar and Pompey, who in their youth obtained from the Commonwealth of Rome, not with∣out much imprudency, the highest honours, and supremest dignities, then that absolute Tyrannical Power, to which Cesar openly, and Pompey more cunningly did afterwards aspire? A great mis-government, and from which the famous Roman Liberty might presage her death. Though the most glorious Venetian Liberty gave great signes that she was very well pleased with Aratines opinion, she notwithstanding com∣manded the remainder of the Vertuosi, to speak theirs. Then thus be∣gan Benedetto Varchi; My Republick of Florence, which never had the luck to work peace and union between her noble Families, and that mutu∣al love which doth perpetuate the liberty of Commonwealths, was at last compelled to fall into servitude. Wherefore this appears to me to be the rarest of humane Miracles, that a noble Venetian, though never so highly offended by the murder of his children, and in his own person, being more violently wrought upon by his fervent charity towards the freedom of his Country, then frighted by the rigor of Magistrates, can with a free soul put on the hard resolution of forgiving his enemy (at that very instant) the injury which he hath received. Certainly a most ad∣mirable resolution, and so much the more worthy of wonder, as that it is evidently seen, that the noble Venetian knows how to trust the Senat wil∣lingly with the revenge of any injury he can receive, when sensual men are very loath to remit the like into the hands of God, from whom we re∣ceive all that we have of good. Thus said Varchi, when Lodovico Dolci added, That if that were true, which is confessed by all men, that the rarest and most considerable ver∣tue in a Prince, was to be able with ease, and without any danger, to dis∣arm his Captain General, and to receive perfect obedience from him, e∣ven then when he knew he was sent for back by an incensed Prince, and one who did much suspect his Loyalty; his opinion was, that of all other things which the rest had mentioned of rare in the State of Venice, this was to be preferred, That she did not only with great ease, disarm her Captain Generals at Sea; but that when her chiefest Mini∣sters knew that the Senat was highly displeased with them, and that there∣fore they were sure to be severely punished: though they were absent well arm'd, and in great command, if it should so happen that they should be sent for by the State, they would with great readiness obey, and lay∣ing
down their Arms, and Authority of Chief Magistrates, hasten to Ve∣nice to receive Judgement from their friends and kined, though it might cost them their lives. The examples whereof had been so often seen in Venice in his time, as it had filled the whole world with wonder. That therefore he thought he might justly say he should be much injured, if the so great Authority of the State of Venice, the so great submission, obe∣dience, and unheard of charity of the Venetian Nobility to the Publick Liberty, were not preferred before all those admirable Laws, and excel∣lent Institutions, which others had spoken of before him. The most Sene Venetian Liberty, which without replying any one word to these Vertuosi, had heard all these her so many lawdable Cu∣stoms, and her so many miraculous Prerogatives, said to Lodovico olci, that what he had said, was very considerable; but that it was a benefit which the Ottaman Emperors likewise enjoyed, but that she acknowledged all her Grandesta from one only Prerogative, which she was exactly Mistress of, and wherein she knew she did excell all Principalities, and all Com∣monwealths, as well past as present; which had not yet been touched upon by any of those Vertuosi. Then said Dionigi Antonigi, That the greatest wonder, and which ought to be praised even to the skies, was, To see that the dreadful Tri∣bunal of the Councel of Ten, and the Supreme Magistracy of the State-Inquisitors, could with three Balleting Balls, easily bury alive any Cesar or Pompey, which began to discover himself in that well-governed State. Attonigi had no sooner spoke his opinion, but Ierolimo Mercuriali added, That whilst he exercised his charge of reading in the so famous Schools of Physick in Padua, it happened that some Plebeians in Venice, being gon according to their custom, to the Sea-side to sollace themselves with some young Courtisans which they had carried along with them, they were so beaten by some Noble Venetians, as the former betaking themselves unto their swords, slew one of the others, and handled the rest but ill. For which fault, being sent for by the Judges, those Plebeians, although they saw all the Judges in the power of the offended Nobility, yet they hoped so much in the uprightness of the Senat, and in the exact Justice of the Tribunals for offences, as they stuck not to make their ap∣pearance, and go to Prison: Nor were they deceived in their opinion; for the Judges finding by the defence which they made, how they had been molested by those Noble Venetians, they were as innocent, set at liberty, to the eternal glory of the uncorrupt Venetian Justice. And that it was a prodigie not formerly seen, and which could not be believed, but by those that practised it, that the Noble man, though of powerfull Parentage, famous for his riches, and of great Authority through the ho∣nours he had received in the Commonwealth, the Citizen proved the har∣der adversary in pleading, than the Noble man. And that if the Politick Precept written by great men, was true, That Aristocrasies never died when the young Nobility used Modesty, and the Tribunals maintained e∣qual Justice, he could not see when the most happy Venetian Liberty, which was so severe in punishing the licentiousness of her Nobles, and so exquisitly just in her Tribunals, should ever have an end. Learned Ermolao Barbaro would be the last that spake, who said; That Tyranny being then introduced in free Countries, when the most impor∣tant secrets of Commonwealths was communicated but to a few Senators,
the excellent Venetian Liberty, to shun splitting upon so dangerous a Rock, communicated secrets, and had the most important business of her State discust in the Supreme Magistracy of the Pregadi: Wherein were above 250 Senators, and that it seemed very strange to him, that the Commonwealth of Venice could find that secrecy in so great a number of Senators, which Princes did often in vain endeavor with such diligence, and through such liberal gifts, in one sole Secretary, and a couple of Coun∣cellers. Then did the most excellent Lady of the Venetian Liberty rest her hand upon Ermolao Barbaro's shoulder, and said unto him; You have found out that pretious Jewel, which I so much glory in, and for which I deserve to be envied by all the world; for secrecy is no less necessary for the well governing of States, then good councel. The Sixth ADVERTISEMENT: A Learned Laconick is severely punished by the Laconick Senat, for not having used requisite brevity in his dis∣course. THat unluckie Laconick Letterato, who exprest that in three words, which was judged by the Laconick Senat, might have been said in two, and which was reputed a more then Capital fault, by those Laco∣nicks who are more penurious of words, then courteous men are of pence; after eight moneths long and teadious imprisonment, received his sentence five daies agoe; which was, That he should read only once over the Warr of Pisa, written by Guicchardino; the Laconick read over the first leaf with much agony; but so horribly teadious did that rabble of discourse appear to him, as the unfortunate wretch threw himself down before his Judges feet, who had sentenced him, and earnestly entreated them that they would condemn him to row in the Gallies during life, that they would immure him between two Walls, and that for mercies sake they would flea him alive; for to read those endless discourses, those so teadious Councels, those empty Harangues made at the taking in of a Pigeon-house, was a punishment which surpast all the bitter pains of child∣birth, and all the most cruel deaths that ever the pittiless Perillus could think upon, at the instance of the most cruel Tyrants.
The Seventh ADVERTISEMENT. The Censors of Learning do severely punish one of their As∣sociates, who in his more mature years, seemed to be pleas∣ed with Italian Poetry. A Vertuoso was taken yesterday by the Marshals belonging to the Court of the Censors of Learning, who was found with his specta∣cles on his nose, reading some Italian Poetry; and this morning early, by order from Apollo, he received three sound lashes with a cord first, and was afterward told, that being, as he was, of the age of 55 years, he should learn to apply himself to graver studies, and leave the reading of those Madrigals, Songs, and Sonnets, to be idlely spent by those spruce Young∣sters, in whom those things were tolerated, which were severely punished in old men. The Eighth. ADVERTISEMENT. Apuleius his Golden Ass, and Plantus his Assinaria, complain to Apollo of their Masters great severity, and receive no very pleasing answer. THe eight of this present moneth, Apuleius his glorious Golden Asse, and the famous Assinaria of Plantus, appear'd before Apollos Majesty; to whom in the name of all sorts of Pack-Horses, they joyntly said, That if those creatures deserved to be better treated, which were of little charge, and much use, they had more reason to complain of their Masters, than any other beasts; for though by their perpetual labour, they bore the greatest weight in their Masters house, both by day and night; and for their food were contented with a little course grass and water, and made it a Holy day when they got but a little bran; yet they were so indiscreetly dealt withall through their Masters ingratitude and cruelty, as that misera∣ble beasts that they were, they became the spectacle of all brutish usage; and that since they could not mollifie their Masters cruelty by humble prostrating of their service, they did in all submission beseech his Majestie, to the end that some bounds, though not utter period, might be put to their Ass like sufferings, he would vouchsafe to command their Masters to use more gratitude, atleast more humanity to so meritorious beasts. To which Apollo answered, That the severity used by Masters to their Pack-Horses, for which they so much complained, arose not from their Masters cruelty, since there was none that hated the profit of his own Pa∣trimony; but that it was occasioned through the great sloathfulness, and
monstrous dulness of the Pack-Horses: For which their Masters were forced by store of bastenadoes to egg them on to do that which they had not spirit enough to do by any vivacity of their own wit: And that they who would judge aright of the cruelties used to any whosoever, must not regard so much his genius, who useth severity, as the parties condition who complains of ill usage. The Ninth ADVERTISEMENT. A Sommary of what the Learned in Sciences have sowed and reaped. THe Harvest is already over, and the whole encrease of this year is brought by the Possessers thereof into their Grainaries; which though it hath been various, according to the nature of the grounds, and condition of seed, which hath been thereupon sown; yet the Harvest may be said in general, to be penurious. Since by the publick calamity of mankind, peoples wits are become steril and barren, as well as is the aire and earth. Those who have sowed the study of the Law, have usually had a great encrease, and many are much enriched thereby, particularly those who have cultivated the fields in the Common Pleas; their Harvest is so plentifull, as it yields fifty for one. Greater things have been seen in the fruitfull fields of the Courts at Rome, where particularly Silvestro Aldobrandini, and Markantonio Borghese, two Roman Advocates, each of whose sons were Popes, having sowed the study of the Law with much cost, and infinite labour, and watered it with their sweat, have filled their Granaries with rich treasure, and their sons who have practised the same Husbandry, have thereby purchased Principalities for their Families, and Divine Dignities for themselves. Those who have sowed the study of Phisick, have likewise had a good harvest; but not to be compared with that of the Law; for it gives on∣ly twelve for one. The Plowers of Poetry have seen their fields make a beautifull shew in the Spring of their age, and had great reason to expect a rich harvest; but when in the beginning of Iuly, the season of earing began, they saw their sweat and labours dissolve all into leaves and flowres; so as having laboured in vain, the Poets find themselves pil'd and pol'd, not having meat to eat: Wherefore this sort of Husbandry, as being more for appearance then profit, is almost given over: But little Greek hath been sown, there being in these times but small vent thereof; which may peradventure be occasioned because the bread which is made of such grain, although it hath formerly been the daily food of a numerous Na∣tion, it seems notwithstanding that it proves hard of digestion to the squeasie stomacks of modern weak-wits. Hence it is that some of the more Learned sort have only sowed so much thereof in their Gardens as will serve for their houshold expence, and rather not to appear igno∣rant, than to seem learned; and to maintain Seed, but not to make Mer∣chandize
thereof. The Seed of Hebrew is almost quite lost; for it be∣ing no longer in use, there are but very few that sow any; and certainly it redounds much to the general shame of all men, that this tongue is not ambitiously aspired unto, since God by his speaking in that Language, hath given it so great reputation. The Husbandmen of Philosophy have even lost their seed; and there∣fore the world is about to give over such Merchandize, as that which re∣quireth the fruitfull fields of subtile wits, and infinite study to make it grow and come to maturity; and since it yields but little fruit, and but very few buyers of that little, to intend it, is to loose the Principal. They who have sowed good turns (contrary to the opinion of many) have had a most plentifull harvest: and certainly such seed is as pretious as wonder∣full: For, of many bushels-full thereof, if one onely grain spring up and prosper, it yields so abundant an encrease to the Husbandman, as it makes him rich. It is true, that only magnanimous minds, and men of great liberality, attend the most noble Husbandry of sowing Benefits; for the costive avaricious men, whose greediness is such, as they would reap before they sow, dare not venture to throw that seed upon the ground, which they see is for the most part lost. Those who have sown threats and injurious words, have reaped great store of actual offences; the sowers of curses, reap great store of maledictions. Those likewise who have sown tribulation, have reaped so plentifull a harvest of Thorns, as they have filled their Granaries therewithall, even up to the top, for their own use, and from those that shall descend from them, even to the sixtieth ge∣neration. The Tenth ADVERTISEMENT. Menante comes into the Politians Ware-House, and by the Merchandizes which the Learned buy there, he studies how to know the quality of their Wits. TO make an exact judgement of every mans genius, it is very behoof∣full to frequent those places where vertuous exercises are used, and those Shops wherein vitious things are sold, and to observe them that fre∣quent them. For Libraries serve as well to make known the lovers of Learning, as living riotously denotes out Gamsters, or Cooks Shops Glut∣tons; nor is there a better way to discover vain men, then to frequent Barbers shops often, and to observe who those Ganemedes are, who those Narcissi, who having the patience to sit two hours under the Barbers hands, will be trim'd with such exquisite diligence, as they spend more time in turning up their beard, then a faire Lady doth in dressing her head: they think that every hair which stands out of order, will make them ap∣pear so many fowle fiends when they are in company. Menante there∣fore, who is very well acquainted with this piece of skill, entertains him∣self often in the aforesaid Ware-House opened in Parnassus, by the Col∣ledg
of Polititians, the which he doth, that he may come to know the genius of many of this Court, by the qualities of Ware which they buy there, that he may afterwards give a more exact account thereof to his friends and acquaintance. Three daies since Iohn Baptista Sanga, a famous Secretary in the Court of Rome, happened into this the Polititians Shop, who asked one of the young men if they had any Cole to sell, or no? He was answered, yes: and straightway some Cole was shewed him; which when the Courtier saw, he agreed upon the price, and bought forty load thereof. Menan∣te wondred to see the Courtier buy so great a quantity of Cole, which he knew was very disproportionable for him, who kept but one servant; and being very well acquainted with this Sanga, he with great confidence asked him, why, having none but himself and servant in the house, he made so great provision of Cole? To the which Sanga freely answered, that he burnt no wood in his Kitchin. Menante then asked him whether he did it for that he found it cheaper to burn Cole? To the which Sanga freely answered; That living in the Court, he was forced to measure his affairs by the surplusage of his reputation, not by sparing money; and that he hated wood-fires because they made a great smoak, and but little live coles; and that the burning of cole was very good for those that did not love their porredg should smell of smoke; and that he did not desire that the quality of his victuals should be judged of by those hounds which are only good at smelling out what men do by the smoke of his Kitchin-Chimney, but by the copious adorning of his Table. Next to Sanga, Epictetus entred the Shop, a Philosopher, who for the excellency of his soul, is of high esteem in Parnassus; and therefore very well known, admired, and observed by Menante. This man desired the Foremen of the Shop that they would shew him all the sorts of Furs, or fur'd Garments that they had; and immediately they brought unto him many Minerver skins, Sables, and other very pretious Furs; which not∣withstanding this Philosopher liked not; and therefore told a very spruce Polititian who looked to the venting of Wares, that the skins they shew∣ed were too glorious, and therefore not for his purpose; but that he de∣sired some such Furr as they wore, who would appear to be good men. When the Polititian knew what Epictetus would be at, he led him into a Room apart from the Ware-house, from whence he came out not long after, clad in a Lizards skin, lined with Lambskins. And Epictetus having put the Lizards skin inward and the Lambskin outward, Menante ran af∣ter him, and told him he had put his Garment on the wrong side outwards. But he was much amazed, when that wise Philosopher, after having smil∣ed a little at him, answered, It may be my Menante, that you know how to put on Spanish Buskins, but not how to wear these skins: This Robe is worne as you see, the Lizards skin must be worn inward; I should ne∣ver attain the end of my intents, if any one hair thereof appear with∣out. Menante then returned into the Shop, where he found a great Prince, who desired to be shewn some Ramaivoli da Ministrare: And because they shewed only four, he desired them to bring all they had in the shop; which was forthwith done. The Prince drew then from out his bosom a lift of all his servants names, which were in all 320. and first did exactly examin the condition of every several Courtier, and according to their deserts,
bought for every one of them a particular Ramaivoli; very great ones were chosen for those of great deserts, and much lesser for the rest; and Menante observed it for a great rarity, that the Ramaivoli of some ancient Courtiers, and old servants, who despising the Prince his service had be∣haved themselves negligently in their several places, were very little. Certainly a singular piece of justice, to measure a Courtiers merits more by the assiduety of his service, then by the length of time which he hath been at Court. Menante, who wondred much at the bestowing of so many Ramaivoli, told that Prince, to whom he ought particular service, that in the Courts of other great Princes, he had observed that Cooks made use of one only; wherewith, not with many scruples, but at their own discretion, they did dish up their porredg. Then said the Prince un∣to Menante, Friend, I my self have observed that way of proceeding which you speak of, till now; but with very bad consequence: For having made use of very unequal dishes in serving out porredg to my Courtiers, and giving it out to them only as I liked, I have unwisely kindled in them a fire of such jealousie, rancor, and hatred, as they mist but a little of utter∣ly undoing me and my State: A fault which hath made me see clearly, that a Prince who will have faithfull servants, and carefull Officers, must resolve to be just in his ministring unto them: For Courtiers greedily longing to taste of the porredg of their Princes favour, when they see their fellows porrenger run over with fat, and their own empty and lean, they turn the love which they ought to bear unto their Master, into hatred, their observance into disrespect, their service into disservice; and grow the more incenst against their Lords, for that they impute the so unequal dishing up of their porredg, more to want of love, ingratitude, and par∣tiality, then to inconsiderateness. And in such like injustice, they com∣plain more of the scarcity of their Masters good graces, then of their own small pittance. And to pretend that a Courtier, whose leggs his Prince shall cut off with the sword of disgraces, should speedily run to do him ser∣vice, is as great a piece of folly, as is theirs who intending to make their horse run the faster, hold in his bridle. This Prince was no sooner gone out of the shop, but another man en∣tred, who desired that he might see some Clokes which would hang to the ground, for he was to buy such a one. Forthwith divers were brought unto him, which he could not dislike, neither for colour nor cloath; only they were all of them too short. This man was of somewhat a low stature; and that those Clokes should prove too short for him, which were long enough to reach to the heels of the talest size of men, seemed strange to Menante. Wherefore coming up to this stranger, he asked him who he was, and of what profession? To which the other freely an∣swered, that he was a Sicilian; and that having built and finished two Gallies at his own charge, he meant to put to Sea with them, and gain by Freebooting; but because he knew that trade was very hatefull to the world, and but of small reputation to him that used it, he would provide himself of a long Cloke, that he might cover his intention, and the Inte∣rest which moved him to take up that occupation; and that his pretence might be thought to be, that he had taken it up only to fight against the ignorant, and such as hated Learning. When Menante had heard this, he boldly said to the Sicilian, that he did but lose his labour, for that all the Gloath made in England, was not sufficient to make such long Clokes
for Pyrats, but that two handfuls and a half of Thieves Leggs would still be seen. Soon after a Vertuosi came into the Shop, who desired to see some yard wands, whereof many were presently shewed him; one of which he seemed to like; and as he was about to pay for it, his servant told him that he needed not to be at that expence, for he had a very just yard at home. To which his Master answered, that the yard which he had at home, was just enough for himself; but that in measuring others, he clearly saw that it was needfull to use forreign yards; for having had some occasion of measuring the stomack of forreiners with the yard wand of simplicity, and of the candor of his own soul, he found he was much mistaken. Afterwards Menante saw Lorenzo Gambara, a famous Briscian Poet, en∣ter the Shop, who seeing a beautifull Indian Parret sitting upon a bench, seemed so delighted to hear her speak, as he asked her price; and was told that it would be 150 Crowns. Gambara, who if he could have made his bargen well, might have had the Parret much cheaper, said he did not dislike the price; but the mischief was, he had nat so much rea∣dy money; wherefore instead of ready money, he would give them the Bed he lay on, the Curtains, and other Furniture of his House, to be pri∣zed by two indifferent men. And the bargain being soon accepted of by those of the Shop, Gambara took the Parret to carry her home. Which when Menante saw, he was much scandalized at the Poets so rash resolution, having till then, taken him for a man of good understan∣ding; and therefore pitying his simplicity, he asked him why he, who by the clothes he wore, seemed not to have money to cast away, should out of an humor of having a Parret, not only foolishly bereave himself of his houshold-stuff, but even of his very bed, the only repose for bodily labour, and the labour of the mind. To which he answered, Know my good friend, that to purchase so pretious a Jewel as this Parret, I would not on∣ly deprive my self of all my worldly wealth, but I would sell my self to my skin, and become a slave in the Gallies, rather then miss her. I am a Lombard born, given to the usual defect of those of my Nation, of having a free tongue, and a clear heart; Noble vertues in former times, but now great faults, and which have caused much harm in Courts, and elsewhere, which I hope to amend by buying this pretious bird; which will teach me the vertue which is unknown to us Lombards, and but too well known and practised by other Nations, of suppressing the true sense of the soul, and of speaking only such words as please others, and which are got with∣out book.
The Eleventh ADVERTISEMENT. The excellent Vertue of Loyalty and Faithfulness being se∣cretly departed from Parnassus, Apollo, when he knew where she had hid her self, sent the Muses, Melpomene and Thalia, to perswade her to return. THe Noble Palace of Fidelity, which was formerly frequented by Princes, chief Officers, and abundance of the Senators of the most famous Commonwealths, is of late so little frequented, as it appears to be the house of desolation: In so much, as on the 18 of this present month, the abode of so excellent a Vertue was seen to be shut up: Which, as soon as Apollo heard of, he commanded that the Gates should be broken o∣pen, and that Fidelities self should be asked the reason of so great a novel∣ty. His Majesties command was forthwith obeyed; and the house was found to be totally void of Inhabitants. Which when the Vertuosi heard, they put on mourning weeds, sprinkled themselves over with ashes, and made other demonstrations of true sorrow; and Apollo in particular was so much grieved, and those very effects of inward sorrow were discern∣ed in him, which he shewed when the sad and memorable accident hapned of his son Phaeton. And his Majesty very well knowing that all humane Government would be quite overthrown, when the firm foundation of Fidelity which sustains, so great a building should fail, he immediately caused Proclamations to be every where made, wherein he granted even to the ignorant sort of people, and to all others that were incapable of the noble Prerogative of living with honor in the memory of men, a hundred years of immortality, to be given to whosoever should find out where so renowned a Vertue had hid her self. And he gave Letters Patents for the making good his word, out of the Bank of Homer, Virgil, Livie, and of wealthy Tacetus, all of them chief Merchants in Parnassus, who by their pretious Ink, doe use the noble Traffick of eternizing peoples names in the memory of other men. The largeness of the reward, invi∣ted many to go in search of her; and much diligence being used in the pursuit, The Royal Majesty of Fidelity was found in the Dog-Kennel of that famous Hunter Acteon, and the beautifull Adonis. This so strange news was quickly brought to Apollo, who immediately dispatched away the two Learned Muses, Melpomene and Thalia, with charge to bring her from that place so unworthy of her presence, and to re-conduct her to her wonted habitation; but all was in vain, for that famous Princess bit∣terly bewailing her own unfortunate condition; Say (said she) you Di∣vine Goddesses, to my Lord Apollo, that fraud who hath ever been my capital enemy, hath at last got the victory, in the dispute which hath been perpetually had between her and me, and that base self-interest, which in these unfortunate times doth tyrannize over the souls in all the best Nations, hath banished me from out the heart of man, which was former∣ly wholly mine. Let his Majesty likewise know, that the whole world
is so sunk in the mud of filthy pollution, as that Fidelity which hath been alwaies resolute to serve her Prince honourably, even to the effusion of her last drop of bloud, and to the emission of her utmost spirits, and which was formerly so admired and coveted, is now accounted a foolish and vain ostentation; and tell him, That to have a fradulent soul, full fraught with perfideousness, and ready to use all execrable infidelity, thereby the bet∣ter to fit ones self to the time, place, and person, is now a daies cryed up for wisdom, sagacity, and wariness of wit; and unfortunate I, nautiated to see such approbrious things, was forced to put on the resolution you see, to live amongst these dogs, amongst which I now fully find that faith∣fulness toward their Masters, which I have alwaies so much laboured to in∣graff in the self-interessed and perfidious heart of man. The Twelfth ADVERTISMENT. In the General Diet f the Learned, appointed by Apollo to be held in Helicon, his Majesty, contrary to all mens expe∣ctations, decrees Eternity to the name of Vincenzo Pinti, called in the Court of Rome, the Knight of the Lute. TIs four moneths since Apollo intimated the holding of the general Diet of the Learned, on the eight of the present at Helicon; where all the Poet-Princes, the Nobility and Burgesses of the Vertuosies Uni∣versities, being met together early in the morning in the great Hall, his Majesty sate under his Cloath of State, of transplendent Eternity, invi∣roned by the most Illustrious Muses. And because Apollo had given no∣tice in his Edicts, whereby he specified the calling of the Diet, that he had done it to give Eternity to the name of a Vertuoso whom he would propound unto them. Divers were the opinions of the Learned, touch∣ing who it should be that he would nominate; but the most general o∣pinion pitcht upon Iustus Lipius, a Flemish Gentleman, whose Writings filled Parnassus with such fragrancy, as they had provoked in all the Ver∣tuosi, rather a ravenous desire of devouring them, then an appetite to taste them. Others said, that when the publick entry should be made, and au∣dience given in the great Hall, Eternity should be given to the most famous name of the most Illustrious and vertuous Cardinal Serafino Olivieri, the Prince of Modern Scholers, who being lately come to the Confines of Parnassus, was met with unaccustomed demonstrations of ho∣nour, by most of the Vertuosi, who wondred that a man who had been imployed all his life-time in the laborious charge of the Rota Romana, the Court of Exchequer, could come to the exact knowledge of Divinity and Philosophy, that he should be the prime Lawyer of his time, a fa∣mous Mathematician, able Astrologer, and as well verst in the Greek as Latine Tongue; and that which made the wonder greater, was, that a Prelat so skilfull in so many Sciences, so full of vertues, should die a lear∣ner; for thinking that he knew but little, he in his eightieth year of age
began to learn the Arabick Tongue. The reputation of so noble a Per∣sonage was increased by his famous Library, the which was yet more fa∣mous, for having a Master more learned then all his Books; whilst the reverend Colledg of Vertuosi stood expecting, which of these two so fa∣mous men should be named, Apollo propounded Vincenzo Pinti, called in the Court of Rome, the Knight of the Lute, for his excellent skill on that Instrument. The Vertuosi were so astonished at the election of so base a person, as they in all humility told his Majestie, that they would willingly obey his commands, but that they only desired to put his Maje∣stie in mind that his most faithfull Colledg of Vertuosi, were unwilling to admit of a Fidler into their Society. To this Apollo answered, That he foresaw that the Colledg would wonder at this his choice, yet wished them willingly to decree Immortality to this man, for he knew how to com∣mand what was necessary, though it appeared strange to them: the busi∣ness was then carried by a secret scrutiny, and Eternity was favourably decreed to the name of the Knight of the Lute, who was forthwith brought into the Colledg of the Vertuosi, by the Masters of the Pegasean Cere∣mony. Then said Apollo to the Knight; You Vincenzo, are the first of your Profession that was ever admitted into this learned Colledg; an honour reserved only for those who by their perpetual pains taking, are come by the knowledge of Learning; but the present necessity of your person hath forced us to take this resolution: See therefore that you teach both Princes and privat men the necessary art of tuning Lutes, wherein many are so ignorant, as they break the strings by scruing them up too high; and some humorous phantastical mad wits are more parti∣cularly recommended to you, and which I am certain you will meet with∣all, who being obstinately resolved to make the great Base strings act the part of Trebles, they do so strangely stretch them, as though they be very great and strong, yet they break them, and quite ruine the Lutes. The Thirteenth ADVERTISEMENT. John Francisco Peranda with much ado gets leave of Apol∣lo to be admitted into Parnassus, and despiseth Jerolomo Fracastoo's pffer, who would have restored him to his eyesight, which he had lost. THough it be many years since Signior Iohn Francisco Perando did much solicite his Majestie that he might be admitted into Parnassus, and that he used great means to obtain his request, yet Apollo would ne∣ver give way thereunto; for since he brought nothing into Parnassus but a volumn of his Letters, his Majestie, who is much nauceared with such Composurs, said that he was resolved rather to throw the greatest part of the infinite volumns of Letters which were in the Library, out of it, then add one new one to it. For nothing but writings of Invention, and Nocturnal Labours being received into the Delfick Library, the innumer∣able
volumns of Letters that were there were but troublesom, and took up a great deal of room. And that all men being full of ambition and vain glory, and the manner of Modern writing being reduced to the naked speaking what they think, without any artifice, and that there be but few men who want business, and who cannot write, the easie admittance of e∣very one that writes Letters, into Parnassus, would occasion so great an inconvenience, as every one, though never so meanly learned, would print great volumns of his own Letters, only to make the miseries and base af∣fairs of his own house known: An error of the greater consequence, for that immortality is not sold at so cheap a rate in Parnassus: And that to these so many respects, it was yet further added, That it was discovered many had been so ambitiously presumptious, as to publish false Letters written to such a King, or such a great Prince, whom they had never seen, nor had ever had any business with them; a falshood the more worthy con∣sideration, for that in all true Letters, the vivacity of an unlooked for con∣ceit, sprang from the reallity of the fact, was that which was admired; whereas feigned Letters were alwaies full of affectation, a thing so much abhorred by good wits. The noble Caitaneans, did notwithstanding so much favour this their servant, as they overcame all these difficulties; moreover they made it appear to his Majestie, that of all Letters that had been yet printed, Peranda's deserved the first place. Wherefore Apollo, by reason of this testimony, and for that there were many of Peranda's Letters appertaining to History, which would be very acceptable to all the Vertuosi, he granted his request, and gave him the first place amongst all the Italian Secretaries. And though in honouring this Vertuoso, A∣pollo (according to his custom) had respect only to his merits, there were notwithstanding some lavish tongues which durst affirm, that this was done in favour to the Illustrious Cardinal Henry Caietan, a Prince who for the magnificency of his Works, for his undaunted courage, his laudable customs, candid genius, purity of soul, and for all the most excellent gifts of Nature wherewith he was richly adorned, is usually called his Ma∣jesties best beloved. It must not be forgotten, that when (according to custom) all the Ver∣tuosi were permitted to pass their censures upon Perandas writings, Clau∣deus Ptolomeus said that they deserved to be corrected, because there were many words in them which were not Tuscan. But the Censurer bad Pto∣lomeus hold his peace, for that in learned writing, the Ingenious Vertuosi noted the conceptions, and that they were only malignant Pedants who censured words. And Peranda having lost his eye-sight some years before his death, Ierollomo Fracastoro proferred to restore him to his sight again; which if he should effect, Peranda promised him 500 crowns for his Cure. The Phisitian being then to do his work, Peranda was set down in a chaire, and asked the Phisitian whether all things were in rea∣diness wherewith to restore his eye-sight? The Phisitian said there was nothing wanting, for he had all his Instruments and Plasters. These things which you have named, said Peranda, do but little import towards giving me that comfort which I desire by my eye sight: Tell me, how goes the world? Even as it did, said the Phisitian, when you fell blind. If it be so, replies Peranda, I will not lay out my money in recovery of that eye-sight which I willingly lost that I might not see the present world drowned in those inormious and hatefull loathsomnesses, which do so much nauceate good mens eyes.
The Fourteenth ADVERTISEMENT. The Italian Academies send Commissioners into Parnassus to obtain some remedy from Apollo for their corruptions; and find the business impossible to be effected. THe Commissioners sent to this Court from the Italian Academies, had not audience till the twentieth of the present month; at which time they told his Majestie, that the fundamental Principles of all Academies being excellently good and vertuous, the Schollers were at first very stu∣dious, and diligent in their disputations, and all other learned exercises; but that this so ardent desire of knowledge did with time so cool in them, as also those vertuous exercises; that whereas at first Academies were fre∣quented by privat men, and held in great reputation by Princes; in pro∣cess of time they grew so forsaken and despised, as they had often, to the great discouragement of Learning, been inhibited; as proving rather pre∣judicial, than advantagious. And that though many remedies had been applyed to this evil, yet none of them had procured the desired operati∣on: Wherefore the Italian Academies being much devoted to his Maje∣stie, were forced to have recourse to him, whom they did humbly beseech that he would be pleased to give them some preservative Medicine against so great corruption. These Commissioners were very graciously recei∣ved, and listened to by Apollo, who recommended the business to the Reformers of Learning: To whom when the Commissioners came, they found them so imployed in the important business which they are perpe∣tually troubled with, di far delle sancie fuse, with making much of no∣thing, as that they excused themselves, as not being then at leasure to at∣tend that business. Wherefore the Commissioners returned again to A∣pollo, who referred them to the Regio Collateral; where the Academies demands were often disputed and discust; and yesterday they had for their last answer, That all those Gentlemen after much debate and propo∣sals, were at last resolved that the saying was true, that Omnia orta occi∣dunt, & aucta senesunt. Wherefore it was impossible to prevent, but that a pair of shooes, how neat and spruce soever they were at the first, should in process of time become torne and ilfavoured. That therefore the lovers of Learning should be very diligent, in suddenly suppressing what∣soever Academy had swarved too farr from the good Rules of its first In∣stitution, and at the same time found new ones, to the end that the world (little to the credit of the Vertuosi) might not be full of unprofitable A∣cademies, but might alwaies enjoy the benefit which it receives from good ones.
The Fifteenth ADVERTISEMENT. Anneus Seneca being accused before Apollo of two fowle Vices which were commonly found in all the Sects of Mo∣ral Philosophers; doth excellently well defend his own Cause, and the like of his Associates. THe last night, to the infinite wonder of all the Vertuosi in Parnas∣sus, Anneus Seneca, that Prince of Moral Philosophers, and one so well beloved by his Majestie, was made prisoner; various were the discourses which so great a novelty occasioned. Some thought that it might be, for that his Majestie would have him give a very particular account to the world, by what Philosphical precepts he had in so short a time of his serving Nero, gotten the worth of seven millions and a half, by which so great riches, he had cast so fowle a shame upon that poverty, and upon that moderation of mind, which in his writings he had made so particular profession of. A thing so much the more scandalous, as by the testimony of many Historians, it plainly appeared he had been a frequent cheater of Legacies, which he had fowlly extorted from wealthy men. Others said that he was imprisoned for the Adultery which some will not stick to say he committed with Agrepina; and many were of opinion that it was for having been cause of the Pysonian Conspiracy against Nero, wherein it was firmly held that Seneca had not only a hand, but that he had so fowlly given himself over to ambition, as after so great a fault com∣mitted, he had suffered himself to be perswaded he might become Empe∣ror. Nor were there wanting those who constantly affirmed that Apollo was exceeding angly with this Philosopher, for that Nero himself had con∣fest that the wicked Paracide which he had committed, was not only done by Sencca's knowledge, but by his perswasion, not out of any love he bore to his Master, but to make him commit so horrid a wickedness, that he might ascertain his own so unexhaustable riches which he had accumu∣lated to his own shame, and his Masters prejudice. But after his exami∣nation, Seneca found, that not only he, but all his fellow moral Philoso∣phers were accused for having very much scandalized all men by two fowl vices which they are given unto above above all other men, to wit, of be∣ing revengefull, and ingratefull. Tis said that Seneca acknowledged these accusations to be true, but that he, nor the rest of moral Philoso∣phers, ought not to be blamed for what was laid to their charge, since e∣ven thereby their goodness did manifestly appear; for good men never offend any; and consequently, since they gave no occasion of being in∣jured, it ought not to be held strange, if they were more mindfull of inju∣ries received, then other men, it being common amongst men, that they know not how to pardon injuries, who best know they never deserved them. And that likewise for ingratitude which moral Philosophers were daily seen to use towards their benefactors, it was no blockishness in them, as was every where affirmed by their illwillers, but that therein the candor
and great goodness of their souls, was clearly discern'd: For moral Phi∣losophers being guided in all their actions by their very cautious souls, did know by the instinct of Nature that all the good and graces which they in this world did receive from men, did proceed from the all-powerful hand of God; it was therefore no wonder that they did not own them from men. The Sixteenth ADVERTISEMENT. Ambassadors are sent from the Colledg of Gardners, to Apol∣lo, to obtain some Instrument from him, whereby they might without any cost or charge, cleanse their Gardens of all improfitable hearbs, and are laught at by his Maje∣stie. AMbassadors from all the Gardners of the world, are come to this Court, who have acquainted his Majestie, that were it either from the bad conditions of their seed, the naughtiness of the soyle, or from the evil celestial influences, so great abundance of weeds grew up in their Gardens, as not being any longer able to undergoe the charges they were at in weeding them out, and of cleansing their Gardens, they should be forced either to give them over, or else to inhaunce the price of their Pompions, Cabiges, and other hearbs, unless his Majestie would help them to some Instrument, by means whereof they might not be at such excessive charge in keeping their Gardens: His Majestie did much won∣der at this the Gardners foolish request, and being full of indignation, an∣swered their Ambassadors, that they should tell those that sent them, that they should use their accustomed manual Instruments, their spades and mathooks, for no better could be found, nor wished for, and cease from demanding such impertinent things. The Ambassadors did then couragiously reply, that they made this re∣quest, being moved thereunto by the great benefit which they saw his Majestie had been pleased to grant to Princes, who to purge their States from evil weeds, and seditious plants, which to the great misfortune of good men, do grow there in such abundance, had obtained the miraculous Instruments of Drum and Trumpet, at the sound whereof, Mallows, Hen∣bane, Dogs-caul, and other pernitious plants of unusefull persons, doe of themselves willingly forsake the ground, to make room for Lettice, Burnet, Sorrel, and other usefull hearbs of Artificers and Citizens, and wither of themselves and die, amongst the brakes and brambles out of the Garden (their Country) the which they did much prejudice; and that the Gardners would esteem it great happiness if they could obtain such an Instrument from his Majestie. To this Apollo answered, That if Prin∣ces could as easily discern seditious men, and such as were unworthy to live in this worlds Garden, as Gardners might know nettles and henbane, from spinnage and lettice, he would have onely given them halters and axes for their instruments, which are the true pickaxes by which the se∣ditious
herbs (Vagabonds, which being but the useless luxuries of humane Fecundity, deserve not to eat bread) may be rooted up. But since all men were made after the same manner, so as the good could not be known from the bad, by the leaves of face, or stalks of stature; the Instruments of Drum and Trumpets were granted for publick peace-sake to Princes, the sound whereof was chearfully followed by such plants as took delight in dying, to the end, that by the frequent use of gibbets, wholsom herbs should not be extirpated instead of such as were venemous. The Ambassadors would have replyed again; but Apollo with much indignation, bad them hold their peace, and charged them to be gon from Parnassus with all speed, for it was altogether impertinent and ridiculous to compare the purging of the world from seditious spirits, with the weed∣ing of noysom hearbs out of a Garden. The Seventeenth ADVERTISEMENT. A doubt arising upon the truth of a usual Saying, That a man must eat a peck of Salt with another, before he can perfectly know him. Apollo makes the point be argued in a gene∣ral Assembly of Learned men which he causeth to be cal∣led for that purpose. THe common saying, That to know a man exactly, one must eat a peck of salt with him, being questioned by some Vertuosi, Apollo being unwilling that the Addages of the Learned, which are general Rules, and inviolable Laws, by which his Vertuosi steer their lives; being I say, un∣willing that the truth of them should be any waies scrupled at; many daies since made it be disputed very exactly and diligently in a general Assembly of the Vertuosi: Where this saying was proved to be so true, as many of the Assembly were of opinion that half a peck more should be added to the former dose; grounding their Judgements upon this appa∣rent reason, That the shamefull vice of dissembling, and infamous practice of hypocrisie being known daily to encrease amongst men, it stood with all the grounds of good Arithmatick, that as corruptions encreased in wicked men, necessary remedies should be multiplyed by the Learned, whereby stoutly to resist vice in its rise. But not so farr to shame the pre∣sent age, as to shew, that whilst the malady of vice encresed in the world, remedies grew less, the wiser sort of the Vertuosi thought it not good to alter the ancient measure; wherefore it was generally concluded by them all, that the saying was very true, for what concerned men; but was very false in women, who without eating either salt or oyle, knew the very thoughts of their husbands the first night they lay with them.
The Eighteenth ADVERTISEMENT. The Hircanians send Ambassadors to Apollo, to be resolved by his Majestie in the Important Article, Whether it be lawfull for the people to kill a Tyrant? AMbassadors came the 19 of this present monenth from the Warlike Nation of Hircania to this Court, where two daies after they had Audience given them in great pomp by his Royal Majestie: For the Ver∣tuosi being very desirous to see the Customs and Habits of Forreiners, came in great numbers to honour Personages so quallified. The Ambas∣sadors being brought before Apollo, the chiefest of them said, That the famous Nation of Hircania being at present miserably opprest by a Prince, who with unheard of cruelty did Tyrannize over them, had been per∣swaded by the fame of his Majesties wise and true answers, to send them so farr a Journey as to Parnassus, only to know the true decission of that weighty Question, Whether or no it were lawfull for the common peo∣ple to kill a Tyrant? It is not to be believed how strangely Apollo was incenst to hear such a question propounded; he was so mightily moved to anger against those Ambassadors, as giving no other answer, he strait∣way rose up in an unwonted fury, and commanded, that for example to others who should dare to propound so pernitiously seditious doubts, they should be immediately drag'd out of the Hall; which was accordingly done. Such an action appeared so hidious to the Illustrious Muses and the Senat of Vertuosi, as not any one of them durst intercede with his Majestie in the behalf of these unfortunate Ambassadors. But Apollo seeing much confusion and amazement in the faces of his beloved Muses, and Vertuosi, said, he thought he had too slightly revenged himself upon those Ambassadors, for this their so scandalous and perfidious demand; for that it was not only not lawfull for the people to dispute so seditious an Article, but that they should keep it like fire, from entring into their brests, since such a doubt would be apt to cause more mischief in the world, then Paris his Apple had done. For those that were born in a Re∣publicks Liberty, had no occasion to raise any such Dispute; since in a free Country, every light shadow, little semblance farr-fetcht suspition, or least jealousie that a Senator should affect to Tyrannize over his free Country, was sufficient to cause revenge be taken by a halter or hatchet, without cavelling upon such foolish words, and calling in question a busi∣ness of so great importance; for in a well governed Commonwealth, if a Senator should incur any such suspition, any colour, shew, or suspition, though never so remote, ought to serve for so convincing proofs, as the party accused must first be hanged, and his process to be made afterwards by usual course of Law. But that in Monarchies, where the base Ple∣beians were incapable of themselves to discern between a lawfull Prince and a Tyrant, they ought, for the great commodity which the peoples ig∣norance gives to such as are ambitious, seditious, lovers of novelty, and
such as dispair of their own affairs, of painting out wicked Tyrants for le∣gitimate Princes, and legitimate Princes for cruel Tyrants; to keep the world from slaughter and execrable confusion, they ought, I say, accor∣ding to Tacitus his precept; Bonos Imperatores voto expetere qualescun{que} tollerare. Tacit. lib. 4. Hist. To pray for good Princes, and to bear with any. This being said, Apollo, who out of his innate goodness cannot endure that any should part distasted from him, though they by their impertinen∣cies have given occasion of offence, commanded that the Ambassadors should be sent for back; who when they appeared before his Majestie, he said unto them, Beloved Hercanians, To people who love to live peace∣fully, Ferenda Regum ingenia, nec usui crebras mutationes, Tacit. lib. 12. Ann. Princes humors are to be born withall, and then especially when they are occasioned by puniard, venem, or any other mischievous machinati∣on: For the alwaies just God being the only competent Judge of Princes, and not the people, who are continually carried about by seditious men, you ought, Quomodo sterilitatem, aut nimios imbres, & cetera Naturae mala, ita luxum, vel avaritium Dominantium Tollerare. To tollerate the luxury or avarice of Soveraigns, as you do barrenness, too much rain, and other evil of Nature. The Ninteenth ADVERTISEMENT. Nero the Emperor, for a very singular commendation given him by Cornelius Tacitus, rewards him with a gift of 25 Mules loaden with Crowns of Gold. VEry Singular is the news which happened this very week in Parnas∣sus, of 25 Mules loaded with Gold, which Nero the Emperor sent to Cornelius Tacitus: All the Vertuosi were much astonished at so rich a present, and forthwith ran to Tacitus his house, some to know the true worth of so much treasure; others to know what had occasioned so rich a gift; and they found that the reward came to 1250000 crowns which Nero gave for the praise which the Historian gave him, when he said that Nero had not infra servos Ingenium, Tacit. Annal. lib. 13. The most learned of this State said, that though Nero's gift was very splendid, yet Tacetus had deserved much more from him in that excellent praise which he gave him, that his genius was not to be subject to the base Dominion of a servant, was more worth then many rich Treasures, because there are but few Princes that deserve such praise. On the contrary, the meaner sort of the learned thought that reward did so farr exceed Tacetus his me∣rit, as they did not stick to speak ill of so heroick an action, terming it one of Neroes prodigallities, and one of those inconsiderate profuseness used by shallow pated Princes, when by giving past number or measure, they deserve rather to be esteemed foolish squanderers, then vertuously liberal. Wherefore these men, more moved out of envy to Tacitus, then out of any love they bore to Neroes honor, told Nero, that most of the
learned in Parnassus did not approve that he should reward two or three bare words written by the Historian, with so great a mass of money, who had said so many obsenities to his prejudice, as did totally obscure that praise which he had so highly rewarded. 'Tis said for certain, that Ne∣ros answer was; That as excellent Picture-drawers did the better set off the figures which they draw, by dark shadows, so true Historians, by the liberal mention of vices, and not the bare imperfection of Heroes, whose∣memories they doe by their writings eternize, purchase believe of the praises which they give them, no more shamefull invectives being to be spoken of Princes, then exagerated praises, without making any mention of those defects which are so joyned to humanity; which when they are truely related, they were true testimonies of the writers impartiallity; and that therefore he did the more value the imputation written of him by Tacetus, for that the praise which he gave him, did exceed all the shame∣full things which he could possibly write of him: For as all the most ex∣quisite vertues which a Prince can be indued with, were directly darkned if he suffered under the execrable vice of subjecting himself to a servant, so the vertue of knowing how to be Master of those that serve, did so well quallifie any whatsoever Prince, as the splendor of so sublime a vertue, did sufficiently cover the fowlest faults: And that all this was not without good reason; for as it was impossible to deny but that the unfortunate man who undid himself in seeking the Philosophers stone by his Furna∣ces and Limbecks, was a mad man fit to be chained up; so it must be confest that the Prince who having made an ignorant servant of his, a Golden Ox, did adore him like an Idol, was of necessity to be esteemed a fool past all recovery. The Twentieth ADVERTISEMENT. The Vertuosi visit the chief Church in Parnassus, and begg of God an important favour. YEsterday being the first day of April, according to the custom of this Court, the Illustrious Poets, accompanied by the Muses, went to visit the chief Temple in Parnassus, and with great devotion beseeched Gods Divine Majestie, that he would vouchsafe for his mercies sake, to preserve his faithfull Vertuosi from the lies of such persons, who being wholly composed of malignity, are notwithstanding held by Princes to be exact honest men.
The XXI. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo, to incourage Senators of Free Countries, to cultivate Liberty, without affecting Tyranny, causeth an exceeding wofull spectacle to be shewn in Melpomene's Amphithea∣ter. APollo firmly believing, that in free Countries, more then in any o∣ther sort of Government, Laws are instituted for the common good, that therein men set their minds more to undertake; and to perform gal∣lant works, and that learned Sciences, and all civil Pollicy do there florish most; doth much abhor those Tyrants who commit outrages upon the Liberty of a well regulated Commonwealth: As those who to maintain an usurped Power, are bound to hate men of great worth, and to perse∣cute their excellent vertues with the same severity, with the which Law∣full Princes punish vice; and though their genius lead them to encline to clemency, they are notwithstanding necessitated to use cruelty, and to Govern the State vitiously, it being very true, that Nemo unquam Impe∣rium flagitio quaesitum bonis artibus exercuit. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist. No man did ever Govern that Empire well, which he came by ill. His Majestie, to affright the Inhabitants of free Countries from committing like wick∣ednesse, caused the Senators that were resident in that State, to meet yesterday in Melpomenes stately Theatre; and having made Cesar the Dictator appear on the other side of the Theatre, he brought in his sister Actia, together with his Nephew Augustus, and his daughter Iulia, and the children which she had by her husband Marcus Agrippa, Lucius, and Gaius Cesar, Agrippa Posthumus, Giulia, and Agrippina, with the nu∣merous issue that the latter bore to her so famous husband Germanicus. It was a sad and miserable spectacle to Cesar, to see how by his prodigious ambition, he had not only drawn on his own cruel death, but had totally extinguished his bloud, which happened in a short time after: For cer∣tainly it was a very compassionate spectacle to see, that of so copious an offspring as proceeded from his eldest sister Octavia, and Giulia, daugh∣ter to Augustus, there was not any one who had not ended their lives, ei∣ther by poyson, sword, famin, or some other miserable death. To this Cesar's so great heart-grief, was added the immence rage which assailed him when he saw the Roman Empire which he had purchased to his so great reputation, and with the effusion of his bloud, should passe after Augustus his death, into that cruel and bloud-thirsty Family of the Claudii, which did so detestably persecute the bloud of the Giulii, from whom they had inherited so glorious an Empire. Nor was the Compunction less which this so very sad sight caused in all the lookers on; for thereby the usual calamity of Tyrants was recal'd into their minds, who are not only unable to evade Divine inevitable Justice of laying the foundations of new Tyranny, by their own violent deaths, but that God, who is still severe in punishing the wickedness of ambitious men, would not permit that his progeny who had dared to undertake so horrid an excess, should
long enjoy the power of State which had been so ignominiously gotten: and which by divine providence fell soon into the power of a family, who forced by good policy, to extinguish the first Tyrants whole race, took publick revenge for subjugated liberty. Moreover it was a calamity which the eyes of the cruellest men that were in that Theater could not behold, not the hearts of the most ambitious tollerate, to see that all Tyrannies are laid with the materials of so many violent deaths, which the unslackt lime of such wicked injustice with the sand of so many horrible cruelties, and with the water of large lakes of humane blood: whilst all the Ver∣tuosie wept to see this so lamentable Spectacle, Apollo said with so fear∣ful a voice, as infused terrour into every one; behold said he, you Ty∣rants, who are so desirous of Soveraignty, these that you have here before your eyes are the ends of your proud thoughts; in these unfortunate Tra∣gedies does the longing, and immoderate thirst which such as you have over dominion terminate; and those who have impiously made themselves Masters of their Countries liberty, bring their families to this greatness that you see. Thou Caesar, who by thy wicked going about to inslave the so Noble Roman republick didst make it appear, that thou either didst not know, or didst not fear God, see and behold to what height of infelici∣ty he is able to bring thee, and all thine. Though Caesar gave apparent signes that he was much confused and af∣flicted to hear these words; yet Apollo the more to rent in pieces the soul of this ambitious man, and to comfort his Vertuosie, who were much afflicted at this so horrid sight, and to encourage Senators to preserve the liberty of their Country, commanded that the humane Neptune of the Sea, the alwaies glorious Prince Andrea d'Oria should be admitted into the Theater, with all his most excellent family. Whereupon Caesar, be∣holding the happiness of that renowned Family, and the glory of those Se∣nators, who in the Commonwealth of Genoa were esteemed, honour'd and observed, as mindful of the great benefit which they had received from that new founder of their new liberty; and that that Prince of every happy memory, had left so glorious a fame of his modesty behind him in those Citizens; the envy he bore to the Grandezza of those Heroes did tor∣ment him more then his own misfortune: and he then knew, that when he and those that descended from him had conquerd France, he should have done better, and more advisedly, if he had undertaken, as did that glorious Prince Andrea d'Oria, to reestablish the liberty of his Country, which was faln into the disorder of a confused Dimocrasie, and to beat down the Tyranny of that ignorant people, with those very weapons with which he had trampled upon the Senates authority: and to have planted a perfect Aristocracy in his Country, and so have won unto himself the high Title, and glorious prerogative of being the second founder of the Roman liberty, by the doing whereof, he and his posterity mought have been as famous in Rome, as the Family of the Dorii shall ever be glorious in the Noble Republick of Genoa, as long as the world shall last.
The XXII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Inthroned Academians, having admitted the chief she-Po∣ets, or Poetesses into Parnassus, Apollo commands, that they be taken from thence. THe inthroned Academians, contrary to their ancient Institutions, did some few months since admit into their Academy the Vertuous La∣dies, Victoria Colonna, Veronica Gambera, Laura Teracina, and other fa∣mous Lady-Poets of Parnassus; which was done with so great applause of the Vertuosie, as the Academians set on fire by the beauty of those La∣dies, were not onely very frequent at their learned exercises; but did eve∣ry day publish such Poesie, as made the very Muses wonder: but it was not long ere his Majesty smelt a very displeasing savour; wherefore he commanded the chief of the inthroned, by no means to admit any longer such like parties: For he had found at last, that Womens true Poetry consisted in their Needle and Spindle; and that the learned exercises of Women, together with the Virtuosie, was like the sporting and playing of Dogs, which after a while ends in getting upon one anothers backs. The XXIII ADVERISEMENT. Justus Lipsius being solemnly admitted into Parnassus, the next day after his entrance, did, contrary to all mens expecta∣tion, accuse Tacitus for being impius, and reaps but little credit thereby JUstus Lipsius (as hath been formerly said) arrived some few daies a∣go upon the confines of this State, whose writings, though they were presently voted worthy to be read by all the Vertuosi, and to be deserved∣ly placed amongst the eternal labours of the Learned, in his Majesties Li∣brary; and that consequently eternity should be decreed unto his name in full Senate, with as plenary prerogative as hath at any time been grant∣ed by this State to any other Subject, yet the publick entrance of a per∣son so highly qualified was deferred till Tuseday was sevennight last; be∣cause the noble Flemish Nation would signalize her self upon this occasi∣on, with extraordinary demonstration of honour to this her Citizen: wherefore they erected many Triumphant Arches with much splendor and magnificency in the chiefest places of Pernassus. The Cavalcata was remarkable; for many of the Learned in all Sciences favoured this Se∣nator, who having received from his Majesty the noble title of Vniversall
in all Sciences, every one thought he was knowing in an things, and eve∣ry one wondred when they saw, that at the very first meeting Lipsius sa∣luted the Noblest Romans who went to meet him, by name, as if he had particularly known them. His learned writings were carryed by Caius Valerius Patercolus, who though his age had made him lame, yet to shew himself thankful to Lipsius for some good turn he had received from him, did beg this favour of his Majesty. By express order from Apollo, Lipsi∣us rode in the midst between moral Seneca, and politick Tacitus; but a great uprore was likely to have risen hereupon; for Tacitus having alwaies formerly granted the right hand to Seneca, by reason of his prerogative of age, and his reputation in the most prised Sciences; yet he did so hotly contest with him for it upon this occasion, as upon the noise thereof all the learned Moralists running in to aid Seneca, and a squadron of Polititians to assist Tacitus, it was feared some great scandal might be occasioned there∣by: but the Moralists struck saile, for they knew that if it should come to blowes, they should not be able long to resist those insolent Polititians, who not having any regard to what is just or honest, thought it not dis∣honourable, but rather great worth to overthrow their enemies, though it were by treachery: but all the business was quieted upon the appearance of the Masters of the Pegasean Ceremonies, who by order from the ho∣nourable, the Lord Censors, said to Seneca, that since Sciences, as fruits in Rome, and fish in Venice, had their seasons, he might do wel to yeild the right hand for that time to Tacitus, and that for the most apparent injury which he should thereby receive, he should solace himself with the remembrance of what honours had been done unto him in the better times of his former daies; wherein those very self-same moral Sciences, which in these pre∣sent unfortunate times are reputed meere predantickness, and old mouldy things, were in so great esteem, as that they were valued as the very pre∣tious jewel of all learning; and the rather, for that this present age, which consists wholly of self interest and violence, did so highly exalt the practice of Policy, as that by scandalous example it permitted Peripatetical Philo∣sophie, which was the supream Ladie of all humane Sciences, to be troden underfoot. Seneca obeyed the Censors command, but much against his will; for moral Philosophers who make so great shew of seeming humili∣ty, are even borne with intence ambition. When Lipsius was come to the Foro Delphico, he was not permitted to see the splendor of his Majesty in open air, nor was he met and received at the foot of the Pallace staires by the Muses; for those who write inven∣tions of their own, and who are beloved by Apollo and the Muses are onely thought worthy of those singular favours: whereas Lipsius his learned writings were onely found to be laborious, and miraculous for the variety of reading that was in them; a thing so common to all the Trans-Alpine writers, whose braines are thought to lye in their backs, as it is usual with Italians, whose braines lye in their heads, to invent alwaies new things, and to labour with matter taken out of the Mine of their owne ingeniosi∣ty, with much sweat and toyl, nor with stuff, borrowed from other Wri∣ters; it being a thing thought belonging to beggerly, botchers, and to broken Criticks, to peice out the tatterd Gownes of the Learned, but to cut out new clothes, after a new manner, and with imbroideries not for∣merly seen, a thing belonging to an experienced and skilful Tailor Somsay that Lipsius was thus smally favoured by Apollo, and by the Muses, and that
they were offended with him, for that they having indued him with so noble a Talent, as he might like a Tacitist have written the civil wars of Flanders, a thing so much desired by the Colledge of the Vertuosi; yet he for certain respects which his Majesty held unworthy, had hitherto resisted the inspiration given him, by his Majesty and the divine God∣desses: but this last is a suspition grounded onely upon likelyhoods, whereas the former is sustained by Truth. Apollo stood to see this Caval∣cata in his little Cabinet, which stands close by Auroras lodging, and which Italian Poets call the celestical Balcony, and he was clad in a white Cloude, which (as upon like occasions is usual) just when Lipsius enterd the Foro Delfico, was by a western wind a little rarified; so as his Majesty by the spendor of one only beam with which he beheld this his Vertuoso, cleans∣ed him from all the stains of ignorance, which till then remained in him, and made him become a perfect Litterato. When Lipsius was afterwards come into the great Hall where Audience is given; just as he began his Oration, with humble thanks to Apollo, for the incomparable grace he had vouchsafed him, he was forced to hold his peace, by reason of a sore mischance which befell the learned Pausanias, a Greek Writer, who was sate on the Cronologist Classis; where he fell into so deep a sound, as he was thought dead, and all the reverend Cosmographists ran to help him, Pausanias familiar friends said, that that accident might be occasioned by meer weakness; for that it being late, he had not refresht his soul in his Library, as he used to do before he came out of his house, by taking two spoonfuls of Conserves made of Pindarus his Poesies; but Euterpe whose humble servant Pausanias professeth himself to be, sprinkling two of Thu∣cidides substantial sentences in his face, made that vertue return into him which was almost lost. Then Pausanius, not considering how great a fault he committed in hindring Lipsius from ending his Oration: O devouring Time (exclaimed he, being overcome with greif of soul) O envious old age, which by your sharp and biting teeth, consume even those things, which were made by men, to the end that they might for ever live upon the earth; how is it possible that the vicissitude of things should be so cer∣tainly affixt to the variation of time, as that my beloved Greece, former∣ly the mother of Learning, the Queen of Sciences, the honoured and safe habitation of liberal Arts, the Garden of the world, the natural Country of the famous Vertuosi in all sorts of Learning, the onely place in the world eternized by my pen, should now be wholly become ignorance, to∣tally savedg, uninhabited, and so dismantled of all those both publick and private edifices, wherewith thou didst formerly so much abound, as now there is nothing to be seen in thee but poor Cottages, and that the famous Athenian Orators, Phylosophers and Historians, are become in these our unfortunate daies, base Oile-men in Constantinople: whereas on the contra∣ry; Flanders, which in my time was nothing but soletary woods, incum∣bred with marish grounds, full of savedg beasts, and men more savedg, where nothing was to be seen but hideous Caverns, poor Cottages, inha∣bited by beggers, should now be become a very fruitful, beautiful, and pleasant Province; inhabited by civil, wealthy and industrious men, full of noble Cities, adorned with both publick and private edifices, very sumptuously built; and which makes the wonder the greater, that it should be a happy Country, where the learning of the ancient Greeks and La∣tins, seem to have tane up her eternal abode: all the learned Grecians, as
Aristotle, Plato, Demosthenes, and Pindorus, were so moved at what Pau∣sanius had said, as also many others who could not forbear shedding of tears; but before Lipsius his Ceremonies could be compleated, fell into so great lamentations, as being followed therein by the other Vertuosi; Lipsius, who knew that his Oration could not be heard, by reason of the great noise which those sighs and groans made, came down from his seat, being satisfied for the injury which Pausanius had given him by that inter∣ruption, with the consolation he received from the Encomium he had made of his Country the Flemmish Nation. It was believed by all the Learned of this State, that great intimacy and friendship was contracted between Cornelius Tacitus and Giustus Lipsius, by reason of the many reciprocal courtesies which had past be∣tween them; but to the wonder of all the Learned in Parnassus, the con∣trary happened: For two daies since, Lipsius accused Tacitus for having said some very impious words in his first Book of Histories. His Maje∣stie much incenst to hear such an accusation, commanded Tacitus to ap∣pear before him the next morning, and to make his defence; Tacitus o∣beyed this command with such undaunted alacrity, as his learned Friends, who had been much astonished, were greatly cheered. I, who give you an account of these Informations, was present when Beato Renano, and Flavio Orsino, both of them being Tacitus his good friends, drew Lipsi∣us aside, and earnestly entreated him that he would desist from that accu∣sation, which would prove a great dishonour to himself, if he should not be able to make it good, and would prove very unfortunate if he should prove it: For Tacitus being the first Politick Baron of Parnassus, and therefore much followed by potent men, who have long hands, and short consciences, they would certainly in time work their revenge. To this Lipsius answered, that howsoever he would discharge his conscience; which being said, he appeared before Apollo, where came likewise Taci∣tus attended by the most pollisht Vertuosi of this Court. Then Lip∣sius thus began; That he was a friend to Socrates, a friend to Plato, but a greater friend to Truth. Here Tacitus interrupted him, and bad him leave those preambles, which smelt so rammish in that place, and fall round∣ly to his Impeachment, for his fellow Polititians could not with pati∣ence hear premeditated preludiums from them from whom they expe∣cted fowle performances. Then replyed Lipsius, You in your first Book of History have taken the freedom to say, That God cares not otherwise for mans welfare, then in what concerns punishment; a conceit so much the more impious, for that it would be a great fault in an earthly Prince, much more in God (whose peculiar Vertue, Mercy is, and Charity to all mankind) to say a thing so exorbitantly wicked. Your very words (said he) are these; Nec enim unquam attrocioribus Populi Romani Cladibus, magisve justis judiciis approbatum est, non esse Cura Deis securitatem no∣stram, esse Ultionem. Tacit, lib. 1. Hist. Tis true that you may plead in excuse of this your great fault, that you were led thereinto by unwary Lucan, who having said the same thing be∣fore you, wrot these Verses:
Foelix Roma quidem, Cives{que} habitura superbos: Si libertatis superis, tam Cura placeret, Quam vindict a placet. Blest Rome, great Citizens might well have had, Had the Gods minded her good as well as bad. When Tacitus had heard this, It grieves me, said he, my Lipsius, that you who have boasted your self to be the only Oracle of my obscurest meanings, have so grosly erred in a poynt which so much imports my re∣putation. For those words of mine which you have now recited, are so farr from being impious and wicked, as you accuse them to be, as I will prove them to be pious and holy: and that you may know I speak truth, I will by a circumlocution of many words, interpret that my conceit, which ac∣cording to my custom, being exprest in few, you cannot conceive. Af∣ter having in the beginning of my Histories, acquainted the Reader with what I intended to treat of in my whole Work, I said, I undertook a la∣bour full of various chances; Atrox praeliis, discors seditionibus, ipsa eti∣am pace savum, Quatuor Principes ferro interempti, tria Bella Civilia, &c. Cruelty in Wars, seditious discord, savageness even in peace, four Princes assassinated, three civil Wars, &c. When I had related the great calamities and miseries which the Romans suffered after Nero's death, I said they were so many in number, and such in quality, as it had never at any time been better verified, by the bitter sufferings of the Romans, and by Divine Justice, that that same God who had formerly so favoured and protected the people of Rome, as being as it were inamored of their greatness, it seemed his only care was, to render them perpetually victorious, triumphant, and Masters of the World, was seen so to change his mind after Nero's death, as it did evidently appear; Non esse Curae Deis securitatem nostram: which is, That he had quite gi∣ven over the care of their welfare; esse ultionem; which is, that he mind∣ed only to take revenge for the great distastes which they had given him. Is it then Lipsius! a wicked conception to say, that by reason of the great excesses committed by the people of Rome, both before, and after the death of Nero, Gods care of protecting them from all evil, was turned to se∣vere Justice in afflicting them with all sorts of misery. The thing which you have said (said Lipsius) is very pious; but it doth not square with the words which I accuse of wickedness, which will then receive the interpre∣tation and sence which you give them, when the words, securitatem no∣stram were only to be understood of the people of Rome; but they being universal, it is apparent that you comprehend all mankind: That by the word Nostram, upon which I perceive you chiefly ground your self (re∣plyed Tacitus) I only understood the people of Rome, Lucan makes it clear unto you, who you were pleased to say, led me into this error; he expressing my very conceit in Verse, mentions only the Romans; affirm∣ing that Rome would have been perpetually happy, and would have kept with her Citizens in continual glory, if God Almighty had been as well pleased to preserve her in her ancient Liberty, as he was to revenge him∣self of her. And do not you think it to be true, Lipsius, that the Ro∣mans, who could never put a period to the insatiat ambition which they
had to rule over the whole world, did so provoke Gods anger against them, by laying so many Noble Monarchies and gallant Commonwealths dessolate, by having plundred the world, and filled it with fire and bloud, to satiate their unquenchable thirst after wealth, as after having delivered them over into the hands of cruel Tyrants, by whom they made tryal of the most deplorable miseries, he at last permitted, that by exemplary shame, they should be trampled upon by the most barbarous Nations of the earth? Certainly a most unfortunate end; but much merited by the Roman ambition, cruelty, and avarice: precipices into which the Divine Majestie of God causes those Empires to fall, which know not how to prefix bounds to their insatiate desire of Reigne. But to make your er∣ror appear yet more clear unto you, Do you remember, Lipsius, that ever I made use of that word, Nostram, or Nostri, in any other part of my Writings? I remember (said he) that you mention how Tiridates, King of Armenia, who was sent to Rome by Corbalone, to acquit himself before Nero, of some imputations that were laid upon him, did capitulate with Corbalone before he took his journey, that no servitude at all should be made to appear in him Tiradates, that he should not be made to lay down arms any where during his journey, that he should be admitted to visit the Governors of the Countries, without being kept out of dores, and that he might be suffered to keep the same grandezza in ceremonious ob∣servances, as did the Consuls; which way of proceeding was laughed at by Corbalone, and esteemed a barbarous vain-glory, as you your self do in these words publish; Silicet externae superbiae sueto, non erat notitia nostri: apud quos jus Imperii valet, innania transmittantur. Tacit. lib. 15. Annal. Doubtless, by one accustomed to forrein pride, no notice was ta∣ken of us: Needless things are forborn amongst those that stand upon the right of Empire. And in another place, relating how much the dis∣cord of her enemies made for the quiet and greatness of the Roman Em∣pire, you say, Maneat quaeso, duretque gentibus, si non amor nostri, at cer∣te odium sui quando vergentibus Imperii satis nihil jam praestare Fortuna majus potest quam Hostium discordia. Tacit. de Morib. Germ. Let there I pray continue amongst the Nations if not a love of us, at least a hatred amongst themselves, since to the declining fate of the Empire, Fortune can now grant nothing greater then her enemies discord. Then said Ta∣citus, Do you believe, Lipsius, that by the words, non erat notitia nostri, and si non Amor nostri, I did intend all mankind, or only the people of Rome? Lipsius then grew pale, and said, I now my Tacitus, perceive my error, I humbly crave your pardon, and freely confess, that the more your Writings are read, the less are they understood, and that your Annals and Histories are not to be read by a meer Gramarian, such a one as I am.
The XXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. A mournfull day in Parnassus, in commemoration of the un∣happy Introduction of the Grace-Cup. THis first day of May (a day by all Nations consecrated to Jollities) is so sad a day in Parnassus, as not only the Muses, Poets, and all the Vertuosi are clad in Mourning, but the publick Market places, open Tar∣races, and Schools of Learning, are all covered with Blacks, for that it ap∣pears by the testimony of Pollidore Virgil, on this day of unhappy memo∣ry, first through the ambition of Princes, and then through the foolish vain-glory of privat people, the pestiferous use of the Grace-Cup was in∣troduced. Never in the memory of the Learned, did there happen so sad a calamity in Parnassus, and more bitterly bewailed by all the Vertuosi, then the direfull spectacle of beholding that pretious Liquor, Wine, the only delight of Tables, without which, eating would be a laborious task, fit only for Porters, cruelly driven from the Table; and certainly not without reason: For what greater misery can befall mankind, then to be reduced to drink according to another mans discretion, and to be brought to that sad condition, even to beg for Gods sake a glass of Wine from a mean servant, who many times minds thee not, and oft-times does not hear thee, which that a man might live as long as Nestor, he ought to have alwaies in his hand, or hold it to his mouth? And what more cruel means could there be invented to torment a gallant man, then to make him stint his drinking when a savory bit hath provoked a lusty thirst in him? And is it not a spectacle able to make a man die for anger, to see drink brought sometimes in too little a glass, oft-times half empty, and in so unequal a thirst, to drink still the same measure? And which makes the grievance the greater, to have the Wine alwaies changed? For the gluttonous, and wicked Butlers cannot be perswaded to bring out their best Wines to Feasts, but keep it for themselves. In this the Literatie's so great affli∣ction, the glorious German Nation, which is free from so severe a slavery, pittying the misery of the Spaniards, Itallians, and French, moved a Trea∣ty with the Princes, to exterminate from out the world, the known per∣nitious practice of the Grace-Cup: But the Princes answered resolutely, They would never give way that the glory of the Bottle-house should be taken from their Festivals. And though to facilitate the business on the behalf of the Literati, it was propounded that Wine should stand still up∣on the Tables, that it should alwaies be good, that in the Butteries, or Bottle-houses, Si facesse la speca delle minestre che spesse volte ammorba∣no di caccio riscaldato; They should spend their porredg seasoned with tosted cheefe; but they were not listned unto: So as the business ap∣appearing to be desperate, Andrea Marone, a famous Brescian Poet, stept forth, and in the presence of Apollo, the Muses, and of all the Learned in Parnassus, did very fluently on the sudden make a stout invective against so cruel an invention in Heroick Verse; and proved conclusively by the authority of Esculapius, Hippocrates, Galen, and other famous Phisitians,
that Hectick Feavers and Tissicks, which were but little known before, were mightily encreased by the sorrowfull introduction of the Grace-Cup, and the three-ounce glasses. For those silly people who were foolishly perswaded to drink by the ounce, drunk but by scruples, thereby purchasing unto themselves pale and weak complexions; whence it happened, that in these present times, wherein the vanity of good breeding was more respected, then substantial drinking with chear∣fulness, the strong complexion of old lusty men was wholly lost. In the end of his Oration, this Poetical Orator averred by the testimony of the Muses, that when the custom of drinking great carrowses was given over, the race of Homers and Virgils was wholly lost, and the world was pester'd with hide-bound Poets. The XXV. ADVERTISEMENT. The principal Monarchies abiding in Parnassus, ask the Illu∣strious Venetian Liberty, by what means she obtains the benefit of so equisite secrecy, and such exact obedience from her Nobility? And received from her their desired satisfaction. THe controversie which arose some few daies since amongst divers of the Literati, and which was decided (as hath been said) by the Illu∣strious Venetian Liberty, hath afforded this State of Parnassus much oc∣casion of discourse. But more particularly it raised such an envy in the powerfull Monarchies of Spain, France, England, and Poland, as two daies since they went to the aforesaid Liberty of Venice, and told her that they wondred very much to see that she should find such faithfull secrecy in all her Nobility, when they had very much desired (but all in vain) to obtain so much from one single Secretary, and a pair of Councellers: A calamity affirmed by these powerfull Queens, to be so much the greater, as that in this present fraudulent age, the first weapons which some Princes use to draw against their enemies, was to corrupt other Potentates chief Officers with vast sums of Gold; they therefore desired to know of her, by what means she in her weightiest affairs obtained so much secrecy from her Nobility, and such obedience also in the certain danger of their ruine? To this the Venetian Liberty answered, That she did allure her Nobili∣ty to the vertue of Secrecy by rewards, and frighted them from the vice of disobedience by punishments. The aforesaid Monarchies replyed, That they likewise made use of the same means, yet could not compass the same ends. That, said the Venetian Liberty, is because the rewards given by Monarchies, are poor, and the punishments slight, in compari∣son of those which were practised in well governed Commonwealths. To this, answer was made, That Monarchies could affirm the contrary; for the rewards of free Countries, compared with the profuse liberallity which great Kings use towards their chief Ministers of State, was but beg∣gery:
For it was never known that the State of Venice rewarded the fi∣delity of any of her Senators with the rich Donatives of Castles, Citadels, Cities, and other Noble and rich Fee-Farms, with which Princes did of∣ten remunerate their Ministers of State; the greatest rewards used by the Venetian Commonwealth to her most meritorious Senators being to pro∣mote them to greater Magistracies, and that by degrees, and not without their having taken much pains ere they could come by it. Moreover, that the greatest part of her imployments being rather expencefull then profitable, they only brought with them an increase of reputation. That then for the poynt of punishment, certainly punishments inflicted by the resolute will of Princes for great offences, were incomparably more severe and dreadfull then those which were decreed against a Senator by any Senat, which were usually rather mild and circumspectious, then pre∣cipitate and cruel: And that there was a great disproportion between a Prince who judged his Vassal, and a Senator, who by his sufferage punisht his equal, his friend, one of his own bloud. That the State of Venice used no worser Gibbits, Gallowses, Fetters, Ropes, nor fire in their No∣bilities misdemerits, then were used in Spain, France, England, and Po∣land, unless it were the Cavala Orfano, which was the Venetians utmost severity. That if Kings had not that Channel in their Kingdoms, they could notwithstanding sew up their disloyal Officers in sacks, and cause them to be thrown into deep Rivers and Wells. The Illustrious Venetian Commonwealth did then smile, and said, That in lieu of those Fee-Farm Rents which Princes bestow with such a limited authority upon their well deserving servants, she gave unto her Loyal and obedient Nobles, the Kingdom of Candia, Corfu, and the other Islands subject to her Dominions, the States of Dalmatia, Istria, Freuli, Padua, Vicenza, Verona, Brescia, Bergamo, Crema, and that most majestical Mi∣racle of the most Royal Cities, Venice: And all this with full authority to command and govern them absolutely; so as her Nobility were not to be esteemed as privat men, but as Kings, and great Princes, who in the weighty affairs of the Commonwealth, were faithfull to themselves; where∣as the servants of Princes were faithfull to others; and that the detestati∣on which the Noble Venetians had of selling the Commonwealths secrets to forrein Princes, arose from the infinite disproportion between what they should lose by their fellonious dealing, and what they got by their Loyalty: That there was no proportion or comparison between the re∣morse which a Minister of State feels for having betrayed his Prince, and the fear a Senator had to be unfaithfull to his free Country: Because to be unfaithfull to others, was to betray himself. Lastly the Venetian Liberty said, That the rewards which Princes give to their Secretaries, and other State-Ministers, did often produce perni∣tious effects, and clean contrary to the intention of the givers: For that they did not only make the Officer grow more coole in his Masters ser∣vice, since he had nothing more to hope for from him; but that Princes minds being so mutable, and the plots of their Court-rivals so frequent, it often hapned that the servant sought by his disloyalty, and by suppres∣sing his Master; to secure that reward, which by his good service he had got. All which were pernitious effects, and wherein their rewards fell so much the shorter, for that the Patrimony of the Venetian Nobility en∣creasing alwaies with the greatness of their Empire, the love of their Se∣nators
was daily encreased more and more, and their charity towards the weal-publick. Then she said, the disproportion in punishments between her and Monarchies, was far greater, for she had often had experience, that when her Nobles have even been in arms, and much importun'd by forrein Princes, if she should but mention unto them the Senats displea∣sure, and their degradation from Nobility, there was not any Venetian Se∣nator, who would not with unspeakable chearfull obedience hasten to Ve∣nice, with firm resolution rather to lose his life between two pillars, then to be deprived of that Liberty which is so highly valued by generously minded men; and that there was not any Senator of Venice, who would not willingly suffer death, rather then put himself in subjection to any whatsoever forrein Prince. The reason why, because the Noble Veneti∣an was a Fish which being born in those Waters of Liberty, could not live out of Venice, in the element of servitude. The XXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Francis the First, that Potent King of France, meeting the Lady Philosophy naked, profered her his Royal Mantle; which would not be accepted. THe bountifull King of France, Francis the First, met casually yesterday the Lady Philosophy, leaning upon Aristotle and Plato, as she went sporting her self in Parnassus: And seeing her to be naked, the King had a strange compunction of mind to see that the very Queen of all human Sciences, who ought to abound in all the most ex∣quisite delights, should be so poor, as that she should not have wherewith∣all to cover her self. Wherefore that magnanimous King, throwing off his Royal Cloak or Mantle, which was all imbroidered with Flowre-de-Luces made of Diamonds, would therewithall have covered that beau∣tifull Lady; when first having rendred all due thanks to so great a King, for so courteous an offer, she said, That she who had no shame to hide, nor deformities to cover, might without any prejudice to her reputation, walk naked in Parnassus.
The XXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo complains bitterly of the Muses, for that they inspire many mean wits with Poetical fury; and they defend them∣selves excellently well. APollo finding the products of Modern Italian Poets, for the most part very imperfect in Similies, Metaphors, Allegories, Hyper∣boles, and other figurative expressions, with which they deck and adorn their learned Poems, sent two daies agoe for the Muses to come unto him, with whom he bitterly complained, that the most Noble Poetical Fury was inspired into certain ignorant people, who not able to undergo the labour of purchasing by their perpetual study, the perfection of Poe∣try, published poor Poems, by which that Poetry lost much reputation, which is the delight of Learning, the only recreation of the Learneds la∣bours, the very restorative of the Vertuosi, the Jewel of all Liberal Arts; not without much imputation of blame to them the Muses, who were de∣sired by the choicest Vertuosi, that Poetical fury might only be inspired in∣to laborious wits, and such as were in love with Learning, and who might make themselves worthy to receive so singular a grace from them. 'Tis said that Polyhimnia in the name of all the other Muses, answered his Ma∣jesty, That they, in the inspiring of Poetical Fury, and the flowing vein of elegant Verses into others, were alwaies used to have respect to the fruit∣fulness, and natural vivacity of mens wits; and that his Majestie very well knew, that the gift of Poetical fury must of necessity precede the know∣ledgs of Arts, Sciences, and Learning, to the end that those who should have received so particular a favour from the Muses, might afterwards im∣prove the Talent which was given them, by perpetual study; and that his beloved Pindarus, when they first inspired him with Poetical fury, he was altogether void of all those pretious Sciences, with which he after∣wards did so richly adorn himself. When Polyhimnia had thus ended, Erato added, that the bad Poems of some late Italian Vertuosi, was not to be attributed to the idleness of the Poets, but to the misery of the pre∣sent times, wherein none of those liberal Mecena's being to be found, who were formerly the maintainers of Poetry, such Sciences were now only prized by modern men, as brought with them certain and present advan∣tage; not such as brought only delight and reputation; an unhappiness which was the cause why in this present age, such studies were only ply∣ed, as serve to feed the body, and those not regarded which only feed the soul. Whence it was, that even they, the Muses, were with much sorrow, forced every day to see that those very elevated and noblest Spi∣rits, which they did most intirely love, and into whom they had inspired all the most excellent Poetical fury that they were able, did rather violent∣ly resist the gift of Poetry, and the instigation of their minds, bigg with Verse, then pursue it. And that therefore the best Italian Wits, being forced, even for necessity of bread, to abandon the noble study of Poetry,
to which they were naturally addicted, did so greedily thrust themselves into more gainfull studies, as that a noble Italian Wit, even then when he was most inflam'd with the composure of an elegant Stanza, was forced to forgo that his laudable labour, and for the getting of a couple of crowns to turn Advocate in a civil case at Law. That if his beloved Virgil did by his taking-Verses, so much increase the honour of Poetry, it was be∣cause he was perpetually encouraged by Augustus his bounty. That it was impossible for modern Poets to cultivate by their assiduous studies, those fields of Poetry, which produced nothing but barren brakes; and that it even broke the hearts of her and of her fellow-Muses, to put his Majestie in mind, that Iovan Andrea dell' Anguilara, a noble Italian Poet, died for meer want in a Lodging in the Street Torre di Nona, at Rome; and that Sanazzarro being reduced to a great scarcity of all necessaries, died mad in the same City; and that Lodovicus Ariosto, and Torquatus Tasso, resplendent lights of Italian Poetry, were so hardly dealt withall by the avarice and ingratitude of the present times, as all the Vertuosi saw them enter into Parnassus, without Clokes, and with tattered clothes. The XXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Torquato Tasso presents Apollo with his Poem of Giurusa∣lemme Liberata, or Godfrey of Bullen, For which Lo∣dovico Castelvetro, and Aristotle, are severely repre∣hended by his Majestie. TOrquato Tasso, two daies after his admittance into Parnassus, present∣ed his learned and elegant Poem of Giurusalemme Liberata before A∣pollos feet, and desired that if it should be thought worthy, it might by his Majestie, be consecrated to immortality. Apollo gratiously received the Poem, and according to the ancient custom of this Court, gave it to the Reformer of the Library (who at this present is Lodovico Castelvetro) that it might be renewed. After two months space, Tasso applyed him∣self to Castelvetro, who told him, that having diligently perused his Poem, he found not that he had therein observed the Rules of Poetry, published by Aristotle: That therefore he did not think it fit to be placed amongst the publick Writers of the Delfick Library, wherefore he might do well to amend those errors, and then return to him, and he would again renew it. Tasso was much astonished at this unexpected answer; wherefore be∣ing incenst, he forthwith went to Apollo, and told him, that with much labour, and infinite pains-taking, he had composed the aforesaid Poem, in the weaving whereof, he had only observed the Talent which Nature had given him, and which his Caliope had inspired into him: Wherein he thought he had fulfilled all the duties of Poetry, and that his Majestie having prescribed no Laws thereunto, he knew not with what authority Aristotle had published any rules to be observed in it: And that he ne∣ver
having heard that there was any other Lord in Parnassus, but his Ma∣jestie his fault in not having observed Aristotles Rules, was an error of ig∣norance, and not of any malice. By these words of Tasso, Apollo was as highly offended against Aristotle, as Princes use to be when their Au∣thority is intrench upon; in so much as he forthwith commanded the Guard of German Poets to bring that bold Philosopher bound un∣to him; which they did. Apollo with an incenst countenance, and irri∣tated voice, asked Aristotle, whether he had been so shamefully impudent, as to dare to prescribe Laws, and publish Rules to be observed, to the high conceptions of the Vertuosi, in whom he had alwaies been pleased that there should be an absolute liberty of writing and inventing. For the lively wits of his Literati being loose from any tie of rule, and free from the chains of precepts, did greatly to his contentment, every day, enrich the Schools and Libraries with gallant Composures, woven with new and curious inventions; and that to make the wits of conceited Poets, subject to the bondage of Law and Rules, was to infringe the Grandezza, and to take from the alluring delights of their products, and greatly to inslave the wits of learned men, who when they handled their pen with wonted and unbridled liberty, they divulged such writings, as by reason of their novelty and elegancy, did not only afford delight to him and his beloved Muses, but even admiration; as was evidently seen in the Advertisements of a Modern, Menante, wherein under Metaphors and jesting Tales (a new invention) important politick affairs, and choice mo∣ral precepts, were couched. And that the Poem of his beloved Tasso, being received by the general good applause of all the world, it did evi∣dently appear, that he had punctually observed all the rules of exquisite Poetry that could be prescribed. Poor Aristotle trembled at the hear∣ing of these words, and humbly beseeched his Majestie that he would com∣miserate his old age, and that such a Philosopher as he, might not suffer for anothers ignorance, saying, that he had writ the rules of Poetry, not in that sence in which it was afterwards understood by the ignorant, as if without observing his rules and precepts, no Poem could possibly arive at perfection; but that only to facilitate the Art of Poetry, he had shewed the way wherein the best Poets had walked: That the only fault which he had committed, and for which he humbly craved his Majesties pardon, was, that having found long before, that the ignorant took those his ob∣servations for Laws, and peremptory precepts, blinded with that ambi∣tion which robs all men of their eye sight; for that that error had en∣creased his honour and reputation, he had given his Majestie thereby so high a displeasure: And that he confest that the brains of high strained Poets might write Poems so absolutely perfect, as they might serve o∣thers for Rules and Laws to be observed, without keeping his Laws and precepts: And that the truth of this that he had said was clearly proved by the Politicks which he had published, which in comparison to the mad∣ly wrested Reason of State which was now practised by many, was meer foppery.
The XXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Cornelius Tacitus is chosen Prince of Lesbos; whither be∣ing come, his success proves not good TWo months ago the Prince of Lesbos departed this life, whereupon the Electors of that State, who as every one knows, obey an Elective Prince, sent Ambassadors to Apollo, desiring him that he would be pleased to name a man unto them worthy of so high preferment, and they would willingly chuse him for their Lord and Master. Many worthy Letterati were propounded by Apollo; the Ambassadors thought, that since Cor∣nelius Tacitus was famed farr above all others for matter of Policy, he was fittest to be chosen. But before the business passed any further, they went to visit him, and asked him, in case they should chuse him for their Prince, how he would govern them: Tacitus speaking at large unto the Ambassadors of himself, said, that all men knew what his abilities were in the well governing a State; since the whole world set such an estima∣tion upon his writings, as he thought he might justly boast, that it was governed by the modern Princes, according to the rules of his Politicks: That having shewn others the true practice of the most exact Reason of State, they might easily believe he should know better then any other, how to put it in execution in his own State. And though upon this oc∣casion he durst undertake upon the sudden, in their presence, to make a compleat discourse upon the means that were to be used by a Prince who would govern an Elective Kingdom well, yet to let them see that he with much reason was acknowledged by the most understanding Polititians, to be the Master of that Art, he would tell them in two words, what sa∣tisfaction he intended to give them in his Government. Which was, That he would diligently imitate the late Prince in those actions which he should know gave content unto the people, and that he would ex∣ceedingly detest him in those which they were displeased with. He then added, That what he had said, was the very extract of all true Policy, the quintescence distilled by him, and only by him thought upon; and that relying much upon them, he had imparted unto them this secret, which if it were made common, Shop-keepers, and even the meanest sort of men, would know how to rule Kingdoms, and govern Empires. The Ambassadors were much pleased with what Tacitus had said, and did assure him that he should be the man that should be chosen; they on∣ly advertised him, that when he should be created their Prince, it would behove him to speak in a more usual stile, that he might be the better understood by the people of Lesbos, who were not so learned as those of Parnassus. To which Tacitus answered, That it was necessary for one like him, who profest to speak more sentences then words, to speak obscurely; for sententious meanings, and politick precepts, lost much reputation, when they were spoken in trivial Latin: And he, to the end that he might not communicate that political Science to the base rabble-rout, which ought
only to be known to great Kings, used that manner of Language; that therefore his conceptions were understood only by the choicest wits, whose accurate pallats were able to rellish them; yet for the general good of those that understood but little, he would bring with him for his In∣terpreters, Mercerus, Lipsius, Fulvius Orsinus, and that he would bring with him as far as from Italy, the most affable Courtius Pecchena, whom Ferdinand the great Duke of Tuscany, the best Scollar that ever came out of Tacitus his Schoole, had offered him, whensoever he should have occasion to use him. The Ambassadors returned to Lesbos much satisfied with these answers, and made such relation of Tacitus his miraculous wisdom, as by the gene∣ral applause of all the people, he was presently chosen, and declared Prince. But the success of Tacitus his Government in his Principality, proved clean contrary to the expectation which was had of him: For soon after he had taken possession, he began first to sow, and then to nou∣rish great discord between the Nobility and the common people: and be∣cause the Nobility was of more worth, and better advised then the vul∣gar, who were kept under by the power of great ones, Tacitus secretly and cunningly adheared to the weaker side; wherefore the heads of the people growing very bold with the Nobility, by reason of the stout assistance which they received from the Prince, they exercised bruitish in∣solencies, by means whereof, in less then a months space, a dreadfull fire of civil Warr was kindled in Lesbos. Tacitus this mean while appearing in publick to be a well-wisher to the general peace, interposed himself as a mediator to compose those differences, which in privat he wished might never have an end; and shewed himself to be so zealous of all their goods, as he became the absolute arbitrator of the differences between both sides: And making use of the calamities of others, as an instrument whereby to agrandize his Authority, he first infused great fear into the people, that they would be quickly cut in pieces by the power of the Nobility, if they did not all the sooner find out some remedy for their preservation. By this means he easily obtained their good wils, that a Militia of forrein Souldiers should be admitted into the Metropolitan City, to keep them from being over-powered by the Nobility, which Militia he honested by the name of Souldiers of Peace: And they, with approbation of the Nobility, were permitted to be armed, under pretence, that by them he would curb the people, who were already grown too insolent. The Souldiers were three thousand in number, and an intiment confident of Tacitus was by him given them for their chief Commander. And to the end that they might be faithfull to him, and ready to serve him upon all occasions, he obliged them not only by othes, gifts, and all demonstrati∣ons of liberality; but made them as partial to him, as they were hatefull to the Nobility and common people, by permitting them to commit all sorts of cruelty and plunder against the Nobility and Commons of Lesbos, Tacitus being thus fortified in his power and greatness, did in a few daies fill the Senat and City Lesbos, as also the whole State, with Promooters and Spies, which he incensed against the chiefest of the Nobility of Les∣bos, who under pretence of divers faults, were bereft of their Estates and imployments, wherewith he exalted and agrandized their accusers. Where∣fore the chief men of the Senat, some through avarice, some through am∣bition, and very many to save their own lives, became wicked Ministers
of their Princes cruelty and ambition, by accusing, and falsly calumniating the greatest Subjects of the State. Moreover, such Senators as he knew he could not oppress by false accusations, he imployed them abroad in for∣rein Negotiations, which were expensive, and could cause no jealousies; then by little and little he disarmed under colour of various pretence, the ancient Officers who had the charge of the Militia, and put their arms into the hands of such as were affectionate to him; and whilst by this deep and wicked cunning, he abased the powerful, he exalted new men, cho∣sen out of the meanest sort of the people, and who did wholly depend upon him, to be Senators, and other supream Magistrates. Then under colour of securing the State from being invaded by forrein Princes, he be∣gan to begirt it round with strong Citadels, which he put into the custody of forreiners, who were his friends. And because he could not endure that the people and Nobility should be armed, and knew that to disarm them, would be a dangerous business, he made use of a safe way to disarm his Subjects by long peace, by idleness, or wantonness, and by using se∣vere justice upon such as did any waies dispute these their necessary re∣centments: And totally to irradicate all vertue from out his Subjects souls, he caused costly Theaters to be built in the chiefest Cities, wherein pastimes, Comedies, Huntings, and other delightfull spectacles, were per∣petually represented, by the over-much use whereof the people and the Nobility, gave over their ancient care of publick affairs, and the thought of Military exercises: And as one who knew very well, that to come by his desired end of erecting a Tyrannical Government over a people who were born free-men, and had long lived in liberty, it was requisite to glut them with perpetual plenty and abundance, Tacitus gave himself wholly to provide that great store of all good things, should alwaies be found in his State. Thus farr Tacitus his affairs past on successfully; but when he would go about the last precept of Tyranny, by laying snares for the lives of some great Senators which he was jealous of, he contracted so cruel and so universal a hatred against him, as lest he might be opprest by a great conspiracy which he found was plotted against him, he fled disguised six daies since from Lesbos, and returned to lead a privat life in Parnassus. His Nephew Pliny, who as all the Vertuosi know, was always the best friend that ever Tacitus had, was the first that came to visit him; he with a Ro∣man freedom, greatly reprehended his friend, that having prescribed such approved Rules of well governing States, to others, he himself should prove so unfortunate in his Principality of Lesbos. The same Pliny re∣lates that Cornelius Tacitus gave him these very words for answer; Hea∣ven (my Pliny) is not so far distant from earth, nor doth snow so far differ in colour from cole, as the exercise of Empire is far from, and unlike unto the Theory of Politick Precepts, and the best Rules of Reason of State: For that sentence which in Galba's person I teach Piso, and which hath won me so much credit amongst men, as it hath been thought to be the answer of an Oracle, and which the ignorant think may easily be put in practice, hath in the use thereof proved very unfortunate to me: The reason is, because the Metamorphosis is too great, when from being a pri∣vat man, one becomes a Prince. And know Pliny, that privat men hate and detest many things as great defects, and apparent vices in Princes, which are vertuous and excellent perfections. I tell thee this, for that
when I was first chosen Prince of Lesbos, I was resolved to steer the Na∣vigation of my Principality by the assured North star of the aforesaid sen∣tence; and therefore I diligently informed my self of all my Predicessors actions, firmly resolving to imitate him in those which were praised, and to shun those which were blamed in him: I knew that he had greatly offend∣ed the Senat by assuming too much Authority, by which he had taken unto himself the affairs of all the Magistrates; in so much as little more then the bare name of Magistracy remained unto them. I found he was much hated for the little esteem he made of the Nobility, and for that he would have all the affairs of the Senat depend upon him: And I knew also, that in his austeere manner of life, by which it appeared he desired to govern the State of Lesbos rather by absolute Dominion, and as an hereditary Prince, then as an elective Lord by limited Authority, he had distasted all men. Whilst I was a privat man, I thought this way of Go∣vernment to be bruitish, and altogether Tyrannical, and therefore I resol∣ved to shun it. But know, that the very first houre took upon me my Principality, I found those my first wholsom resolutions to be so grub'd up and eradicated by the cursed power of Rule, as to say it properly unto you, Vi Dominationis convulsus & mutatus. Tacit. lib. 4. Annall. I began to think those my Predicessors actions, which whilst I was a privat man; I esteemed so foolish, insolent, and Tyrannical, to be excellently good, and not things done out of phancy, or by chance, but good pre∣cepts politick resolutions, and necessary State-Reason: So as not able a∣ny waies to resist the violent ambition of Government, I thought I should be baser then a Pack-bearer, if I did not arrogate unto my self the whole power of command in Lesbos, where the Prince lives with much li∣mited Authority; which my inordinate desire did occasion that bad satis∣faction in the Senat, and whole people of Lesbos, which hath made me run upon the Rock which you see. All which disorders (my Pliny) are occasioned not through my ignorance, but through my knowing too much: For in the Principality of Lesbos, where people live between Li∣berty and Slavery, Nec totam Libertatem, nec totam Servitutem pati∣possunt. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist. They can neither endure to be wholly slaves, nor wholly free. He who will Reigne long quietly there, must not on∣ly resolve to leave things as he found them, but must be of a peacefull spirit, so farr from ambition, as that he may be able to put in practice the hard precept, of living himself, and suffering others to live: so as men who are absolutely Polititians, as I am, who are incited by nature to af∣fect sole Dominion, and who will measure all things by their Reason of State, prove very unfortunate in Elective Principalities.
The XXX. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo being aware of the great disorder occasioned amongst men by the flight of Fidelity; By assistance of the Muses, and of the sublimest Heroick Vertues, procures her return to Parnassus. IT cannot be said by the tongue of man, how greatly Apollo was trou∣bled at the secret and sudden departure from Parnassus some weeks since (as you have heard) of the Illustrious Vertue, Fidelity: For his Ma∣jestie could not with patience think that the world should be deprived of so beautifull a Princess: His afflictions were increased by hearing of the great disorders which arose in all places, between the people and sacred Friendship, the only delight of man-kind; since she saw her self forsaken by Fidelity, lest she might receive some fowl affront from Fraud, she would no longer live amongst men, who being freed from the Oath of Al∣legeance to their Princes, and from the severe bond of love, by which they are bound unto their privat friends, they grew so very perfidious, and so savagely seditious, as allowing all sorts of wickedness to be lawfull, they drive away pure Fidelity by treachery, from human familiarity, and holy peace by sedition, filling the whole world with bloud, theft, and all per∣fidious and cruel confusion. Apollo was moreover perpetually trou∣bled with the just Appeals of Princes, who publickly protested, that by reason of their Subjects hainous infidelity, they were forced to forgo the Government of man-kind. Wherefore Apollo thought it necessary (as a remedy for so great disorder) to call a Diet of the States-General, which he did on the twentieth of the last month, whither he summoned the Princes Poets, and the Deputies of all vertuous Nations; who not failing to appear on the prefixt day, such hatred was discovered in many people against their Princes, as they said openly, that not through any dis∣loyalty, but that driven by dispair, they had for ever banisht that Loyal∣ty from out their hearts; which, as being very prejuditial to them, they were resolved never any more to acknowledge; by reason that it was basely abused by many Princes. For in times past Subjects Loyalty ser∣ved as a means to force Princes to barter civil and courteous proceed∣ings, with their peoples faithful service; but now they saw clearly that the vertue of humble and prostrate obedience, was accounted the baseness of an abject mind; and the merit of a voluntary and uncorrupt Loyalty, necessity of service. By which fowle way of proceeding, publick disor∣ders were so far advanced, as many were forced to put on the resolution which now was seen, only that Capricious Princes might clearly know, that the Authority of commanding was soon lost, when the ill usage of Subjects, and ingratitude towards them, had so exceeded all humane pati∣ence, as they had made Nations which were naturally well disposed to o∣bey, resolve to admit of no more Masters, but rather hazard themselves in a free Government, then to be so undervalued, rent in pieces, and cruelly
dealt with by Princes. Though the anger of Princes towards their peo∣ple was great, and the peoples distastes greater, yet the Illustrious Muses, assisted by the Heroick Vertues, who laboured very much to bring a bu∣siness of so great concernment to a happy end, did at last by their dexteri∣ty, mollifie and appease the minds of incenst Princes, and the hearts of venomed people: And the Diet was dissolved upon these Articles of a∣greement; That the people should solemnly promise to admit again of Loyalty into their bosoms, and swear to make her absolute Mistress of their hearts: And that Princes should be bound to banish avarice and cruelty from out their breasts, and possess their souls fully with liberality and clemency, which were the things that made Subjects loyal and obedi∣ent. Since it plainly appeared by authenticate faith, and was witnessed by Gaius Plinius, and the rest of Natural Historians, That sheep which did so willingly obey their Shepherds, did infinitely abhor Butchers: And that it was impossible to make Doggs (though naturally very faithfull and loving to men) wag their tails, and leap about them, who gave them more blowes then bits of bread. The XXXI. ADVERTISEMENT. In the time of Carneval, the Vertuosi in Parnassus run races, and make other demonstrations of mirth, and jollitie. THe time of the Vertuosi's festivals, and publick rejoycings being come, Apollo caused Macrobius to publish by sound of Trumpet, in the Chaire appropriated thereunto, Aulus Gelius his Saturnalia (whom the reformers of the modern Pedantry call Messer Agillio) his pleasant Attick Nights; and the pleasant genial or jovial dayes of Alessandro de gli Alessandri, and finally the merry Bacchenalia of the Romans, the Lords of the world, and supream Princes of Learning, all of them festival and merry daies, and consecrated by the Genius of gallant men: and by his Majesties particular edict it was commanded that they should be chearfully celebrated by all the Nations of the Vertuosi which inhabit Parnassus, ac∣cording to the institutions and customes of their several Countries. As soon as this so joyfull news was made known to the people, the rich publick Libraries were opened in Parnassus, and the famous Libraries of privat men, into which during those daies of jubile, it was lawfull for eve∣ry one to enter, to come out of, and to tarry there as long as they listed, to surfet by their perpetual reading upon the savory viands which the Ver∣tuosi have first seasoned, and then disht up at the plentifull Table of their Composures. It was an honourable and a joyfull spectacle to see the publick invitati∣ons made by Plato, by Athenaeus, and the other great Princes of the Court, throughout the whole streets and houses of Parnassus, where the Vertu∣osi drank deeply of the Falerno of Learning, and filled their bellies till they were ready to burst with good Discipline. Only the Doctors of
Law, seeing the Shop of their Tribunals, and of their litigious Traffick shut, were sad, and died for hunger amidst such plenty of savory meats, and abundance of merriments: For meer Pettifoggers being many ages before declared by his Majestie to be meere Asses, he inhibited them to feed upon the sweet food of Divinity, Philosophy, Poetry, Astrology, and other savory Sciences, upon which the acutest Wits do only feed. Wherefore the Pettifoggers were seen, much to their shame, to go through Kitchins licking of Ladles, whereas other Scienced men were served with all the delicacies of Learning; and then it was that high∣minded spirits did detest the sordid study of Law-Cases, and great Vo∣lumes of trivial Law, as that which being only able to fatten the fowle great body of Wealth, makes curious wits die of the Hectick Feaver: But above all the rest, the invitation made by Pliny, was the most famous, to which the most learned in all Sciences that were in Parnassus, being come, they were all satisfied according to their several pallats, with costly and pleasant Cates. And though at that splendid Feast they did for the most part only eat and swallow Gudgins, yet were they all so well drest, and handsomly disht in by that copious. Wit, as they were eaten by all the Guest with much delight, praised for their excellency, and taken for truths. The third day of the Feast there appeared two load of Neapolitan Villa∣nelle Fruits of Parthenope, which for being come from that vertuous Cli∣mat, were suddenly bought up and eaten by the hunger-starv'd wits of the Litterati; but because through their much slipperiness, or glibness, they occasioned dangerous Fluxes in most that eat them, such impurities were forthwith forbidden by the Censors to be any more brought into Parnas∣sus. The same day Tansillus clad like a Gardner, presented Apollo with a basket full of Neapolitan Brocali, the excellencies whereof he did so ex∣agerate in four Stanzas which he on the sudden recited, as having perswad∣ed his Majestie to taste them, as soon as by the very smell he found them to be ordinary Coleworts, he turned towards Tansillus, and said, All your Poetry will never make your Neapolitan Brocali prove any thing bu common Coleworts; and Coleworts do not deserve the praise of so much prittle prattle. Soon after, a handsom Peasant of Ferrara, called Pastor Fido, presented his Majestie with an odoriferous handsom Tart: Apollo not staying for the usual hour of dinner, fell to eat it with such an appetite in the open street, as he lickt his lips and fingers ends, according to the Countrey-fa∣shion, when he tasted the Pastoral Tart; and seemed so delighted with that food, as he thought it not only good manners, but even requisite to give part thereof to the Illustrious Muses, left that they, who are alwaies big with Verse, by longing to taste thereof, might miscarry, or might be delivered of a Poem marked with some fowl spot of ignorance. Whilst the Muses, being called by his Majestie, did together with Apollo, eat the Tart of that fortunate Shepheard with such delight, the Vertuosi who stood looking on, longed very much to taste so savory a thing. Wherefore his Majestie gave every one of them a piece of it; and the Tart was so commended, as they all confest there could nothing of more delicate in that kind be eaten. There was only one of the Vertuosi who said it nau∣seated him, as being too Melliuous; to whom Apollo, being much in∣censed, said, That sweetness was the friend of Nature, and that those that
were not mightily delighted therewithall, had a depraved taste, and that he was certainly a malignant, if he did not confess that that delicate Tart, being seasoned with more conceptions then words, was raised up with the Paste of Capons skins; and that he made himself to be known to be one of those sowre detractors, who blinded by envy, blame such things as are to be imitated by extraordinarily fruitfull wits: But his Majesties an∣ger, and the dread which the Vertuoso was in, were turned to laughter, when the Tart being wholly eaten, Signco Giovandalla Casa, took the Plate whereon it stood, and licking it with equal greediness and unman∣nerliness, told his Majesty and the Muses, that in things that do ravish with delight, men were not Masters of themselves, nor could they re∣member Gallateo's rules, and that in time of Carneval, it was lawfull to commit exorbitances. His Majestie went afterwards about the Foro Massimo, and was much delighted to see every corner full of canvasing and disputations, and the Piazza throng'd with Orators, who made Learned Orations in praise of the Learned Sciences; and bitter invectives against ignorance. Some phantasti∣cal Italian Poets added to his Majesties mirth, many of which being mounted upon benches, sung an infinite number of Verses ex tempore, which shewed they could not imitate the Latine Poets, who through dif∣ficulty of feet, by which their Verses walk, are forced to goe lea∣surely. And now Apollo dismist the Muses, who went sporting themselves for many hours through the gladsom street with their inamored Poets; and were much delighted in Mauro's shop, wherein were great store of large and little beans, with which some of those Dieties cram'd their bellies full: And it was noted for a very strange thing, that they liked the emp∣ty husks better then those that had kernels in them. They then cast their eye upon Monsieur de la Casa's Oven; they entred where Varchi was kneading, and from thence went into the shop where Iovan Baptista Marini made Spanish Buskins, whereof whilst Coppetta would have puld on one, and it proving to be very streight, he used violence in pluck∣ing of it on, that he tore it, so as (which occasioned much laughter in the, rest) he pulled off one of the straps, and gave a strapping fart. As Apollo returned afterwards to his Royal Palace, some Courtiers of great Princes desired they might have leave to make some Mascherades; to whom his Majestie answered, That they needed not to mask or disguise their faces, for that their souls were so well masked, as they might go any where safely, for he assured them they could not be known, neither by the eye, nor yet by the judgement of any man, how wise soever. The next day, according to custom, they ran Races with their Coaches; and it fell out odly amongst those of four wheels, for many Charrets ap∣pearing at the first starting with new wheels well greased, and swift horses, Cornelius Tacitus appeared there with a three-wheel'd Charret, swathed round about, and drawn by lean weather-wrung-Jades, which he had hired. And then it was that Tacitus made his skill appear; for being started, whilst all the other skilfull Coachmen belaboured themselves in the Cource, and deafned all the lookers on with the noise they made in whipping their horses, and speaking unto them, crying, stand up; Taci∣tus very tacitly, no waies discomposing himself, by his rare dexterity, and admirable skill, did so seasonably switch and put on his horses, and did so
judiciously guide his disordered Charret, as he was come to the Staff or Post, before the other fleeter Charrets had driven two thirds of the way. Whereby all the Vertuosi of this State discerned how much the dexterity of a juditious wit, exceeds strength or force in all things in so much, as the wisest said, that they who carry on their business handsomly, with skill and dexterity, are fit to bring any disordered enterprize to a good end. The Vertuosi were not so much delighted in seeing the Courtiers run on foot naked: For they were much troubled to see what injustice was used in the inequality of the starting-places; which the ignoble and poor Ver∣tuosi took from farr off; whereas they that were noble and wealthy, were so near the staff, as without running, they might touch it, if they would but put forth their hand: So as by such inequality, they thought it rather a thing purchast by fortune, then gotten by industrious labour, when at Court a poor Litterato comes by the staff of honor and Supream digni∣ties. Yet in this last Race it was observed, that many Noble and rich men came behind, and the poor mean runners won the reward: And though some say they did it through the humorousness of Princes, and by favors backt by Court; yet the more judicious sort affirm, that it is necessary for such who by their dexterity and fair behaviour, know how to gain their Princes love, and have the wit to arive at highest preferments from them, to have good legs to run withall. But great was the mirth which was caused in all the people, by a chance which hapned between two very noted Personages of the Court, who (as it often falls out) whilst the one thought to keep the other back, they justled one another, and grew so an∣gry, as giving over the chief business of who should win the Race, in the midst of the way (which was very dirty) they indiscreetly fell together by the ears, and after having cruelly bespattered one another, by foul accusa∣tions, and shamefull calumnies, they became a ridiculous spectacle to the lookers on; and for their greater shame, were hist at by them. This, though it appeared ridiculous to the foolish rabble, was notwithstanding thought so worthy consideration by his Majestie, that, as being very ex∣emplary, he gave order that it should be cut in Marble by Praxiteles, that it might serve everlastingly for a Lesson to wrangling Courtiers. It me∣rits memory, that whilst Servius Honoratus, Master of the Barbary Horse which won the Race, went crying through Parnassus (as the custom is) Long live Virgil, that gallant Personage, who counts that shame, which o∣ther Poets account glory, caused Servius to be bastinadoed by his servant Daretes; for which act, though Apollo was much troubled at it, Virgil justified himself, saying, That he had left such memory behind him in the world, as his name ought to be exalted and celebrated for his own worth, not for the gallantry of a horse. Of former years the Prizes were readi∣ly, and without any ceremony given to those that won them, by the Go∣vernor of Parnassus, and by the Urban Pretor; but this year Apollo would give them with his own hands: Wherefore he caused it to be intimated to all the Potentates that were in Parnassus, by the publick Parators, that they should appear in the Royal Hall, that they might be present at so im∣portant a ceremony: It seemed a great novelty to those Princes, to hear that his Majesty would have those Princes who were summoned only up∣on weighty occasions, assist at an action which in former years was thought but mean. Yet his Majesties commands being upon pain of punishment, they all appeared. Then Apollo said, I know, my Lords, that you very
much wonder why I my self should now do that with so much solemnity, wch formerly was performed by my Officers without any manner of cere∣mony: But because not only all your happiness, but even all the greatest satisfaction which the the people over whom you command, does depend on this sole action; for your own advantage I would have you present at it. Learn then of me, all you Rulers of the earth, to banish all privat passions from out your hearts; and in rewarding those that serve you, govern your selves by their deserts, not by your own humors, and giving (as you see me do now) the prize of dignities, and reward of honours to those who by their honorable and laborious course of life have deserved them, you and your posterity will reigne happily for ever: When by doing otherwise, you will dishonour your selves, ruine your States, and of great Princes, which now you are, you wil in time run evident danger of becoming privat foot Souldiers, only for that you would be inamored of stinking carrion. The XXXII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Militia of Ianisaries, seeing one of their Souldiers ill re∣warded, mutiny in the Ottoman Monarchy, and are by A∣pollo quieted. TO the great terror of all the Potentates of this State of Parnassus in the Ottaman Quarter such an uproar arose, as Alarms were given throughout the whole City; and that potent Signory presently drew forth her numerous Armies, and as if she would come to a general battle, she ordered them in divers squadrons; wherefore the Germans, Spani∣ards, and Princes of Italy, growing very jealous, took up arms also, and sent out their Scouts to learn the reason of those rumors; who brought back word, that the whole Militia of Janisaries were mutinied against the Ottaman Monarchy. Apollo, who was presently advertised thereof by the Pretorian Bands of Satirical Poets who keep Corps de Gard continu∣ally in Foro Delfico, caused the uprore to be quieted, and then gave com∣mand that the Ottaman Monarchy, and the chief Commanders of the Ja∣nisaries who had mutinied, should appear before him: And because the Ottaman Monarchy, as also the Janisaries would present themselves before Apollo, accompanied by multitudes of men, they were told by the Lyrick Poets, who supply the place of Porters, that in such occasion of tumults, people came modestly attended to Princes; wherefore the Ottaman Mo∣narchy with his chief Visier, and the Gianasary who had been the occasi∣on of this uprore, without any other company, were admitted unto his Majesties Audience. Apollo demanded of the Janisary the true cause of that Tumult? Who answered, That he, accompanied by a Spahi, with evident danger of losing their lives, had taken by surprise the important Town of Testis in Persia: for which action, which was of infinite advan∣tage to the Ottaman Empire, the Spahi was largely rewarded by being made Captain General of the Asian Cavallery, and that he who had me∣rited
as much, as the Spahi was so ingratefully dealt withall, as he was on∣ly made Spahi della Porta; which fowle partiallity was so much detested by the whole Militia of Janiaries, as they had joyntly taken up Arms to revenge so great an injury. Apollo having heard this, turned to the Otta∣man Monarchy, and told her that he much wondred why such a Princesse as she who professed to recompence the worth and merit of her souldiers with infinite rewards, had shewed her self so partial towards that Janisary. To which the Ottaman Monarchy answered, that she had not so highly rewarded the Janisary as he had done the Spahi (though he very well knew it became him so to have done) out of an important reason, that it was well known to all men, that she took the young sons of her Christian Subjects, whereof he made three choices; making such as were of best natural parts, a Seminary of youths, who when they came to years of be∣ing imployed, they were placed in several services of the Chamber, and about the very person of the Ottaman Emperors; and to these, when they came to more mature years, the Government of Provinces was gi∣ven, the care of Armies, and the absolute command of his greatest Empire. That out of the second choice he made his mighty Horse-Militia, and his Gentil husmini della Porta, called Spahi. And out of the third, which was the refuge, and those of weakest natural parts, he formed his formi∣dable Militia of Janisaries. And if it should so fall out, that a Spahi should by his worth exceed the expectation which was had of him (as was seen in the Spahi who had surprised the Fort of Testis), he was admitted into the first rank; but if it should happen that any extraordinary worth should be found in a Janisary, by which he might have done some act of much merit, yet they were never raised to any higher degree by the Otta∣man Emperors, than to the degree of Spahi. And that the reason of this his resolution was ready; for that the first Seminary of Bassaes, as also the second of the Spahi, and the third of the Janisaries, every one of them a∣bundantly loving the brethren of their own Classis, to give the command of Armies, or Government of Provinces to men of the first or second Sera∣glio, who were very few in comparison of the Janisarie Militia, was no waies dangerous; but that to intrust places of jelousie in the hands of a Captain, or other Officer, who was come out of the Janisarian body, would be an indiscreet and dangerous advice, by reason of the great retinue of so dreadfull a Militia that such a Subject would have: And so much the more, for that whereas the Bassa's and Spahi's being men highly minded, and who do not willingly subject themselves to their equals, live continu∣ally in strife, jelousies, and emulation, by reason of their pretences to the same preferments; whereas the Janisaries, as being an ignorant sort of people, did not only live in greater union, but would greatly admire, love, and even adore those who by their extraordinary worth, were got out of their Classis. That therefore, to advance one to the Supream power of a General, who would be followed and beloved by so mighty a Militia, would be no better then to nurse up a serpent in ones bosom, which did misbecome a wise Prince to do. And that the Ottaman Empe∣rors held it for an infallible maxim in Policy. That that Militia on which the perpetuity, greatness and selicity of an Empire was grounded, should be commanded in chief by a foreiner; who would be obeyed by the Army, or rather out of the reverence which the Souldiers bear unto their Prince, then for any merit, Valor, Nobility, or attendance they should find in the
reiner. When Apollo had heard this justification made by the Otta∣man Empire, he did so much admire her wisdom, as he commanded that Janisary to be quiet: And turning to some Vertuosi that stood by, and said, that without reading wicked Bodine, or mischievous Machiavil, he found who was a perfect Polititian; since such barbarous Princes, and who profess utter enmity to Learning; were the Kings of men, in the ex∣act understanding how to govern the world, and in the exquisite practice of the best State-Reason. The XXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo frees Carlo Sigonio, and Dionigi Atanigi, the first being accused of Ingratitude by Pietro Vittorio, and the other by Hannibal Caro. VVHilst Apollo sate this morning in the Tribunal of Gratitude, in the company of the other Judges, Carlo Sigonio, a Learned No∣ble man of Modena, was brought before his Majestie by the Keepers of the Prison, fast bound; whom Piero Vittorio a Florentine, complained against bitterly, for that this Sigonio being seased on by the Sargeants, who were carrying him to prison for a debt of a thousand Duckets which he ought to Paulo Manutio, he, to keep his friend from suffering such an affront, and from the prejudice of long imprisonment, had with such libe∣rality, as was more then he could well do, disburst the thousand Duckets to Manutio, which having afterwards re-demanded of Sigonio, he had set several times for the payment of it, but Sigonio still broke his word, so as finding himself at last abused, he was inforced much against his will, to imprison him; and that seeing his former friendship strengthened by so great a courtesie, was turned into hatred, he was much grieved that Sigo∣nio in so just a cause should so often falcifie his promise; he therefore de∣sired, that as an unacknowledging and ungratefull man, he might receive condign punishment, according to the Laws of Gratitude. Apollo did so little value Vittorio's Impeachment, as openly taking up∣on him Sigonios protection, he said that they broke their words who did not fulfil such things as were in their power to do; but as for the promise of paying of monies upon a prefixt day, they were only to blame, who coyning monies by the malignity of a lying intention, and not by the meer want of coyne, did not make good their promise. Then turning to Vittorio, he said, that such a one as he ought to consider, that the cour∣tesie he had done to Sigonio, was one of those whereof the obligation of Gratitude was lost, when all that was rigorously exacted, which was known to be deserved by a friend: For such courtesies as did exceed the condi∣tion of the receiver, were done by the Vertuosi, only to discover their magnanimous liberal mind, and only the more to oblige a man: and that great good turns done to such friends as were of ability, were sufficiently
rewarded by purchase of the fame of being Bountifull and Liberal. As Apollo had ended this cause, the Impeachment was heard which the Commendador Hannibal Caro made against Dionigi Atonigi, wherein it was alleadged, That when Mario Molza died for having had to do with too many women, he left a little daughter of his to his custody, which when she came to be sixteen years old, he gave to wife to Atonigi with a Porti∣on of 40000 Crowns: In which resolution, the violence of his affection to Atonigi, had overcome the consideration of his beggerly estate, which ought to have kept him from making that alliance. And that A∣tonigi being thus well dealt withall by his dear friend, was not ashamed in recompence of so great a good turn, to acknowledge it by the beggerly gift of a douzen shirts, and four hand-towels: And that after so great in∣gratitude, the very marriage day he had very discourteously forbidden him his house; he then added with tears in his eies, that he having bred up that young woman as if she had been his own beloved daughter, she likewise loved him as if he had been her father, and that to see himself deprived of her so dearly prized conversation, was the thing of the world that did most torment him. Apollo answered Caro, That doubtlesly A∣tonigi had done amiss; and therefore commanded, that to compleat the gift of twelve shirts, and four hand-towels, he should immediately add a douzen handkerchifs, and eight night-caps, with which demonstrati∣on of gratefulness, Caro should think himself well rewarded by Atonigi. When Caro heard this judgement given by Apollo, he was not only (as it became him to have been) not appeased, but growing very outragious, he freely said, That in this discourteous act of Atonigi, Tacitus his Sen∣tence was proved very true upon himself, That, Benificiaeo usque laeta sunt, dum videntur exolviposse, ubi multum antevenere, pro gratia odi∣um redditur. Tacit. lib. 4: Ann. Benefits are so long welcom, as there is any appearance of a possibility of repayment, which when it is much exceeded, hatred is repaid instead of love. Apollo hearing this, answered Caro somewhat angerly, That Tacitus his Sentence was very true, but very badly understood by him, and by many others: For great benefits were usually seen to berepaid with infinite in∣gratitude, more through the impertinency of the Benifactor in exacting Gratitunde of anothers Obligation, then through the discourtesie of the receiver. Then growing more incenst, his Majestie said to Caro, Do not you know, Signor Hanibal, that the extraordinary affection which Guardians bear their women-Wards, when they are once grown into their teens, is usually turned into libidinous love? And are you one of those special Officers, whereof I have known divers, That for having helpt a friend to a rich wife, will be paid for their good turn, by a nights lodging with the Bride? And in so many years as you have lived in the well pollisht Court of Rome, have not you learnt, that as well wives, as Principalities, cannot be given to a friend, with intension of reserving the use of them to ones self, without running apparent danger of having the difference decided by the sword? Then Apollo said thus to Atonigi; My beloved Dionigi, injoy thy dear wife in peace and quiet; and if Caro shall at any time tax thee of ingratitude, call you him Impertinent, and so you shall give him his due name.
The XXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Publius Terentius being by order from Giasone dol Maino, an Urban Pretor, charged with Fornication; is by Apollo freed, with much derision to the Pretor. PUblius Terentius lives in a little, but very well accommodated house in the quarters of the Commick Poets attended only by his maid-servant Bacchide, and Davus his man-servant. And though Bacchide in the flowre of her age was very handsom, and a great friend of Terentius, & of many other Commick Poets, yet now being very old, and therefore somewhat de∣form'd, she lives modestly, and without any scandal, in Terentius his house, and without offence unto the neighbours. But some ten daies since, Giasone Mayno a Modern Pretor of Urban, commanded Terentius upon a certain penalty, That he should put Bacchide out of his house, and so free himself from the shame of keeping a publick Concubin. Te∣rentius did not only not obey this command, but refused to pay the a∣mercement; wherefore the Pretor gave order for arresting his body, and he was yesterday taken; whereat Apollo was so highly offended, as he said in publick, that even in Parnassus the wicked abuse was brought in, by his rather malitious then ignorant Officers, of being quick-sighted in ap∣pearance; but blind in the substance of affairs. Wherefore giving order that Terentius should be forthwith set at liberty, he caused Giasone, to the infinite shame of so great a Lawyer, to be cast into the same Prison; and did not only publickly disgrace him, by taking from him the place of Pretor, but did exceedingly grieve him by substituting Philippo Decio in his place, who was his capital enemy. And Decio being gone yester∣day to Apollo, to receive the Mace and Tipstaff, the particular ensignes of the Pretorian Dignity, his Majestie told him, that he might learn that by Giasons punishment, that good Judges, who in the admini∣stration of Justice, did mind more the pleasing of God, then making merry with men, the Alessi were first driven out of the dores of respected Poets, and then the Bacchidi.
The XXXV. ADVERTISEMENT. Publick Audience is given by Apollo, wherein by wise Answers, he decides many Affairs of his Vertuosi. THe contentment of Princes who love to see their people well satis∣fied, consisting chiefly in the often hearing all mens grievances; A∣pollo, to boot with his other often Audiences, gives publick Audience e∣very Thursday in his great Hall, attended by his Senats, Collaterals, and full Parliaments of this Court. And because that therein vertuous reso∣lutions are had, and such as are worthy to be known by those who living far from this State, have the curiosity to hear news from Parnassus; Me∣nante, who was present at the last Audience, expresly that he might sa∣tisfie his Customers, will now give you a true relation of all the chief things that hapned there. The first who addrest themselves to Apollo in this Audience, were two honourable Ambassadors, who told his Majestie that they were sent from mankind, who weary of the necessity they were in, of eating every morning and evening, did much bewail, that human Wit, so highly indu∣ed, and capable of understanding and knowing all things, who together with their mothers milk, did drink in the unexplicable curiosity of still Learning, should notwithstanding be wholly busied in fordid occupation of cultivating the earth, and in other painfull exercises, only to provide food for himself, as bruit beasts do; that therefore they were sent to his Majestie to ask councel, whether mankind should do well to beg of Gods Divine Majestie that he would be pleased to grant men the benefit of li∣ving long without meat, as he had done to Dormise, Snakes, Bears, and otheir Animals. A thing which they desired, only to the end that they might with a fasting mind or stomack, which doth so much better the o∣perations of the Intellect, apply themselves to the study of all those Sci∣ences which belonged properly to men. This request which was thought to be very honorable, and full of ver∣tuous zeal, by all that heard it, was much derided by Apollo; who answer∣ed the Ambassadors, That those who through strange conceits, and extra∣vagant novelties, thought to new mould the world, did alwaies fancy un∣to themselves ridiculous things. And then he asked the Ambassadors what obligation the earch had to so great a God. The Ambassadors an∣swered, she was bound to propuce green grass and plants. Apollo reply'd, If it were so, Why, for the space of 6000 years and more, that the earth had absolutely obeyed the will of her Creator, were there no Woods seen but on Mountains and in desert places? The Ambassadors said, this was because men for their plowing (which was the sustenance of mans life) did with their Axes cut down the Woods in such places as were aft to bear Corn. Apollo asked them then again, To what case the world would be reduced, if husbandmen had not weeded and purged it of such superfluous plants as the earth produced? The Ambassadors answered, That then
doubtless the world would be so overgrown with wood, as it would be uninhabitable. Apollo asked once more, whether they did believe that men did busie themselves in cutting down of Woods, rather out of a desire that free commerce might be had among Nations, or that they might reap the abundance of fruit which the earth produced, being sown and planted by mans industry? To this the Ambassadors reply'd, That the great abundance of pleasant Products which by mans industry the earth brought forth, made the no∣ble Art of Husbandry appear not painfull, but full of delight. The Am∣bassadors having clearly learnt by this Answer, and by the precedent In∣terrogatives made by Apollo, That if men did neither eat nor drink, the world would be so ful of Woods and Forrests, as it would rather be a fitting habitations for Bears, Wolves, and other wild Beasts, then for men, de∣parted the audience much confused. They being gone, Menenius Agrippa came to Apollo, and told him, That he having happily ended the important and difficult business of making peace between the Senat of Rome, and the common people, who being distasted, had withdrawn themselves into the Aventine Mountain; That he might purcase more Grace from his Majesty, and a more hono∣rable place in Parnassus, he acquainted him now, that he had bethought himself of another handsom story; by which he hoped to agree the great disunion between the Hollanders and the Spaniard. Apollo laught to hear this, and answered Menenius. That mens humors were so alter'd in process of time, and that hatred was grounded so inveteraly in them, as not only rediculous tales were not able to appease those obstinate peo∣ple, nor make them lay down their perfidiousness which they proposed unto themselves when first they rebel'd, of purchasing their Liberty at the price of bloud, or else to die in the quarrel: but neither were the sad Tragedies able to effect it, which to that purpose had been represent∣ed upon the Scene of the Low-Countries by the Spaniards, for above the space of fifty years. Menenio being departed with this little satisfaction; Paolo Vitelli, that famous conductor of the State of Florence, appeared with his head cut off (a most horrid spectacle) in the Audience; who complained bit∣terly of that Republick, for that in a precipitous-manner, without any confession made by himself, or any of his friends (who were imprisoned for his sake) which did any waies prejudice his innocency, he out of slight suspitions, and not being suffered to speak for himself, had his head struck off in Florence the very next morning after his imprisonment: And that the Judgement was hastned, not for that the importancy of the fact was such as could brook no delay; but to hinder the intercession of great Princes, who would have moved to assist him. Apollo seemed much to abhor that Judgement; and because he greatly loved, and admired the worth of that Military man, he desired the Judges that they would give their opinions in the case. Who when they had heard the relation of the process, gave sentence for Vitelli's innocency: Wherefore Apollo by publick decree did restore Vitelli to his former ancient reputation. Paolo thanked his Majesty, and very humbly beseeched him, that for his satis∣faction, and to keep other Commonwealths from giving such precipitous Judgements, he would be pleased to shew some rigorous rescentment a∣gainst the Florentines. Apollo wisht Vitelli to be quiet, for that his son
Alessandro making use of the fair occasion which fell into his hands after the death of Duke Alexander, had so revenged his fathers death, as had infinitely surpassed all the tearms of the Guardian-ship, for which he was impeached. As soon as Apollo had given satisfaction to Vitelli, Carmagnuolo, a fa∣mous Venetian Captain, who had likewise been beheaded, complained bitterly before his Majesty against the State of Venice, who out of vain suspitions had unjustly taken off his head: And then he delivered his Pro∣cess and his Sentence into Apollo's hands. Apollo, without either recei∣ving or perusing the process, willed Carmagnuolo to rest content, for no Review, nor yet appeal was allowed of, from any sentence maturely given by an Aristocratical Senat (as was that of Venice) out of the great pre∣sumption he had of her exact administration of Justice. Carmagnuolo being gon from the audience, an African (to the wonder of every one) was seen to enter the Hall, leading in his hand a lusty Lyon, by a little chain, which Lyon was so very tame, as it fawn'd upon its Master like a little whelp. This man presenting himself before Apollo, in the name of Hanibal the Carthaginian, gave him that Lyon, which his Maje∣sty was very well pleased withall; who asked the African what art he had used to tame, so fierce, ravenous, jealous, and cruel a Beast? The Afri∣can answered, By feeding him continually with his own hand. Apollo turned then towards the Princes, who for the honour of that Audience, were there in great numbers, and said unto them, Learn, Lords, by the miracle of this Lyon which you see is become so tame, that fair treat∣ment doth domestichize even savage beasts; doe you the like by your Subjects, and make them not come hardly by their food, through your angersom Taxes upon things necessary for human life; for by so doing, you shall not be beloved, served, and honoured by your own natural Sub∣jects only, but even by the most Forrein and Barbarous Nations of the earth. This being said, two armed foot-Souldiers appeared in the Audience, who when they had presented his Majesty with their credential Letters, told him, that they having forsaken their Country, wives, children, and means, to serve Princes, without any respect to their own lives; that whilst they bore arms in the most remote Wars, by vertue of the not only cruel, but inhuman Military Laws, they were cruelly slain, hung up upon trees, shot to death, by their Superiors, even for the smallest faults. And that through the unheard of cruelty of Modern Commanders, the anci∣ent punishment for shaping out of their quarters, of having their share of provant in Barley, and other less severe executions, being now no longer in use, every least misdemeanor, were it but of omission, was punisht with death; and not he who understood, or knew most, was thought the best Judge in the Camp, but he who was most resolute in executing cruelty; and that the inhumanity of Military Laws was grown so great, as the cir∣cumspection, equity, and consideration which they ought to have who judge not beasts, but men, was esteemed poorness of spirit, and idle folly. That therefore the universality of Souldiers so sorely afflicted, did humbly beseech his Majesty, that he would be pleased to order the moderation of so inhuman Laws. There was not any one in the Audience, how severe soever, who was not mov'd to hear the barbarity of these Military Laws: Only Apollo shewed no compunction, but with an angry countenance,
thus answered those souldiers; Who forceth you to forgo your own homes, and to change the wholsom human Laws under which you are born, with those severe ones which are practised in War? He who falls down of himself, deserves not to be raised up, nor is there any mercy to be hoped for from one who is so very cruel to himself. This request having received its answer, much to the delight of all the Vertuosi that were at the Audience, the famous Printers appeared be∣fore. Apollo, namely, Sebastian Grifo, Guilielmo Ruell of Lyons, Christo∣fano Plautino of Antwerp, the Giunti of Florence, Giolito, Valgresi, and many others from Venice; and amongst these the learned Aldo Manutio did not disdain to make one, who in the name of all his fellows, told A∣pollo; That of all Modern Inventions found out by the wit of man, he thought the precedency ought to be given to the Press, both for the use and admirable felicity thereof: A benefit, which had the ancient Litte∣rati had, they would not have so lamented the burning of former Libra∣ries; and that now the Press had not only for ever secured the past and present labours of the Vertuosi, but had made the way to Learning much more easie; and that his Majesties State wanting so excellent an invention, if he should so please, they would for the publick good, bring it upon their own cost and charges, into Parnassus. Apollo absolutely re∣fused that offer, and said, That men praised the Art of Printing upon very indiscreet grounds; for it was that that had infinitely obscured the glory of the Liberal Sciences: For having made Libraries more nume∣rous then good, they were admired only by the ignorant; and that when with infinite labour, the writings of other men were copyed out by the pen, such as deserved not to pass through the hands of his Litterati, they and their shame died in the house of their unfortunate Author: where∣as now so great abundance of foolish and ignorant volumes were printed, as that Libraries were shamefully cram'd with them, to the little reputa∣tion of the Liberal Sciences, and of his Litterati; and that by the reason of the unexhausted store which were printed of the learned labours of the Vertuosi, the Homers, Virgils, Ciceros divine and painfull labours, which for the miracle of their wits, ought to be shewn to men only upon some particular daies of the year, were polluted by flies and moths in every Book binders shop: That therefore they might be gon when they pleas∣ed, for he would by no means admit of the break-neck of the too ambi∣tious Litterati into Parnassus. Presently after this, Seneca the Moralist appeared before his Majestie, who had caused his cruel enemy Publio Suilio to be personally cited be∣fore that Audience; and rather in rage then anger, complained of certain injurious words which that man had spoken to the prejudice of his repu∣tation; wherefore he pressed that he might be punished as a slanderer. Apollo commanded Suilio to repeat the words by which Seneca took him∣self to be so highly injured. Suilio confest ingeniously, that moved thereunto rather out of truth, then any privat hatred, upon a certain occa∣sion which arose, he had reproached Seneca with these words used by him, Qua sapientia, Quibus Philosophorum preceptis; intra quadrienium regia amicitiae, ter millies sestertium paravisset? Romae testamenta, & orbos ve∣lut Indagine ejus capi. Italiam & Provincias, immenso fenore hauriri. Tacit. lib. 13. Annall. Seneca perceiving that Apollo was very much scandalized at the exces∣sive
getting of seven millions and a half of monies in so short a time, told Apollo, the world knew his wealth, though it were very great, proceeded not from any greedy desire he had of riches, but from Neros meer libera∣lity. Apollo, who did not approve of Senecas excuse, said freely to him, That the floud of that his immence wealth, which was very shamefull in such a Philosoper as he was, especially when gotten in the twinkling of an eye, must of necessity have received troubled waters from the torrents of fowl industry. To which Seneca answered, That his condition was not to be considered according to Suilios rotten tongue, which was so ac∣customed to lying, as he lived only by the infamous practice of slander and back-biting, but by the so much praised and admired writings which he had published. Suilio finding himself thus bitterly offended by Sene∣ca, answered boldly, that it was not the pen which exactly shew'd what men were, but the leading of their lives: For works, not words, were the true touchstone whereby to know the true allay of mens genius. Seneca being about to reply, Apollo, who was nauseated by that hatefull diffe∣rence, turned towards him, and bad him say no more; for great riches gotten by any whosoever in a short time, brought but little of reputation with them, and that it behooved of necessity, that to the sweet of so rich treasure, the sowre of publick mumurs should be added. At last, fetching a deep sigh from the bottom of his heart, Apollo said, I heartily wish, O Seneca, that either thou hadst never been born, or that thou hadst not left the seed of so many punctual followers of thy behaviour. Seneca quitted the Audience with this but smally satisfactory resolution. When the two Noble Princesses, the Roman Lucrece, and Katherin Sforza, bow∣ed to Apollo, to whom Lucretia (to whose share it fell to speak first) said, That by witness of all Historians who had written the affairs of Rome, the fowle outrage which Tarquin the proud had done her, having been the only powerfull cause why the Kingdom of Rome was turned into so fa∣mous a Commonwealth, and which was so much celebrated throughout the world, she had not notwithstanding obtained so honourable a place in Parnassus as she thought she deserved, and which in the opinion of all the Vertuosi, was due unto her: And that Helen of Greece, who compared to her, had been the occasion of but trivial novelties, had obtained a much higher place. She therefore desired, that if his Majestie should think she had suffered wrong, she might be righted. Apollo answered Lucretia, That the change of the Roman servitude into Liberty, and the driving of the Tarquins out of Rome, was attributed to the outrage done to her, by those only who understood but little of the worlds affairs; but that those who saw further into State-affairs, knew very well, that the Tarquins lost so famous a Kingdom, when by their bad comportments they made themselves so hatefull to the Plebeians, on whose good will their greatness was grounded; for it was hard to bring such a Kingdom as was that of the Romans (which by reason of the infinite priviledges it enjoyed, might be said to live in a sort of Liberty) to receive total bondage, without openly provoking the enmity of the Senat, and of the whole Roman Nobility, which were by natural instinct given to be very desirous of Liberty, and consequently very jealous of their Countries Priviledges. That there∣fore the Tarquins, though undergoing some indignities, ought tenacious∣ly to have endeavored the not losing the affection of the people of Rome, which was that which did not only maintain them in power, but which
might have setled them in a perfect Monarchy: which leaning-stock, when through their ignorance they lost, they gave a fitting occasion for the Nobility to joyn upon any the least accident which might occur with the common people, and to take up arms aaainst them, just as it fell out by the outrage which they had committed against her. He further told Lucretia, that if she should obtain from him the Place in Parnassus which she desired, she would only have taught people the trivial document, that Princes in their lust ought above all things, to avoid the staining the bloud of their great ones; but that being in the place she was in, she clearly proved that important Politick Precept, That when a Prince knows not how to keep the Nobility and common sort of people divided, and hath not wit enough to make either the one or the other of them greatly par∣tial to himself, but through ignorance makes both of them his enemies; it is as easie to drive him out of his Dominions, as it is to throw down an Oak, how great soever, whose roots are first cut away. With this answer Lucretia was dismist the Audience, when Catherin Sforsa, Princess of Imola and Forli, told his Majestie, that her husband being cruelly murthered by the conspiracy of some of her disloyal Sub∣jects, and the Castle holding out for her, she, to the end that both her State and her own person might not fall into her enemies power, made them believe that she would deliver up the Castle to them, if they would permit her to go thereinto, that so she might make her Souldiers give way to the surrendring of it, and that for their security, she would deliver up her little children as Hostages unto them; and that when she was got into the Castle, she from off the Walls threatned the Conspirators with condign punishment for the wickedness they had committed: Where∣fore the Conspirators seeing themselves thus deceived, protested openly, That unless she would deliver up the Castle unto them, they would cut her children in pieces before her face: That she was not at all astonished at these their horrid threats, but plucking up her clothes, and shewing them her privacies, she bad them do what they would with her children, for she had still the mould to cast others in. For which her resolution, she was highly commended by all Historians. She desired that Apollo would poynt out for her what place he should best please, in Parnassus. The Judges differed much in their opinions concerning this demand; some of them thought it to be an act of shameless and affronted impuden∣cy. But Apollo affirming, that to keep still within the terms of modesty, was the duty of privat women, said that Princesses who were descended of high and Noble bloud, upon any weighty occasions which should occur unto them, were bound to shew manliness. The vote given by Cino of Pistoia upon this occasion, is not to be past over in silence, who said; That that place was worthy to be seen by all men, out of which was come that famous Champion Iovanni d' Medici, Father to that great Cosmo, who having been the happy Founder of the flourishing Tuscan Monar∣chy, from which Italy now receives so great splendor and ornament, hath deserved immortal fame and glory throughout all ages. Katherin Sforza having obtained the favor she desired, a Court-Nota∣ry drew near to Apollo, who acquainted his Majestie, that Giovan Pico, Count of Mirandola, that Phenix of all Sciences, and only ornament of all vertue being some few daies sithence departed this life, had by his last Will and Testament, left a Legacy of threescore and ten thousand Crowns,
to be disposed of to some such pious use as his Majesty should please to appoint. Apollo being told this, forthwith commanded that an Hospital for the incureable, should be built with those monies, where all diligent care and charity should be used for the cure of such as were sick of Ambition, an infirmity from which those that were affected with it, could never free themselves, Licineo Mecenate, the delight of that State, whose house is a secure haven for all the Vertuosi, and a sanctuary for the Litterati, said then, that he by the disposal of his whole Patrimony amongst the Ver∣tuosi, having deserved the Prerogative that all such as use any extraordi∣nary liberality towards the Litterati, should be called Mecenati, was much grieved that his name should be irregularly and lavishly used, by mean and hunger-starv'd foolish Scholars, for some little reward which they might receive from Princes. Apollo was much troubled at Mecenates complaint, and to the end that that glorious Title might be perpetually maintained in its due decorum, he decreed that for the time to come, no man under the pain of infamy, should presume to give the honorable title of Mecenas to any Prince, from whom he had not formerly received costly and curious food and ray∣ment during life. Then great Tamberlan the Scythian appeared before Apollo, in so great pomp, as gave much delight to all the Audience, who were likewise very much pleased with the novelty of his phantastical face and habit. This truely singular man who had the vain glory to be called the Emperor of the East, having (according to the custom of his Nation) only bowed his head a little to Apollo by way of salute, said, That he who by his worth had raised himself from the mean condition of a shepheard, to such a greatness, as to have formed a vast Empire, and to be the man alone, who of all the Princes of the Universe, had discomfeited the numerous Ottaman Armies in open field, and taken the Prince of so dreadful an Empire prisoner, to the end that he might obtain a fitting place in Parnassus, was not satisfied, but rather thought himself much injured by finding himself placed in the Clas∣sis of famous Commanders, and not in that (which he thought he had ve∣ry well deserved to be) of Founders of great Kingdoms, wherein he found Romulus, Caesar, Pharamond, Ottaman, and many others placed. Apollo answered Tamberlan, That great difference being put in Parnassus, be∣tween overrunning a number of great Kingdoms with numerous forces, and the founding of an Empire, he did ill to pretend to the place of Foun∣ders of Monarchies, which was only granted to such, who to the worth of knowing how to purchase, had the singular wisdom joyned, of knowing how to maintain. For the gallantry of many Souldiers shared in acqui∣sitions, but the safe preserving of what was got, shewed the exquisite wis∣dom of one only Prince; and that the Prerogative of Founders of King∣doms was only granted in Parnassus to such, who had so well joyned the Vertue of Maintaining, to the Valor of Archieving, as they had so well ordered and established the States which they had won, as to transmit them happily over to the third Heir. A thing which had been so lit∣tle observed by him, as even his own immediate sons could not keep the States which he had won at the expence of so much bloud; and that ac∣cording to Tacitus his Precept, neither Prince, nor any privat Captain, who would win the fame of being wise and advised in the mannaging of
Arms, ought Nova moliri, nisi prioribus firmatis: attempt new things, unless they had setled former: for he, Longinquis itineribus percursando, quae conservari nequibant; following after what was not to be kept, had imitated those base smel-feasts, who eating more then they could well digest, were with shame compelled to cast up what they had eaten. And that though Alexander the Great, at his first entrance into Parnassus, had extraordinarily affected the same Prerogative of a Founder of new Mo∣narchies; yet by reason of his indiscreet way of warfaring in Asia (which he rather overrun as a ringleader of robbers, then subjugating as a great King, by the true rules of Military Art) he could not obtain it. Tamberlan went much afflicted from the Audience, when Alexander Vellutelli appeared before Apollo, who presented his Majestie with his Commentary upon Petrarks Sonnets. Apollo, before he would take the Book, asked Vellutello what stile he had used in commenting upon the rhimes of that excellent Poet. And Vellutello answering, That first he endeavored to shew the occasion why the Sonnet was made, and that af∣terwards he gave the true signification of the words, and made known the Poets conceit; Apollo bad him keep his Commentaries to himself; for, for his part he loved those Commentators upon Poets, which discovered unto the Reader the Authors subtilty in weaving of his Poem; who shew∣ed wherein the excellency of his Verse lay, which were his flourishes, which his Figures, and which the other Poetical beauties; and that the Italian Poems were so perspicuous of themselves, as they needed not any such Commentators, who supplyed only the base Office of interpreting words to gross and ignorant people. Vellutello received this very small satisfaction from Apollo, when a certain Personage appeared before his Majestie, who told him, That he having commanded the famous Province of Pamphillia, had willingly given over his command, meerly out of a desire of living retiredly; wherefore he de∣sired that the same place might be alloted to him in Parnassus, which those Vertuosi enjoy, who have proved by their actions, that they are Masters of that excellent Vertue of Moderation. Apollo answered this man, That Kingdoms are sometimes renounced by vertue of a soul inamor'd of that felicity which men enjoy in a vertuous privat life; oft-times to satis∣fie sons who are arived at years fitting to rule people, and sometimes to shun the tumults of rebellion, or out of fear of some potent Enemy, and not seldom through unaptness for government; wherefore he would be informed what was fitting to be done in this weighty business, by ex∣aminers deputed to the like affairs; who if they should find that he had done so gallant an action, and which is so strongly withstood by Humane nature, as to relinquish a Kingdom, mearly out of a well disposed mind, he would willingly grant him a sublime place amongst those other Demi∣gods, who had preferred the peace of a private life, before the hazards of reigning; and he should be the more content to do this, for that the exe∣crable ambition of reigning was so disproportionably now increased a∣mongst men, as that to come by Kingdoms, they did not onely gladly imbrace any whatsoever wicked enterprizes, but all means which were used to compass so abominable ends, were by men esteemed to be good and vertuous, though they were infinitely wicked and inhumane; that if they should find he had renounced Government, either to please his Chil∣dren, grown already fit for rule; or that he might see the succession of his
Empire settled in his blood during his own life, he would give him an honourable place amongst those prudent Princes, who by quickly giving over their States to their children, have known how to shun coming to some woful end with them, who were become impatient of living a private life: But if it should be found, that being under the great weight of Government, wherein men ought to shew the greatest worth, he had renounced his Kingdom out of poorness of spirit, incapable of such greatness, he might then return back again: For the true mo∣deration of the soul being seen in gallantly undergoing cases of adver∣sity, not in losing a mans self in prosperity, his Parnassus was very un∣like those wicked times of Nero. Quibus inertia pro sapientia suit. Tacit. vitae Agricoll: when slothfulness was taken for wisdom. Presently after the Duke of Rhodes, a man not well thought of in this State, by reason of his apparent foul vices, came to Apollo, to whom he grievously complained of the lewd life that his people led; for he said, That Gluttony, Lust, Implacable Enmity, by which his Subjects made the streets run with humane blood, did very much reign in his State; and that the moneys which they ought to spend vertuously in feeding their families, they viciously threw them away at dice, the ve∣ry seminary of contention; and such severe punishments as keep men from doing ill in other places, not proving any ways valid for the cure of so great an infirmity in his state, he humbly beseeched his Majestie for some opportune remedy to this his so great necessity. Apollo answered the Duke, That it being impossible but that people should be their Princes Apes, he might compass his desired end, when abandoning the Idleness, lust, play, and bloody customs, to which he was so greatly given, he would amend his own ways; for the best Bezar to cure the members of a languishing body, was to be applyed to the ill-affected head, it not being possible but that a Prince, who himself lives devilish∣ly, should have worse Devils then himself to his Subjects. This Prince being gone, a young Stoick, of appearing civil behaviour, complained grievously to Apollo, That whilst being yet but a novice, he was, without any reason, expelled the house wherein he had much de∣sired to spend all his days. Apollo inquired of Epictetus, who was there present, wherefore the Stoicks of his sect had dismist that young novice. Epictetus answered, Because for six moneths space that that young man had been a novice, not the least imperfection could be found in him, though all his proceedings had been narrowly pryed into by many of his sect. Apollo hearing this, seemed much to abhor the nature of that young man (who appeared to the whole Audience to be very modest and well composed) and said, That he must certainly have devilish vices hid within him, who had not the excellent vertue of dis∣covering some of those imperfections, which all men that were made of flesh did so abound in the very first day of their conversation with other men. Thus was the young Stoick dismist when Giacomo  came in a great heat into the hall, and told Apollo, That being sent for by the Genoeses to write the story of their Countrey, he was persecuted by them, and accused of viciousness, and at once lost both his life and his reputation, onely for that some of them found him resolute to obey the truth in things that were past, with that liberty which becomes
Historian, without respect of persons. Apollo, contrary to the belief of all men, did not onely seem not any ways to compassionate what had been this his Vertuoso▪ but in a resenting manner told Buonfadio, that though the fault for which he was proceeded against was false, yet he had deserved to be treated as he had been by the Genoeses, for his foul indiscretion. For to profess that a man will write things prejudicial to the honour of great parsonages, whilst they and their children are alive, though the things he write be true, was rather an act of imprudency and rashness, then of an incorrupted mind, that greatly loves truth; and that he was a greater fool who believed he could save his life from the anger of a powerful man, whose reputation he had asperst with his pen, though but slightly, much more if he should wholly dishonour him; and that Historians might do very wisely to imitate Grape-gatherers, and others, who had skill in fruits, who knowing they stould not please men if plucking unripe grapes from the vines, and green apples from apple∣trees, they should bring them to the Market, had that requisite patience (which would likewise very well become Historians) to stay till time might bring things to perfection; and that the great master of wise Historians, Tacitus, when in his writings he mentioned those great Sena∣tors who Tiberio regnante penam vell Infamiam subire, who underwent punishment or disgrace in Tiberius his reign, when they had any posterity living, wisely took his pen from off his paper, chusing rather to erre a∣gainst the Laws of History, then to prejudice the reputation of such fa∣milies, who were known to value nothing so much as their honour; for that singular man thought it to be a thing of too eminent danger to an Historian, Nimis ex propinquo diversa arguere. Tacit. lib. 4. Annal. to contradict actions too near at hand. Buonfadio went away much af∣flicted from the Audience, by reason of this publick reprehension; when with unspeakable gravity Zeno the great founder of the sect of Stoicks, drew near to Apollo, to whom, after he had saluted him, he said, That being to go upon a far Ambassy, for affairs much importing the Prince of Guido, he desired to take his leave of Apollo's Majestie, and to kiss his hands, before he took his journey. Apollo perceiving that the Prince of Guido was himself present at the Audience, asked him with a very an∣gry countenance, If there were not other Litterati in Parnassus, to make use of upon that his occasion, and whether he were one of those Princes, who through avarice, and out of a malitious intent of being able to break his word with less danger, committed such indignities, as to send Stoicks to lie at Inns. His Majestie complained afterwards very much of the Stoicks, who making open profession to have abandoned ambition, and all worldly pomp, did not withstanding wind themselves so willing∣ly into State affairs, wherein great impieties being often times commit∣ted, it were an excellent thing that they were not onely negociated by ignorant people, but even not known unto them. Then turning to Zeno, he in a no less angry manner said unto him, That he having pro∣mist before both God and man to attend one profession, if he should af∣terwards publikely undertake another imployment, it was an action of infinite scandal▪ and that such a one as he, the founder of so famous a sect▪ should, by greatly abhorring the Courts of Princes, and by se∣questring himself wholly from their affairs, make Tacitus rather appear alyar to all the world, then a Teller of truth, who had termed the Stoick
sect, Arrogant. Et quae turbidos, & negotiorum appetentes faciat. Tacit. lib. 4. Annal: which makes men turbulent, and desirous of busi∣ness. Zeno was thus dismist the Audience with scorn, when many Princes together in company presented themselves before Apollo, who told him, that they did love to learn Sciences as well as did the other Vertuosi of Pernassus, and that they did esteem the liberal Arts very highly; but that the mountain of vertue being very steep and craggy, it was so dif∣ficult to get to the Top of it, as the lovers of learning weakening always their stomacks, disturbing their heads, breaking sometimes the vain of their breasts, and spoiling their eye-sight, the Litterati were ge∣nerally seen to fall into the dangerous diseases of Hectick feavers, Tisicks, and into Hypocondriacal indispositions; that therefore they humbly desired his Majestie that he would be graciously pleased so to facilitate the way unto this mountains top, as Princes who were not accustomed to such insufferable labours, might have some encouragement to arrive at the top of it. To these Apollo answered, That the onely means whereby to make the way to the Liberal Arts easie, was the fervent love of learning, the taking delight in reading the fruitful labours of his Litterati, and to study out of pleasure; but that Princes being accu∣stomed by their moneys to possess at night whatsoever of exquisite they had desired in the morning, would likewise possess themselves of the precious treasures of Sciences in their pastimes and idle delights; wherefore they did abhor such things as were onely to be come by by labour and toil; and that the famous Francisco Maria della overe, ought to incourage them to clime the mountain: who thinking learning the onely recreation of elevated souls, the delight and sole contentment of great men, was, to the glory of the Liberal Arts, to the honour of Ita∣lian Princes, and to the singular glory of the present Age, become the most universal and best grounded Litterato which the present time had in all the choicest Sciences; he therefore wisht them not to think the study of learning so hard a business, nor so laborious a thing but plea∣sant past me and recreation, and that so they might as easily come to the Mountains top, as if they had made the journey in a coach with six horses. These Princes seemed to depart very well satisfied with this answer; when Luca Guarico appearing before his Majestie, said, That he having foretold Iovanni Bentivoglio, that Bolognian Tyrant, that he should that year be driven out of his Country; which accordingly succeeded, Bentivoglio had inhumanely made him be ceased on by Sergeants, and caused him to have fifty lusty stripes given him with a rope; which having much discomposed all his bones, had also wounded his reputa∣tion. He therefore desired his Majestie that he would be pleased to re∣scent that high peice of injustice in such sort as he should best like. Apollo seemed to all men rather to laugh at the harm and  that was done to this man, then any way to compassionate him; and asked by what art of Divination he had foretold this calamity to Bentivoglio? Guarico answered, By the excellent Science of Judicial Astrologie which he had very much studied. Apollo replyed, Why did not the same Astrology which made you foresee other mens misfortunes, admonish you of your own mishaps? Guarico answered, Because through his
Parents negligence, he knew not what day he was born on. Apollo then laught, and greatly despising Guarico's vain and unfortunate study, told him, he was a great fool, and worthy the misfortune which had befallen him; for wise men hated to be the first bringer of ill news, even to men of the meanest sort, much more to Princes, whose ears were so delicate, as they delighted in nothing but good news; wherefore it was better to flatter them, by foretelling them a long and happy life, and to assure them that they should quickly enjoy many things which they desired, and be very happy. For to foretel Princes who were jealous of their lives and good fortunes, that their death was near at hand, or any other bad accidents, and to profess the doing of this by a false Art, which onely became foolish people, was to shew that a man did de∣sire all those misfortunes should befal them which he did prognosti∣cate. Guarico was no sooner dispatcht, but Count S. Paul appeared, a no∣ble Prince of France, who sorely complained unto his Majestie against Lodowick the eleventh King of France, who after having pardoned him, and sealed his pardon with many oathes, had made his head be struck off. Apollo, with much cruelty, answered the Count, That he ought not to blame King Lodowick so much for this his misfortune, as his own imprudency; for when Subjects arrive once at so great rashness as to take up arms against their Lords and Masters, they were very great fools if they did trust them at any time after. For nothing of more shameful being to be seen in a State, then that a man should walk therein who had plotted his Princes death and the ruine of his State; all Princes thought it less shameful to break their words, then to live with such a blur in their face. That therefore they onely ought to confide in such like pardons as made a Prince be praised for clemency; but that for such as brought shame with them, they ought to trust no more unto them then to a rot∣ten rope. As Apollo was a little advanced, Iovan-paolo Lancellotto, a famous Perugian Lawyer, appeared, who presented unto his Majestie his com∣pleat commentaries which he had lately made upon his admirable Cano∣nical Institution. This noble Vertuoso was chearfully and lovingly re∣ceived by his Majestie: yet Apollo told him, He had been very ill ad∣vised to gloss upon the Argument of his well filed Institution, for such eminent wits as he, who were absolutely Masters of the Matters which they write upon, using very artificially a succinct and pithy brevity, as if they gave others the substance and quintescence, by them extracted not without much pains from the difficultest Sciences shewed, and that much to their honour, that they writ to such as were learned, who did fully understand the subject they treated on; which leaving without any Commentaries, they made it appear unto the world, that what seemed hard and obscure to others, was very easie and clear to themselves: That if it hapned afterwards that other Vertuosi commenting upon the learn∣ed labours of other men, for the publike benefit of the lovers of learn∣ing, they did so wittily adorn them with various acceptions of several significations, as they made them oft times speak excellent things, and which their Authors never dreamt of, as it luckily befel Aristotle, il∣lustrated by Averoe's his eminent wit; and Homer, who being most happy of all other writers, in having learned Commentators, was very much inriched by the learned labours of other men.
The last that appeared was Claudius Nero the Emperor; who signi∣fied to Apollo, That being at last aware of his wife Agrippina's shameful incontinency, who blinded by the violent ambition of Government had given her self over to the imbracements of his base servant Paantes, he was resolved to take such revenge upon her, as the world saw he had done upon Messalina, who had likewise been an unchaste wife of his. But that this wicked woman, being gotten into Thali's  a safe sanctuary, by reason of the great respect which was given to that Il∣lustrious Muse, he could not get Agrippina into his hands. He therefore earnestly desired his Majestie to command that that dishonourable wo∣man might be put out from thence, to the end  he might wash away the shameful stain wherewith she had tainted his reputa∣tion. Apollo was never seen to rage more, no  when in the fiery house of Leo, then at this  of the Emperor : to whom with a threatning voyce and gesture, he said, He might do well to hasten quickly out of that Audience▪ for he whose first wie , fell by marrying another into the same it of Infamy, deserved rather to be buried there alive, then to be holpen out by any one. The XXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Harpocrates being found by Apollo to be ignorant, is driven out of Pernassus. THis morning Apollo sent for Harpocrates, that great Mster of Silence, to come unto him; and told him, that he had still ad∣mired his perpetural Taceturnety, but that now he much desired to hear him discourse, for that silence was to be wondered at in him, who upon occasion could give content to the curious Litterati, by his copious speaking. Harpocrates hearing this, shrunk up his shoulders, and made signs that he could not speak. Apollo ad him lay aside his affected si∣lence, and discourse upon some elegant subject. Harpocrates still con∣tinued to put his finger to his mouth. When Apollo, with somewhat an angry countenance, commanded him to speak; Harpocrates drew then near to his Majesties ear, and in a very submiss voyce said▪ That the world was grown so depraved in its customs, as they deserved chiefly to be esteemed wise, who had eyes to see, judgement to observe, and mouth to hold their peace. Apollo being mightily offended at this Answer, turned to those that were about him, and said, He had at last discover∣ed that Harpocrates was a piece of useless flesh, and commanded him to be packing out of Pernassus; for he had discovered him to be one of those gross pated coxcombs, whereof there were very many in the world, who under colour of a vertuous silence, did hide and palliate gross Igno∣rance.
The XXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. A learned Roman desires a receipt from Apollo to make him forget certain great injuries which he had received at a great Prince his Court. His Majestie gives him some of the water of Lethe to drink, but with bad faccess. THe learned Roman who some days ago came to Pernassus, had Audience given him yesterday by Apollo. To whom he said, That he was much disquieted in his mind, by reason of divers injuries which he had received from undry of his ill-wishers in a great Prince his Court▪ Dove le persecutio  s ssercitano co artificii di essanta Cara, where persecutions are exercised cunningly, and to an excessive height; and the more for that he could not be revenged without pulling greater ruine upon himself, then what his enemies had occasioned him; and yet he found not that he had so vertuous a soul, as to put on the generous resolution of pardoning offences: Wherefore to free himself from the hellish torment which he continually lived in, he addrest himself unto his Majesty, humbly beseeching him that he would prescribe him som receit, whereby he might cleanse his soul from the many passions of Hatred, wherewith it was foully polluted. Apollo appeared clearly to commisse∣rate this Gentlemans unhappiness; insomuch, as he commanded a great bowl of the water of Lethe to be given him to drink, so prepared, as it should make hateful things be forgotten, but should in no sort prejudice the remembrance of benefits received. The Gentleman drunk up the water with much greediness; which to the great wonder of all men was found to have the vertue onely of making him forget such injuries as he had received from men of a inferior fortune then he was; and that those which he had received from his betters, were rather more deeply graven in his mind then forgotten. Whereupon many began to murmure, that that vertue was not found in the Lethean waters, which had been so much discourst of by the Poets. When his Majestie did assertain them all, that the waters of Lethe had, as they should ever have the same ver∣tue, but that it had not wrought the desired effect in that Gentleman, be∣cause men nobly born, and of generous hearts, did usually write inju∣ries received from mean men, in sand; but over hand blows given by men of power, in characters never to be blotted out; for that it became Nobility to forget offences out of magnanimity, not to pardon them out of▪ necessity.
The XXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Duke of Laconia is accused before Apollo to have Ido∣latrized a Favorite of his, for having advanced a faith∣ful Secretary to the highest State-preferments; and he de∣fends his cause excellently well. THe now Duke of Laconia hath so highly exalted a subject of his (for whom he hath a great affection) from a low and mean fortune, to the highest State-dignities, as he hath not only admitted him into the La∣conick Senat (a preferment ambitiously coveted for the eminency there∣of, even by great Princes) but having infinitely enriched him by giving him great revenues, hath made him be as much honoured, and respected as highly as any whatsoever Personage of the State. This famous Duke was accused before Apollo some few days ago, by those who did much envy the advancement of this his servant, for idolatrizing a Favorite. Apollo being highly incenst against this Prince for so hainous a fault, without further informing himself (as upon all occasions he is used to do) of the truth of the impaachment, sent immediately for Luigi Pulci, Provost-Marshal of this State▪ and threatned to punish him severely, if he did not within half an hour bring the Duke of Laconia a prisoner un∣to him, in the most shameful manner he could devise. Pulci did diligent∣ly obey, for he dragg'd that Prince along immediately before his Ma∣jestie, loaded with irons. Apollo, who was presently advertised of this At∣tachment by an express Messenger, gave order that the greatest bel should be rung, whereby the Quarantia Criminale should be summoned, which was done; whither the Duke being brought, Apollo having him∣self acquainted him with the fault which was laid to his charge, told him in a very angry manner, That he aforded him onely one half hours space to make his defence in: And in the interim (as if the Prince his case had been altogether desperate) he commanded that he should be condemned to eternal infamy, who having committed so foul an Indig∣nity, as to adore a servant of his own, was not worthy to live amongst the vertuous Princes of the Phebean Court. The Duke began then thus to defend himself, Most mighty Sir, and Father of the Vertuosi, I have so arm'd my conscience with the breast-plate of Innocency, and have behaved my self so vertuously in all my actions, as I am more then cer∣tain that I have never deserved ill at your Majesties hands, nor am I any whit affrighted at your Majesties anger, nor at this precipitate Judgment, that the horrible sentence of my Infamy should precede the Cognizance of my cause: I onely wonder to see, what I thought never to have seen, that the foulness of an Impeachment, even in the justest of Tribunals, as this is, should be able so greatly to indanger the reputation of one of my condition. But I rest pacified with Gods will, who will have the gold of Innocency refined in the fire of Calumny, by the Test of Persecution. I freely confess unto your Majestie, That I have exalted my Friend much more then my accusers have informed against me; and in this my action, which hath been made by relation to appear so hainous to your Majestie, I am onely sorry that I
have not shew'd my self so grateful to this my friend, as his deserts chal∣lenge, I should have been. And if those who accuse me and other Princes of prodigallity, of Giddy-headedness, and of poorness of Spirit, born to serve servants, did not suffer themselves to be blinded with malice and envy, when they see a Courtier greatly beloved, and rewarded by his Master, but would with an unbyassed mind consider the merits of Court Favorites, they would stile that vertuous liberality, which they now call Vicious Prodigallity; those gifts the debt of Gratitude, which they term inconsiderate actions, and that a vertuous affection, to which they attribute the Infamy of Idolatrizing Minions. But it appertains not to common men to penetrate, Abditos principis Sensus, et si quid ocultius parant. Tacit. lib. 6. Annal. into the secret of Princes. Whence it falls out that ignorant men call Vertuous Gratitude, the effect of an abject mind. The Principality of Laconia (as is very well known to your Ma∣jestie) is elective; wherein the neighbouring Princes have always had a greater stroke then he who was Governor, not onely out of the common end of all elective Princes, in procuring potent Friends to those of their blood, after their own death; but by reason of the adherence which Forreign Princes have for no small ends, with such Senators as have the prerogative of chusing a new Prince: whose followers they work upon by those means, which are too well known to all men. And your Majestie likewise knows, that the Prince of Macedonia had by his subtilty got so great a Power in my State, and was so far encreased in strength above all the Grecian Princes, as he was not onely the sole Ar∣bitrator of all Greece, but aspired at an universal Monarchy: It is more∣over known to your Majestie, that the same Prince of Macedonia, under pretence of Friendship, and of taking the Dukes of Laconia into his protection, did with deep designs labour their suppression: And because the Prince of Epires greatness kept him from achieving so high designs, he either totally to remove, or at least to weaken that obstacle very much, did occasion those Insurrections of the Commonalty, and Rebellions of the Nobles in the Principality of Epire (more by his gold and under∣hand dealing, then by open force of arms) which did so much weaken the State of Epire. And I will not here repeat (since it is sufficiently known to all men) how my wise Predecessor, knowing that the suppres∣sion of Epire was a manifest may to the ruine of the Laconick Empire, resolved openly to assist afflicted Epire with puissant Forces, so to secure himself from the ambition of o potent an Enemy; and how that that good Prince whilst he had these wise considerations dyed; not without great presumptions that he was poysoned by the procurement of the Prince of Macedonia, who was not able to endure that the division of Epire (which he thought so sure) should be hindered. In this unhappy crisis of affairs, I had this dignity conferred upon me; and that I might not come byso unhappy an end as my Predecessor did, I, in the beginning of my Principality, seemed to be of a remiss spirit, and totally incapa∣ble of the great affairs of State, and onely busied my self in reforming the Magistrates of my Dominion, together with the abuses, and other vices of my people, appearing publikely to be a main Enemy to the Prince of Epire, but inwardly knowing very well, whither the Prince of Macido∣nia's plots tended. And knowing that whatsoever evil befel the Prince of Epire, tended to the lessening of me, I put on a resolution of assisting
him, that I might establish my own State which was in manifest danger: But to secure my life from those misfortunes whereinto my predecessor fell, I was forced to be very secret in my proceedings. And it is well known to your Majestie, as to all the rest of these honorable Judges, that amongst many imperfections of elective Kingdoms, the greatest is, that they less enjoy the so important benefit of secrecy in their State-Mini∣sters, then any other sort of Principality: for mens manners are so de∣praved, as that such as are Senators, are for the most part greedy Mer∣chants in their high places, by which they strive to reap all possible advan∣tage. Finding my self in such straits at the entrance into my Principality, and knowing that for certain I was to split upon the rock of infidelity, if I should in a business of this weight, make use of those ordinary Secreta∣ries, who I knew for certain, were long since pensioners to forrein Princes; Great God (from whose goodness I acknowledge this great mercy) open∣ed my understanding, and it was he who propounded unto me, this my, I will not say servant (for I have found such singular worth in him, as will not suffer him to be stiled by so base a name) but dear friend; and to him who had served me with all fidelity for eight years space, whilst I led a pri∣vat life, I discovered that secret of my heart, which I thought very dan∣gerous ever to have dreamt of. And then I was aware that the excellen∣cy and chiefest praise of a Secretary, did not consist (as many men believe) in knowing how to speak eloquently, but how faithfully to be silent. And this I say, because I so happily made use of this my Officer in the impor∣tant business which I had in hand, as I luckily deceived the subtile Prince of Macedonia, which no wit, how cunning so ever, could do at any time before. And by means of this my so faithful Secretary, I succored that Prince my friend, whom I publickly profest to persecute, no man ever penetrating into my Councel; and I have had fortunate success in the mystery of cheating and abusing, even those who make publick professi∣on to be Masters of that Art; and by this handsom under-hand-dealing, I have reduced the formerly ruinous and precipitate state of Epire, into the condition that now it is: It being risen from so deplorable a condition, to the high pitch of being the only true Arbitrator of whole Greece. And the Macedonians who had fancied unto themselves universal Monarchy, and who thought to have sipt up every mans State in less then a months time, are fallen from this their height of hopes, into the pit of desperation, and quite giving over their ambitious conceits of possessing themselves of o∣ther mens States, have much ado to preserve their own. Apollo having heard this, ran joyfully to embrace the Prince of Laco∣nia, and with a great deal of tenderness, spake thus unto him; You, Duke of that noble Nation, who express much in few words, have had to doe with a man of such worth, and one, who to say truth, hath very few that are like him, amongst all the Laconick Senators; I mean this friend of yours, as if you should give unto him your whole State, you would notwithstanding die ungratefull. For in these unfortunate times, wherein through the perfidiousness of many, Princes secrets are sold by the candle, to who will bid highest for them, that servant who in weighty affairs proves faithful to his Master, cannot be so much rewarded as he deserves.
The XXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. The People of the Island of Mitilene, their Prince being dead without issue, argue whether it will be better for them to chuse a new Prince, or to set up Liberty in their Coun∣trey. THe Inhabitants of the famous Island of Mitilene, whose natural Prince did not only die lately himself, but together with his life, left the whole Royal Line extinguished; being without a Prince to Go∣vern them, disputed in many of their Congregations, whether it were better for them to live still under a Monarchy, and chuse a new Prince, or put on that noble resolution which had made so many people fortunate, of erecting a Free State. Great and dangerous contentions arose touch∣ing a business of this weight; and tis said that one of the chiefest Citi∣zens, in the last Congregation that was assembled to this purpose, spake thus: Beloved fellow-Citizens, Of all the felicities which men receive from God in this world, two are the greatest; That they are born men, not Beasts; and free, not slaves. And surely there is good reason for this; for what greater happiness can any man receive in this life, then to obey only the Laws of God and men? What Jewel is to be compared to the rich Treasure full of all the most pretious Oriental Stones, of securing life, means, and reputation from the will of one particular man, inclined to commit so many impertinent things? None that is here, acknowledgeth Liberty to be more lovely then my self; and that it is a pretious gift, which immortal God bestowes of meer grace on those whom he loves; he who knows not this, I pronounce him to be blind, him a fool who doth not highly esteem it, and him an enemy to himself and Countrey, who doth not heartily endeavor it. But my dear friends, you must consider, that as those pretious stones are most esteemed of, which are rareliest found amongst men; so we must grant that perfect Liberty is a pretious Jewel, and much desired by mankind, because it is rarely found amongst men. And know, that as the Carbuncle and Diamond are created by an absolute heavenly vertue, and such counterfeit stones are poor and base, which men make in imitation of the Divine Artificer; so Liberty may be rather said to be a Divine Manifacture, then any humane work. If it were possible to Institute a Free State so easily as I perceive you imagin, there where Monarchy hath a long time reigned, since Li∣berty is a thing so much desired by all men, there would be no Monar∣chy left in the world: For people to come by so great a happiness, would all of them lay claim to Liberty. And yet since there are many Monar∣chies, and but few Commonwealths, we must needs see, that to erect Liberty in a Country, is rather an impossible then a difficult thing, and a gift which ought rather to be beg'd of God by prayer, then to be hoped for from any humane wisdom: Nor be not moved by the example of so many Commonwealths, which with so much happiness to those peo∣ple,
are lately instituted in Germany: For examples square not, unless where the same circumstances agree▪ Too great is the disproporion be∣tween the Germans (who are born in a sort of middle Liberty, from which condition, passage is easily made to intire Liberty) and us, who having alwaies undergon all servitude from our Princes, are so  from being able to purchase perfect Liberty, as we cannot pass from this, into the other extream, without exposing our selves and Country to manifest ruine. I grant that some Princes prove sometime phantastical, insolent, very beasts; and that it is a species of great felicity to secure ones self from these evils; but say you with me, That there is not a more phantastical, insolent, or bestial Government in the world, then that of an ill ordered Commonwealth, of a free tumultuous State. All who have written, or reason'd of Politick Affairs, confess that a people like us, born, bred up, and who have lived even to their decrepid age in servitude, are altogether uncapable of living free. Commonwealths being more formed by the good condition of Citizens dispositions, proportioned to live free, then by Laws: For as a new Vine soon grows dry if it be planted by an aged Tree; and on the contrary, does grow up prosperously, and bring forth fruit in great abundance if it be placed near a plant, which as if it were her husband, is of like age with it self▪ so the new Vine of Liberty scorns to take root, and to bring forth satisfactory fruit, if it be placed near an antient Tree of a people grown old in servitude. For the ambition of the Nobility, and sedition of the common people who are capital ene∣mies to living free, would for certain so suck up the radical moysture which gives life to the new Vine, as they would in a short time make it wither and become dry. This truth which I relate, is evidently seen in the as perspicuous, as rare example of all the past and present Liberties of the immortal Venetian Commonwealth, which being planted whilst yet a young Vine, together with the little bush of the Venetian people, though born but a little be∣fore in those moorish and fennish grounds, takes such deep and strong root, as it now gives savory fruits of secure Liberty to its Citizens. It is folly for us to hope for alteration of Customs, which are not changed so easily as apparrel: For mans genius affecting quietness in all its ope∣rations, a soul which knows how to submit it self to a Citizen, who though his superior in being a Magistrate, is yet his inferior in all other respects; how being rich and young, to honour a poor old man with submission, to bestow all his love upon his Country (next to his God) yea rather then upon his children or wealth,▪ to preser the publick good before privat interest; to judge uprightly in civil and criminal affairs between friends and parents, to tremble at the severity of the Laws in a ee State; to possess the wealth of a Prince, and have the mind of a privat man, so far to mortifie himself, as humbly to begg the favorable vote of his inferior; and finally to have the taceturnity in publick affairs, and to possess all those habits worthy of a free-man, which are observed to be so exactly in every Noble Venetian; is a Doctrine which is not learnt by Books▪ nor by the mouthes of men; but which is brought from the womb; and suckt in with the mothers milk, by such as are born in Free Coun∣tries. If (as I understand many of you are minded to do) you will send to
Venice, to receive the Laws of living free, from that excellent Com∣monwealth, doubtlesly rare ones will be given you; but Laws, no less then habits, do not square with ll men. God would be too gracious to men if they were permitted, in the midst of Iuly, when they are scorched by the Sun, to go into the Woods, and take from thence the greatest Plane-tree which they should find there, and  it into their own Gardens, so to enjoy the shade thereof. Liberty, like a young Tree, planted amongst men, is very hard to rear up; for it must be con∣tinually watered with new Laws, according to occasion which every day arise, and prun'd by severe Justice. Nor must men be impatient in these cases; for no man enjoys the noon-day-comfort of a great Tree standing in his Court-yard, which was not first planted but a little sprig by his great great Gandfathers. And it hath been Gods will, that Trees and Commonwealths, should with much difficulty arive at long life, and be long in bringing forth their fruits. And very exceeding great pains and labour was taken to make that very Plant of the glorious Venetian Liberty, what the world sees it now to be; and those Ancients who plant∣ed it, partook of no good thereby, but only pain and toyle in bringing it up; whereas now their twentieth generation enjoy the verdure, the noon-day-comfort and freshness thereof. For though it be above 100 years since it was planted in those Washes, yet is it not so long since it be∣came so perfect, and so secure a Plant of true Liberty, as that it fears not the wind of forrein Princes pride, nor the frost of Domestick seditions: Add to these things (my fellow-Citizens) that it is not so much the Laws, though they be very good ones, nor yet the other particulars which I have touched upon, which have maintained, do maintain, and will maintain the Venetian Commonwealth in perpetual greatness, as is the miraculous and singular situation of those Marish and Fenny grounds, which we cannot partake of. All that understand any thing in State-af∣fairs, confess that the Senat is the Heart and Fountain of Life of every Free State. Skilful Fencers, when they will overthrow their enemy with few blows, make a thrust at their heart; and Princes who have en-deavored to subdue Commonwealths, have made their first blow at the Metropolitan City of the Free State, only to dissipate the Senat; for these are the mortal wounds which kill all, even the most potent Liber∣ties: For the Senat being routed, and consequently the heart of the Commonwealth struck through, it dies immediately. An imperfection which Monarchies have not, the greatness of whose Empire is alwaies where the Kings person is; as the Duke of Guise made proof of, who by his taking of Paris, did rather accelerate his own death, then hasten on his own greatness. The Dictator Cesar proves this which I affirm, to be true: Who to Tyrannize over his Country, made himself Master of Rome (which Pompey was very indiscreet in abandoning) only that he might defeat the Senat: A thing which Hanibal, the true Master of Militia, and sole honor of Africa, knew before him, and endeavored it, but knew not how to effect it: And which after him, the Emperor Charls the fifth, that Founder of the greatness of the Spanish Monarchy, knew very well how to do, and did practice it against the Florentines and the . This mortal wound could never be given to the State of Venice, whose Metropolis, where the Senat abides, is fortified, and armed with
the proof-Armor of Marishes and Washes▪ wherefore I think I may conclude, that their wils are good, who desire to bring in Liberty of li∣ving Free in our Country; but their wisdom is but weak: And that they who are for a Prince, intend well, and are excellently well advised; and in taking a resolution in this our so weighty business, I desire you all to remember, that the Florentine Nobility, which through the imper∣tinency of the seditious people, could never bring in a perfect form of living free in their Country, not being able any longer to undergo the cruel and bloudy insolences of the base Plebeians, were forced to call in a forrein Tyrant, the Duke of Atene, only that by extraordinary severi∣ty, he might afflict the common people of Florence, who did so abuse their Liberty. Though these reasons were thought very efficacious by the wiser sort, yet could they not make the people resolve upon chusing a new Prince: Wherefore the business was carried, for living free, and that Ambassadors should be sent to Venice to receive the Laws of living free, from that Com∣monwealth, which was suddenly done. The Ambassadors were received and welcom'd by the Venetian Commonwealth with incredible magnificency, and the Venetian Government, Orders and Laws were shewn unto them, which the Ambassadors caused to be exactly copied out, and registred, and so departed. And being returned to Mitilene, they made their Re∣port, and read in publick Senat, the Laws which they had brought with them, which gave very bad satisfaction to all the common People, and to the greatest part of the Nobility: For the people could by no means in∣dure, that by the Venetian Laws they should be excluded from publick Government, saying that that Country merited not to be called Free, where all did not command: And the wealthier Nobility being accustom∣ed under Monarchy, to purchase favors from the Favorits, and to obtain places of Magistracy (which they did shamefully execute) from their Princes, storm'd, and said publickly, That that was a most unfortunate Country, where men were inhibited the making free use of their monies; which was purchased by industrious men at the cost of so much sweat, not only to buy meat and clothes, but to purchase therewith such things which encreased reputation: And that it was much better for Citizens to be ruled over by a Prince, whose good will might be won by a thousand seve∣ral waies, then to be govern'd by inexorable Laws, when they were ad∣ministred by a numerous Senat; where a little not being sufficient, and e∣nough not being alwaies to be had, whereby to make so many prevaricate and break the Laws, it might truely be said to be incorruptible. And that under Monarchies, the chiefest of the Nobility did from the first, execute the prime places of the Principality; and that in Commonwealths it was sad for them to begin together with the meanest Senators, at the lowest imployments, and come slowly by degrees to places of highest dignity: That it required more then the usual years of man to arive at the supream∣est preferments; and the rigor of bestovving places of Magistracy only according to mens meer merit, vvas a Precept first invented by Tyrants, to keep potent men lovv, and to exalt the mean. But amongst all these bad satisfactions, nothing distasted three parts of four of the Nobility more, then the severe Magistracy of the Censors, which they heard was used by the Venetians, who perpetually did severe∣ly and strictly examin all mens behaviours; wherefore they said freely,
that if the Nobility were so severely proceeded with in the State of Ve∣nice, the Noble Venetians were slaves amidst their Liberty, and the peo∣ple of Miteline free amidst their servitude, for very dread of these things, all, with a loud voice cryed out, Monarchy, Monarchy: And that if any one would set up Liberty in Mitilene, let them burn all Laws and Sta∣tutes; for such understood that to be perfect Liberty, where none obey∣ed, all commanded, and every one did what he list. The XL. ADVERTISEMENT. James Creyton, a Scotchman, having incenst the Vertuosi in Parnassus, by a proud defyance, was so shamed by them through a bitter jest, as without ending the dispute, they forced him to forgo Parnassus. JAmes Creyton, a Scotchman, the Prodigie of Nature for Learning, came some daies ago to this Court with such vain-glorious pomp, and self-oftentation, as moved as much nauseousness in the compleatest Ver∣tuosi of this State, as wonder in the meaner sort of people, who are usual∣ly ignorant, to see that a young fellow of but 25 years of age, should pre∣tend to be exactly knowing in all Sciences, when the chiefest Vertuosi know the continual study of 80 years is but a short time to be Master of one only Science. This Creyton the next day after his entrance into Par∣nassus, caused a paper to be fixed upon the Gates of all the Colledges, and upon the Pillars of all the Delfick Portici, wherein in large Capital Let∣ters these words were written, Nos Iacobus Crytonius, Scotus, cujus∣cumque rei propositae ex improviso respondebimus. We Iames Creyton, a Scothman, will answer ex tempore to whatsoever shall be propounded, This bold defiance, which was thought by many to be very arrogant, did so nettle the Vertuosi, as many of them framed Arguments even in the hardest Sciences, wherewith they thought to choak him at very first. But an acute Satyrical Poet bereft the whole Colledge of the Litterati of the pleasure of that dispute: For the very night after the posting up of this defiance, he underwrit in those very papers, these sharp words: And he that will see it, let him go to the signe of the Faulcon, and it shall be shewn him. Creyton was so stung with this biting Jest, as he presently departed from Parnassus, much ashamed and confused; having first made known unto his Majesty that he thought he could no longer appear with his ho∣nour amongst those Vertuosi, who had done him the affront to deal with him as with a Juglar and Mountebank.
The XLI. ADVERTISEMENT. After strict examination of such as were to be chosen, the List of Governors is filled up in Parnassus. AFter long expectation, the distribution of the Governments of this State was yesterday published with general satisfaction, it is not to be imagined what diligence and circumspection was used by his Majesty and his State-Ministers in the choice of them: For first they were care∣full to chuse old men to govern the people, only that I Polledri non habbi∣ano a por bardella a Cozzoni, Coults might not put Tramels upon their Pacers: And it was a thing worth much consideration, that of so many as put for it, they chose only men of slow Wits, cold Natures, such as were perplext and irresolute in all their actions, and drousie, even to the point of appearing foolish; whereas they excluded those who for the vi∣vacity of their spirits, seemed fit to have been preferred before them. And this was done because those wise men who were chosen to examin, verily believe, that bold, and over-lively wits are not very fit to govern others, they themselves standing in need of a bit and Caveson, to keep them from falling into ditches; for experience hath taught all men, that such men, with their too irresolute wits, do rather disquiet people, then prove Instruments of keeping them in that peace and good satisfaction, which ought to be their chiefest care who are the Governors of Provinces; and it is a thing known to all men, that those Electors hold it for an infallible Maxim, That he succeeds best in the Government of Cities, who being of a slower wit, and setled mind, knows best how to fit himself for ma∣king his abode there, as it were the signe of an Inn: For the world, which is much ruled by it self, is much disquieted and imbroyled by the chyme∣ra's of some sharp wits, who being overwise in all their waies, Intempestivis remediis delicta accendunt. Tacit. lib. 13. Annal. Make things worse by unseasonable remedies. Hence it was, that in the strict examination that was made in this so weighty business, the ignorant were not excluded, but only those who were too wise, and who having their heads full of querks, and new inventions, are enemies to those ancient Customs, to which the people being accustomed, think themselves wronged by being bettered by new Laws. 'Ts true, they studied to find out flexible people, of ea∣sie and supple wits, who could accommodate their own Nature to that of others; nor did they admit of any Officer who had not past four years in the study of that important Philosophy, of living, and suffering to live: A Basis whereon all peoples quiet, and the assurance of all good Govern∣ment wch can be expected from the good Governor of aProvince, is secure∣ly grounded; in whom they thought not the knowledge of the Laws and Statutes to be so necessary, as that they should be verst in that gentle way of proceeding, and in that dexterity of judgement, which is not registred in Books. A Consideration so much the more necessary, for that some Lawyers who have had the Governments of several Provinces, have be∣haved themselves but foolishly therein: Witness Bartolo, the very light
of the Law, who with all his Legal knowledge, was forc'd to leap out of the window at the Palazzo di Todi, to shun being seized on by those who could no longer endure his Impertinencies; who had a fair tongue, but foolish pate. And it is very certain, that they did drive avvay certain great beastly fellows, even with Bastenadoes, who proudly playing the Peacocks, and publikely professing severity, delight much with their grave looks to threaten men with death in publike assemblies: and they excluded from all hopes of Government, brutish Busirides, who thirsting after humane blood, think they can mend the world, with Pillories, Gallowses and Axes: but they mightily loved those who la∣boured more to inhibit them to punish faults, and who underwrite Capi∣tal sentences in ink, made of Tears. The next day after the publica∣tion of the bestowing of Governments, all the Provosts came before the Regio Collaterale, where Apollo was in person, and there with solemn ceremonies, they made oath between his Majesties hands, that they would leave the world in the same happy condition as they found it; it being high treason in this State, where Tacitus his rule is observed (that super omnibus negotiis, melius atque rectius olim provisum, et que con∣verterentur, in deterius mutari. Tac. lib. 4. Annal. That better provi∣sion was made for all things in former times, and all alterations made since have proved to the worse) to make any the least Innovation in Go∣vernments. These oathes being taken, the great Delfick Chancellor, placed in a high seat, said, You Gentlemen Officers, his Majesties pleasure is, that in the places which are bestowed upon you, you be sure to have a strict care to your ways; and that you swell not so with ambition as to play Rex, but that you remember you are but counterfeit Princes, whose Empire is but weak, grounded upon a frail sheet of paper, and fortified by a little wax. Then Marcus Tullius Cicero made an Oration in praise of those new Officers, affirming that they were so wise and good, as they were able to new mould the world. And this oration being ended, Apollo, with a pleasing countenance, did with his own hands give every one of them their Letters Patents, and commanded them to go present∣ly to their several charges. It was a thing which caused astonishment in all men to see, that as soon as ever their Patents were delivered, his Ma∣jesties formerly clear and serene face towards those his Officers, was changed into a dreadful & angry aspect, as if he had hated them deadly, and the civilities, proffers, and friendly demonstrations of those signori del Collaterale, were changed in the twinkling of an eye into Threats and Accusations; insomuch, as they themselves who had been so very cir∣cumspect in making that election, swore to every one that those Officers were a company of greedy companions, publike sellers of Justice, and Birds of prey; and before they departed, by order from his Majestie, an Urtamartino taken out of the Pegasean Stable, was given to those who were Governors of the chiefest Provinces, an Instrument thought ne∣cessary by all wise men, to beat down some imperious fellows, who de∣firing to domineer in other mens houses, do with ready money purchase hatred, laying the blame of all their impertinences, insolences and ill usage committed against the master of the house, upon their own dis∣composed and hasty nature. I was told by very credible people, that after this Salustius Crispo President of the Collaterale, taking the Govern∣our
of Libetro (whom he much favoured and loved) aside, told him, That he should do well to be very negligent in the beginning of his Go∣vernment, but be exquisitely diligent in the end thereof; remembring always, that to begin ones Imployments Acribus Innitiis, Iioso fine. Tac. lib. 4. Annal. with strict beginnings, and neglective end, was to imi∣tate the Asses Trot, which is so usual to the common sort of officers; that in his administration of justice in things of dispute between ordina∣ry people, he should do them exact right without any respect of persons; but that in controversies which might arise between the Nobility, or people of better rank, he should use the dexterity of a wary judgement, with the rigour of Justice, remembring always that the accusations of powerful men were so hateful to Princes as they besprinkled the Offi∣cers Garments with certain spots and stains of bad impression, which could never be washt away with any sope of Innocency; that therefore with such he should so use the buckler of dexterity, with the sword of justice, as no wounds of distaste might be given or received by either party: for it being requisite for Princes, for their own affairs, to have the Nobility satisfied, the Officer must know exactly the art of draw∣ing rotten teeth with a piece of cotton; that in his Government he should strive Omnia scire, sed non omnia exequi, Tacit. vita Agric. to know all things, but not to put all things in execution; for to go about to wash a Blackmoor white, were to play the mad man; and that in this so corrupt Age, Officers might do more wisely to bear with some an∣cient disorders in the people, then with very little of satisfaction, to afflict ones self, with introducing good where it was not welcome, that he should shun contentions with neighbour Officers, who were subjects to the same Prince, and that such differences as he could neither cloak nor shun, he should like a Gown-man defend them with his pen; but that he should neither seek for, nor yet shun differences with neighbour∣ing Princes: but defend such as should arise, like a Souldier with his sword, observing still the temper, as to shew reverence towards forreign Princes, and zeal towards his own Prince: that being placed in Go∣vernment to decide quarrels, and to put an end to other mens differences, he should keep himself from kindling new ones, as he would do from fire, holding it for a certain rule, that Officers won infinite reputation, when at the very instant that they were set upon, they could resolve to give over with loss: Mercè che delle mosche pigliate con le natiche, mai non si trovo chi facesse utila ritratto: and that he should think that no∣thing did more shew an Officers lightness, then to seem greedy of dis∣putes and quarrels, whereof wise-men would give fourteen to the dozen; that in some things he should do well to prefer the publike peace, be∣fore the rigor of Justice, taught by books; that he should never be over angry, for any whatsoever Impertenency which should be seen or heard of in his Government; and that if he could not do this, he should not onely forbear from acting, but even from speaking in the heat of Anger; and should recommend the consideration of all things to cool blood; that in vveighty affairs he should avoid to appear undaunted, bold and resolute, but take pleasure in taking the crab out of his hole vvith his Princes hand, armed vvith the Gantlet of Authority; for though the Officer had authority to act, tvvas notvvithstanding good often times, not to use that authority: that he should avoid such Go∣vernments,
as he vvould do precipices, vvhere any of the Blood-Royal lived, or any of the kindred of Court-Favorites; which vvere the Silla and Caribdis, and inevitable quicksand of ruine to all Officers: and that he should not be ambitious of governing in Provinces, vvherein vvere many of the Nobility, to govern vvhom, vvas to lead a heard of Foxes, and a flock of Hens to feed, and be bound to bring them all back again to their folds at night: but that he should esteem such Go∣vernments best, which being full of mean and ignorant people, received full satisfaction if they had plenty of bread in their market-places: that he should keep conversation and acquaintance at large with all that were in his Government, but stri ct friendship with none; that he should avoid that retiredness which made men be hated, and that domestical familia∣rity, which caused scorn, but use such gravity as purchased love and re∣spect to the Officer, that he should abhor to converse with base men, and communicate onely with persons of his own profession; and that he should be wary of making any one his friend, to whom he might not at the very same instant become a capital enemy, without any prejudice to himself; for in Officers houses mushromes grew in an instant to be as high as Ciprus Trees; that he should by all means shun having to do with those great ones in Cities, who love to have many followers, and make profession of Arms; for that Giddy-headed Officers cannot more shamefully nurse up a Serpent in their bosoms, then by lending an ear to the intercessions which such men make for unruly people, who are imprisoned for seditious faults; every one being ready to spend their lives in his service, who hath once saved them: that in publike Audiences he hould observe great gravity speak little, but resolutely, imploying his ears more then his tongue in such places; and that he should there shun to argue the points of reason with Advocates; for an ignorant man that speaks, knowing better what he hath to say, then a learned man that listens unto him; an Of∣ficer who will on the sudden argue a case with an advocate, cannot make good his reputation against him, who havng first studied the business, comes prepared, without being so insolent as to use his authority instead of reason; that he should praise, and yet shun the hateful and foolish customs of Provinces; and that he should patiently bear with the stink∣ing pride of Advocates, and the affronted impertinencies of Proctors, and maintain their honour in publike, whose faults he might correct in private, that he should practice that golden sentence of Tacitus, Utilis∣simus idem, ac brevissimus bonarum, malarum{que} rerum delectus, cogitare quid aut nolueris sub alio Principe, aut volueris. Tacit. lib. 1. hist. It is the most useful and ready choice of both good and bad things, to con∣sider what you like or dislike under another Prince; with such circum∣spection, as to shun a defect in his Predecessor, he should not fall himself into the other extream. As a certain Prince had foolishly done, who to avoid the over much pleasantness which was blamed in his Predecessor, betook himself to unheard of severities; that he might account business his pastime, eminent spirits making the pleasure they take in command∣ing and exercising authority over others, serve instead of Picquet or Lurch: that he should be more careful in well governing his own house, then in curbing seditions in the City, for that Provincialists are more troubled at the immodesty of an Officers favorite, then at a foul inso∣lency
committed by a Townsman; that he should abhor forestalling of Markets, and that he should esteem those hisCapital enemies who should propound unto him such unlawful gains; and that he should firmly believe that the onely gainful merchandize becoming an honorable Officer, was to engage himself deeply in the Traffick of purchasing glory and honor; by which rising still to higher preferments, he in a short time would a∣bound in wealth and reputation; that he should shun prodigallity ad avarice (shameful extreams in Officers) that he should set aside one fourth part of the day for the dispatch of civil causes, and the other fourt part in deciding criminal affairs, & the rest in being hospital, on which an Officers reputation did wholly depend; that he should always have an eye to his Judges hands; that he should not resolve any thing in difficult affairs, before he were fully possest of the whole business; for sudden resoluti∣ons were very dangerous in such like cases: and that he should always behave himself so therein, as if he did rather grieve to have done too little, then too much; that he should so accommodate his own genius to the nature of those of the Province, as to be gentle with those that were pleasant and peaceful, and severe with those that were stubborn and se∣ditious; that above all things he should curb the insolencies of Sergeants and Marshals-men, who in many places are grown so insufferably bold, as they have not onely caused wicked scandals to Princes, who in all o∣ther respects are glorious and happy, but have rendred such States hate∣ful where the bridle hath been let loose to such like Rascals, wholly made up of insolency; for he was ill advised who gave much authority to one who knew not what discretion meant; that not to appear foolish, he should not acquaint his Prince with every trivial affair, nor keep from him the knowledge of things of importance, least he might be thought to neglect him; that he should believe that wary Judges did threaten more then punish, and that he should not forget, that Officers govern men, who are subject to a thousand imperfections, infinitely addicted to errour, and not Angels, who cannot sin; that therefore in his Go∣vernment he should rather affect to be reputed pleasing then cruel; that he should avoid Baals, and publique Feasts, which do abase the Per∣sonages of Officers; that in the shameful faults of Noblemen, he should be severe against the Delinquents person, not touching upon the honour of his Family; that he should many times rather wink at carnal faults, then seem over desirous to punish them; that by wisely appear∣ing pleased, he should rather make the world believe that his subjects were good, then make them become such through rigour; for those that boast they have hanged I know not how many hundred men in their Governments, glory in their infamy.
The XLII. ADVERTISEMENT. Agus makes proffer of himself to the Dukes of Venice, to guard the Virginity of their illustrious Commonwealth, and his offer is not accepted. ARGUS never had any imployment in Pernassus till now, since he proved so unfortunate in watching fair Io; for though many great Princes would by large salaries have hired him to guard their Ladies honour, he hath always refused to take upon him the care of any Ladies reputation, having clearly found in Io's unfortunate business, that wo∣men, when they are lewdly inclined, or are strongly solicited, are not to be secured, no not by a thousand Argusses: Yet of late days, being ve∣ry needy, he offered himself to Andrea Gritti, and other Princes of the Venetian State, to guard their beautiful liberty, so as he might be well paid for his pains, and he would bind himself to keep continually ninety eight of his hundred eyes awake to watch over that illustrious Princess. Argus was graciously listened unto by Gritti, and the rest of the Dukes of Venice, who first presented him with a purse full of ma∣ny millions of Crowns, which they said they gave him for the good will that they found in him, but that they had no need of his ayd in this affair; for their liberty needed not his hundred eyes to guard her honour, her own chaste inclination being sufficient to do it, assisted by the six eys, by the vigilant and dreadful Magistracy of the three State-In∣quisitors, who wrought so by the sword of justice, which they did con∣tinually brandish over the heads of the Libenus, as that their Liberty, though she be exceeding fair, was looked upon with chast eyes, even by the most ambitiously lustful, and coveted with a perfect Platonick love. The XLIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Florentines in their pastime called the Calcio, admit of a Spruce Forreign Courtier, who wins the Prize. THe Noble Florentines plaid the last Tuesday at the Calcio in the Phebean field, which all the Litterati of Pernassus came to see; and though some, to whom it was a new sight to see many of those Floren∣tine Gentlemen fall to down right cuffs, said, that that manner of pro∣ceeding in that which was but play and sport, was too harsh, and not se∣vere enough in a real combat; yet the Vertuosi took delight to see it, for many praised the Gamesters swift running, their nimble leaping, and
their strength; others were very well pleased with the invention of the Game, which was very good to breed up youth to run, leap and wrastle; and many believed this to be the cause why it was instituted in that for∣merly so famous Commonwealth: but the quicker sighted Politicians, argued from the going together by ears of those young Florentines, that some great mysterie lay concealed in that sport; for that Common∣wealths are fuller of intestine hatred, and hidden ranchor of spirit, then are Monarchies, by reason of the continual flocking to Magistrates, and frequent denials which are given to Senators of such places as they de∣sire, receiving doubtlesly more distastes thereby one from another, then is observed to fall out between people who live in a Monarchy; and it being impossible but that some violent passion of anger must burst forth in a liberty full of distastes, the Politicians affirmed, That the Common∣wealth of Florence had done very well and wisely in introducing the Calcio amongst her Citizens, to the end that having the satisfaction of giving four or five good round buffets in the face to those to whom they bare ill will, by way of sport, they might the better afterwards ap∣pease their anger. An evaporation which if it should be had upon another occasion by a dagger, it would have much indangered the publike liberty. The same Politicians affirm for certain, that the Sancsi introduced the fa∣mous Gioco della pugna in their Commonwealth, and the Venesians the assaulting of the bridge in theirs, for no other end but this. But it hapned that a spruce Courtier who was a Spectator at this sport, being asked by that famous Pietro Caponi, who by the bold answer he gave to a King of France, won eternal fame, how he liked their Calcio; who answered, The sport was very pleasant, but that those Florentines did not play well. And the Game of Calcio being particular to the Florentine Na∣tion, and altogether unknown in ther parts, Caponi thought the Cour∣tier had said amiss; wherefore he asked him, Whether he thought he could play better? The Courtier answered freely, that if they would permit him to play with them, he would teach those Florentine Gen∣tlemen the true art how to take the ball, how to un with it, how to re∣pulse the wrastlers dextrously, who would take it away, and other ex∣cellent master like tricks. Caponi laught to hear the Courtier boast thus, and having acquainted all the Florentine Gamesters with what he said, they joyntly invited him to play. The Courtier made himself ready, and entred the lists; where the Florentines promising themselvs much pastime in buffetting and abusing him, made him a round, and present∣ly the Ball was thrown up in the ayr by men appointed thereunto: which came no sooner to the ground, but that the nimble Courtier ran towards it, and having taken it up, clap it under his left arm; those of the contrary party ran to take it away from him: but he with great strength justled one, and thrust away another; and whereas the Florentines, who were masters of the sport, thought to have thrown him down, they were thrown down themselves; for the sturdy Courtier did so freely lay a∣bout him on all sides with his arm, shoulders, head, and every part of him, as he made all keep aloof, so as the greatest part of the Florentines of the adverse part, were thrown to the ground; and some of them re∣ceived such blows on their breasts, as they could hardly breathe for a good while after. And the Courtier having overcome all that withstood him, threw the ball over the lists, and won the Prize. At which he
Florentines were so astonished, as they took a solemn oath never to admit of any Courtier more to play with them; as those who in run∣ning had winged heels; and are rather Devils then men in justling, thrusting, making men keep back, and making room for themselves in croudes, and making way there, where people flock most; in the art of never suffering the ball to fall to the ground when they have gotten it, nor ever to be taken from them, and in giving their adversaries such deadly squelches as they shall never rise again. The XLIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Batista Platina, being bastenado'd by Agustino Niso, com∣plains to Apollo (little to his reputation) of the injury received. BAtista Platina, who keeps the Pastrey shop in the corner of the Herb-market as he the other day was raising a piece of dainty Paste, Agustino Niso da Sessa, that famous Neapolitan Philosopher en∣tred his shop, and took up the rowling pin wherewith Platina made his Paste, and did so cudgel him with it, as certainly he would have slain him, had not some of the Vertuosi, who heard the noise, run in, and hindred him. Platina being thus ill dealt withal, caused himself to be brought before Apollo; to whom he sorely complained of Niso, and said, That he was not so much grieved at the blows he had received, as that he had never deserved to be so foully affronted by that Philosopher, whom he had always so deerly loved. Apollo did with much grief rescent Niso's extravagancy, and gave order for him to be forthwith sent for: who when he appeared, was ask'd by his Majestie, what had moved him so to dishonour such a Vertuoso as Platina. Niso boldly replyed, That by reason of Platina's evil proceeding with him, he was forced so to re∣venge a shameful slash, which he had given him over the face from one ear to another. Platina with tears, said to Niso, I have always admired your worth Agustino, and loved you as dearly as my own soul, and you, without any cause, have offended your friend, whom you were bound to love and reward. Niso turned then to Apollo, and told him, That he being desirous some few days before to give a private supper to some Neapolitan Vertuosi, had sent to Platina's shop for a Veal Pye, for which he was presently paid; and that Platina, whom he had never of∣fend, had to no end placed his Arms over his shop door, whereby he had published him throughout Parnassus, to be one of those useless persons, who delighting in Gluttony, study nothing but how to eat vvell. Platina excused himself, and said that he had placed his arms over his door, to honour him, not out of any infamy to him. Apollo then bad Platina hold his peace; for you (said he) have well deserved the mischief vvhich hath befallen you; for the arms of men of honor, and of such a Philo∣losophers
as is my beloved Niso, ought to be seen in Libraries, no i Cooks shops, vvhere none but those of smell feasts ought to hag; for there is no fouller defect nor vice, then to study hovv to please the pal∣lat, and to make the base and shameful profession to hunt after good victuals. The XLV. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo knowing what mischief over-much riches causes to Poets, exhorts the Magnanimous King of France, Francis the first, to moderate his profuse liberallity which he used towards them. THe Illustrious King of France, Francis the first, he, who whilst he lived, did not onely place learning on his right hand, but always saluted the Litterati by taking off his hat; whom he so loved, as that he enriched many of them, so as by authentick faith made to Apollo, it appears; that so great a King was the first, who by his profuse liberali∣ty to the Vertuosi of that his Noble Kingdom of France, had planted such learning there, as taking deep root afterwards, hath brought forth infinite volumes of the labours of the learned French, which have much enriched the Delphick Library; and that using still the same bounty to such as lovelearning, he feeds a great many of the Litterati very plenti∣fully in his Royal Palace in Parnassus, to whom he pays very liberal pro∣visions. A magnanimity and Splendor, which till now was very pleasing to Apollo, who much to his discontentment, is come at last to the know∣ledge that this Kings munificence towards the Litterati, produces bad effects; for that over-much riches, according to their custom, begins to blemish the souls of many Vertuosi, with such vices as luxury and ease bring with them, which have so produced the Moth of idleness even amongst the Vertuosi of this State, as that many famous Poets have so far given over their studies, as even Ovid himself, who formerly to the wonder of all men did every day inrich the Delfick Liberary with some one Elogie or other, since he grew into so domestical acquaintance with so great a King, suffered nothing to proceed from his pen in a whole year, save four Epigrams made in praise of the four seasons of the year. Wherefore Apollo perceiving that this Kings liberallity towards his Vertuosi occasioned even the overthrow of learning; to the end that the intents and perpetual desire which they have to learn still some∣wat whilst they are poor, might not be extinguished, sent two days since for King Francis, whom he told, that he much loved and admired the great Liberallity which he used towards his Vertuosi; but that for the indempnity of Sciences he was forced to will him to be more moderate therein; for that Learning, which is born and bred in poverty, was re∣quisitely
to live therein, as in her particular Element: That therefore he should not permit Poets to purchase any thing by his Royal Munificence, but meat and cloathing; the one modest, the other mean: For that he clearly perceived, that they in the abundance of bodily wealth, grew poor in the like of their souls, vitious amidst riches, in delitiousness, idle; or that the like disorder was found in them, as was observed to be in hens, which, the fatter they are, lay the fewer eggs; Poets being like crickets, who sing not but out of meer necessity: And that they follow not the chase, like dogs, for pleasure; but like Falcons and Goshawks, for meer hungar. The XLVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having found out the first Inventor of Guns, as he is about to punish him severely for his fault therein commit∣ted; The Artificer defends himself very well. TIs now some fifty years since Polidor Virgil had a Pension given him by his Majesty of twenty Crowns a month, together with mainte∣nance for himself, two servants, and their horses,; only that he might endeavor to find out the Inventors of all things which had been thought upon by extraordinary Wits for the benefit of man: For Apollo thought such men deserved so well for their industry, as that they were to be kept in perpetual memory. And his Majesty being infinitely troubled that the Art of Warfaring (which was alwaies cruel) should now be arived at so great a height therein, by the new Invention of Guns, as that in all late Wars much more use was made of fire, then of the sword: And be∣ing grieved even to the very heart, that so many men should be destroyed, and Cities ruined in a short time by this diabolical Invention, he com∣manded Pollidor Virgil, that with all speed he should find him out (if at least so devilish an Instrument could be found out by any humane crea∣ture) who had the cruel heart to introduce a scourge amongst men, so like to dreadful Thunder. Pollidor obeyed, and in a short time did not only learn that the Inven∣tors of Guns was a Dutchman; but found him out, and delivered him a∣live into the power of the Court. Apollo being hereat overjoy'd, com∣manded the Judges of Assize, that they should do exemplary Justice up∣on this so cruel enemy to mankind. These gave sentence immediately, that the Dutchman should be put alive into a Cannon, to which fire be∣ing given, he might be torn in pieces by his own hellish Invention. All things tending thereunto were already in order, and the unhappy Dutch∣man was brought to punishment, when in those his last streights he in∣treated that he might be permitted to speak but a word or two before his Majestie in his own defence. He had his desire granted; and being brought before Apollo, spake thus; Illustrious King of Light! shall he
be condemn'd to so cruel a punishment by your Majesties Judges, who are esteemed to be just by all the world, who hath laboured to deserve fa∣vour from God, and good will from men, by inventing things beneficial for mankind? It is the intention, purpose, and mind of a man that makes the fault, which, whatsoever excess may insue upon any mans work, yet is it not imputed to any one whose will was good, and his intention holy. I call God to witness, and your Majesties own light, which sees all things, that I did not invent Guns to afflict mankind (as I find many do wrongfully think) but out of zeal, charity, and piety; and if any mischief hath since insued thereby, it was more then I intended: For be∣ing vexed at the very soul to see, that through the ambition and avarice of those that rule, men were by divers waies drawn, will they, nil they, to the slaughter of War, I bethought my self, that people could not receive a greater benefit from any one, then to acquit the world of the vast ex∣pence of bloud occasioned by War; being very sure, that if Princes should want souldiers, they would not wage War so much, and would content themselves with their own fortunes, when man to man with their weapons in their hand, they must overcome that enemy, whose State they would usurp. For the danger of losing their lives, would make them lay aside the insatiable ambition which they have of domineering over the whole world. To arive then at this so holy end, and wherein I thought the whole felicity of mankind did consist, I bethought my self of this inven∣tion of Guns, firmly believing, that out of horror of this so dreadfull In∣strument, all men would be so terrified, as they would abominate the my∣stery of War. I did the rather believe this, for that I saw men were mightily affrighted with Thunder from Heaven, though they knew that God in his mercy makes more Thunder be heard for terror, then Bolts seen for punishment; that notwithstanding many when they see the lightning which precedes the thunder, run into corners to hide themselves; nay o∣thers have built themselves Chambers of Iron for security. Wherefore I did firmly believe that no man would ever be so rash or cruel to himself, as to expose his life to the manifest danger of death, by incountring with earthly Thunder, so like in all respects to the Thunder of Heaven; and levelled at the life of man, not to affright, but to kill him. If the con∣trary to what I believed, have since fallen out, and if men be grown so superlatively foolish and cruel to themselves, as out of a desire to appear gallant, to go even with delight against the mouth of the Cannon, and I to be blamed for other mens rashness and beastiallity? Apollo was so moved to hear this Dutchman so gallantly defend him∣self, as turning his punishment into favour, he commanded that he should be rather rewarded then censured; and with tears in his eyes, said, That by reason of their beastiallity who dare sell their lives for the poor price of six pence a day, he was compelled to be pleas'd that cruel inventions should daily more increase, whereby to rid the earth of this lewd sort of men; and since that neither fire nor sword were able to do it, he earnestly desired the Majesty of his Creator, that he would once more open the Chateracts of Heaven, and quickly powre down new deluges of water upon the earth, to wash those wicked men from off the earth (without harming such as love peace) who forgetting that they are obliged to multiply man∣kind, have taken upon them the cruel trade of annihilating it by fire and sword.
XLVII▪ ADVERTISEMENT. The Roman Monarchy desire to be resolved by Cornelius Ta∣citus in a Politick Doubt; and receive full satisfaction therein by Melibeus, the Mantuan Shepherd, who was ca∣sually there. THe Illustrious Roman Monarchy, which before it was trampled upon by the barbarous Northern Nations, lived here in Parnassus in that height of glory, which no other human worth could ever arive at; under pretence of going a hunting, went in disguise the other day to find out Conelius Tacitus, who for his recreation was retired to his Countrey∣house; and told him, that she was come to him only to be resolved in a Doubt which had a long time troubled her mind, the which she had con∣ferred about with many other great Polititians, and had not received such satisfaction from them, as she hoped to do from him, who was the greatest Statist and Arch-Flamming of all Modern Policy. And that the busi∣ness which so much troubled them, was, That the Kingdom of France, Spain, Egypt, Soria, the Commonwealth of Carthage, and the rest of the Immence States which she possest in Asia, Africa, and Europe, were of themselves formidable to every one, before they were joyned to her but that being all of them united in her person, instead of strengthening her, they had made her weaker then she was before; a thing which they did the more wonder at, for that it was evidently know, that many threads made a strong Rope, and many little twigs a strong rafter; and yet an infi∣nite number of Principalities being joyned together, had not formed that eternal and great Monarchy, which men did expect? Tacitus answered to this, that the question was of weight, and therefore deserved to be maturely consulted, that he would return the next day to Parnassus, where when he should have cast his eye over his Annals and Histories, he believed he should thereout draw such an answer, as would give her Majestie full satisfaction. The Roman Monarchy was very well pleased with this Answer; and just as she was going to take her leave and be gon, Melibeus, that famous Shepherd, who had brought a dish of Curds and Cream, and two new Cheeses that very morning, as a present to Tacitus, and had heard the question asked by that great Monarchy, de∣sired her that she would be pleased to stay, for that he would instantly give full satisfaction to her in that which she desired to know: Tacitus and the Roman Monarchy smiled upon Melibeus, and bad him hold his peace, and go look to his sheep, for that was his profession. Me∣libeus then boldly answered, That no sort of men whatsoever knew bet∣ter how to discourse of, and resolve State-affairs, then Shepherds; That Princes should be happy if they used the same charity in governing their Subjects, as shepherds do in feeding their flocks, and the people most hap∣py if they would imitate sheep in their obedience to their Princes. Taci∣tus and the Roman Monarchy marvailed much at this bold and resolute answer of this Shepherd; wherefore they bad him freely make his con∣ceit
known: With which permission Melibeus thus began; Most powerfull Queen, (as it is well known to my Virgil) am a shep∣herd of Mantua, and I should much injure this my gray head and beard which you see, if I were not absolute Master of my profession. I say then, that in so many years that I have had the charge of sheep, I have clearly learnt, that a shepherds power and greatness, consists not (as many that are covetous and ambitious believe) in having many millions of sheep; but only in having so many as a good shepherd may keep with his eye, go∣vern with his rod, and rule with his whistle. And the reason is apparent; for shepherds are beggers when they have too few sheep: for great po∣verty forceth him to milk them too dry, and to shear them too close. Shep∣herds are alwaies wealthy and happy in a mean (wherein all perfection con∣sists) whereas in Immensity they run certain danger, for that it is very hard to govern such a number of sheep as is disproportionable to the forces of any one man. Whence it is, that silly sheep, when in too numerous flocks, first grow lean, and then of necessity die, through the meer care∣lesness of him that looks unto them. This disorder is occasioned, for that flocks of too disproportionate a greatness, instead of good institutions, are full of fowl confusions; and the Proverb frequently made use of, and di∣ligently observed by us shepherds, is true, That a few sheep will not sup∣ply the necessities of a Shepherds Cottage; many will; and infinity be∣get confusion; and are rather prejuditial, than of use. Princes and Commonwealths were happy if they had the property of Cammels, to stoop down humbly to the ground to take up the load of Government; and if they could put a period to their pride and ambition, by rising up on their legs, and not suffering any more load to be laid upon them, when they know they have sufficient for their strength to bear: but men do all their life-time, long to grasp a great stack of Hay, to the end that they may at one burthen carry it all home to their own Barns; which falling afterwards by the way, they find that after so much industry and pains, they have laboured in vain. Hence it is, that for 1600 and odd years that I have been a Shepherd in Arcadia, I never had in my Pen∣folds above 500 Sheep, which affording me the certain gain of 500 crowns a year, I have still been held to be very fortunate by all the Shepherds of Arcadia. I therefore think that shepherd unhappy, who being blinded by avarice, thinks to grow rich in one day, by having many flocks of sheep, which not being able all of them to be looked unto by the Masters eye (which is that which fattens the sheep, and which is the flocks chiefest fe∣licity) he commits them to the custody of careless boys, and oft-times rents them out to cruel Shepherds, who out of greediness to reap a little Interest more then the sheep can yield, do lose the Principal. Neither have there wanted amongst us shepherds those Alexanders the great, who to asswage their thirst of Government, have not been ashamed to ask of God, that he would create new Worlds. For in our Arcadia was one Menalcas, one that did alwaies envy me, and was my mortal enemy; who thinking he should be able to crush me if he could get more sheep then I had, was not content with 500 sheep which he had, but that he might make himself absolute Monarch of all the Shepherds of Arcadia, took up money at use, sold the greatest part of his Patrimony, and having got together a good sum of money, he sent for three flocks of sheep, each of them consisting of 500 from Spain, France, and England, where he knew the best sheep were, and paid excessively for their transporting;
which being strangers, and not acquainted with the Shepherd, nor yet understanding his voice nor whistle, they were but ill-favoredly led to their pasture in the morning, and brought back again at night to their folds. Wherefore Menalcas, to bring his sheep to better obedience, which went still wandring up and down, set dogs upon them; which not being known to the sheep, were alwaies hated by them, and they were the more incenst, for that to their natural hatred, they added offences; which be∣got such obstinacy, dispair, and disobedience in the sheeps hearts, as they began infinitely to abhor their shepherds, and the being guarded by dogs. Moreover when they found they were to be milkt or shorne, they hid themselves in woods; and then it was that all the shepherds of Arcadia, knew that dispair may make Conies turn Lions. Wherefore the Spanish sheep grew so inraged, as they even ventur'd to bite the shepherds; the French kickt the pail down with their feet, wherein they had been miklt; and the English sheep, that they might not obey strange shepherds, nor have their wool torn off by unknown dogs, forbore to graze, chusing rather to die for hunger, then to live in that slavery. It was more strange to see, that the same profit of Cheese, Wool, and Lambs, which those forrein sheep so willingly yielded to their own Country shepherds, were with so ill-will paid to Menalcas, as thinking they were not only ill treated, but tyrannically massacred, they seemed to be glad that they were become barren, and laught to see their shepherd undone. Menalcas being exceedingly afflicted at this novelty, was forced to send to Switzerland for a new regiment of dogs, to bring his sheep to better obedience; which remedy proved both chargeable and unfortunate; for these dogs growing so cruel to the sheep, as even to worry them, and eat them up; this cruelty wrought such effect in the sheep, as they began re∣solutely to throw off all obedience. So as afflicted Menalcas fell at last into the misfortune of listning to a Florentine, a damn'd Master of Policy, who told him, that wary shepherds had no better way to make forrein sheep which were disobedient, serviceable unto them, then by keeping them poor and lean; which as soon as it was put in practice, proved so pre∣juditial both to the sheep and sheepherd, as Menalcas could not get so much as one Cheese, nor half a tod of wool from his sheep, and the sheep died for want of meat. And in one months space, Menalcas lost both his Interest and Principal; and (which caused much mirth in all the Arcadian shep∣herds) from being a happy shepherd of a noble flock, fell, through his gree∣dy ambition to be a woful Merchant of sheep-skins: A great misfortune, wholly occasioned through the ignorance that men have of shepherds A∣rethmatick, which differs so from the Merchant-like Arethmatick used in other affairs, as Menalcas who gained 500 crowns a year by 500 sheep, fell far short of getting a thousand, by a thousand. For it is true, that in common Arethmatick twice five, makes ten, and thrice five, fifteen, and so forward; but in Pastoral Arethmatick, twice five, makes three, thrice five makes one, and four times five, makes that cypher which ruins as ma∣ny as by grasping at too much, holds fast nothing.
The XLVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Vertuosi of Parnassus, in the Assembly of Focide, de∣cide the mystery of an Host; and find the keeping of an Inn to be a Noble Heroik Vertue IN the Assembly which some daies past was celebrated in Focide by the Vertuosi, for decission of some Controversies which arose amongst the Vertuosi, it was resolved to the wonder of all men, that Inn keeping was not a sordid occupation, but a most worthy Heroick vertue, only fit for such high spirited men, and men of worth, who born to be liberal and splendid, cannot endure that their purses should be strung with avarice, nor that the Coffers wherein they keep their Gold lockt up with the key of niggerliness; for they think that the use of money serves for nothing, but the more to inable gallant men to do gallant things. The wonder was yet the greater, for that it was said, the Vertuosi concur'd so unanimously in this Declaration, as it mist but a little, that this vocation, held at first so sordid, was not added as an eight to the seven Liberal Sciences. The meaner sort of the Litterati could hardly believe that this Paradox was ap∣proved by the noblest sort of Parnassus: For Aristotle, Plato, Averoes▪ and many other antient Litterati of the first Classis, did highly praise this resolution of the Assembly, confessing all, that no nobler art, no more honorabler exercise, nor greater advantage could be had or made by great men, then that of Inn-keeping: Alwaies provided that they should be ve∣ry circumspect in lodging certain quallified passengers, who upon occasi∣ons which daily occur, might with half a penful of nk▪ and one little word, make their Host happy, and not only pay for their supper and horse meat, but make good the losses he had suffered by such as feed upon other mens costs, and pass for noddies. Presently upon this Declaration, many generously minded men of Par∣nassus, and who were formerly verst in the Noble Husbandry of sowing good turns, and reaping gratitude, betook themselves to the chief high∣waies, where they have built commodious Inns to take Sturgeons with Pilcherts. And Alberto Pio, Conte de Carpi, one of his Majesties Coun∣cel of State, dispatcht away an express by Post, to acquaint his Nephew Octavius Aquaviva, who was then in the Court at Rome, with this news. This nobly minded Prince, and worthy successor to his vertuous forefa∣thers, as soon as he had read the Letter of so high advertisement, took Post, and riding tods the high-way which leads from Rome to Tusny, did mmediately erect a publick and Royal  in Viterbo, with the signe of the blew Lyon, where he nobly treated all the Princes, and other gallant Gentlemen that past by that way; and did this with such Host-like chear∣fulness, as having twice lodged Cardinal Nicolas Sfondrato very▪ suddenly, the said Cardinal being afterwards made Pope, remembring how good cheer his Host had made him at Viterbo, and considering the Noble bloud, and great worth and mes which did  so great a
Prelate, he caused him to be sent for to Rome, and discoursing with him of what he had eaten at his Inn, did gratefully requite him with a sallet of boyl'd succory, a dish of delicate porredg, with Wardens rosted in the embers, and with a Cardinals Cap, in despight of some poorly conditi∣oned fellows, who are not ashamed to give scurvy nic-names to the ac∣commodation which we receive by being well lodged, and which ought to be esteemed a great happiness. The XLIX. ADVERTISEMENT. A Litterato severely punished for saying that Duels were sometimes necessary. THe Argumentation had three daies ago between certain Litter in the Peripatetick Portico, whether his Majestie had done well or no, to forbid Duels upon so severe penalties, was very remarkable for the m∣fortune it occasioned to some: For the Disputation was no sooner end∣ed, but those who had held that oft-times such differences might arise be∣tween souldiers and other persons, as not being to be decided but by the sword, Duels were necessary, were seised upon and condemned to the Gallies. The wonder of this so sudden sentence was increased, it being clearly seen, that even Justice her self, which was never known to shew a∣ny passion in any whatsoever occasion, did not at this time conceal her anger against those that were sentenced. Some of the wisest of this Court say, that she had much reason to ap∣pear so incensed, since her reputation was so deeply concern'd by those who had dared to affirm that it was possible for some differences to fall out amongst men, as were not to be decided by her Laws, without the use of Duels. The L. ADVERISEMENT. The Dukes, Marquisses, and other Titulati of Parnassus, complain grievously to Apollo, that their honorable Ti∣tle of Excellency, should be given to Doctors of Law, and Physick. THe Duke of Aganippe's wife fell sick the last week of a dangerous Feaver; he therefore forthwith called together a Colledg of the best Physitians of this Court, wherein for his better satisfaction, he would be
present himself. And it fell out, that whilst these Physitians were arguing the business amongst themselves, they gave the Title of Excellency to one another: Whereat the Duke was so scandalized, as not being a∣ble to endure that so high a Title, and which in this our age is so ambi∣ously coveted by great men, should be frequently used by those thread∣bare Doctors; not tarrying to hear their result, departed from them, and went to find out divers Princes to whom the Title of Excellency is given; and told them they must make head, and no waies tollerate that so ignal a Title should be abused by Doctors of aw and Physick. The Princes were so wel pleased with this motion, as y immediately presented them∣selves before Apollo, and complained grievously that the Princely Title of Excellency should be used by those Doctors, for whom the Title of Sir, or Master, was too much. Apollo gave them no other answer, but that they should send for the parties to appear; which was done. So as the Doctors of both these professions appeared the next day before A∣pollo, who (the Princes their adversaries being present) said it was well known to all men, that Lawyers and Physitians were in the world long before there were any Dukes or Princes, who had their beginnings only since the Goths, and other barbarous Nations passing into Italy, divided it amongst them, into petty Principalities, till when the names of Dukes, Marquisses, and Earls were never heard of; and that the Doctors of Law and Physick, from the first plantation of Learning, had the Title of ex∣cellency given them, which they had ever since peacefully possest; and that those first Titolati which were seen in Italy, took upon them the Title of Excellency, as being a thing which was highly esteemed of by Lawyers and Physitians; and that since the Titolati were of much later standing then Doctors, no Justice would permit that the latter should deprive the more ancient, of the Title of Excellency: and that if the Princes their adver∣saries thought that that  was of less repute for being used to Sholars, they might leave it, and take to themselves one which they should like better; but that they were very sorry, that in these Modern times the Liberal Sciences should be of so small esteem, as it should be accounted a dishonour that Physitians and Doctors of Law should use the Title of ex∣cellency, which the ancient Dukes took from Doctors, as a thing which they did much value. And then they added, that for the eternal glory of Learning and to incourage men to learn the Liberal Sciences, the re∣wards of honorable Studies ought rather to be increased then diminished. To this the Princes answered, That the first foundation laid by the Do∣ctors, that the Titolati had taken the Title of Excellency from them, was false▪ for that the most of them had purchast it at deer rates from Su∣pream Princes. To this the Doctors reply'd, That if to enjoy the Title of Excellency at dear rates, made for any advantage in this dispute, the Doctors of both these professions might say that they had paid dearly for the degree of Doctor, which brought with it the itle of Excellency to the Colledg which had given them that Degree. The Princes reply'd with a great deal of contempt and derision, that it was very strange that Doctors should pretend to parallel their excellencies which might cost them 50 crowns, with that of Dukes and Princes which required many thousands; and that the difference between the one and the others excellency, was easily discerned by the difference of the price. It appeared strange to
Apollo, that the Princes should presume to enjoy the name of Excellency at a dear rate: and he told them, that they by their monies had purchas∣ed the substance of the Estate which they possest, not the vain-glorious Title. But that Doctors who did first possess the substance of learning by their perpetual labour and watchings, might justly say that they had purchast the Title of Excellency, when they parted with their monies for the Degree of Doctor. To this the Princes answered with a deep sigh fetcht even from the bottom of their heart, that his Majestie was in the wrong; for many of them had purchast the Title without any State; when to a Castle or place wh they had enjoy'd from their Supreme Prince with the Title of Baron or Lord, they had purchast the Title of Duke or Prince, only that they might be honoured with the Title of Ex∣cellency. Apollo was so much distasted hereat, as he presently made an Edict, whereby he commanded all Kings and Emperors, that for the fu∣ture they should abstain from such like Mercandize, as from a thing un∣lawfull; and granted all Priviledges and Prerogatives which the Law by way of charity doth afford to Widows, Orphans, Idiots, and other mise∣rable people in demanding full restitution ex capite enormissimae saesionis, to those silly people who would throw away their money to buy smoak without roast-meat. Then to rid himself of this troublesom controver∣sie between the Princes and Doctors, he referred it to the Tribunal of the sage Grandees of the Liberal Sciences, who upon hearing of the fact, were to determin it: Before whom when the Dukes and Doctors appeared, after two hours dispute, those Judges gave sentence, that though the Ti∣tle of Excellency which was used by Doctors, and given to Princes, was of the same matter, quality and substance, yet it was the goods of For∣tune which was honoured in Princes with the Title of Excellency, and in Doctors, those of the mind. The Dukes thought then that the sentence was favorable on their behalf; wherefore with a scornful smile they said to the Doctors, These Judges have cleared the question once for ever. At the hearing whereof, the Doctors, who smiled inwardly at the simpli∣city of these Titolati, not to give themselves any further trouble, answer∣ed nothing. But when the Princes had conferred with their Learned Councel, who told them that the sentence made for the Doctors, they prest his Majestie that they might be suffered to appeal: Apollo troubled at the Princes pressures, bad them be quiet; for they vilified the Title of Excellency, who bought it with their monies; not they who had won by their labour and study: And that if the Dukes, and other Ttolati would purchase infinite honor to themselves, they should open their purses, and by rewarding the Professers of Learning acquire unto them∣selves the Title of Liberal; which with men of sound judgement, and perfect understanding, was thought to be much above that of Excellency, Highness, nay even that of Cesars sacred Imperial Majesty.
The LI. ADVERTISEMENT. A Marquiss who caused his Genealogy to be made by Scipio Ammerati, found himself so ill dealt with by him, as he re∣demands the reward he gave him. AT Scipio Ammerato's first entrance into Parnassus he opened a pub∣lick shop, where he still professes the mystery of making Genealo∣gies, and Pedigrees for principal Families, at which he is so expert, as he hath the chief work in this Court of that nature. Wherefore some months ago a Marquiss of some condition desired him that he would draw a Pedigree of all his Family, and endeavor carefully to find out the first original thereof, for which he would not be unthankful to him, and in part of payment he presently gave him 200 crowns of Gold. Ammerato spent divers months in this business, and at last found all that was possible to be found of that Lords Family, and drew it up into an exact form. By that Genealogy it was seen that this Lords Predicessors had been Mar∣quisses for above one hundred years, and that the first of his Family that possessed any Estate was a Captain, who for his good service done to an Emperor of Germany, had a Castle given him, which was called Marquiss. Ammeratus found that this Captains Father was a Physitian, that this Phy∣sitian was the son of a Notary, that the Father of this Notary was an Oyl∣man, descended from a Serjeant, who for some roguery was hanged; that this Serjeant was son to a Matrix-maker, who was descended from a Gentleman of Savoy, who for having conspired against his Prince, was put to death: Whose son, when he was very young, being sent by the Prince of Savoy to shift for himself, was taken into the house of meer charity by the said Matrix-maker, who having taught him his Art, adopted him his son. The Gentleman of Savoy was son to a great Count, whose Father, Grand-father, great Grand-father, and great great Grand-father had been of good esteem in that County, which was purchast by a Courtier, a great favorit to the Prince of that time. This Courtier was found by authen∣tick Records, to be the son of a certain Jew, whose name was Salamon, who becoming afterwards a Christian, was called Arnoldo; and this Jew being come from Rhodes, his pedigree could be no further pried into: Ammirato having arived at this, presented the Lord with this Genealogy; who seeing the great bulk thereof, not looking into the contents, seemed to be well satisfied, and gave Ammirato a thousand crowns. But when he read the loathsomness of his Family, and the mean condition of divers who were registered in his Genealogy, he returned to Ammirato, and told him that instead of an honorable pedigree which he had desired him to make, he had composed an infamous Libel against him. Then giving him back his Genealogy, re-demanded the moneys which he had given him, saying, he used to reward those who would cover his shame, not those who would lay it open to the world. But he was soon quieted, when Am∣mirato told him he should do wisely in not being over-curious in seeking
far into the Antiquity of his house; for that the wheel of this world turn∣ing continually round, and in a short space of time laying those low, who a little before were at the highest pitch, they who were too ambitiously desirous to know who their progenitors were from the flood, would find many in their Genealogy stained with the like blemishes as his was. The LII. ADVERTISEMENT. A dispute arising amongst the Vertuosio touching the truth of certain Sayings and Speeches of wise men, their true mean∣ings were argued and resolved in the General Dyet celebra∣ted in Helicon. THe Sayings, Sentences and Answers of the wise, are the Laws, Acts, and Statutes which are observed by the Vertuosi in this State; and therefore Apollo is very careful that they may be perfectly true, and ex∣actly good. And because many days since a great dispute arose amongst the Literati touching the truth of some of them; according to custom, in a business of so great weight, the General Diet of the Vertuosi was intimated in Helicon: Wherein the first thing that was called in questi∣on was, whether or no the common saying was true, That wise men and fools are cozened by fair words and foul deeds. Many were for the Affirmative, saying, that the cunning of divers modern wits was ar∣rived at that height of double dealing, as there were many good people, who being fed with good words, were afterwards paid with bad per∣formances; and that it was daily seen, that double dealers did by their fallacious speeches turn and winde plain meaning men as they listed, and led them by the nose at their pleasure, though they were held generally to be wise men. Yet it was resolved by the major part of the Dyet, that in times past the saying was allovv'd of with much reason, and pra∣ctised as a true one; but that novv adays by the overdaring boldness of dissemblers, vvho vvere openly seen to cheat and cozen the eyes of the simplest, and very Ideots vvere so opened, as believing onely such things as they savv plainly by noon-day, and touched vvith their hands, none but fools vvere cheated vvith good vvords and bad deeds; for vvise men vvho vvere avvare of these vvicked mens vvays, did not onely not at all believe them, but holding them to be Crosbiters and Cutpurses. shunn'd them as they vvould do the Plague: So as such as these being upbraided with their double dealing, durst no longer shevv their faces amongst honest men; but like Ovvls and Bats, appeared onely by night, to hide their shame by darkness. It vvas next taken into consideration, vvhether the proverb, Omne solum Forti patria est, To a stout man all the vvorld is his Countrey, vvere absolutely true or no. The first day, vvhich vvas vvholly spent in hot disputation upon this point, the Dyet seemed to think it vvas a great error to question a Sentence, vvhich till then vvas held undeniable by the unanimous consent of all Schools; since
it vvas plainly seen, that gallant and worthy men were cherished and wel∣come vvheresoever they came; and that no Prophet being approved of in his ovvn Countrey, men highly minded, and of generous spirits, had reason to account that their Countrey, vvhere their vvorth vvas valued; and vvhere, vvithout being envyed by their neighbours, every man was valued according to his true vvorth, that they onely should esteem that for their Countrey wherein they were born, whose foolish behaviours abroad made them be accounted odious foreigners; yet the adverse party had the better, so as the saying was repealed as false: For by the Vertuosi of the Dyet, it was found to be directly contrary to the Di∣vine will of God: For God being pleased, for reasons unknown to man, to make the whole fabrick of the earth of a like fertillity and plea∣santness; and yet it being his will, that the most barren mountains should be as well inhabited by men, as the most fruitful valleys, and the scorch'd and frozen climates, as well as the Temperate, he with wisdom worthy of himself, did infuse into the heart of man so exces∣sive a love unto his Countrey, thereby obfuscating his judgement and understanding; as he hath taken from man the knowledge of better, who still thinks that Countrey the most delicious where he is born: A love so necessary, as were humane creatures deprived thereof, they would abandon the Craggy Alpes, the frozen Northern parts, and the scor∣ched Southern ones, and with infinite confusion flock all of them to the temperate Countreys of Europe and Asia; and that wilde beasts, and all other creatures did clearly evidence this, who governing themselves by natural precepts, were seen to live perpetually in those Countreys wherein they were bred; and though they were swift of wing, and fleet of foot, yet they were contented with the small circuit of their own Countrey. That therefore Hares, when hunted from their seats by dogs, in flying from them are so frighted with the sight of new Coun∣treys as fearing new places, more then the hounds teeth, they return to dye where they were first started. That the curiosity of man had observed, that Swallows by so long a Tract both by sea and land, return to build their nests in the same place from whence they went the year before. After this averdment, it was much disputed by the Deputies of the Dyet, whether the proverb Festina lente, were true or no? And it was said, That it being impossible at one and the same time both to run and walk slowly, the proverb contained contrarieties, and was therefore impossible to be put in practise; for slowness could not consist with swift∣ness, and that it was impossible to use mature deliberation, where pre∣cipitation was wisdom. And in this particular Tacitus his opinion was much approved, who freely said, that Nullus cunctationis locus est in co concilio, quod non potest duri, nisi peractum: quia non cunctatione ops ubi pertior fit quies quam Temeritas. Tacit. lib 1. Histor. there is no room for delay in that advice, which admits not of praise till it be ex∣ecuted; for where pawsing is more dangerous then rashness, there needs no delay. In this variety of opinion, the Dyet that they might ma∣turely resolve the business, caused the Emperor Flavius Vespatianus to be sent for, whom they demanded in what sense he who first used that saying Festina lente, dict understand it; and whether by those words he would teach others Mature haste. To this Vespatian answered, That he did not set up the Impress of the Anchor and the Dophin, with the
motto which was so well known, in that sense which was afterwards commonly given unto it; for he very well knew, that many occasions might happen, wherein precipitation was to be esteemed great wis∣dom, and according to the French, first to act, and then to argue and resolve. But that by Festina lente, he would have wisely admonished his Romans Lente Festinare, to be flower in making feasts, for that in Rome where there were many Beagles which were very well sented to find out wild beasts, though in never so secure a harbour; and great store of swift-Greyhounds, and abundance of those two legged Ani∣mals, who being of a wilde nature, Fiunt occupantis, have no certain owner, the too frequent use of feasts was nothing else but to hunt for Horns, and fill ones budget with them. After this Interpretation of his impress, given by Vespatian, which was fully satisfactory to the whole Dyet. It was propounded, whether the usual proverb, Rosso Mal pel, beware of a red head were true or no? And because of all men, those that have red hair drink most, and therefore are accounted brave fel∣lows, jovial companions, truth tellers, and pleasantly disposed, no ways revengeful nor cruel, but much given to pastime; red hair seemed to be best, for those who desired to appear before men with countenances which might purchase them good will and credit amongst men. The Dyet did unanimously vote for the repealing of the proverb, and vvith a joynt vote declared it to be false. When at the very instant that the decree vvas entring, the vertuous Lady Victoria Colonna, vvho in the Dyet represented the vvhole University of Poetesses, briskly opposed it, and caused the vvhole Dyet to alter their opinion. For she told them, That they had revoked the truest saying that ever proceeded from the mouth of any vvise Philosopher: For (said she) the proverb Rosso mal pelo, did not vvarn men (as it vvas commonly believed) to bevvare of red hair, but vvomen, and especially married vvives, that they should by all means avoid it, as a treacherous hair. For there being but fevv men of that complexion, if one of them chance to be more then ordinary gra∣cious with a Lady, he is sooner taken notice of for a Whore-master, then those vvhose more ordinary hair serves to cloak their knavery. The interpretation given by the Lady Victoria, appeared to the vvhole Dyet to be true, and vvorthy the judgement of so noble a Poetess. So as vvhen this controversie vvas ended, the great Delfick Chancellour questioned the saying, Ubi Bonum ibi patria, great diligence vvas used in the discussing a business of such importance: and the Literati said, That the greatest part of Humane felicity, consisting in the vvealth vvhich men possess, they knevv not vhy that should not be esteemed a mans happiest Countrey, vvhere his greatest riches lay, for the Countrey vvhere men live by their labour, and by vvages purchast by svveat, vvas by vvise men esteemed an unfortunate abode, not a delicious Countrey. It vvas notvvithstanding unanimously agreed upon, That in former times the proverb vvas held to be very true, but that in these days, vvherein the ravenous nails of Fischi, Promoters vvere grovvn longer then Vul∣tures clavvs, or Lyons pavvs, and vvherein great revenues, upon occa∣sion of any Delinquency imputed to vvealthy men, served of times for conclusive proofs, and undeniable arguments, to enrich Princes Treasu∣ry by confiscasions, it vvas a blessed thing to live in Italy, and have a mans estate in Iapan.
The LIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo at last grants admittance into Parnassus to Francisco Sforza, Duke of Milan, which he had long denyed to do, upon a hard condition, which he accepted of. COunt Fr. Sforza, he who by his extraordinary military valor purchast the Dukedom of Millan, whereby he rendred his Family as famous and honourable as the like of the greatest Princes. Though 140 years be past, since at the great desire of the Souldiery and Literati, he came to the confines of this State, yet he was never suffered by Apollo to en∣ter into Parnassus; and though the chiefest Princes of this Court, who did always admire the great worth of so gallant a man, have perpetual∣ly interceded for him, his Majestie notwithstanding, without ever making the cause known, hath always denyed him that favour. But being prest thereunto much more then usually eight moneths ago by Lo∣dowick the eleventh, King of France. Apollo answered resolutely, That he infinitely loved Sforza's worth and extraordinary merit, but that for good respects he would not admit so scandalous a man into Parnassus. To this that King, who was so knowing, couragiously answered, that in respect of the Dukes extraordinary military valour, his excellency in councel, his singular dexterity, his quick dispatch, his continually un∣corrupted faith, and his other heroick vertues, wherein he did so abound, he thought that the true Patron of worthy Commanders, and the Idea of a Prince greatly wise in peace, and infinitely valliant in war, was ra∣ther to be admitted into Parnassus, then any thing that was scandalous. To this reply Apollo answered, That he did not gain-say the Dukes great deserts; but that man beginning happily already to discern the false Alchimy of the Militia, and the unhappy use of the Souldiers craft, he would not, by admitting of the Duke into Parnassus, renew the repu∣tation of rash and hiddy giddy men; and so much the rather, for that the foolish sort of men, for their greater calamities, were more en∣couraged to despise the danger of Navigation, for one onely ship that returned safe into the haven, then they were terrified for 1000 that were sunk in the sea. Apollo added, that he was more desirous to admit the Duke into Parnassus, then the Duke was to be there: Wherefore he wish'd King Lewis to tell him, that he would very willingly grant his request, if at his entrance into Parnassus he would onely bring such with him, as had come to an unfortunate end in the pay they took from the Sforzeses Militia. The Duke thought this condition to be hard and shameful; and was long in dispute with him self, whether he should ac∣cept of it or no; for the desire of glory pleaded on the one side, but then he was deterd to know that the Militia promising so fairly, and coming off so ill, he was to bring with him the unfortunate attendance of those that were miserable, and much to be bemoned. In this so great doubt, this Heroes endelss desire of glory got the upperhand; wherefore
he signified to Apollo by his Secretary Simonetta, that he willingly ac∣cepted of what was proffered him in his Majesties name; and Apollo immediately appointed a day for his entrance, which was the 19 of this present moneth. When the Princes and famous Commanders of this Court knew this the Dukes resolution, they were much troubled there∣at, and left nothing undone to make him change his resolution, which they knew was to bring great prejudice to the whole Militia. But the Duke, standing still stedfast to his resolution, resolutely answered those Princes, that he was fully resolved to purchase a place in Parnassus at what rate soever, let whatsoever mischief befal the mysterie of war. For that Fisher-man was not to be esteemed ungrateful to his occupation, who being grown very wealthy by the great gain he had got by Fishing, burnt his boat, and tore his nets. He presently therefore called for such as he did most confide in, whom he commanded to muster together all those Souldiers who had miscarryed in the Sforzese Militia, which were a very infinite number; and the next Wednesday about 6 a clock, the Duke all armed made his entrance: never was there a sadder nor more woful spectacle beheld: For it exceeded all the greatest miseries, and made tears to fall even from the hardest hearted men, to see an infinite num∣ber of young men, well provided of fortunes, who lived at ease, enjoy∣ing all delights in their fathers houses, dead of hunger, and starved in Hospitals; some lying dead in ditches, many on the high-ways, and an infinite number drown'd, serving for food to dogs and fishes, others all rent with wounds, some trod to death by horses, others begging their bred by the high-way, not having received sufficient recompence from those Princes in whose service they had lost their blood, and ex∣posed their lives to a thousand dangers, to carry them back to their own houses, which they had so unfortunately forgon. And every one wept when they saw a yong Gentleman of about twenty years old, who be∣ing shot into the eye by a cross-bow arrow, whereof he dyed, and who having been told by Guido Bonati, a famous Astrologer, that if he would be so wise as to keep in his own Countrey, he might assuredly live to be fouscorce year old; the same Guido Bonati tenderly imbracing him, said, O unfortunate young lad, Why wert thou so foolish as to sell 60 years of life for sixpence? Then fearful curses were heard against the first in∣troducers of war. The next day after the Dukes entry, the most ac∣complished Literati came to Apollo, and told him, he very well knew that there was no difference between the miseries of war and Courtiers unhappiness. For if war were miserable, Courts were nothing but af∣flictions; if Souldiers were unhappy, Courtiers were unfortunate; that therefore since the sad spectacle of Duke Sforza's entrance into Parnas∣sus had infused such dread into all the Militia, as it was abhorr'd by all men, it would be equally advantagious to the world, if when any Cour∣tier were admitted into Parnassus, who was risen from a mean condition to the supremest dignities, he should (as the Duke had been) be accom∣panied by all those miserable Courtiers, who suffering under the Avarice and ingratitude of several Princes, dyed despairing. This advice was rejected by Apollo as pernitious, who said, that men had more need be incouraged to go to Court, then terrified from going thither; for though but few came by any dignities, wealth or honor, yet all of them inriched their souls with the purchase of several vertues; which was so true, as
he thought he deserved not the name of a compleat Gentleman, who having spent many years in Court, had not been Scozzonato, had not learnt his lesson well. The LIV. ADVERTISEMENT. A dangerous contention which arose amongst the Pedagogs in Parnassus upon a very ssight occasion, is appeased by Apollo. YEsterday about eight of the clock a great alarm was sounded in the Gramarian Quarters, which made all the Vertuosi run to see what the matter might be: and they found that the Schoolmasters, Panegyrical writers and Commentarors, were fallen so foully together by the ears in Brigadoes, as there was much ado to part them The dispute which arose between them was, Whether the word Consumptum were to be written with a P, or onely with a T. Apollo was much troubled at this dispute, not onely for the mean cause of the quarrel, but for that Paulus Manutius (vvho vvas thought to be a chief actor in this brabble) hit Lambino in the face (vvho stifly maintained the contrary opinion) with a Roman stone, vvhereon Consumptum vvas vvritten vvith a P, vvherevvith he broke his nose. Apollo, vvho vvas at first much incensed at the Pedanticks mean folly, vvas so highly scandalized at this nevv excess, as he commanded the Pretor Urbano to rid Parnassus of that Sottish crevv of Pedants. But aftervvards, at the intreaties of Cicero, Quintillian, and others of the chiefest Literati of this Court, vvho interceded for those bravvling people, saying, That those Pedanticks could not fall out for any matter of moment, vvho vvere onely acquaint∣ed vvith slight affairs, his Majestie vvas appeased. The LV. ADVERTISEMENT. For remeady of many disorders which are found in Histo∣ry, a General Assembly of Historians being summoned, Apollo publisheth a severe Edict against them, and ma∣ny Historians are reprehended for their errors. THe General Assembly of all Historians, vvhich vvas intimated some moneths ago by the Censors, by express order from Apollo, to meet in Delos, vvas ended tvvo days ago, much to his Maj. satisfaction, by rea∣son
of the excellent orders that therein vvere established in a business, wherein the eternal Fame of those things consist, which are composed by gallant men. This caused the more general content in all the Ver∣tuosi, for that modern Writers have strayed far from those laws which they devoutly promised to observe when they took the oath of Historians before Apollo; and because the importance of the business doth deserve it, Menante will not grudge to give you the very Edict which was pub∣lished yesterday morning in his Majesties name by the sound of Trumpet in the Market places, and afterwards posted upon all the Colledge gates of this State. We Phoebus, by the Grace of God Emperor of the fixed Stars, King of Planets, Prince of the Zodiack, Duke of Light, Marquis of Gene∣ration, and Earl of all visible things; To all our faithful Vertuosi, and well-beloved Literati, health. We having much to our displeasure found, that many modern Historians have much wandred from that way of truth, which was walked in to the publique good of others and their private honor, by our faithful Pen-men Dionysius, Livy, Salust, Tacitus, and many others; to the end that future Ages which do so eagerly read History, may be sure to find truth from the pens of faithful Writers, and not be abused by lies given out unto them by flattering and mali∣cious ignorant Historians, do by this our Edict, which is to continue for ever, call into the memory, and give notice to all those who undertake the noble work to eternize by their writings the actions of famous men, that they must always remember, that being to write, not to the pre∣sent, but to those that are to come, they publish writings full of that Historical truth, which renders the names of sincere Pen men glorious and eternal to future ages: And that they should value the blame and threats of such as are justly taxed for their unworthy actions, but as dung; there being no more woful folly, then continually to labor with pen in hand how to shame themselves, by writing falsehoods, without any advantage to those whom they flatter, declaring, that to publish false Histories, is to assassinate the Vertuosi who read them: And therefore our will and pleasure is, That those who run into so enormous excesses, be irremissably punish'd by the like assassination. And because it is appa∣rent that Princes have arrogated so much authority even over the free pens of Historians, as not to suffer any thing to be written of them, though it be true, which is not fully to their satisfaction (a pretension which hath so banished historical truth from the pens of writers) as the great wits of our choicest Vertuosi being frighted by the base fawnings whereby modern Princes will be flattered, the weighty imployment of writing History, reserved onely for the choicest Pen-men, is now adays (to the great shame of the present age and infinite damage of the future) fallen in the hands of ignorant people: We therefore by reason of this foul disorder, are forced to put Princes in mind, That their Authority ceasing with their lives, they are fools if they believe they are able af∣ter their deaths to hinder our Vertuosi from writing the truth of their actions to future times. And we do more particularly advertise the same Princes, That their valliant carrying of themselves in affairs which require freedom, is the cause why our faithful Historians, esteeming them∣elves offended by so much severity, out of meer rage of revenge, after he lives of such Emperors, write rather Invectives then Histories, as
the Emperors Tiberius, ,  and , have to their great shame ound. And to obviate the great inconvenience, occasioned by their ignorance▪ who in these modern times do  the worth of History by their Sottish writings, o will and pleasure is and we do expresly command, That hereafter no man, of what degree o condi∣tion soever he be, shall dare to write History, unless he be first approved of for purity of language, by Iulius Caesar; for ence by Livy; for policy, by Tacitus; for the good understanding of Princes interest, by Guicchardin. And more over under pain of perpetual infamy, we do ex∣presly prohibit for the future, the writing particular Histories of any what∣soever City, unless it be the Metropolis of some Empire, Kingdom▪ or great Province: And this we do, to the end that the precious jewel of Time be not mispent in mean things, both by him that writes, and by him that reads. And for the same reason we ordain, That it shall not be lawful for any writer, to publish the life of any Commander, un∣less he have commanded in chief in some Armies, or had deserved his pay twenty times told, won some Provinces, besieged and taken some strong holds, and have sought two set battels at least in open fields. And to take away all abuses that may be committed by ambitious men, we declare, That those whose lives any one shall undertake to write, have the same requisite parts as were in Bellisarius, in Narsetes, in Godfrey of Bullen, in Alexander Fernese. And to rid the world as much as may be of a certain arrogant Ambition which is known to reign in many, we likewise command. That it be not lawful to write any particular History of any Family, unless it be made appear to our Colledge for History, that it hath maintained it self famous and illustrious in the world for full five hundred years, with plenty of Personages who have put a period to important wars, and honourable undertakings; and that in this parti∣cular they take our glorious and well-beloved Families of the Orsina's, Caietans and Collenesses for their examples. And because it is well known by many former examples, that to suffer an ambitious man to write his own acts, is to put a naked sword into a mad mans hands, we do expresly command, That it shall not be lawful for any one to write any Commentary or formal Story of his own life, unless he have given in sufficient security to contain himself within the terms of modestie and truth; and unless he be declared by our Colledge of Historians to be so eminent a Personage, as his actions deserve to be consecrated to Immor∣tality for the good of future ages. And to extirpate the wicked vice of Flattery out of the world, to the which (to our infinite grief) we see our Vertuosi are much inclined, we do expresly command, That it be not lawful for any writer to publish the life of any whatsoever Hero, though he be Emperor or King, before he be dead, allowing mention of men whilst alive to be onely made in general Histories, or in some short par∣ticular Elogies. Moreover, to shun the infinite follies which are daily seen in many Histories, our express wil & pleasure is, that it be not lawful for any writer to compose the Historie of any particular foreign Nation, unless he have lived for the space of twenty years in that Countrey, whose Story he will write. And for the like reason we do forbid any whatsoever Vertuosi to undertake to write History, unless he have tra∣velled many Provinces; unless he have been Secretary or Counsellour to some great Prince, or be not Senator to some famous Common∣wealth;
and chiefly unless he have spent two third parts of his life in fol∣lowing Courts, which we have judged to be the more requisite, for that in our Delfick Library we find some Histories written by Courtiers, who are altogether ignorant of the purity of Languages and of all the most important precepts of the Art of writing History; but so abounding in smart politick precepts, as they make clearly appear that it is the parti∣cular vertue of accomplished Courtiers to publish to posterity, not such things as they have gathered up by hear-say, but the most hidden in∣trinsical meanings of Princes, which they by their quick speculative wits have known how to penetrate into. And because in many volume∣nous Histories, we read bitter invectives against the Nation which is an enemy to the place where the Author of the History lives, we do here renew our Edicts published in this particular some years ago; wherein for the indemnity of Historical truth from the blames imputed by one Nation to another adverse Nation, we have ordained, That an abate∣ment shall be allowed of 60 per cent. And because we are assured, That the sad loss to learning, of the greatest part of our beloved Livies pretius Dechads, is occasioned soly by Lucius Florus, we do expresly command, That from henceforth it be not lawful for any one to epitomize or write a breviate of the writings of any whatsoever Historian. So also, with all the plenary power that we have over learning, we forbid all our Ver∣tuosi, at any time hereafter to write the universal History of the world, or of any particular Nation, which like the famous Romans, French or Saracins have done gallant acts, compendiously, or in small volumes; as many have done to little or no purpose, who have written the actions of all Nations, from the beginning of the world to their own times, in a few sheets; experience having taught all men, that the reading of things so succinctly written, is altogether unuseful, it being unpossible to reap that abundant fruit, which is tasted in particular Histories, where not meerly res gesta, the thing done is related, but the reasons and counsels thereof. In the last place, we put the reverend Preisthood in mind, that they attend to the reading and writing of sacred things; and leave the writing of profane Histories to those lay people, who think it a meretorious truth not a sinful murmuring, to asperse the actions of Princes, or private men, who have done things amiss. Given at our Zodiack, the 20 day after our entrance into Libra, the year of our la∣borious course, 5570. After the publication of so severe an Edict, it was whispered in this Court (but because the business was carryed very secretly; and Menante, who advertiseth nothing but truths, tells it not for an assured verity) that many Historians, yea even of the first Classis, were severely reprehend∣ed: For tis said, that Iulius Caesar was commanded, that within twen∣ty days he should not fail to add the breaking open of the Roman Ex∣chequer in his Commentary, punctually as it passed; and that he should therein mention certain other particulars, which being more then mean∣ly loathsom, he had forborn to relate, lest it might entrench too nearly upon himself. That uetonius Tranquillus was severely reprehended, for that having made more open profession then any other Literato, to be ve∣ry circumspect in his writings, he had notwithstanding recounted such obscene lasciviousness of Tiberius, of not forbearing in his lust to make use of sucking caildren, pollutions which howsoever ought not to be
spoken of, not onely in respect that Historians cannot affirm those lewd actions for truths, which in point of lust are done in the dark, when doors are shut; but for that such things (though truths) ought not to be touched upon, which for the great scandal which they occasion, ought rather to beburied in oblivion, then divulged; it being the end of all Historians to insert vertue into mens minds, not to instruct vice. Tis said indeed, That Dion was told in milder terms, that History, which ought to be wholly real truths, the very pitch of politick instructions, needed not to be filled with the so often reiteration of those prodigies, with which he had so heaped up his writings, as they did even choak those that read them. And which was the more tedious, for that they had exceeded the bounds of discretion, both in their numbers and qualities: For Apollo his self smiled to see him write of so many showers of blood and stones; he not remembring that he had ever exhaled such Meteors, which were afterwards congealed into blood, or turned into stones. It is said, That Titus Livius, the father of the Roman Histories, blushed not a little at this reprehension which was given to Dion; perhaps, because he found himself guilty of the like errors: But it is certainly affirmed by all, that Lampridius was severely proceeded against; for by order of the whole congregation, his Histories were turned back upon his hands, and he was freely told, That he should go and teach those execrable lusts in the publike Classis, wherewith he had so delighted himself to fill his shameful papers, wherein he had written the lives of Heliogabalus, Cara∣calla, and other lascivious monsters of nature: It is also noised that Ma∣chiavel was reproved for his mad and desperate policy, with which he had so freely filled his Histories, and other writings, as he openly mani∣fested his desire was to draw his Readers into the same ditch of Impiety whereinto himself was shamefully fallen. Tis said, that in the next place the Congregation found fault with Guicchardin, for his having spoken amiss of the Venetian Commonwealth, the which was called by the whole Assembly, the Sanctuary of the Vertuosi, the true seat of perfect liberty, the Bulwark against Barbarians, the Mint of Libraries, the salt of humane wisdom, glory of the Italian Nation; and many do be∣lieve, that Guicchardin in the face of the whole Congregation, did not onely acknowledge, but bewail his error, alledging for his excuse, that meer envy to see the State of Venice grow daily more glorious in her eternal liberties, whilst the Florentines, by their domestick factions, lost their freedom, had made him so foully prevaricate; but that the Fame of Venice, the glory of that excellent councel, whereby she did (as a rare and onely example) daily increase both in State and reputation, was arrived at that height of splendor, as was not to be obscured by the pen of whatsoever passionate writer. It is also said, That Ialiano Goselini. Secretary to the Senat of Millan was sent for by the Censors; who told him, that certainly he thought he spoke to drunken men, when in the life wihich he writ of Don Ferrante Gonsaga, where he makes mention of the Apostolick sea, he did not stick to say, That her greatness was Cae∣sars particular care; and whilst Goseleni was about to defend what he had said, he was bid to go make Ballads, invented for flattery, it be∣ing the business of History to write real truths. And because Girolao Conestaggio, Conestaggio, Gentleman of Genua, had taken his History of Portugal out of the Delfick Library, which had been there many years before,
and had in lieu thereof given in another edition of the same History, which (as he said) was corrected in some places: The overseers of the Library, finding that he had rather abused then corrected that edition, which he had not reprinted (as he gave out) for the general good, but to give satisfaction to some, whose reputations were deservedly taken by him, he was told, That if he did not bring back the first edition in∣to the Library within eight days, the Assembly would put some affront upon him. For the ruine of the Portugueses being occasioned by those who had the care of instructing King Sebastian in his youth, it was very necessary, that by the unhappy end of so great a King, and by the mise∣rable calamities of the Portugueses, Princes should be taught to know, that the learned masters which are to have the care of breeding up their children in their youth, ought to be Commanders of tryed valour, and Senators of known Politick prudence. The LVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo, to secure the rivers of his State from Pyracie, makes Bernardo Capello General of the Ionick Sea, and gives him excellent directions. APPOLLO being desirous to provide against many evils which Learning suffers under by the Frigots of ignorant Pyrats, in the rivers of Corinth, declared Bernardo Capella two days ago, in the great Senat of Litterati, to be Admiral or General of the Ionick Sea; whom he strictly commanded, that to that purpose he should levy foot, and was content that he should take along with him some of the best born young Poets of that State; who to begin the mysterie of bearing arms, did offer themselves to serve his Majestie upon this occasion. Apollo afterwards sent for Capello, whom he strictly commanded, under the pain of being declared to be wofully ignorant, that he should molest none with his Gallies, but the Frigots of ignorant Pyrats; and that he should suffer Merchants ships, of what Nation soever, to go free, toge∣ther with their Merchandize, to do them all possible honour; and that he should be ayding to them upon all occasions, as they well deserved, for that by theirnoble industry, men enjoyed the commodities of the remotest Countreys; to the end that the zeal that his Majestie desired to shew unto the world, of defending his subjects and their faculties from the rapine of Pyrats, might not be turned into a greater inconveni∣ence by his filling the Seas with new and a worser sort of Sea Rob∣bers. His Majestie then said, It would be too shameful a thing that the robbing of publike Merchants ships should be done in the name of the most exquisitely vertuous Prince, who should be much to blame if he imployed his prime Nobility in such an exercise, wherein they should be∣gin their Militia with shame enough, if their first action should be to
pillage Merchants ships. And to the end that all the world might know, that his Majesty had no interest in a business of such weight, save only the publick good; he charged Capello to kill as many Pyrats as he should take; not only the more to terrifie so pernitious a race of men, but that so usefull a work might not by taking of ransoms, be turned into a pub∣lick prejudicial Merchandice; it being proved by many things which had hapned, that such Pyrats as had first been prisoners, and had afterwards purchast their Liberties, did very willingly expose themselves afterwards to all sorts of danger to reimburse the money which they had paid for their ransom. The last and chiefest order which his Majesty gave to Ca∣pello, was, that his charge being only to guard the Rivers belonging to Par∣nassus, he should keep himself from going out of them at any time▪ as he would do from fire, lest he might fall upon the same shame as those fools do, who forsaking their marriage-bed to commit adultery with other mens wives, became cuckolds. The LVII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Prince of Epire's first son being born, he is thereat so af∣flicted, as he forbids that any shews of joy be made for it in his State. THe last Letter that came from Epire, bears date the 22 of this present month, and they tell us of the birth of a son to the Prince of Epire; and say that he being the first-born, the people of that Country were not only exceedingly joyed to see their Prince his succession secured, but that they and many of the neighbouring Lords prepared to make extraordina∣ry demonstrations of gladness. But the Prince was the only man who in this publick rejoycing was so very sad, as he forbad the Steward of his house, who went to take order for the expence of bone-fires, fire-works, and other expressions of joy for the birth of their young Master, to shew any signes of jollity; and bad him make the Fountains run with. Wie, to proclaim open Court for forty daies in his house, spend a hundred thou∣sand crowns in Tilt and Turney, when he himself should have a son ; the Lord Steward wondred much at this the Princes answer, to whom he said, What means this, Si, is not the child that is bo your son, your wife having brought him forth twelve months after you were married▪ I now find, said the Prince, that privat me are not much acquainted ith the Interests of Princes. But to let you see that I have reason for what I say, tell me how old I am▪ Eighteen the twelth of  month▪ re∣plyed the Steward. Confess then, said the Prince, that the child  now born, is my brother, not my son; for privat men  children from their brethren by their birth; but Pri by  age: and know that those shall be my best beloved sons, who shall be  o me when I shall be 50 years old; and when any such shall be born, I will be content that extraordinary joy shall be shewn: For when sons are born
to a young Prince as I am, bels should rather toll out for sorrow, to Fu∣nerals, than Trumpets sound for joy: A Prince who marries whilst he is young, runs hazard of having a multitude of sons, which is the true stone of offence, of whatsoever State; this is so great a truth, as a King can re∣ceive no greater blessing from heaven, than to have but one only son a∣live. Moreover, a Prince who hath many sons whilst he is young, ought not to covet long life; for as Fathers desire to die with Supreme power in their hand; so sons, when they come to certain years of age, have not patience to wait till the Fruit of Government grow to be ripe by their Fathers death: for many great Kings have had sons, who blinded with a desire of reigning, would rather hazard their healths with eating green Grapes in Iune, then tarry till they should be ripe in September. If it be so, said the Steward, I must confess the condition of Princes is to be de∣plored in that, wherein we privat men do envie them. Know then, said the Prince, that when my son▪ who is now born, shall come to be one and twenty years old, and I shall not put him into full possession of this my Principality, if he shall then chance to contrive any thing against my Per∣son, or my State, it is I that shall therein have erred more then he. For it will be as great a discourtesie in me, not to resigne over unto him my State then, as it would be inhumanity in me, if when I should be eating at a plentifull Table, I should see him stand by, ready to starve for hunger, and not bid him eat. The LVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo erects a new Tribunal in Parnassus, for the punish∣ment of flatterers; but succeeds very unfortunately therein. THe civil and vertuous life which the Litterati lead in this State of Parnassus, is not so much to be attributed to the severe punishment threatned to such as are vitiously given, as to the great rewards held out to such as are vertuous; nor yet to the good genius which the Litterati are generally of, as to Apollos wisdom, who hath appointed several distinct Tribunals for every vice, for every fault omitted, and Judges thereunto ap∣propriated; for his Majestie hath learnt by the late disorders, that when his Ministers are troubled with but a few affairs, they dispatch them accu∣rately well; whereas those that have great store of business upon their hands, are neither speedy, nor very just in their dispatches. Nor was Apollo aware, till six months since, of the great disorder which reignes in this State, wherein many severe Tribunals being erected against all such principal vices whereinto men do most usually fail, there was no Judge nor punishment set apart for the vice of flattery, which his Majestie doth so much detest, and which is so pernitious both to Princes, and pri∣vat men. So as his Majestie thought that disease was so generally diffused
amongst men, chiefly because there was neither Physitian, nor Apotheca∣ry appropriated thereunto: Wherefore his Majestie who is alwaies vigi∣lant in the extirpation of all vice, and in procuring indempnity to his Ver∣tuosi, thought it very necessary to correct so great an error, and to curb so wicked a vice. He therefore of his own meer motion, erected a Tribu∣nal six months ago in this Court, under severe punishments against flatter∣ers: For his pleasure was, that such as should be found guilty of so foul a fault, should be tied to the infamous Chain which is in the chief Market∣place, and flead live by Marsia, who was very skilful thereat, having learnt it at his own charges: And for the more severe punishment of so enormous a vice, he chose the chief Satirical Poets of the State, as the greatest enemies of flatterers, to be their Judges. Peter Aratine was made Lord Chief Justice, Iuvenal the first Advocate; Ariosto Attor∣ney-General; Francis Berna, chief Notary, who had Nicholas Franco, and Cesar Caporali for his substitutes; and six months being past since the erecting of the Tribunal, in all which time no complaint came in against flatterers, though flattery were seen to be daily used in Parnassus; Apollo, that he might have occasion to punish those wicked persons, made use of a great many Spies, who diligently watching over them, might accuse them before the Tribunal. This remedy wrought good effect▪ for ere long they found Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, who flattering a foolish Prince; given to hunting, wantonness, all sorts of delights, neglecting the Govern∣ment of his State so far, as he had transferred the care thereof into the hands of one that was mercenary, ignorant, and very passionate, he term∣ed him vigilant, indefatigable in taking pains, an enemy to all pastime, which he had wholly placed in following business. Cavalcanti was sud∣denly seased upon; who upon examination, presently confest all that could he desired. Wherefore the Judge using all the mercy to him that could stand with Justice, allowed him three daies to make his defence, and Martia brandisht his knife about, and put all other things in order; when the Judge coming to examin the Prince who was flattered, found, that though he was notoriously known to be what was said of him, he pre∣tended notwithstanding, that Cavalcanti had not only spoke truth, but that in the praise which he with reason gave him, he came short of his de∣serts: So as being asked if he had any thing to alleadg against Caval∣canti, or whether he thought himself offended by his gross flattery, the Prince being much incenst, answered, that he had no reason to complain of one that had said truth, and that he did not esteem those praises which he ought to reward, injuries: and added, that he did very much wonder, and was greatly scandalized at that new Tribunal, which seemed to be in∣vented rather to defame men of honour, then to punish cheaters. Aretin being much moved at this answer, with more freedom then became him, asked with what face he could pretend that Cavalcanti had not lied basely in praising such a blockhead as he was, so notoriously stupid, unfit for Go∣vernment, which he had totally turned over to a vitious favorite of his? The Prince hearing this, advanc'd with unexpressible rage, and told Ara∣tine, Tune dirai, e farai tante, e tante Lingua Fracida, marcia, senza sale,
Ch'al fin si trovera, pur un pugnale Meglior di quel d'Achille, epiu calzante. Saggio son Io, et tu sei un Fortante Nutrito del pan d'altri, del dir male, Un piede hai in Chiasso, l'altro allo spedale Stropecciato, ignorante, et arrogante. Thou'lt talk, and do so many sottish things, With that thy rotten, base, unworthy tongue, As that a Dagger will be found ere long, Better then that Achilles with him brings. I'm wise, and thou a rascal underling Bred up at others Tables, men t'abuse, One foot i'th' Hospital, th' other i'th' Stews: Thou art an arrogant sot, Aratine. The Attorney-General, the Notaries, and all the other Officeres, were so incenst to hear such words given to a Judge, the Court sitting, as they all fell with violent hands upon the Prince, to carry him to prison. But he that was better at his hands than head-piece, did not only defend him∣self, but assisted by his attendance, struck one of Aratines eyes almost out, broke Iuvenals arm, and Berna's jaw-bone; and poor Ariosto, who be∣took himself to his heels, when he saw the scuffle begin, fell down the stairs, and bruised himself terribly. When Apollo heard of this disorder, he was not so much grieved at the affront done to the Tribunal, nor the harm done to his Poets, as for that he now evidently saw, that there was no cure for flattery, nor no punishment to be found for it, since men were become so blind, as they esteemed the fawnings of flatteries, not injuries, but fa∣vours worthy of reward. Whereupon, much to his grief, he abbrogat∣ed the Tribunal, and confest it was impossible to punish a fault which no body would complain of. The LIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo being very far in love with Torquato Tasso's good conditions, creates him Prince Poet, and Lord High Con∣stable of Italian Poetry. TOrquatus Tasso being every day more and more admired in Parnassus; for his Heroick and Lyrick Verses, for his Prose, Poetry, and final∣ly in all sorts of Compositions, Apollo was so imar'd of the smoothness of his pen, of the newness of his conceptions, his easie vain, and of his pleasant wit, as he used the other day, extraordinary signes of affection to∣wards him: For of his own meer motion, he created him Prince-Poet, and Lord High-Constable of all Italian Poetry: And at the same time with great solemnity, gave him the Royal Ensigns used to be given to
Poets Laureat, of being allowed to keep Parrets in his windows, and Apes at his gate. It is strange, that upon this occurrency, Tasso did not only make himself known to deserve the honour which his Majestie had done him, but worthy of much higher preferments. For he did not as many others do, who being exalted by Fortune, or by the pleasure of Princes, from a mean condition, to Supreme Dignities, think it is suffici∣ent if they put on the Stately Robe of that new Magistracy, though they leave their souls covered with an old base jacket, made of course cloth, and all tattered; but he immediately after having received so high an honour▪ clothed his soul with those Heroick and Royal Vertues, which becomes a Poet Laureat. For at the very instant that he received those Royal Ensignes from his Majesty, he kept open Court in his house for 40 daies together; in all which time, the Vertuosi of all professions were fed with such abundance and curiosity of delightfull Viands, as there was not any one Litterato in all Parnassus, who did not gorge himself with vertuous Composures, more then his stomack could digest, and who was not drunk with his savory conceptions. And all this with so great plen∣ty of all exquisite Science, as his Majesty and all the Muses marvailed ve∣ry much how the unexhausted multitude of so many elegant conceits, disht in with the choicest phrases, and smoothest way of delivery, could be served out by so fruitfuul a wit. But during this Jubile, and this Feassio' celebration, which gave general satisfaction, some pilfering Poets broke o∣pen Tassos most privat desk, where he kept his choicest Compositions, and stole away Aminta, which they divided amongst themselves; an in∣jury whereat Tasso was so much grieved, as it imbittered all his past de∣lights. And the Authors of so shameful a theft being discovered, and pursued by the Sergeants, they fled into the house of immitation, as into a secure sanctuary; from whence they were taken by the Provost Marshal, by Apollos express command, and shamefully led to prison. And one of them being found with the Prologue of the said Pastoral about him, he was forthwith punished according to the Sergeants custom, and question∣ed super aliis, & complicibus. Whereupon the wretch having the rope on, named 40 of his companion pick pocket. Poets, all of them base peo∣ple, who being given over to play, and to all lewdness, tend nothing else but to steal away the conceits of others labours, making themselves mer∣ry therewithall, abhorring to live gloriously in the world by the labour of their own studies. Urbanus the chief Justice, using the due rigor of the Law upon these sawcy companions, sentenced them to the Gallows; and the other morning many Gibbits were set up in the chief Market∣place, at the number whereof Apollo being much moved, he told the Judge, that though those thieves deserved the utmost punishment, he should notwithstanding give them some other severe exemplary chas∣tisement; for the detested cross-bars of Gallowses, made Justice be inter∣preted cruelty: They therefore deserved the name of good Officers, who made themselves known to be well sighted in forbidding faults; whereas such as thirsted after bloud, seemed to take delight in having Gal∣lowses often seen in the Piazzas, thinking that they had betterd their con∣dition, when they had got the name of being great Hangmen.
The LX. ADVERTISEMENT. A Litterato desires of Apollo, the Art of Memory, for which he is laught at by his Majesty. ON last Tuesdaies Audience, a poor thread-bare Litterato presented himself before Apollo, and told his Majesty, that by reason of his small learning, he durst not appear in the common Schools; and that his ignorance in Sciences proceeded from his very bad memory; for he re∣membred but very little of what he read: And that having a great desire to be a Scholar, he humbly craved some remedy which might produce in him as tenacious a memory as those great Litterati have, who remember whatsoever they do read: And be chiefly desireth the gift of Local me∣mory, whereby he had heard that they reaped great honor who had it. Apollo told him, That the lovers of Learning got good Memories by perpetual reading; and that Local Memory was a thing onely pra∣ctised by Mountebanks, and by the common sort of Litterati, who are sed with ostentation, and a certain vain-glory to appear more then what they are; and not by sound and well-grounded Schollars, who esteemed it a ridiculous thing, good only to make the common people wonder. The Petitioner replyed, That if it were so, he desired to better his memo∣ry by usual means. Apollo said again, That memory could not be bet∣ter perfected, then by continual study, and assured him, that thereby he might compass his desire. The Schollar replyed again, He had found the contrary: For having lately been very diligent in studying Virgil the mi∣racle of the Latin Poets, he remembred but very few of those infinite de∣licacies which he had observed in him, all which deserved never to be for∣gotten. Apollo was not pleased with this answer; for with some shew of anger, not usual with him in giving audience, at which times he puts on miraculous patience; he bad him go study Virgil again, and that he would remember much more the second time, than he had done the first. Then turning to those that were near him, he said, he hated their impertinances, who having been but a quarter of an hour in a Mill, would come forth as much bemealed, as those Millers who keep there day and night all the daies of their life.
The LXI. ADVERTISEMENT. Juvinal refuseth a Challenge given him by Francisco Berni, to contend with him in Satyrical Poetry. SOme Latin and Itallian Poets fell some few daies ago, a comparing the Itallian and Latin Poetry, when Lodovico Ariosto thinking that the Latins did too much undervalue Itallian Poetry, by too highly exalting their own, said that the Itallians yielded to the Latins for the Heroick Verse, which was grave and stately in the Latin tongue, and did observe a delightful cadence, by coupling the Dactils and Spondeas so excellently well; but that in Lyrick Poetry, he was of opinion they might march hand in hand together; and that for what concerned Satyrical Verse, the Itallians were so far advanced, as in the tartness of their pleasant concepti∣ons, in the mordacity of their more grave affairs, and in their easie ex∣pressing their conceits, they far exceeded the Latins. The Latins ap∣proved not of Ariostos opinion, and said in their own defence, they saw not why the Italian Poets should so much presume upon their skill in Satyri∣cal Poetry, there not being any one of them who might deservedly be compared to Iuvenal, nor who durst vie with Persius. Francisco Berni was present at this discourse, who having gon beyond all the terms of the bitterest backbiting, had so wounded even Aretines self with his cut∣ting Verses, as he bore the shamefull badges thereof in his face, brest, and hands. This man told the Latin Poets, that Iuvenal in respect of him, was an ignorant fellow in Satyrical Poetry; and that he would maintain this truth which he had spoken, fairly and freely, the first and second time, and even till blood came, in a bush of Bryars, not only against Iuvi∣nal, but against whatsoever other Satyrical Poet, yea though he had the advantage of a Commentator. It is not to be said how highly all the La∣tin Poets were incenst at the hearing of these words; who to abate the edge of this arrogant mans too great presumption, and to maintain the name of Latin, so much injured, they had like to have used superchery to him; but Horatio Venosino, desirous that this question might be fairly and honorably decided, appeased the incenst mindes of the Latin Poets, and told Berni, that he lied in all that he had said to the prejudice of Iu∣vinals honor; and that he had slandered a Poet whose pens he was not worthy to make clean, and that he in Iuvinals name accepted the chal∣lenge. He therefore wisht him to appear the first day in Bellona's field, with eights and thirds, where Iuvinal should give him a good account of himself, with his Heroick Verses in his hand. This being said, Berni, ac∣companied with his brother-Poets, went to arm himself, and Horatio hast∣ed to find out Iuvinal, whom he acquainted with all that had past between him and Barni. Iuvinal being astonished at the novelty of the business, pawsed a good while, then said, Horatio, if you have accepted the chal∣lenge in my name, try you the business with him, for I dare not. As for Latin Poets, I fear no mans face, neither do I care a fig for a thousand; but I tremble at the very naming of an Italian Satyrist. Horatio seeing his own
honor, and the like of all Latin Poets in such danger, encouraged Iuvinal, and bad him remember that he was the Prince of Satyrical Poets, and that such a one as he, who had deserved the happiness to have Commentators, a thing so much coveted by learned Poets, ought not to be afraid of Ber∣nies railing; and told him there was no proportion to be held between the powerfull weapons of Heroick Verse, between the excellent blade of the Latin tongue, and the faint Italian Verse, made by chance, and so strictly tied to rhime, as Italian Poets having their hand bound up with the cords thereof, they could make no down-right blows, nor lead a streight stockado, as occasion should require, as was clearly seen by Mauro, who in the dangerous combat which he had, when labouring in the bean∣field, he was set upon by an enemy, and thinking to make a full and mor∣tal thrust at his belly, his rithme forced him to give it him on his back, which purchast him the name of Treachery. The more the Venetian Poet incouraged and inheartned Iuvinal, the more did his fear encrease. The news of this challenge was by this time so spread abroad amongst the Vertuosi, as it came to Apollos ears, who was very much pleased thereat, for he delighted exceedingly to see two Litterati buckle together in fury, and wound one anothers reputation handsomly; for, for the most part, the Vertuosi speak and write, but so so in cold bloud; but when heated and chafed with anger, they do things beyond human wit, in defence of their reputation, and to purchase renown. Wherefore hearing of Iuvinals back∣wardness, he caused him speedily to be sent for, and sharply upbraided his cowardliness, and recommended the reputation of Latin Satyres unto him. Then Iuvinal said thus in his own defence to his Majesty; Sir, I have the same courage that I formerly had, nor do I fear to encounter a dozen Latin Satyrists; I beseech your Majesty to remember, that the ex∣cellency of Satyrical Poetry consists not in having a bold wit, quick spi∣rit, a detracting Talent, in sharp bitter reparties, handsom Sonnets, and ready replies; but in the condition of the times wherein men live: for in corrupt times, the vein of Satyres is very fluent; and the times wherein I lived, cannot any waies be compared to the wickedness and cosenage of this present age. If Berni should appear within the Lists, and should as∣sail me within the launce of modern vices, such as were not known in my daies, would he not drive me out of the List? Apollo hearing this an∣swer, had no more to say, but declared, that though Iuvinal baulked the quarrel, he suffered not in his honour, nor did he do any thing misbecom∣ing an honourable Cavalier Poet; for it was not Bernis wit that he feared, but his corrupt times, too unequal to those of Iuvinals.
The LXII. ADVERTISEMENT. Domitio Corbulone being severely prosecuted by the Qua∣rantia Criminale, (a Venetian Magistracy consisting of for∣ty men) for some words spoken by him in his Government of Pindo, which were formerly declared by Apollo's publick Edict, to be Tyrannical; Is at last acquited with much praise. THe City of Pindo, and all its large Territories, being filled by great store of Murderers, and dangerous factions (by the too much lenity of some of its late Governors) which did greatly anoy the peace of good men; Apollo, to curb the licentiousness of his most seditious Subjects by exemplary punishment, sent severe Domitio Corbulone some two months ago to that Government: Who so carried himself, as in a short space the people of that State were reduced from mighty seditions, into a peaceful condition. And enquiring of some of his Confidents, what the people thought of him, they freely told him, that his rigorous proceedings against many, had so affrighted the Uuniversality, as he was hated by all of them. Corbulone was overjoyed at this answer, and replyed to those his beloved friends in the well-known saying, Oderint dum Metuant: Let them hate, provided they fear. This was suddenly reported to Apollo, as a capital fault. His Majesty liked not this accusation, and committed the examination thereof to the Quarantia Criminale: for it had been long before published by a Decree from his Majesty; That whatsoever Prince, were he either legitimate, natural, or hereditary, who should dare to use such insolent and rash words, should be held and reputed an abominable Tyrant; and that if any Officer should, though at unawares, let them e∣scape his mouth, he should suffer capital punishment, Corbulone was therefore cited to appear before the Court; which he did the next day; where the cause was severely canvast by the Judges: And whilst all the people of Parnassus expected to see some rigorous sentence pass upon Cor∣bulone, he was by his Majesties approbation, gratiously absolved, and sent back to his Government with more plenary Aurhority then before: For the Judges declared, That such words were abominable, and altogether Tyrannical in Princes which have the means to be gratious, but very ho∣norable in an Officers mouth, who hath nothing in his power but the de∣tested lash of Justice: That Prince being truely to be admired, who could make himself be beloved by his Subjects, and reverenced: That Of∣ficer to be reputed very sufficient, who had the genius to make himself be feared and obeyed.
The LXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Chair of privat Tranquillity being void by Diogenes the Cynicks promotion to a higher degree; Apollo offers it to the famous Philosopher Crates; who refuseth it. THe Cynick Diogenes, he who for so many years, to the general ad∣vantage, and his own particular glory, had the publick Chair in these Schools, wherein his Office was to praise Poverty, Solitariness, and Peace of mind: By whose perswasion, Atalus, the very King of Treasures, put on that admirable resolution, of forgoing all his riches, and become a Sto∣ick in Parnassus, was by reason of his great deserts, exalted two months a∣go to the sublime Dignity of the Muses Arch-Flamming; so as so noble a place being void, his Majestie bestowed it upon the famous Crates; who went yesterday to Apollo, and contrary to all mens expectation, re∣fused so noble a Chaire; saying, that the charge of poverty, and of the souls peace, being greatly injured by Diogenes his promotion to that im∣mense dignity, he could not discharge his duty with that fervency, with that purity and integrity of heart as the place required: For the very first day that he should undertake the imployment, he should necessarily be so puft up with ambition, and should have so great a desire to obtain the same dignity which his Predecessor had obtained, as would drive from out his mind, though never so well composed, that sincerity which makes an O∣rator speak from his heart, not from his mouth; and that the necessity of his ambition, and his violent desire arose not from any vice, but from that laudable zeal of reputation, which is most intense in even the most morti∣fied Vertuosi of Parnassus: For if in process of time he should not re∣ceive the same honor from his Majsty as Diogenes had done, the world would think that the whole had happened, not by reason of his humility, not for that he preferred a privat life before publick Magistracy, quiet be∣fore business, or poverty before riches, but because his Majestie had not found such deserts in him, as he had done in Diogenes. So as having his soul perturbed by the violence of ambition, he could not hope to reap a∣ny advantage by exagerating the praises of Humility, the contempt of Riches, and of the vanity of worldly Greatness; it being impossible that any man should be so efficatiously eloquent, as to be able to perswade o∣thers to that sort of life, which the standers by must needs say, was abhor'd by the perswader.
The LXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Many people having wasted themselves in keeping great Ta∣bles, and going gloriously attired, desire their Princes to make a Pragmatical Law for the Moderation of such ex∣pences; but obtain not their suit. PEople subject to Princes who live in Parnassus, learning by experience, that luxury and vanity in apparel, are so much increased, as that there is no patrimony, how great soever, which may not be quite consumed in a short time by womens vanity, and mens ambition; and plainly seeing, that bravery was grown to so great a height, as a whole portion, though very great, was not sufficient to buy Jewels for a young maid that was to be married; which was the cause why parents could not marry off their daughters: It being likewise known that delicacies for the pallat, were oflate years so prodigiously doted on, as modern gormandizing hath quite ruined those Families, which were made great by antient Parcemony: They by joynt consent presented themselves all, some few daies ago be∣fore their several Princes, whom they earnestly desired that some remedy might be found out to prevent this their so apparent ruine. All the Princes were very well pleased with this their peoples Petition; and then it was that they knew it to be true, what many have written, That pe∣remptory or pragmatical Laws ought only then to be published to the people when they themselves desire them: For if they be inacted against their wils, they seldom produce good effects; the reason is, because pro∣digality never frightens scapethrifts, till they have been acquainted with the hideous and dreadful face of poverty. All the Princes therefore by common consent, caused many excellent pragmatical Laws to be made by understanding men, wherein luxuriousness and superfluity being a∣bridged, nothing but decency was seen in apparel, and men did eat to live, not to ruine both their lives and fortunes by gluttony. And because a thing so much desired, might be brought to pass, the Princes gave order that this Law should be proclaimed on the 18 of this present moneth; but the preceding night the Farmers of the Customs, Toll takers and Excise-men, came all of them to their several Princes, and told them, that if they published the pragmatical act, which they understood was penn'd, they desired to have abatements made of the great rents which they paid; for the greatest revenues of the Custom house, and of all Gabels arising out of Silks which came from Naples, Gold-thread from Florence, rich Draperies made at Millan, and other accoutrements be∣longing to apparel and the livelihood of man, which were brought from foreign parts, the price of the Customs would fall infinitely by reason of this Law. The Princes were so confused to hear this, as when the Deputies of the Nations came the next day to receive the Edict which was to be pro∣claimed,
they told them, that having heard the just appeals made by the receivers of their Customs, who were better verst in that affair, they re∣solved not to impair themselves for the bettering of others: That if they could invent any Law, wherein the Princes interests were not concerned, they would give them all possible satisfaction therein, to witness the fa∣therly love they bore unto their Subjects; but that to empty the pub∣lick purse, to the end that those of privat mens might be filled, was a frau∣dulent desire, and clean contrary to charity, which thinks it a piece of cru∣elty to macerate ones self that another man might grow fat. The peo∣ple departed much unsatisfied, by reason of this peremptory and interess∣ed answer; and confessed, that to go about to cure the peoples disorders, when the medicines touched upon the common Taxes, was to undertake to cure an incureable Cancar. The LXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Johannes Bodinus presents Apollo with his six Books of his Commonwealth; wherein it being found that he approves of Liberty of Conscience, he is sentenced to be burnt. JOhannis Bodinus, that famous French Litterato, was deservedly impri∣soned in a dark Dungeon the very first day that he presented Apollo with the six Books of his Commonwealth; for his Majesty would by no means permit that the wicked Tenet which he had published in his repub∣lick, that it made much for the quiet of States, to allow of Liberty of Conscience, should pass without some exemplary punishment; an opini∣on which was alwaies held by his Majesty, and by his best politick Litte∣rati, to be no less wicked then false; as that which makes her desciples ra∣ther seditious, then wise Statesmen; nothing being more prejuditial to a Principality, then the want of unity. Severe process was therefore made against Bodine, and he was yesterday condemned in the High Court of Parliament, to be burnt, as a seducer of the people, a publick stirrer up of sedition in ambitions men, and as a notorious Atheist: Bodin craved mercy of his Majesty, confessing his opinion to be false and wicked, and abjuring it as such a one; but that being deceived by the Ottaman Em∣pire, wherein with much peace to the State, all religions were allowed of, desired them that they would shew some pitty towards him. The Judges were then more incenst at Bodin, and told him, that he deserved the grea∣ter punishment, for that he being a Christian, had dared to publish the wicked precepts, especially in matters of Religion, of those Turks, who ought to be abominated for their wicked impieties, not only in profane, but in sacred things. Yet before they would proceed further with Bo∣dine, the Judges were resolved to know of the Ottaman Monarchy, how she governed her self in this particular; intending, by what was found out afterwards, to impose the same punishment upon her, if it should be pro∣ved
that she had given so scandalous an example unto the world, as to al∣low her people Liberty of Conscience. The Ottaman Monarchy was then sent for in great haste, who was ask∣ed by the Judges, whether it were true, or no, that she had let the reyns of Religion so loose in her State to her Subjects, as every one might be∣lieve what he listed? The Ottaman Monarchy wondred much at this de∣mand, and with great vehemency answered, that she was not so unexpe∣rienced in the affairs of the world, as not to know that the peace of States, and the universal quiet of the people, could not be had by any more se∣cure means, then by the unity of Religion; and that in all her Empire, no other Religion was either preached or believed by her Mossulmans, but only Mahometism. The Judges hearing so clear an answer, they turned to Bodin, and in great anger said unto him, That if a Mahometan, igno∣rant of that true Divinity which discovers the greatness of God unto men, and the truth of his holy Law, spoke so clearly of the unity of Re∣ligion which was to be observed in an Empire, what ought he to do who was a Schollar, and born in the most Christian Kingdom of France? To this Bodin answered, that the Ottaman Monarchy confessed with their mouthes the necessity of an unity in Religion, which was not really pra∣ctised in their States, wherein were Christian Catholicks, Hereticks, Grecians, Jacobines, Nestorians, Jews, and people of many other reli∣gions, which was the cause of his mistake. Thou knowst full little (said the Ottaman Empire to Bodin) of the proceedings touching religion, which is used in my house; for thou oughtest not to say for all this, that I grant my Subjects Liberty of Conscience, because men of all the several religions which thou hast named are seen in my Empire. Thou must know that I having conquered innumerable Provinces for the space of 300 years and more, most of which were formerly Subjects to several Christian Princes; and having found by experience, that people newly assubjected, easily rebel, if they be forced to change their religion, as those who are more obstinate in defending the faith wherein they were born, then in defending their Estates, Countrey, and lives; I, that I may go∣vern in peace, have alwaies used to suffer them to live in the same Laws, as well sacred as civil, wherein I found them; bereaving only the Christian Latins of their Religion, taking their Priests from them, and forbidding them to rebuild their Churches which are fallen, or to erect new ones. So by little and little the memory of their ancient religion failing in them, together with their sacred exercises, their children, if not they themselves, or at least their grand children, at last become Mahometans. Wherein I have had so good success, as the many Provinces which I possess in Asia, which were formerly full of Christians, are all of them now turned such Mahometans, as my Emperors being used to take many children from their Christian Subjects, wherewith to recruit their Janisary-souldiers, there are now but very few to be found in Asia. I proceed otherwise in Greece, for I grant them the free use of the Grecian rites; and the cause of this diversity is, because there being no Grecian Prince who can cause jealousie to my greatness, and consequently the Grecians which live in my Empire, not being able to be fomented by any Prince of their own religion, they do not trouble me so much as do the Latins, who have many and po∣tent Princes, which is the cause I take such care to annihilate their religion.
But I am so watchfull that all my Mahometan Subjects should punctually observe the Religion profest in my State, as it is not lawfull for any of them to prevaricate. I give you for a clear example of all this, That I having the Persian, who is held an Heretick by my Religion, no Turk that is my Subject, dare upon pain of life believe, much less preach the Persian Faith; nor is that Heresie permitted in my States: For though my last Emperors, by reason of the divisions of Germany, and the great jealousies which are amongst all Christian Princes, might much to their advantage have made War in Hungary, and so extend my Empire even to Austria, the acquisition of which Province would throw open the Gates unto me, to conquer Italy; yet they have been wisely better advised, rather to weaken the Persian Heretick, then to make War upon the Chri∣stian Princes, who being so far distant in poynt of belief, from my Religi∣on, do not frighten me so much as the Persian Hereticks do; for there is a great difference between tolerating Infidelity in a State (from which the passage to true belief is so hard) and the permitting of Heresie, a plague which so easily infects any Kingdom, how great soever; as the Germans, English, Flemmings, French, and others have seen and tryed. And know that I have rooted out all Sciences and Learning from out my Dominion, only to the end that my Subjects may live in such simplicity as is most requisite for my Religion; and to this purpose I have conside∣rately, and upon severe punishment, inhibited the translation of my Al∣cheron, which is written in the Arabick tongue, into vulgar Turkish lan∣guage; having learnt at the cost of some Christian Kingdoms, what mis∣chief the translation of the Bible into vulgar languages hath occasioned, which falling into the hands of ignorant people, I hear that in those parts where this abuse is introduced, even poor silly women spend more time in disputes about Religion, then in spinning. Wherefore to free my self from the evil of Heresie, which may be introduced into my Empire by ambitious men, I have commanded, that whosoever shall propound any doubts in Religion, be answered by the Scimiter. Because the He∣resies which now reigne in the Christian Religion, have opened all mens eyes, so as they may discern, that those who have first sowed them, are more moved by ambition of governing the earth, then out of charity (as they would make blockheads believe) of sending mens souls to heaven by their new positions. My Subjects sobriety, who are all of them bound to drink water, makes much for the keeping of my Territories from the contagion of He∣resie; and I say this, for that I see the fire of Heresie amongst Christi∣ans, breaks most forth there, where they drink merriliest. I very well know that all divisions in States are very dangerous, but especially those which arise in point of Religion; because people do not only not love, honour, or faithfully serve those who are not of the same religion with them, but hold them to be beasts, and bear them that cruel hatred which we see reigns amongst Nations of different Religion. Add hereunto, That as it is impossible for a man to live without a head, so is it for diver∣sity of Factions; and where there are two Religions, there must of ne∣cessity be two Heads; and every fool knows whether or no one King∣dom can at one and the same time receive two Kings: And thou Bodin oughtest so much the less to have published the seditious opinion which hath caused thee so much sorrow, for that thou knowst better then any o∣ther,
that the modern Heresies which now reign in many Chri King∣doms, have been sowed and fomented by great Princes, to whom Luthe∣rans, Calvinists, and many others like thy self, have served to seduce the people, and to be bawds to their ambition; only that they may thereby be followed by the mal-content Nobility, who greedily imbrace new sects out of a desire to better their condition, and by Plebeians, who fol∣low them out of avarice, and a detestation which they bear to their own unfortunate condition. And if for the quiet of Empires, all the people of one and the same Kingdom, ought to be under one and the same hu∣man Law; how much more for the same reasons, and out of the same con∣siderations, ought this to be endeavored in matters of Religion? which being bred with us in our mothers belly, hath taken such deep rooting in our hearts, as she is become the absolute Queen of all our affections, and of all our passions; and therefore she ought to be so much the better re∣gulated in every State, for that we cannot live without her, nor can we be touched in any thing which is more ticklish. These things are all of them so true, as I will boldly affirm, that even bruit beasts, could they speak, or could we understand their yelping, braying, and other noises which they make, would be heard to praise God, even as we do, who hath created them, and who doth feed them. I remember, that many years ago I heard a Polititian discoursing of this very Article; and because he esteem∣ed it too wicked to God-ward, and seditious towards Princes, I desired to inform my self of him, whether there were any Prince, or Commonwealth in the world, who did permit so wicked a thing in their Dominions? And he freely told me, That even the most modern Hereticks themselves, who had cryed up Liberty of Conscience in other mens States, would by no means allow of it amongst themselves: For they hated to see their own houses burn with the same fire which they by their seditions had kindled in other mens habitations: And of this, said he, Geneva, which I call the sink of all seditious impiety, is an evident example, where they who en∣deavor to raise new Heresies, are condemned to be burnt. The same man told me moreover, that in Germany, where so many modern Heresies were invented in their Hans Towns, only to suppress the house of Au∣stria, Liberty of Conscience was permitted; but that it would be evi∣dently dangerous to imitate them, for that the example of others would prove unfortunate to those who had not all the same requisite circum∣stances, as those whom they set before them for a President. He said that the Hans Towns of Germany live without any apprehension of any enemy-Prince, who might aspire to deprive them of their Liberty, that their Emperors were weak, and that their Citizens were not only by nature far from the ambition of Governing the Country; but were forced by necessity, to live and die what they were born. For if it should so fall out, that any one to better his condition, should presume to make himself head of any Heresie, the power of all the other free Towns, who were joyntly interessed in Liberty, with that City where factions began to arise, would presently assist with arms in hand to beat down that faction Moreo∣ver, that though the diversity of religions occasioned in those Cities by the Liberty of Conscience, were less dangerous in them, yet could it not be said that they were totally free, nor that the humor was not pernitious, and apt to occasion deadly evils; and that no father of a family was ever induced to set his own house one fire, for having the means of quickly
quenching it by a neighbouring River: But that in Empires, and great Kingdoms it fared otherwise; for in them there were oft-times brothers to him who Governed in Chief, and other Princes of the bloud; and there were alwaies therein great store of particular privat men, eminent for birth, riches, and adherents, who were all of them ambitious, and out of a thirst of reigning, thought any enterprize, how desperate soever, ea∣sie: And that to boot with these, they had potent forreign enemies, up∣on whom they confined, who were more then ready to foment such heads of faction as should appear to arise; as had lately been seen in France, and in Flanders; and that as well the lay Princes Electors, as every other Prince of the Empire, who had imbraced the present Heresies, did not live with liberty of conscience, but with a particular thirst, accommodated to human Interest: As appeared clearly in the Lutheran impiety, which taking its beginning in the Dukedom of Saxony, to the end that he who declared himself to be Head thereof, might not grow too great, the rest of the Heretick Princes had introduced the new Sects of Calvin, Zwinglius, and of others in their States, with such confusion to sacred things, as it might be truely said that there was as many Heresies in Germany, as Princes and Potentates that did rule there: And that which made me wonder most, was to hear, that some Subjects in Germany were forced to alter their Religion at their Princes pleasure; an inconvenience which was seen to happen so often amongst them, as some Cities have past sundry times from one Heresie to another in less then one months space. All which are things of very bad example, and an excellent means to introduce that Atheism amongst men, which I said I thought was not to be found a∣mongst beasts. Wherefore Bodin, as a horse which is long suffered to go without a bri∣dle, becomes fierce and unserviceable to man; so people, when they have the Reyns of Religion let loose in their necks, grow wild, seditious, unru∣ly, and no longer apt to be governed or ruled by a Prince: For he who is not taught by a sound and well regulated religion, to love, honor, and fear God, cannot obey, honor, nor fear man. So great a truth, as it is the nature of all people, who alwaies err in the extreams, to despise Humane Laws, when they are miss-led in those that are Divine: for the freedom which they have to offend the Majestie of God, provokes them against their Prince, who gave them that liberty. This truth which I tell you, is apparently seen in those who seduced the Flemmish to change their reli∣gion, and to rebell against their natural Prince, who to bring them to so wicked an enterprize, permitted them to plunder Churches, and Church∣men; and when at last they would have refrained, and regulated them in their highest Towring Tumults, they found that when God is despised, men are so likewise. The Government of people is a weighty affair for any Prince how wise soever, nor is it possible for him alone to support so heavy a burthen; but being assisted by Religion, it becomes so easie unto him, as one Prince may govern many millions of men; for very many are so ill conditioned, as they despise human Laws, yet do they often fear divine ones; and many who little esteem the anger of an earthly Prince, dread the King of heaven, and live peaceably. Bodin was sorely cast down, when he heard the Ottaman Emperor speak so solidly of the care which Princes ought to have of the unity of Religion; and was then more grieved when the Judges told him, that it
was wicked ignorance to maintain that Princes are Lords of mens bo∣dies, and not fit to rule their souls; as if the Allegiance which by Gods command, Subjects owe their Princes, be not as well a duty of the soul, as of the body; and that God hath constituted the most Christian Kings of France, and other earthly Princes, only that they might feed their ambiti∣on by reigning, and pass away their time in delight, wallowing in the plen∣ty of so many earthly blessings, and had not made them his Lieutenants on earth, to the end that they may observe his holy Law; for these rea∣sons, all the Lords of Parliament ordered that he might be immediately punished by fire, who had publisht a Tenet fit only to set the world on fire. The LXV. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo punisheth a Poet severely, for having been so despe∣rate as to blaspheme. APollo doth so abhor Blasphemy above all other vices, as two daies a∣go he caused a Poets tongue to be struck through with a naile in the Delfick Temples Porch, who had presumed to say that Nature had dealt injuriously with him, in having indowed him with a Princely soul, and al∣lotted him but a beggarly fortune. And though many Litterati earnestly beseeched his Majesty that he would in some sort mittigate this punish∣ment, he did not only deny to do it, but in a great rage said, that such wits deserved the severest punishments, who being born to a poor fortune, consumed all their time in afflicting themselves by seeking out new con∣ceits which might make poverty appear unto them more shamefull and insupportable, which they should imploy in seeking out such Instructions as might make it appear less shamefull, and more tollerable; and that he would teach men of but mean fortunes, by this example, how to accom∣modate their minds to their means; it being a hatefull piece of petu∣lancy to envy great Princes fortunes; whilst others in tattered clothes di∣ed of hunger.
The LXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. The Vertuosi of Parnassus visit the Temple of Divine Provi∣dence, whom they thank for the great Charity which she hath shewn to mankind. THis morning, according to the ancient custom of this Court, all the Prince-Poets, and the Litterati-Lords of Parnassus, went to visit the Temple of Divine Providence, to whom Giovan Ioviano Pontano made a learned Oration, wherein he highly praised the infinite Charity, and immence love which she had shewed to mankind in creating frogs with∣out teeth: For it would have been of no advantage to man, that this world, canopied by so many heavens, full of so many stars, should not on∣ly abound in all things necessary; but even be fully fraught with all most exquisite delitiousness, if gallant men who inhabit it, should be forced to wear iron buskins to defend themselves from being bitten by such fastidi∣ous and importunate animals; whereas now there needed no fence a∣gainst such rascally companions, who are composed of nothing but mouth and voice, but a good pair of ears, which vallue not the noise which they know can do them no harm. The LXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. The most excellent Paolo Peruta, by order from Apollo, de∣clares in the Publick Politick Schools, what the genuine signification is of that Precept in Policy; That to reigne se∣curely, the people must be kept under. THe usual Precept in Policy, That to Reign securely, the people must be kept under, is as true, as it is wrongfully understood, and worse practised by many Princes; who out of their insatiate avarice, interpret the best politick sentences, in such sense as makes most for their present advantage. Wherefore Apollo being much displeased, that so singular a precept should be so grosly abused, sent a few daies sithence, for Paolo Peruta, who at this present time reads the ordinary morning Politicks in the publick Schools in Parnassus; and commanded him, that for the be∣nefit of Princes, and the peoples profit, he should declare publickly what was the true and genuine sense of so signal a precept? Peruta obeyed, and on an appointed day, when the School was full of all the greatest Princes of this Court, he took the Chair, and said, That as an exquisite
Prince could be likened to nothing better then to a good Shepherd, so people might be very fitly compared to a very numerous flock of sheep; and that to the end that one onely Shepherd might commodiously go∣vern a great many sheep, the Divine Majestie had made them to be low∣ly minded, and had created them without the weapons of Horns or Teeth: for otherwise, to the great prejudice of mankind, every sheep must of necessity have a shepherd alloted him: for God having armed the head and hands of man with a stout heart, and wise genius, he became not obedient and submissive to his shepherd, as many Princes did believe, by being often shorn and continually milked, or by being hindred from growing fat in good pastures by angersome vexations; for the true way to keep the people low, was not to afflict them perpetually by pinching taxes, was not to reduce them to shameful poverty, by grating penal∣ties, but to avoid the arming of their head with that ambition of com∣mand, which people so delight in, as the appetite is encreased by satie∣ty: Which true means, and safe counsel, is onely known, and succes∣fully practised by the Ottaman Emperors, who knowing very well how dangerous a thing it is for States to arm their subjects with ambition, authority, or the attendance of many Souldiers, think it a capital error, and the ruine of their States, to give any place of command to a native Turk; certainly a most happy custom, and which plainly teacheth Princes, that the true meaning and genuine interpretation of so useful a precept in policy, is onely, That it is a dangerous thing to arm the head of subjects with ambition, not their hands with swords; to keep them humble, by not giving them places of too great attendance, not to de∣sire their poverty by taking their means from them; for that Almighty God not having made sheep humble and obedient for any want they have of wool, milk or lambs, did thereby teach Princes to use all means possible, that their subjects may increase in wealth, and that they may abound in goods; it being very true, that people by increasing their pri∣vate patrimonies, make chains wherewith they keep themselves fast bound up; for lest they may lose their wealth got by so much toil, they did so religiously study peace, as the ancient Romans, who were true masters of the reason of State, found no better means to make the warlike French, whom they had newly conquered, quiet and obedient to their Republike, then by affording them all possible means of growing rich; an advice which proved so fortunate unto them, as that Politick Tacitus speaking of the French, the most warlike people of all Europe, doth not onely call them Dites, & Imbelles, lib. 11. Annal. but freely affirms, Gallos quo{que} in bellis flouisses. Tacit. Vita Agric. which plainly shews, that great riches gotten by the French, had brought that formerly warlike Nati∣on into such a wretchless slothfulness, as it seemed an old wives tale, that the French knew ever how to manage arms; whereby we are made aware, that riches by disarming men, keeps them submiss in the humility of peace; whereas on the contrary every one sees, that the not being con∣tent with their present condition, makes men greedy of novilties. For men are not abased, as ignorant people believe, by being poor, but need begets in them such an immence desire of change of fortune, as makes those that are in bad condition, venture upon any how desperate or dan∣gerous soever an undertaking; it having been often times experienced, that nothing arms people more then poverty. Which produceth despe∣ration,
not when it is occasioned by the earths barrenness, by adven∣tures at Sea, by mens carelessness, by the misfortune of Factors, or other humane accidents; but when caused by the Prince his avarice, who foolishly perswades himself he shall become a rich shepherd by keeping his sheep poor. Wherefore that Chair man of Polititians affirms, that to go about to reduce subjects to Loyalty, and Principallities to peace, by keeping them poor, was neither better nor worse, then to pre∣tend to cure the dropsie, by giving the sick party over much drink. To prove all which to be truth, it is daily seen in all insurrections, Princes meet with no sorer enemies, then mal-contents, and such as have not wherewithal to live commodiously; who in the garboils of commotions, prove always Devils, whereas those who are wealthy are obedient and peaceful. The LXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. A nobly born Laconick Senator, having committed a great fault, the Duke of Laconia thinks it wisdom to pass by it. YOu have formerly heard, how that the Laconick State is governed by an Elective Prince; and how that the Laconick Senate is repu∣ted and celebrated for the best that is in Parnassus. The Duke of La∣conia to supply the place of a Senator that was deceased, advanced the second Son of the Prince of Mitilene to that so high dignity. And not above a fortnight sithence, this Gentleman, much to the Dukes regrete, committed a fault, which his Highness had severely punished in other Senators; and he seeming not to take notice of it, many of his Sena∣tors were troubled at it, and advised him to use the same punishment for the same fault. To which the Duke answered, That the same punish∣ments were not to be inflicted for the same faults, where there was a di∣sparity in the Personages; and that God, whose will it was that no sub∣lunary thing should be without somewhat of amiss, had so ordained it, as that the finest Currel should not be without its rubbish; and that in so famous a Senat as was that of the Laconicks, eminent Personages added much to the Splendor of it, and were oft times of great assistance to the State upon urgent emergencies. But that this advantage was counterpoised by a notable allay, that such persons were not so easily go∣verned, nor held in as others, over whom the whole power of command, and absolute authority of the Law being to be exercised, they were not of the same reputation, nor advantage to Elective Princes, as were Se∣nators highly descended; and that the Sythe of equal Justice did for∣tunately fell grass of an equal height; but that the wary Mower, who spyed a great shrub amongst lesser grass, hoisted his Sythe, lest he might break it, or blunt the edge thereof, a piece of wisdom whereby elective Princes, whose prerogative it was to chuse Senators, were taught not to promote Personages of extraordinary birth to that degree, unless they do formerly resolve to bear with many things in them, which they would severely punish in ordinary subjects.
The LXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Andrea Alciati finding himself injuriously persecuted in his place of Magistracy, flies for help to Apollo, but finds none. ANdrea Alciati, who was not onely very well versed in the profession of Law, but was in great esteem with Apollo, and all the Vertuosi of Parnassus, for his great insight in all the choicest learning which makes men be so highly prized in this Court; knowing the sour of obeying, and sweet of commanding; the meaness of a privae life, and the gallan∣try of being, or of but personating a Prince, applyed himself from his very first entrance into Parnassus, to the perillous practise of Gorvern∣ment; till at last he was deputed a Trianual President of the Isle of Negrapont, by the Prince thereof, where with undaunted sincerity, he administred such exact and severe justice as is pleasing to God, and hateful to proud and insolent people who though they be born to serve, will notwithstanding Tyranize; and so it fell out, that those who had been severely punished for their insolences by the rigour of the Lavv, waited for the coming of the Sessions, a time usually longed for by the lewdest sort of men, that they might revenge themselves of their Presi∣dent, and wherein they charged him with bitter accusations. Alciati seeing himself so wickedly dealt withal by his ill-wishers, had forthwith recourse to the Prince of Negrapont, who is at present in this Court, and demanded such protection of him, as is due to those Officers who discharge their duty faithfully. The Prince (as many others do) that he might win his subjects good will, lent a favorable ear to the accusers, increasing thereby their insolence, and Alciaties vexation; who for his last refuge, appealed this very morning to Apollo, complaining that he had been persecuted for doing justice; and did not onely require his Majesties protection, but boldly prayed him, that he might have a new tryal, but such personages as were unconcerned, and not swayed by pas∣sion. Apollo, not onely as if Alciati had been a man of no merit, but even a publique offendor was much incenst at him, and drove him away; wherefore many of the standers by, who very well knew his worth, and how wrongfully he was persecuted, were witnesses unto his Majestie of them both. But Apollo, continuing in his former opinion, bad Alciati (though he was very submiss in his carriage) get out of his sight. His Majesties great wisdom being known to be such, as that all his actions pass for necessary precepts for men to govern their lives by, the standers by wondred why he should deal so hardly with one who deserved help; and not being able to believe but that his Majestie concealed somewhat in his mind, that was worthy to be known, they asked him, why he who always sought all possible means how to comfort the afflicted, did now add to the affliction of this innocent person. Then Apollo freely un∣bosoming himself said, that if Alciati were poor, he would have taken
him into his protection; but that he being wealthy enough, so as he might compass his ends of coming to higher preferment a safer way, he deserved to be treated thus, and worse, for betaking himself to an im∣ployment wherein there was certain danger, and which was onely fit for such, who not being able to eat bread at home, were necessitated to take any the most hazardous course to live; and that men who were well to live, and had honourable imployments, though they might be very ex∣pensive, ought onely study how to win reputation and glory. To this Alciati answered, That he, to the end he might be better esteemed of in the world, and that he might not be pointed at, as a Plebeian clad in silk, had carryed himself with such reputation in all his honourable imployments, as would make any man, how meanly soever born, appear to be highly descended. Apollo being still more incensed at Alciati's words, replyed, With what face canst thou affirm that thou hast gone about to joyn reputation to thy means, having taken shameful ways to work thy intent? Dost thou not know the true attestat of Guicchardin, that Oracle of Italian Historians, that it is more usual for an Officer to run hazard, then for a Merchant to break, or a Sea-man to drown? Dost not thou know, that no Gally-slaves, nor any other men how miserable soever, eat courser biscat, or swallow down more bitter distastes then those who sit at the helm of Government? And knowest thou not that many Princes after having highly displeased their subjects, by their ava∣rice and cruelty, use to quiet and appease them, and to purchase their good will, by delivering up unto them such an Officer, as by his pun∣ctual performance of justice, have well deserved their Princes protecti∣on? And art thou alone he that doth not know, that these men desire nothing but the pleasure of command, and the profit of revenue? and that they abhor rumors, which they are so far from believing, that they proceed from the execution of that true justice, which is displeasing to him that tastes thereof, as they firmly believe it proceeds from the Offi∣cers ignorance and wickedness? though nothing be more certain, then that he who will administer upright justice, must as requisitely make the people complain, as the Chyrurgion who will perfectly cure a wound that is Gangren'd, must make the sick party cry out: and neither Hi∣pocrates, nor yet my beloved Esculapius could ever yet find out any such medicine for a malady, as would make the patient lick his lips; and the chiefest mischief is, that a man who hath his knee out of joynt, would beat the Chyrurgion, who useth all his best skil to put the bone again into its right place.
The LXX. ADVERTISEMENT. The Lady Victoria Collonna begs of Apollo in name of all the Feminine Sex, that such marryed men as are Adulter∣ers may suffer the like Infamy, as unchaste Wives do. THe most excellent Lady, the Lady. Victoria Colonna, a Princess of exemplary chastity, came before his Majestie three days ago, and said, in behalf of all the feminine Sex, That all women did so affect Chastity, a vertue wherewith they were particularly endued, as they did not any whit envy strength, which was a vertue attributed to the masculine gender; for they very well knew, that a woman whose soul was not chaste, was a stinking carcase, but that with much reason they did bewail the great disparity which was seen to be observed between the husband and the wife, in the particular of punishment for Adultery. For wives could in no sort be contented that marryed men should think themselves so much at liberty, as even the punishment of shame (which men of honor had wont to apprehend so much) could not keep them from being false unto their wives. In which disorders she affirmed, they were so far advanced, as many husbands were not onely not ashamed to keep concubines openly in their houses, but were grown sometimes so hardy to take them into bed with their wives: which excesses were oc∣casioned, because the same severe punishments were not provided for adulterous husbands, as were thundered out, and put in practice against unchaste wives. And that in this particular the Laws were so partial to marryed men, as if they should find their wives in adultery, they would not be satisfied till they should have revenged the injury with their own hands. By reason of which notorious grievances, the feminine sex were forced to have recourse to the clear fountain of justice, to the end that they might receive competent remedy for this their oppression, by the publication of parity of punishment for the same fault; and that if his Majestie should not like of this, that he would at least be pleased to al∣low women the like liberty in point of adultery, as men pretended to lay claim unto: And that this like liberty was not desired, to the end that women might make use of it, but onely that by the terror thereof, they might curb their lustful husbands. To this request Apollo answered, that the Law of Loyalty ought to be alike between the husband and the wife; and that the violation thereof ought to be no less punished in the one, then in the other: but that the more exact chastity was desired in wives, in the weighty respect that men might be sure to father no chil∣dren but their own, in which regard the excellent vertue of chastity was given to the female sex: for the certainty of their issue was so necessary to husbands in the generation of mankind, as were not their mothers endued with chastity, their sons would lose as well their inheritance, as their fathers affection; which was so great a truth, as wise Nature her∣self
had given chaste mates to all earthy Animals, where the male shares in hatching the eggs, or in bringing up the young ones. To the end that Fathers might think the pains for the welfare of their children, well be∣stowed, and value their costs as consolations, and great gains. At this answer an honourable blush stole upon the cheeks of the Lady Victoria, who with a Roman ingenuity confest the simplicity of her request to Apollo; and said, it would be too great a shame to the female sex, if they should suffer themselves to be exceeded in chastity by brute beasts who though they follow nothing else with greater propenseness then their de∣light, yet not to berive the father of his ehildren, or the children of their fathers by their Libidinousness, keep their chastity; and that husbands had so great reason to desire their wives might prove chaste, as the Lavvs against adultery in married vvomen appeared to be too merciful; for the vvounds vvhich husbands gave their vvives by their unchasteness, did onely pierce the skin; but that marryed vvomen, by their adulteries did kill their husbands vvith eternal infamy, and did dishonor their ovvn children. The LXXI. ADVERTISEMENT. Caesar having taxed Marcus Brutus of ingratitude, in a full Assembly of great Personages, they challenge one an∣other. SO great hath the hatred alvvays been betvveen Caesar the Dictator, and Marcus Brutus, as there could never be any reconciliation made between them, though it hath been much endeavoured by the prime subjects of this State. Tis true that to avoid the displeasing of Apollo, they have both of them been so discreet as to shun meeting in the streets, much less the having any intercourse between them. But the flames of hatred long kept concealed in a passionate mans bosome, in process of time must needs break forth. This is said, because in a great assembly which was had the other day of the chief of this state, wherein Caesar hap∣ned to be, it was impossible to perswade Brutus to withdraw himself, who esteemed it poorness of mind to yield to that his capital enemy at this meeting. Caesar (though in covered words) said somewhat which re∣flected upon Brutus, taxing him with ingratitude; and (as it usually fals out where there is not a perfect good understanding beween people) doubtful words being taken in the worse sense, and small injuries being held hainous offences; Brutus boldly gave Caesar the lye, and at the same instant accompanied the lie with its necessary correllative, laying his hand upon his dagger. Caesar slew like an enraged Lyon upon Bru∣tus, and certainly some great mischief had been done, had not the Princes that were present interposed themselves, and parted them. The next day Caesar published a Manifesto against Brutus, wherein in high lan∣guage
he said, That it was known to the whole world, that  civil wars he met with no more cruel enemy then Marcus Brutus,  was worse to him then even Pompey's self: and though he with the d of victory and revenge, which he had in his hand, might by goo son of War, have secured his own life, by taking away that of Brut, yet chusing rather to use clemency then just rigour, he did so clearly and fully pardon him that offence, which would never have been forgotten by any other man, as (as if injuries had been great obligations) he turned his hatred into love, his revenge into favour, and this with such integri∣ty as in his last will and Testament, he declared him to be his Heir, with which magnanimity the people of Rome were so pleased, as after his murther, they preferred the revenge of so great ingratitude before their own liberty, which upon that occasion they might easily have re∣covered. And if the common sort of people, who use rather to move out of base interest, then out of any genurosity, did so much detest this ingratitude in Brutus, how much more ought Brutus to do so, who had received the obligation? And that if Brutus his behaviour to∣wards him was not open and shameful ingratitude; sure no man was ever ungrateful; and he should be forced to believe that ingratitude was a vain name in the Abstract, and that there was no such thing in the con∣crete thereof. Brutus finding his honour much concerned in this Caesars Manifesto, answered him presently in a writing which he published, That since he had never deserved ill at Caesars hands, he could not acknow∣ledge the pardon which he said he had given him for taking up Arms a∣gainst him, as a favour. For he who takes up arms to defend his free Countrey from a Tyrant, did but what was his duty to do, and did not therein misdemerit, but ought rather to be commended even by the enemy. And that Caesar after his victory at Pharsalia, did not oblige those unto him whose lives he pardoned; for he onely won the good opinion of his enemies, who pardoned injuries received not injuries done unto them. And if it were faults, not merits which deserved to be par∣doned, then they who took up arms to defend the Roman liberty ought to pardon Caesar, not Caesar them. For the fault was his, who would usurp upon his Countreys liberty, the merit theirs that did defend it. And that though it vexed his very soul to hear himself taxed of ingra∣titude by Caesar, yet he was more troubled to think he should hold him for so great a villan, as that, though with pardon of life for so doing, he could forget the injurious usurping the Countreys liberty, which all wor∣thy Senators ought to keep always deeply ingraven in their hearts. And that that being onely true clemency which proceeds immediately from meer meekness, certainly Caesar merited nothing at those Senators hands, whom he pardoned for defending their liberties. For he did it not out of any worthiness of mind, but onely to secure his own Tyrannie: for ve∣ry well knowing, that to grow cruel after victory, towards the chief Sena∣tors, was to incite the people of Romes publique hatred, and highly to incense the prime Senators, he gave other men their lives to secure his own. That for his having declared him in his will to succeed in part of his inheritance, he would have Caesar know, that he treated not with ig∣norant people, or such as did not very well know his deep cunning, hid under that feigned benevolence and false liberality, since it was not out of any affection to him, that he had named him to be his heir, but onely
to ma him lay down his Arms, and to make him become an enemy to his ntrey, and to blot out of his mind the desire of recovering li∣berty, a servitude which ambitious Tyrants purchase at a contemptible rate from base and avaricious Senators; not from such as he, who were so far from selling their or their Countreys liberty for any sum of gold, how great soever, as they sought to purchase it at the expence of theit blood. And that the trick of basely lulling chief Senators asleep, by sending them to be Ambassadors, was past from Caesar into Augustus, whose will and testament: Tertio Gradu primores Civitatis Scripserat, plerosque invisos sibi. Tacit. lib. 1. Annal. was not as Tacitus had former∣ly, but foolishly affirmed, Iactantia, Gloriaque ad Posteros; but onely that those Senators, who were his sorest enemies, allured with hopes of reaping more benefit in servitude, then in a free condition, might become instruments to Tiberius, in training him up in that Tyrannie, which they were bound to make head against. Brutus concluded this his writing; saying, That he was so far from acknowledging it a favour to have his life given him by Caesar, as he would have taken it for a greater obliga∣tion from him if he had bereaft him of it, since a worthy Senator cannot acquire a more glorious life, then to be torn in pieces by the publike Ty∣rant, such a Senators life being formidable unto the Tyrant, for being a valiant defendor of liberty; and that Tyrants gave a glorious life to such Senators as they were cruel unto, whereas they asperse those with shame who too greedy of life, did interchange the base benefit of their received pardon, with the shameful oblivion of the injury done them in bereaving them of their publike liberty. Caesar who was by nature haugh∣ty, was so incenst at this answer, as he challenged Brutus to a single duel in Campo Marte; which Brutus willingly accepted, but abhorring to fight with men half dead, he bad him first go cure those wounds which he had given him in the Senat, and then return to receive more with the same dagger, with which he would be ready to wait upon him. To this scorn∣ful answer of Brutus; Caesar did as sconfully reply, that the alledged im∣pediment should not keep him from meeting him in the field, for that Brutus very well knew, that those his wounds were very well cured by his Nephew Augustus, and by the whole Triumpherate, with the corresive of proscription. That therefore he should onely appear armed in the field, and leave behind him those Cassii and Caschi, and other swagger∣ing companions, which he was accustomed to make use of in his super∣cheries and foul play to men of honor. To this Brutus answered, That his custom was to put a great difference between enemy and enemy; and that such as he, fought onely with the arms of military worth, to propa∣gate the Roman Empire, against the Hanibals, Jugurthans, Mitredates, and other Foreign Princes; but that Tyrants, and ravinous wolves cloathed in lambs skins, ought to be dealt withal with like Treachery, and to have traps laid for them, as is usually done for crafty Foxes.
The LXXII. ADVERTISEMENT. Certain Subjects desire their Princes that the infinite multi∣tude of Laws which they live under, may be reduced to a lesser number; and that the Governors of Provinces may be forbidden to publish every day new Proclama∣tions. THe great abuse in some States is certainly much to be blamed, where not onely the Princes are prone enough in publishing every day new Laws, but do permit the Governors of their Provinces to run into the same error. Which being often changed, and all of them commencing their Government with an ardent desire to mend the world the very first week, shame themselves with divulging certain new Proclamations ac∣cording to their own fancies, and full of those many extravagancies which use to abound in them, who having framed new conceits in their brains, are not so well advised as to weigh them with practice, which is that true hammer whereby to discern between pure silver, and false Alchymie. For zeal to the publike good, not regulated by a perfect judgement, injures a gallant man in his reputation, more then any bad intention. The liberty of this manner of proceeding, causeth those States wherein it is used, to abound so much in Edicts, Proclamations, Constitutions, and an infinite medly of new Laws, as men live there∣in in great confusion; it being very true, that Corruptissima Republica plurimae Leges. Tacit. terio Lib. Annal. a most corrupted Courey a∣bound most in Laws; and the worst is, that every Officer being reso∣lute in the observance of such Proclamations as are by him published, foolishly forgets those made by his predecessors, so as the people not a∣ble to discern in this so great disorder, what things are lawful, what un∣lawful, receive the worser satisfaction thereby, for that they have oft∣times found, that many of them, to vent their anger against one they hate, or to give a purging pill to a rich Churmuggion, have made use of absolute Proclamations and Edicts which have lost their validity, be contrary usance. To the end then, that some cure might be found out for so many evils, the people who live under them, chose certain Com∣missioners long since, to acquaint their Princes therewith. These earn∣estly desired that the multitude of Laws, which bred confusion amongst the people, might be abrogated; and that the Governors of Provinces might be inhibited the making of new ones for the future. Most of the Princes judged this the Commissioners request to be very just; and that they might consult the better thereof, they met in Clios house, where some that were zealous of their subjects good, were of opinion, that with as much brevity as might be, all the ancient Statutes should be made an end of; and being made void, new ones might be enacted, which might bring quiet, not confusion to the people. But the Princes who
were of a contrary opinion, were greater both for number and quality; they freely affirmed, That those things which had been tollerated by their ancient Predecessors, ought to be presumed to proceed rather from wisdom, then from ignorance; for it was always to be believed, that their fore-fathers had examined & digested matters concerning the Go∣vernment of their people, much more accurately then modern men do, who were then seen to run into great disorders, when out of novelty they would abrogate those ancient customs, which experience had found to be good; and that it was to be thought a high presumption, that the world without ever being aware of, oramending her errors, had lived long in those customs, which others would correct, as being prejudicial. And that Princes, who ought to study nothing more then how to di∣late their own Authority, committed a mortal error, when they tyed up their ownhands, and made rods for their own breeches, becurtiling their jurisdiction. Whilst the Princes were thus discussing the business, the Commissioners desires to hear the result, made some little noise at the chamber door: At which the Princes being very angry, they grew so hot, as having no other weapons, they broke some forms which came first to their hands, and making use of the feet thereof for cudgels, they beat away the Commissioners; who crying out, Help, help, many Phi∣losophers came from the Peripatetick School, who withheld the Princes, and freed the others from being further mischiefed. The Princes thinking it fitting to acquaint the Philosophers with the reasons which had moved them to this resentment, said, Gentlemen, these Rascals, under pretence of Grievances, Proclamations, Statutes, and confusion by new Laws, have dared to come even within our doors, to assassinate us, adding insolence to their impertinent demands; for we having out of our fatherly charity, given free leave to these ingrateful people to keep as many Hounds and Greyhounds as they please to take Hares and Goats withal, permission to lay gins to catch Partridge and Pheasants, to make nets to take Finshes and Sparows, to lay lime-twigs wherewith∣al to take Black-birds and Thrushes, to make hooks, pastes, drag-nets, weels, and twenty other things, that they may want no fish: These Rascals will not notwithstanding permit us poor Princes, who even con∣sume our selves in studying how to serve them, to take half a dozen fat Becchifichi, for our own use.
The LXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Vertuosi of Italy beg of Apollo, that Philosophy may be treated on in the Italian Tongue, and are denyed their request. THe Italian Litterati have these many years been very instant with his Majestie, that he would be pleased to enable the Italian Tongue to treat of Philosophical matters, and have used all the possible means they could to get it effected: But Apollo would never grant it, saying, That the Liberal Sciences were no longer esteemed, then when they were handled in Greek and Latin; for the Metaphisicks, and the other Soveraign Sciences, would suffer an infinite alloy, if the admirable secrets thereof being taught in Italian, should be communica∣ble even to Hosts and Hostlery; moreover, if all the Liberal Sciences were suffered to be written in the Italian Tongue, the most noble Latin Tongue, in which all men confess the true majestie of writing, and speak∣ing elegantly doth consist, would go near to be lost. The Italians were not onely not satisfied with these alledged reasons, but continued still so fervent in their former desire, as his Majestie seemed to be inclineable to give them content, when all the Liberal Sciences doubting lest some re∣solution might be taken, which would be displeasing to them, bad the Italian Litterati be quiet, for they would by no means undergo the shame of being discust in insipid Italian Circumlocutions, but would be argued in their ordinary Latin Terms. Alexander Picolomini was there present, who freely said, That the Greek and Latin Philosophers were Fools, if they believed that the Italian Writers were so ill read, as that they did not very well know, that Philosophy being a natural Science; and there∣fore known even to children, would wholly lose her reputation, it be∣ing treated of in Italian, the world should know, that she were wholly hid under Scholastical terms, which being neither Greek nor Latin, seemed rather to be Slavonick words, which being translated into Italian would discover the cheating tricks of Philosophers, who spend nights and days in the study of Philosophy, to learn names more then re∣alties.
The LXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo shews unto his Litterati the true meaning of the La∣tin Sentence, Homo longus, raro sapiens, A tale man is seldom wise. TO the wonder of Apollo, and all the standers by, above 300 Litte∣rati, all of them beyond the usual size of men, appeared on Tuesday last in the publike Audience. Every one knew that the assembling to∣gether of so many Vertuosi, all of them of extraordinary stature and greatness, must needs have somewhat of meaning in it, and so it had; for reverend Cino, Auditor di Rota in Parnassus said, in the name of all his fellows, that all those Vertuosi who his Majestie saw there, were known by the whole world to be well skilled in the Liberal Arts, which his Majesties Delfick Library might likewise sufficiently witness; and that notwithstanding they were scoft and laught at by most of the Litte∣rati in Parnassus, and held for fools and shallow witted people: Where∣fore, such injuries being altogether insupportable, they were forced to have recourse unto his Majestie. And to the end that some remedy might be found for so great an abuse, which might occasion many in∣conveniences, those Litterati of a more then usual stature and greatness of body, demanded place and time (always provided it might stand with his Majesties Approbation) where and when, hand to hand, two to two, three to three, or in what greater numbers the contrary party should choose, they would dispute vvith the Vertuosi of small, and of middle stature in all sorts of Sciences, and venture their reputations thereupon: But that vvhen his Majestie should think they had given sufficient Tryal of themselves, and should have proved themselves to be real Vertuosi; their humble request was, That he vvould be pleased to dece the pro∣verb to be false and erronous, vvhich says. Homo longus, raro sapiens, vvhich vvas the rise of all the scandal. His Majestie gave ear to Cino's complaint vvith a pleasing countenance; and told him, That he vvas sensible of the rash judgement vvhich his Vertuosi gave of them; but that the proverb being true, he neither could nor vvould declare it to be false; and that Homo longus vvas not to be understood (according to the vulgar misinterpretation) for any extraordinary proportion of body, but in respect of resolution and deliberations taken in affairs; for too much delay and length of time in dispatching business, vvas a clear evidence of vvant of vvit, simplicity, and of a drousie understanding; for he vvas onely to be accounted vvise, vvho vvas resolute in his affairs, and vvho being able to resolve upon any sudden occasion, dispatched business vvith admirable dexterity of vvit.
The LXXV. ADVERTISEMENT. The Ruota di Parnasso having decided a point in difference between the Military men, and the Litterati on the Milita∣ry means behalf, are aware of their error, and withdraw their sentence. THe precedency between Arms and Learning is still obstinately dis∣puted on both sides, between the Litterati and Millitary-men in Par∣nassus. And it was resolved in the last Ruota, That the question should be argued, if at least the name of Science and Discipline might be at∣tributed to the exercise of War. Which doubt was of such consequence, as the victory of the whole cause depended thereupon; wherefore both parties were very diligent in informing the Auditors; and Vigetius in particular was not sparing for any pains, in procuring that the sentence might prove favourable on his side. The business was very subtilly can vast and argued, and the Court seemed wholly to incline to the Litte∣rati; but the Princes used such forcible arguments, as it was resolved, That Military men in their exercise of War, might use the honourable names of Science and Discipline. The Litterati were much displeased at this dcision, who exclaimed all of them, that Learning would be much defiled, if she, who adorns mens minds with good precepts, should be forced to communicate her honourable names with the Mili∣tary Art, which fills the body with wounds, and the soul with the oulest vices. The Litterati were in this despair, when unexpectedly all the Butchers of the world were seen to appear in Parnassus; which slovenly sort of people, all besmeared with blood, with hatchets and long knives in their hands, infused such fear into the Litterati, as apprehending some general slaughter, and to be cut in pieces, they fled away to their own houses, where they fortified themselves. But they were better pleased when those dreadful people made signs of peace, and desired to be heard. Apollo that he might know what they meant, sent some Deputies to them: To whom those Butchers stoutly said, That hearing that the Court had decided, That the Art of sacking and firing of Cities, of cutting their inhabitants in pieces, and in fine, that the cruel mystery of killing men, and of dispeopling the world, and of calling with sword in hand, mine thine, should be termed a Science and Discipline, they also, who did not profess the killing of men, nor any thing that tended to the destruction of mankind, but the killng of Calves and Muttons to feed men withal, demanded that their Art might be honoured by the same illustrious names. The Military-men appeared as if they had no souls amidst this rabble rout, when they saw so base sort of people should desire that their so opprobrious Trade, should be paralell'd with the Art of Warfaring, which was practised by the greatest Princes, and prime Nobility of the world. And the same Signori Auditori di ruta, when they saw the Butchers appear in the Pallace, and heard their de∣mands,
they were aware of the injustice which but a little before they had done to all the Vertuosi by their decision. Wherefore they again propounded the same question, and unanimously agreed, That the myste∣rie of War, though it were sometimes necessary, was notwithstanding so cruel and so in humane, as it was impossible to honest it with civil tearms. The LXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Aristotle being besieged in his Countrey-house by many Princes, is by them forced to revoke his Definition of a Tyrant. ARistotle the Prince of Peripateticks, that he might the better at∣tend his study, withdrew himself some days ago, to his Countrey-house, where unexpectly he was besieged by night, by some Princes, with a great number of foot and horse, who after having with incredi∣ble speed made their Trenches and Gabbiouns, prepared their Cannon to play upon the house. When Apollo heard of this so great Novilty, he forthwith dispatcht away the two famous Satyrical Poets, Lodovico Adisto, and Francisco Berni, with two Legions of Veteran Saterists to∣wards them, who with all military skill endeavoured to raise the siege, but in vain; for though the Poets let fly disfamatory Verses, yet the Arms these Princes wore were so excellently vvell tempered, as they were proof against every pungent Terzetta. So as no good being to be done by force, Apollo, who would be sure that nothing might befal that excellent Vertuosi, whereby the Peripatetick Philosophy might be any ways prejudiced, dispatched away into the field that great lover of Learning, Federico Feltrio Duke of Urban, who upon parley vvith those Princes, by his rare dextrousness obtained a suspension of Arms; and at the first entrance into discourse, those Princes complained greatly a∣gainst Aristotle, for having given so malignant a definition of a Tyrant in his Politica, as it included or comprehended every good Prince; and in great anger said, That if (as Aristotle had been bold to affirm) those Princes vvere to be esteemed Tyrants, vvho intended more their ovvn profit, then the like of their subjects, they knevv▪ not vvhere that Po∣tentate, hovv good or ancient soever he vvere could be found, vvho might not be concerned in that so universal definition. As if the end of every good shepherd vvere not to milk and shear his sheep, but onely so far to love them, as to dy of hunger themselves, so their flock might grovv fat: and that Aristotle discovered himself to be too grofly igno∣rant if he seemed not to knovv, that gain vvas the end of all merchan∣dizing, and that the vvhole vvorld vvas but a great publike shop. And that if the very lavv of Nature did so commend vvell regulated Charity, as Fathers vvere seen to love themselves better then their ovvn
proper children, with what ground of reason would Aristotle oblige Princes to love the good of others better then their own. And upon this occasion the Princes added, That the Litterati were grown to such petulancy in many important particulars, as blinded by proud pre∣sumption, they had not feared to intermeddle in the very greatest Con∣cerns of Princes; and even to give Laws to Reason of State; not knowing (poor people that they are) that the insight into Politick af∣fairs is so far from the common judgement of any wit, how good soever, as none ought to discourse thereof, but men who have spent their whole time in the Government of Kingdoms, and in the affairs of great Princes, though they may peradventure want that Philosophy, Rhe∣torick, and other Sciences registred by the Litterati in their Scribled Papers: For Policy not having so much Theory, as that a Grammar may be thereout composed, which may teach men the art how to govern States well, consisted wholly in practise; of the which, none but such as had learnt it from great Princes Secretaries, and in State-Councils, ought to discourse, lest they become ridiculous for writing things which deserves the rod. By these words, Duke Federico found that the Princes had just rea∣son to be incensed; wherefore he easily prevailed with Aristotle to revoke his former definition of a Tyrant, and to make a new one, which might satisfie those so highly offended Princes. Then Aristotle suddenly recanted, and said, That Tyrants were a certain sort of men in the old time, the Race whereof was wholly lost now. The Princes having received such satisfaction as they desired, presently quitted their quarters: And being gone towards their own States, Aristotle, be∣ing half dead with fear, returned to Parnassus, assuring all the Ver∣tuosi, that his Philosophical Precepts failed him very much against the fear of death; and bad the Litterati attend their studies, and let alone the reason of State, which it was impossible to treat of, without running evident danger of being esteemed Criminal by Princes.
The LXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. By order from Apollo, a general Reformation of the world is published by the seven wise men of Greece, and by the o∣ther Litterati. THe Emperor Iustinian, that great Compiler of Statutes, and Books of Civil Law, some few daies since shewed a new Law to Apollo, to have his Majesties approbation of it: wherein men were strictly forbid∣den killing themselves. Apollo was so astonished at this Law, as fetch∣ing a deep sigh, he said; Is the good Government of mankind, Iustini∣an, fallen then into so great disorder, as men, that they may live no lon∣ger, do voluntarily kill themselves? And whereas I have hitherto fed an infinite number of Philosophers, only that by their words and wri∣tings they may make men less apprehensive of death, are things now re∣duced to such calamity, as even they will now live no longer, who could not formerly frame themselves to be content to die? And am I amongst all the disorders of my Litterati all this while supinely asleep? To this Iustinian answered, That the Law was necessary, and that many cases of violent deaths having hapned, by many mens having desperately made themselves away, worse was to be feared, if some opportune remedy were not soon found out against so great a disorder. Apollo then began diligently to inform himself, how men did live in the world; and found that the world was so impaired, as many valued not their lives nor Estates, so they might be out of it. These disorders necessitated his Majesty to provide against them with all possible speed; so as he absolutely resolved to create a Congregation of all the most fa∣mous men that were in his Dominions, for wisdom and good life. But in the entrance intoso weighty a business, he met with difficulties impossible to be overcome; for when he came to chuse the members of this Congregati∣on, amongst so many moral Philosophers, and the almost infinite number of Vertuosi, he could not find so much as one, who was indowed with half those parts which were requisite to be in him, who ought to reform his companion: His Majesty knowing very well, that men are better re∣formed by the exemplary life of their reformers, then by any the best rules that can be given. In this great penury of fitting personages, A∣pollo gave the charge of the Universal Reformation to the seven wise men of Greece, who are of great repute in Parnassus, as those who are conceiv∣ed by all men to have found out the receit of washing Blackmoors white. Which antiquity, though still in vain, hath so much laboured after. The Grecians were much rejoyc'd at this news, for the honor which Apollo had done their Nation; but the Latins were much grieved at it, thinking themselves thereby much injured. Wherefore Apollo very well know∣ing how much the ill satisfaction of those that are to be reformed, in their reformers, hinders the fruit which is to be hoped by reformation; and his Majesty being naturally given to appease his Subjects imbittered
minds, more by giving them satisfaction, then by that Legislative pow∣er which men are not well pleased withall, because they are bound to obey it. That he might satisfie the Romans, who were much distasted, to the seven wise men of Greece, he added Marcus Cato, and Anneus Seneca: And in favour to the modern Italian Philosophers, he made Iacopo Maz∣zoni da Casena, Secretary of the Congregation, and honored him with a vote in their Consultations. The 14 day of the last month, the seven wise men, with the aforesaid addition, accompanied by a Train of the choicest Vertuosi of this State, went to the Delfick Palace, the place appropriated for the reformation: And the Litterati were very well pleased to see the great number of Pe∣dants, who with their little baskets in their hands, went gathering up the Sentences and Apothegmes, which fell from those wise men as they went along. The next day after the solemn entrance, the Assembly being met to give a beginning to the business, tis said Talete Milesio, the first wise man of Greece, spake thus; The business (most wise Philosophers) about which were are all met in this place, is (as you all know) the greatest that can be treated on by hu∣man understanding: And though there be nothing harder then to set bones that have been long broken, wounds that are fistuled, and incurable cancars, yet difficulties which are able to affright others, ought not to make us despair of their cure; for the impossibility will increase our glory, and will keep us in the esteem we are in; and  do assure you that I have already found out the true Antidote against the poyson of all these pre∣sent corruptions: I am sure we do all believe that nothing hath more cor∣rupted the present age, then hidden hatreds, feigned love, impiety, the perfideousness of double-dealing men, cloaked under the specious mantle of simplicity, love to religion, and of charity; apply your selves to these evils Gentlemen, by making use of fire, razor, and lay corrosive Pla∣sters to these wounds which I discover unto you; and all mankind, which by reason of their vices, which leads them the high-way to death, may be said to be given over by the Physitians, will soon be made whole and will become sincere and plain in their proceedings, true in what they say, and such in their sanctity of life, as they were in former times. The true and immediate cure then for these present evils, consists only in necessitating men to live with candor of mind, and purity of heart, which you will all confess with me, cannot be better effected, then by making that little window in mens brests, which, as being most requisite, his Majesty hath often promised to his most faithful Vertuosi: For when those who use such art in their modern proceedings, shall be forced to speak and act, ha∣ving a window wherein one may see into their hearts, they will learn the excellent vertue of being, and not appearing to be; and will conform their deeds to their words, their tongus which are accustomed to dissembling, to sincerity of heart, and all men will banish lies and falshood, and the in∣firnal spirit of hypocrisie will abandon many who are now possest with so foul a fiend. Talete's opinion did so please he whole Congregation, as being put to the vote, it was clearly carried for the affirmative; and Secretary Mazzoni was commanded to give Apollo a sudden account thereof, who perfectly approved the opinion, and gave command that that very day, the little window should be begun to be made in mans brest. But at the very instant
hat the Surgeans took their instruments in hand to open mens brests, Virgil, Plato, Aristotle, Averoes, and other of the chief Litterati went to Apollo, and told him that he was not ignorant that the prime means where∣by men do with much ease govern the world, was the reputation of those who did command; and that so pretious a jewel not being to be exposed to danger at any time by wise Princes, they beseeched his Majesty to consider in what esteem of holy life, and good demeanor, the reverend Philosophical Synod, and the honorable Colledge of the Vertuosi, were held by all the Litterati of Parnassus; that therefore they earnestly de∣sired him (as it became him to do) to have a care of their honors, who by the fame of their goodness, increase the glory of Parnassus: And that if his Majesty should unexpectedly open every mans brest, the greater, and better sort of those Philosophers, who formerly were highly esteemed, ran evident hazard of being shamed; and that he might peradventure find fowlest faults in those whom he had formerly held to be immaculate. That therefore, before a business of such importance should be taken in hand, he would be pleased to afford his Vertuosi a competent time, to wash and cleanse their souls. Apollo was greatly pleased with the advice of so fa∣mous Poets and Philosophers, and by a publick Edict, prorogued the time of making the wind ows for eight daies; during which time, every one did so attend the cleansing and purging of their souls from all fallacies, from a hidden vice, from conceal'd hatred, and counterfeit love, as there was no more hony of roses, succory, cassia, scena, scamony, nor laxative syrups to be found in any Grocers or Apothecaries shop in all Parnassus: And the more curious did observe, that in the parts where the Platonicks, Pe∣ripateticks, and moral Philosophers did live, there was then such a stink, as if all the Privies of those Countries had been emptied: Whereas the quarters of Latin and Italian Poets, stunk only of Cabbadg-porrage. The time allotted for the general purging was already past, when the day before they were to begin making the windows, Hippocrates, Galen, Cor∣nelius Celsus, and other the most skilfull Physitians of this State went to Apollo, and said, Is it then true, Sir, you that are the Lord of the Liberal Sciences, that this Microcosme must be deformed, which is so nobly and miraculously framed, as if any chief muscle, any principal vein be but touched, the human creature runs evident danger of being slain? and that so much mischief should be done only for the advantage of a few ignorant people? For not only the wiser sort of men, but even those of an indif∣ferent capacity, who have converst but four daies with any Quacksalver, know how to penetrate even into the innermost bowels. This memoran∣dum of the Physitians wrought so much with Apollo, as he changed his former resolution, and by Ausonius Gallus, bad the Philosophers of the Reformation, proceed in delivering their opinions. Then Solon thus began; In my opinion, Gentlemen, that which hath put the present age into so great confusion, is the cruel hatred, and spite∣full envy which in these daies is seen to reigne generally amongst men. All help then for these present evils, is to be hoped for from infusing charity, reciprocal affection, and that sanctified love of our neighbour, which is Gods chiefest commandment into mankind; we ought therefore to im∣ploy all our skill in taking away the occasions of those hatreds, which in these daies reign in mens hearts; which if we be able to effect, men will do like beasts, who by the instinct of nature, love their own species; and
will consequently drive away all hatred and rancor of mind. I have been long thinking, my friends, what the true springs head may be of all human hatred, and am still more established in my old opinion, that it proceeds from the disparity of means, from the hellish custom introduced amongst men of meum and tuum; the rise of all scandal; an abuse, which if it were introduced amongst the beasts of the earth, I assure my self, that e∣ven they would consume, and waste themselves with the self-same hatred and rancor wherewith we so much disquiet our selves: The not having a∣ny thing of propriety, and the equallity which they live in, is that which maintains that peace among them, which we so much envie in them. Men, as you all know, are likewise creatures, but rational; this world was cre∣ated by Almighty God, only that mankind might live thereupon, as bruit beasts do; not that avaritious men should divide it amongst themselves, and should turn what was common, into that meum and tuum, which hath put us all into such confusion. So as it clearly appears, that the deprava∣tion of mens souls by avarice, ambition, and tyranny, hath occasioned the present inequality, and disproportionate division. And if it be true (as we all confess it is) that the world is nothing else but an Inheritance left to mankind by one only Father, and one only Mother, from whom we are all descended like brethren; what justice is it that every one should not have a share thereof equal with his companion? And what greater dispro∣portion can there be imagined by those that love what is just, then that this world should be such, as that some possess more thereof then they can govern, and others have not so much as they could govern. But that which doth infinitely aggravate this disorder, is, that usually good and ver∣tuous men are beggars; whereas wicked and ignorant people are weal∣thy. From the root of this inequality it then ariseth, that the rich are in∣jurious to the poor, and that the poor envy the rich, For pride is proper to the rich, to beggars desperation. Hence it is that the rich mans oppres∣sing the weak, appears to be natural; and the ill-will which poor men bear to the rich, is innate in them. Now Gentlemen, that I have discovered the malady unto you, it is ea∣sie to apply the Medicine: I therefore think, that to reform this age, no better counsel can be taken, then to divide the world anew, and to allot an equal part thereof to every one. And that we may fall no more upon the like disorders, I advise, that for the future, all buying and selling be forbidden; so that parity of goods will be instituted; the Mother of pub∣lick Peace, which my self and other Law-makers, have formerly so much laboured for. Solons opinion suffered a long debate; which though it was not only thought good, but necessary by Bante of Periandro, and by Pittaco, yet it was gainsaid by the rest; and Senecas opinion prevailed, who with very ef∣ficacious reasons made it appear, That if they should come to a new di∣viding of the world, the great disorder would necessarily follow, that too great a share would fall to Fools, and too little to gallant Men: And that the Plague, Famin, and Warr, were not Gods most severest scourges, with which God, when offended, did afflict mankind; but that his severest scourge for the punishment of man, and which out of his mercy, he made not use of, was to enrich rascals. Solons opinion being laid aside, Chilon spake to this purpose; Which of you, my fellow-Philosophers, doth not know that the immoderate
thirst that men now adaies have after gold, hath filled the world with all the mischiefs which we all see and feel? What wickedness, what impiety, how execrable soever, is it, which men do not willingly commit, if there∣by they may accumulate riches? Conclude therefore unanimously with me, That no better way can be found out, whereby to extirpate all the vices wherewith our age is opprest, and to bring in that sort of life which doth best become men, then for ever to banish out of the world the two infamous Mettals, Gold and Silver; for so the occasion of our present disorders ceasing, the evils will likewise necessarily cease. Chilons opinion was judged to have a very specious appearance; but when it came to the test, it would not endure the hammer: For it was said, that men took so much pains to get gold and silver, because they are the measure and counterpoise of all things; and that to make provision of all things necessary, it was requisite for men to have some mettals, or other thing of price, by which he might purchase what was fitting for him; and that if there were no such thing as gold or silver, men would make use of some other thing instead of them, which rising in value, would be as much coveted and sought after, as gold and silver now were; as was plainly seen in the Indies, where cockle-shels were made use of in∣stead of money, and more vallued then either gold or silver. Cleobelus particularly being very hot in refuting this opinion, said, with much per∣turbation of mind; My masters, banish iron out of the world, for that is the mettal which hath put us into the present condition. Gold and silver serve for the use which is ordained by God, to be the measure of all things; whereas iron, which is produced by nature for the making of plow-shears, spades, and mattocks, and other instruments to cultivate the earth, is by the mallice and mischief of men, turned to the making of swords, and daggers, and other deadly instruments. Though Cleobolus his opinion was judged to be very true, yet it was concluded by the whole Congregation, that it being impossible to expel iron, without grasping iron; and putting on Corslets, it would be a great piece of imprudency to multiply mischiefs, and to cure one wound with another. 'Twas therefore generally concluded, that the Ore of gold and silver should be still kept, but that the refiners of them should be wisht for the future to be sure to cleanse them well, and not to take them out of the fire, till they were certain they had taken from both the mettals, that vein of turpentine which they have in them, which is the reason why both gold and silver stick so close to the fingers even of good and ho∣nest men. This being said, Pittacchus with extraordinary gravity, began thus; The World, Learned Philosophers, is fallen into that deplorable conditi∣on, which we so labour to amend, only because men in these daies have given over travailing by the beaten road-way of vertue, and take the by∣waies of vice; by which, in this corrupted age, they obtain rewards only due to vertue. Things are brought to that woful state, as none can get entrance into the Palace of Dignity, Honor, or Reward (as formerly they had wont to do) by the Gate of Merit and vertuous endeavour, but like thieves, they climb the windows with ladders of tergeversation; and some there are, who by the force of gifts and favours, have opened the root, to get thereby into the house of Honour. If you will reform this our corrupted age, my opinion is, That you should do well to force men
to walk by the way of vertue, and make severe Laws, that whosoever will take the laborsom journey which leads towards the obtaining of Supreme Honors and Dignities, must travail with the waggon of desert, and with the sure guide of vertue, and take away so many thwart by-waies, so ma∣ny little paths, so many crooked lanes, found out by ambitious men, and modern Hypocrites, which multiplying faster in this our miserable age, then Locusts do in Africa, have filled the world with contagion. And truely what greater affront can there be put upon vertue and merit, then to see one of these companions arive at the highest preferments, when no man can guess what course he took to come by it? Which makes many think they have got it by the magick of hypocricy, whereby these Magi∣cians do inchant the minds even of very wise Princes. Pittacho's opinion was not only praised, but greatly admired by the whole Assembly, and certainly would have been approved of as very ex∣cellent, had not Periandro made those already almost resolved Philoso∣phers alter their minds: For this Philosopher lively opposing the opinion of so great a Philosopher, said, Gentlemen, the disorder mentioned by Pittachus, is very true; but the thing which we ought chiefly to consi∣der, is, for what reason Princes who are so quick-fighted, and interessed in their own State-affairs, do not bestow in these our daies their great places (as they were wont to do of old) on able and deserving men, by whose service they may receive advantage and reputation; but instead of them, make use of new fellows, raised out of the dirt and mire, without either worth or honor. You know, Gentlemen, that the opinion of those who say, that it is fatal to Princes to love carrion, and to imploy undeser∣ving servant, in places of greatest trust, is so false, as for the least Interest of State, they neglect their brethren, and wax cruel even against their own children, so far are they from doting upon their servants in things wherein the welfare of their State lies. Princes do not act by chance, as many foolishly believe they do, nor suffer themselves to be guided in their proceedings by their passions, as we do; but whatsoever they do, is out of Interest; and those things which to privat men appear errors and neg∣ligence, are accurate politick Precepts. All that have written of State-affairs, freely confess that the best way to Govern Kingdoms well, is to confer places of highest honour and dignity upon men of great merit, and known worth and valor. This is a truth very well known to Princes; and though it be clearly seen that they do not observe it, he is a fool that believes they do it out of carelessness. I, who have long studied a point of so great weight, am verily perswaded, that ignorant and raw men, and men of no merit, are preferred by Princes, in conferring their chief Of∣fices and honors, before learned and deserving men, not out of any fault in the Prince, but (I blush to say it) through default of the Vertuosi. I acknowledge that Princes stand in need of learned Officers, and men of experienced valor: But none of you will deny but that they likewise need men that are loyal and faithful. And it is evident, that if deserving men, and men of worth and valor were but as faithful as they are able, as grate∣full as they are knowing, we should not complain of the present disorders, in seeing undeserving Dwarfs, become great Giants in four daies space, and should not bewail the wonder of seeing wild gourds in a short space o∣vertop the best fruit-trees, nor to see ignorance seated in the Chair of Vertue, and folly in Vallors Tribunal. 'Tis common to all men to think
much better of themselves then they deserve; but the Vertuosi do pre∣sume so very much upon their own good parts, as they rather pretend to add to the Princes reputation, by having any honors conferred upon them, then to receive credit themselves by his munificence: and I have known many so foolishly blown up, and inamored of their own worths, as they have thought it a greater happiness for a Prince to have an occasion of ho∣nouring such a one, then good luck for the other to meet with so liberal a Prince. So as these men acknowledging all favours confer'd upon them, to proceed from their own worth, prove so ungrateful to their Princes and benefactors in their greatest necessities, as causing themselves to be nauseated as very perfidious men, they are abhorred, and are causes of this present great disorder, why Princes, in such as they will prefer to great places, and high dignities, instead of merit, vertue, and known worth, seek for loyalty and trust, that they may meet with thankfulness when they stand in need of it; which they rather expect from those who pre∣tending to no merit of their own, acknowledge all their good fortunes to proceed meerly from their Princes liberality. Periandro having ended his discourse, Bias spake thus; All of you, most wise Philosophers, sufficiently know that the reason of the worlds being so depraved, is only because mankind hath so shamefully abandoned those holy Laws which God gave them to observe, when he bestowed the whole world upon them for their habitation: Nor did he place the French in France, the Spaniards in Spain, Dutch in Germany, and bound up the fowl fiend in hel, for any other reason, but for the advantage of that general peace which he desired might be observed throughout the whole world. But avarice and ambition (spurs which have alwaies egg'd on men to greatest wickedness) causing the French, Italians, Dutch, Gre∣cians, and other Nations to pass into other mens Countries, have caused these evils which we (I wish it prove not in vain) endeavor to amend: And if it be true, as we all confess it is, that God hath done nothing in vain, and that there is much of mystery in all his operations; Wherefore think you, hath his Divine Majesty placed the inaccessable Perenian Mountains between the Spaniards and Italians; the rocky Alpes between the Ita∣lians and Germans; the dreadful English Channel between the French and English; why the Mediterranean Sea between Africa and Europe; why hath he made the infinite spacious Rivers of Euphrates, Indus, Gan∣ges, Tigres, Danubius, Nilus, Rheine, and the rest; save only that peo∣ple might be content to live in their own Countries, by reason of the dif∣ficulties of Fords and passages? And his Divine Majesty knowing very well that the harmony of universal peace would be out of tune, and that the world would be filled with uncurable diseases, if men should exceed the bounds which he had alloted them; that he might make the waies to such great disorders the more difficult, he added the multitude and variety of Languages, to the Mountains, Precipices, to the violent course of Ri∣vers, and to the Seas immenceness: for otherwise, all men would speak the same Language, as all creatures of the same species, sing, bark, and bray, after one and the same manner. 'Tis then mans boldness in boaring through Mountains, and in passing over not only the largest and most rapid Rivers, but even in manifestly and rashly hazarding himself and all his substance in a little woodden Vessel, not fearing to cross the largest Seas therein; which caused the ancient Romans (not to mention the many other Nati∣ons
who have run into the same rashness) to ruine other mens affairs, and discompose their own; not being satisfied with their Dominion over whole Italy. The true remedy then for so great disorder is, first to force every Nation to return home to their own Countreys; and to the end that the like mischiefs may not insue hereafter, I am of opinion, that all bridges built for the more commodious passing over rivers, be absolute∣ly broken down; and the ways made for passing over the mountains may be quite spoil'd, and the mountains be made more inaccessable by mans industry, then they were at first made by nature; and I would have all navigation absolutely forbidden, upon severest penalty, not allowing so much as the least boats to pass in, over rivers. Bias his opinion was very attentively listened unto; and after being well examined by the best wits of the Assembly, it was found not to be good: for all those Philosophers knew, that the greatest enmities which are known to reign between Nation and Nation, are not natural (as many foolishly conceive them to be) but are occasioned by cunning Princes, who are great ma∣sters of the known proverb, Divide, & impera. And that that perfecti∣on of manners being found in all Nations joyned together, which was not to be had in any particular Province, men easily learn that exact wis∣dom by travelling through the world, which was peculiar to great Ulysses, who having travelled through many Countreys, had seen and observed the fashions of divers Nations; a benefit which was much furthered by the use of Navigation; which was very necessary for mankind, were it onely for that God (as well became the immencity of his power) having created this world of almost an incomprehensible greatness, having filled it with pretious things, and endowed every Province with somewhat of particular navigation, which is the rarest Invention that could ever have been thought on, or put in practice by humane wit, had brought it into so little a compass, as the Aromaticks of the Molucchi, though above fifteen thousand miles from Italy, do so abound in Italy, as if they grew there. Thus ended Bias, when Cleobelus rising up, seeming with a low bow to crave leave to speak; said thus, I clearly perceive wise Gentlemen, that the reformation of the present Age, a business of it self very easie, becomes by the diversity and extravagancy of our Opinions, rather im∣possible then difficult. And to speak with the freedom which becomes this place, and the weight of the business we have in hand, it grieves my heart to find even amongst us that are here, that common defect of am∣bitious and slight wits, who getting up into publike pulpits, labor more to shew the rarity of their own wits, by their new and curious conceits, then to profit their Auditory by useful precepts and sound doctrines: for to raise man out of the foul mire and dirt whereinto he is fallen, what need we undertake that dangerous manifacture of making little windows in mens breasts, according to Thales his advice? and why should we undertake the laborous business of dividing the world into equal parti∣tions, according to Solons proposition? and the course mentioned to be taken by Chilo, of banishing gold and silver from out of the world? or that of Pittacchus, of forcing men to walk in the way of merit and ver∣tue? or lastly, that of Bias, that mountains should be raised higher, and made more difficult to pass over then nature hath made them, and that for the future the miracle of navigation should be extirpated, which
shews to what pitch mans ingenuity can arrive, are they not sophistical fancies, and mear Chimera's? Our chiefest consideration ought to be, that the remedy to be applyed to the undoing evils, may be easie to be put in execution, that it may work its effect soon and secretly without any noe, and that it may be chearfully received by those who are to be reformed: for by doing otherwise, we shall rather deform the World, then reform it. And certainly not without reason; for that Physician deserves to be blamed, who should ordain a medicine for his sick patient which is impossible to be used, and which would afflict him more then his disease. Therefore it is the requisite duty of Reformers, to provide themselves of a sure remedy, before they take notice of the wound: That Chyrurgion deserves to be punished, who first opens the sick mans vein, and then runs for things to close it up withal; it is not onely foolish∣ness, but impiety, to defame men with publishing their vices, and to shew to the World that their maladies are grown to such a height, as it is not in the power of man to cure them. Therefore Tacitus, who al∣ways speaks to the purpose if he be rightly understood, doth in this par∣ticular advise men, Omittere potius pravallada, & adulta vitia, quam hoc assequi, ut palem fieret, quibus flagitiis impares essumus. Those who would fell an old Oak, are ill advised if they fall to cut down the top boughs: Wise men do, as I do now, lay the ax to the greatest root. I then affirm, That the reformation of the present world consists wholly in these few vvords, Premiar I buoni, e punire gli scelerati, in reward∣ing the good, and punishing the bad. Here Cleobelus held his peace, whose Opinion Thales Mileseus, did with such violence oppose, as he shevved hovv dangerous a thing it is to of∣fend such (though by telling truth) vvho have the repute to be good and vvise. For he vvith a fiery countenance broke forth into these vvords; My self, and these Gentlemen, most vvise Cleobelus, since you have been pleased to reject our Opinions as sophistical, and meer Chimera s, did expect from your rare wisdom, that for cure of these present evils, you had brought some new and miraculous Bezoar fron the Indies, wher∣as you have propounded that for the easiest cure, which is the hardest and most impossible that could ever be fancied by the prime pretenders to high mysteries, Caius Plinius, and Albertus Magnus. There is not any one of us, my Cleobolus, that did not know, before you were pleased to put us in mind of it, that the reformation of the world, depends wholly upon rewarding such as are good and punishing the wicked. But give me leave to ask you, Who are those that in this our age are perfect∣ly good, and who exactly ill? And I would know, Whether your eye can discern that which could never yet be found out by any man living, how to know true goodness from that which is counterfeit? do not you know▪ that modern hypocrites are arrived at that height of cunning, as in this our unhappy age, those are accounted to be cunningest in their wickedness, who seem to be most exactly good? and that such really perfect men who live in sincerity and singleness of soul, with an undis∣guised and unartificial goodness, without any thing of hypocrisie, are thought to be scandalous and silly? Every one by natural instinct loves those that are good, and hate those that are wicked, but Princes do it both out of instinct and interest. And when hypocrites, or other cun∣ning
cheaters are listened unto by great men, and good men supprest or undervalued, it is not by the Princes own election, but through the abuse of others. True vertue is known onely and rewarded by God, and vices discovered and punisht; for he onely penetrates into the depth of mens hearts, and we by means of the windovv by me propounded, might have penetrated thereinto, had not the enemy of mankind sovv∣ed tares in the field where I sovved the grain of good advice. But nevv lavvs, hovv good and vvholsome soever, have ever been and ever vvill be vvithstood by those vitious people vvho are thereby punished. The Assembly vvere mightily pleased vvith the reasons alledged by Thales; and all of them turning their eyes upon Periandro, he thinking himself thereby desired to speak his opinion, began thus, The variety of opinions which I have heard, confirms me in my former Tenet▪ That four parts of five that are sick, perish because the Physicians know not their disease; who in this their error may be excused, because men are easily deceived in things wherein they can walk but by conjecture. But that we, who are judged by Apollo to be the salt of the earth, should not know the evil under which the present age labours, redounds much to our shame, since the malady which we ought to cure, lies not hidden in the veins but is so manifestly known to all men that it self crys aloud for help. And yet by all the reasons I have heard alledged, methinks you go about to mend the arm, when it is the breast that is fistula'd. But Gentlemen, since it is Apollo's pleasure, that we should do so, since our reputation stands upon it, and our charity to our so afflicted age re∣quires it at our hands, let us, I beseech you, take from off our faces the mask of respect, which hath been hitherto worn by us all, and let us speak freely. The great disorder hath always reigned amongst men, which doth domineer so much at the present, and which God grant it may not still reign; that whilst powerful men by their detestible vices, and by their universal reformation, have disordered the world, men go about to re-order it by amending the faults of private men. But the falshood, avarice, pride and hypocrisie of private men (though I must confess them to be hainous evils) are not the vices which have so much depraved this our age; for fitting punishments being by the law pro∣vided for every fault, and foul action, mankind is so obedient to the laws, and so apprehensive of justice, as a few ministers thereof make millions of men tremble, and keeps them in, and men live in such quiet peace, as the rich cannot, without much danger to themselves oppress the poor, and every one may walk safely both by day and night with gold in their hand, not onely in the streets, but even in the high-ways: but the worlds most dangerous infirmities are then discovered, when publique peace is disturbed; and of this we must all of us confess, that the ambi∣tion, avarice and diabolical engagement, which the swords of some powerful Princes hath usurped over the States of those who are less po∣werful, is the true cause, and that which is so great a scandal to the pre∣sent times: Tis this, Gentlemen, which hath filled the world with hatred and suspicion, and hath defiled it with so much blood, as men who were by God created with humane hearts, and civil inclinations, are become ravenous wilde beasts, tearing one another in pieces with all sort of in∣humanity. For the ambition of these men hath changed publike peace into most cruel war, vertue into vice, the charity and love which we
ought to bear to our neighbours, into such intestine hatred, as whereas all Lyons appear Lyons to a Lyon, the Scotch man appears unto the English, the Italian to the German, the French to the Spaniard, the German, Spaniard, French, and men of all other Nations to the Italian, not to be men, not brethren, as they are, but creatures of another spe∣cies: So as justice being oppressed by the unexplicable ambition of po∣tent men, mankind, which was born, brought up, and did live long un∣der the Government of wholesome Laws, waxing now cruel to them∣selves, lives with the instinct of beasts, ready to oppress the weaker. Theft which is the chief of all faults, is so persecuted by the Laws, as the steal∣ing of an egg is a capital fault, and yet powerful men are so blinded with the ambition of reigning, as to rob another man perfidiously of his whole state, is not thought to be an execrable mischief, as indeed it is, but an noble occupation, and onely fit for Kings; and Tacitus, the ma∣ster of Policy, that he may win the good will of Princes, is not ashamed to say, In summa Fortuna id aequius quod vallidus, & sua retinere privatae domus, de Alienis certare Regiam laudem esse, li. 15. An. If it be true▪ which is confest to be so by all Politicians▪ that people are the Princes Apes, how can those who obey, live vertuously quiet, when their Command∣ers do so abound in vice? To bereave a powerful Prince of a Kingdom is a weighty business, which is not to be done by one man alone. To effect so foul an intent (observe what the thirst of Dominion can do in an ambitious mind) they muster together a multitude of men, who that they may not fear the shame of stealing their neighbours goods, of mur∣thering men, and of firing Cities, change the name of base Thief into that of a gallant Souldier, and valliant commander; and that which aggravates this evil is, that even good Princes are forced to run upon the same rocks, to defend their own estates from the ravinousness of these Harpyes. For these to secure their own Estates, to regain what they have lost, and to revenge themselves of those that have injured them, possess themselves of their states: and being allured by gain, they be∣take themselves to the same shameful Trade, which they did so much abhor before. Which hath caused the art of bereaving other men of their Territories, become an highly esteemed science; and is the reason why humane wit, which was made to admire and contemplate the mi∣racles of heaven, and wonders of the earth, is wholly turned to invent stratagems, to plot treasons; and hands, which were made to cultevate the earth which feeds us, into knowing how to handle Arms, that we may kill one another. This is that which hath brought our age to its last gasp; and the true way to remedy it is, for Princes who use such dealings▪ to amend themselves, and to be content with their own present For∣tunes; for certainly it appears very strange to me, that there should be any King who cannot satisfie his ambition with the absolute command over twenty millions of men. Princes, as you all know, were ordained by God on earth, for the good of mankind; I therefore say it will not do well onely to bridle the ambition which Princes have of possessing themselves of other mens estates; but I think it necessary that the pe∣culiar engagement which some men pretend their swords have over all estates, be cut up by the root; and I advise above all things, that the greatness of Principalities be limitted; it being impossible that too great Kingdoms should be governed with that exact care and justice
which is requisite to the peoples good, and to which Princes are obliged. For there never was a Monarchy excessively over great, vvhich vvas not in a short time lost by the carelessness and negligence of those that were the Governors thereof. Here Periandro ended; whom Solon thus opposed: The true cause of the present evils which you with much freedom have been pleased to speak of, vvas not omitted by us, out of ignorance (as you peradventure may believe) but out of prudence. The disorders spoken of by you, that the weak were oppressed by those of greater power, began vvhen the World vvas first peopled. And you know, that the most skilful Physician, cannot restore sight to one that was born blind. I mention this, because it is much the same thing to cure an eye that is infirm, as to reform antiquated er∣rors. For as the skilful Physician betakes himself the very first day that he sees an illaffected eye water, to his clouts and cauters, and is forced to leave his patient vvith a bleer eye; vvhen if the eye vvere quite blind, it vvere too late to seek for remedy; so reformers should oppose abuses vvith severe remedies, the very first hour that they com∣mence. For when vice and corruption hath got deep rooting, it is wise∣lier done to tolerate the evil, then to go about to remedy it out of time, with danger to occasion worse inconveniences; it being more dangerous to cut of an old Wen, then it is misbecoming to let it stand. More∣over we are here to call to mind the disorders of private men, and to use modesty in so doing; but to be silent in what concerns Princes, and to bury their disorders, which a wise man must either touch very tender∣ly, or else say nothing of them; for they having no Superiors in this world, it belongs onely to God to reform them, he having given them the prerogative to command, us the glory to obey. And certainly not without much reason; for subjects ought to correct their Rulers defects onely by their own good and godly living. For the hearts of Princes being in the hands of God, when people deserve ill from his divine Ma∣jestie, he raiseth up Pharoahs against them, and on the contrary, makes Princes tender hearted, when people by their fidelity and obedience de∣serves Gods assistance. What Solon had said, was much commended by all the hearers; and then Cato began thus: Your opinions most wise Grecians are much to be admired; and by them you have infinitely verified the Tenet which all the Litterati have of you: for the vices, corruptions, and those ulcerated wounds, which the present age doth suffer under, could not be better nor more lively discovered and pointed out. Nor are your opinions, which are full of infinite wisdom, and humane knowledge, gain-said here; for that they were not excellently good; but for that the malady is so habituated in the veins, and is even so grounded in the bones, as that humane com∣plexion is become so weak, as vital virtue gives place to the mightiness of vice, whereby we are made to know clearly, that the patient we have in hand is one sick of a consumption, who spits putrifaction, and whose hair fals from his head: The Physician hath a very hard part to play, Gentlemen, when the Patients maladies are many, and the one so far differing from the other, as cooling medicines, and such as are good for a hot liver, are nought for the stomach, and weaken it too much. And
truly this is just our case; for the maladies which molest our present age, and wherewithal all other times have been affected, do for number equal the stars of heaven, or the sea-sands, and are more various, and further differing one from another, then are the flowers of the field. I therefore think this cure desperate, and that the patient is totally incapa∣ble of humane help: And my opinion is, That we must have recourse to prayers, and to other Divine helps, which in like cases are usually im∣plored from God. And this is the true North-Star, which in the great∣est difficulties leads men into the haven of perfection: for Pauci pruden∣tia honesta ab deterioribus, utilia ab noxiis discernunt, plures aliorum even∣tis docentur. Tacit. lib. 4. Annal. And if we will approve, as we ought to do, of this consideration, we shall find, that when the world was formerly fallen into the like difficulties, it was no thought of man, but Gods care that did help it, who by sending universal deluges of water, razed mankind, full of abominable and incorrigible vice from off the world. And Gentlemen, when a man sees the walls of his house all gaping and runious, and the foundations so weakened, as in all appear∣ance it is ready to fall, certainly it is more wisely done to pull down the house, and build it anew, then to spend his money, and waste his time in piecing and in patching it. Therefore since mans life is so foully de∣praved with vice, as it is past all humane power to restore it to its for∣mer health, I do with all my heart beseech the Divine Majestie, and counsel you to do the like, that he will again open the Cataracts of hea∣ven, and send new deluges of water upon the earth, and so by pouring forth his wrath upon mankind, mend the incurable wounds thereof by the salve of death: but withal, that a new Ark may be made, wherein all boys of not above twelve years of age may be saved; and that all the female sex, of what soever age be so wholly consumed, as nothing but the unhappy memory thereof may remain. And I beseech the same Divine Majestie, that as he hath granted the singular benefit to Bees, Fishes, Beetles, and other annimals, to procreate without the feminine sex, that he will think men worthy the like favour. For Gentlemen, I have learnt for certain, that as long as there shall be any women in the world, men will be wicked. It is not to be believed how much Cato's discourse displeased the whole Assembly, who did all of them so abhor the harsh conceit of a deluge, as casting themselves upon the ground, with their hands held up to hea∣ven, they humbly beseeched Almighty God, that he would preserve the excellent femal sex, that he would keep mankind from any more De∣luges, and that he should send them upon the earth onely to extirpate those discomposed and wilde wits, those untnuable and blood thirsty souls, those Hetorotrical and phantastick brains, who being of a de∣praved judgement, and out of an overweening opinion which they have of themselves, are in truth nothing but mad men, whose ambition was boundless, and pride without end; and that when mankind should through their misdemerits become unvvorthy of any mercy from his divine Majestie, he would be pleased to punish them with the scourges of Plague, Svvord and Famine, and that he vvould make use of his severest and of all others most cruel rod, as it is recorded by Seneca, of inriching mean men; but that he should keep from being so cruel, and causing such horrid calamity, as to deliver mankind unto the good vvill and
pleasuree of those insolent vvicked Rulers, vvho being composed of no∣thing else but blind zeal, and diabolical folly, vvould pull the vvorld in pieces if they could compass and put in practice the beastial and odde Caprichios, vvhich they hourly hatch in their heads. Cato's opinion had this unlucky end, when Seneca thus began: Rough dealings is not so greatly requisite in point of Reformation, as it seems by many of your discourses, Gentlemen, to be; especially when disorders are grown to so great a height: The chief thing to be consi∣dered is to deal gently with them. They must be toucht with a light hand, like wounds which are subject to convulsions. It redounds much to the Physians shame, when the Patient dying with the potion in his body, every one knows the medicine hath done him more harm then his malady. It is a rash advice to go from one extreme to another, passing by the due medium: for mans nature is not capable of violent mutati∣ons; and if it be true, that the world hath been falling many thousand years into the present infirmities, he is onely not wise, but a very fool who thinks to restore it to its former health in a few days. And if a sick man, who formerly being fat, and after a long sickness is grovvn very lean, think in the first week of his convalessence to return to his former fatness by much eating, he must surely burst: but he will happi∣ly compass his desire, if he will eat moderately and have that patience which brings whatsoever knotty business to perfection. For quae longo tempore extenuantur Corpora, lentè reficere oportet. Hip. lib. 2. Aph. Moreover, in reformation, the conditions of those who do reform, and the quality of those that are to be reformed, ought to be exactly consi∣dered. We that are the reformers, are all of us Philosophers, learned men, if those that be to be reformed, be onely Stationers, Printers, such as sell Paper, Pens and Ink, and other such things appertaining to learn∣ing, we may very well correct their errors: but if we shall go about to mend the faults of other occupations we shall commit worse errors, and become more ridiculous then the Shoomaker who would judge of co∣lours, and durst venture to censure Apelles his pictures. And upon this occasion I am forced to put you in mind of a fault which is usual amongst us the Litterati, who for four Cujus, which we have in our heads, pretend to know all things; and are not aware, that when we first swarve from what is treated on in our books, we run riot, and say a thousand things from the purpose. I say this, Gentlemen, because there is nothing which more obviates reformations, then to walk therein in the dark; which happens, when the Reformers are not perfectly well acquainted with the vices of those that are to be reformed. And the reason is ap∣parent, for nothing makes men persevere more, and grow obstinate in their errors, then when they find that he that reforms, is not well inform∣ed of their defects who are to be reformed. And to prove this to be true, which of us is it, Gentleman, that knows what belong to the false hook of Notaries, to the prevarications of Advocates, the simony used by Judges, Proctors imbroylings, the abuses of Apothecaries, Taylors filtching, Butchers thieving, and of the cheating tricks of a thousand other Artificers? And yet all these excesses must be by us corrected. And if we shall go about to amend such disorders, which are so far from our profession, shall not we be thought as blind, as he who goes about to stop a hogshead, which being full of clefts, scatters
out wine on every side? This is enough, Gentlemen, to let you know, that reformation is then likely to proceed well, when Marinors talk of winds, Souldiers of Wounds, Shepherds of sheep, and Herdsmen of Bullocks. It is manifest presumption in us to pretend to know all things, to believe that there are not three or four men of every Trade and Occu∣pation, who fear God, and love their own reputation, is meer malice, and rash judgement. My opinion therefore is, That three or four of every Trade or Occupation, who are of known goodness and inte∣grity, be sent for by us, and that every one reform his own Trade; for when Shoo-makers shall speak their opinion touching shoes and slippers, Taylors touching clothes, Chyrurgions concerning Searclothes, Cooks of Lard and Pickel'd meats, and every one shall correct his own Trade, we shall work a Reformation worthy of our selves, and of the present occasions. Though Seneca's opinion was mightily praised by Petacchus and Chilo, who finding the other Philosophers to be of another opinion, entred their Protestation, that it was impossible to find out a better means for the reformation of mankind, then what had been mentioned by Seneca, yet did the rest of their companions abhor it more then they had done Cato's proposition; and moved with indignation, told him, That they much wondred, that by taking more reformers in into them, he would so far dishonour Apollo, who had thought them not onely sufficient, but excellently fit for that business. That it was not wisely advised to be∣gin the general reformation by publishing their own weakness; for all resolutions which detract from the credit of the publishers, want that reputation which is the very soul of business, and that jurisdiction, which is more jealous then womens honor, should be handled so prodigally by such a one as he, who was the very prime Sage of Latin Writers; and that the very vvisest men did all agree, that twenty pound of blood taken from the very life-vain, was well imployed to gain but one ounce of ju∣risdiction; and that he is mad, who holding the svvord by the handle, gives it to his enemy to rescue it from him by the point. The whole Assembly vvere mightily afflicted, vvhen by the refuta∣tion of Seneca's opinion, they found smal hopes of effecting the Refor∣mation; for they relyed but little upon Mazzoni, vvho vvas but a no∣vice, nor could they think that he could speak any thing to the purpose; vvhich though Mazzoni did by many signs perceive, yet no vvhit dis∣couraged, he spoke thus; It vvas not for any merit of mine, most vvise Philosophers, that I vvas admitted by Apollo into this reverend Congregation, but out of his Majesties special favour; and I very vvell knovv, that it better becomes me to use my ears then my tongue in so grave an Assembly as this, I be∣ing to learn and hold my peace. And certainly I should not dare to open my mouth upon any other occasion; but reformation being the business in hand, and I lately coming from vvhere nothing is spoken of but reformation and reformers, I desire, that every one may hold their peace, and that I alone may be heard to speak in a business vvhich I am so verst in, as I may boast my self to be the onely Euclide of this Ma∣thematick. Give me leave, I beseech you, to say, That you, in relating your opinions, seem to me to be like those indiscrete Physicians, vvho lose time in consulting, and in disputing, vvithout having so much as
seen the sick party, or heard his story for himself. We, Gentlemen, are to cure the present age of the foul infirmities vvherevvith vve see it is opprest. We have all laboured to find out the reasons of the maladies, and hovv to cure them, and none of us hath been so vvise as to visit the sick party. I therefore advise, Gentlemen, that vve send for the present age to come hither, that we interrogate it of its sickness, and that we may see the ill affected parts bare naked, and so the cure will prove easie, which you hold so desperate. The whole Assembly was so pleased at this Mazzoni's motion, as the reformers immediately commanded the age to be sent for, which was presently brought in a chair to the Delphick Palace by the four Seasons of the year. He was a man full of years, but of so fresh and strong a complexion, as he seemed likely to live yet many ages; onely he was short breath'd, and his voyce vvas very weak: which the Philosophers wondring at; they asked him, Why his face being ruddy, which was sign that his natural heat was yet strong in him, and that his stomach was good: why, I say, he was so full of pain? and they told him, That a hundred year before, when his face was so yellow, as he smed to have the Jaundice, he spoke freely notwithstanding, and seemed to be stronger then he was now. That they had sent for him to cure him of his infirmity, and bad him therefore freely speak his griefs. The Age answered thus, Soon after I was born, Gentlemen, I fell into these maladies which I now labour under. My face is now so fresh and ruddy, because people have peer'd it, and coloured it with Lakes; My sickness resembles the ebbing and flowing of the sea, which always contains the same water, though it rise and fals; with this vicissitude not∣withstanding, as when my looks are outwardly good, my malady (as at this present) is more grievous inwardly; and when my face looks ill, I am best within. For what my infirmities are, which do so torment me at the present, do but take off this gay Jacket, wherewith some good peo∣ple have covered a rotten carcass, that notwithstanding breathes and view me naked, as I was made by Nature, and you will plainly see I am but a living carcass. All the Philosophers then hasted, and having stript the Age naked, they saw that the wretch pargeted with aparences four inches thick, all over his body. The Reformers caused ten razors to be forthwith brought unto them, and every one of them taking one, they fell all to scrape away the pargeting aforesaid; but they found them so far eaten into his very bones, as in all that huge Colossus, they could not find one ounce of good live flesh. At which they were much amazed, then put on the Ages Jacket again, and dismist him▪ and finding that the cure was altogether desperate, they assembled themselves close to∣gether, and forsaking the thought of all publike affairs they resolved to prepare for r indempnity of their own reputations. Mazzoni writ what the rest of the Reformers dictated, a Manifesto, wherein they witnessed to the world the great care Apollo ever had of his Litterati's vertuous living, and of the welfare of all mankind▪ and what pains the Reformers had taken in compiling the general Reformation. Then coming to particulars they set down the prizes o cabiges, srats, and pompions. And all the Assembly had already underwritten the refor∣mation, when Thales put them in mind, that certa Hglers, who sold Lupins, and black cherryes, vented such smal measures, as it was a shame not to take order therein.
The Assembly thankt Thales for his advertisement, and added to their reformation, that the measures should be made greater. Then the Palace Gates were thrown open, and the general Reformation was read in the place appointed for such purposes, to the people who were flockt in infi∣nite numbers to the Market-place, and was so generally applauded by e∣very one, as all Parnassus rung with shouts and vociferations of joy; for the meaner sort of people are pleased with every little thing; and men of judgement know that Vitia erunt, donec Homines, Tacit. Lib. 4. Hist. As long as there be men, there will be vices. That men live on earth, though not well, yet as little ill as they may; and that the height of human wisdom lay in being so discreet as to be content to leave the world as they found it. The LXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo hearing of the happy Alliance of the two Illustrious Daughters of Charls Emanuel with the two Noble Prin∣ces of Mantua and Modena, commands that extraordina∣ry demonstrations of joy be made throughout his whole Dominions. YEsterday about nine of the clock, the usual Guard of the Pegasean Tower gave notice by two stroaks of the bell, that two men were discovered on the Castalian Plain, which hasted towards Parnassus; whereupon the Litterati ran presently to the Walls and to the Gates, to see what the matter might be. And soon after hearing the sound of a Horn, knew that it was one that came Post, with his guide: The more inquisitive Litterati ran to meet him, and when they heard that he was sent from Italy to Apollos Majesty, they all earnestly desired to know whether he brought news of any gallant Italian product, or of any taking Piece lately printed? To which the Post answered, only that he brought dispatches to Apollo, of incredible joyful news; wherefore he was wait∣ed upon to the Royal Palace by an infinite number of Litterati. When he had presented his Letters to Apollo, all the standers by, who very at∣tentively observed his Majesties face, found, that still as he read, his coun∣tenance cleared up. Having read the Letters, he with incredible joy ut∣tered these words; O how happy Union! Let my beloved Queen of Italy know, that I desire her to come speedily to me. These words caus∣ed various conjectures in the Vertuosi, and divers were the interpretati∣ons they gave thereof; but the most common was, that the necessary League, which is so much desired by all good men, was at last concluded in Italy, against that enemy to Learning, the Ottaman Empire. This mean while the Queen of Italy was seen to come walking apace towards Apollo's Royal Palace leaning upon her Bellisario. When Apollo heard she was coming to the stairs, he ran with great joy to meet her, and ha∣ving imbraced her in his arms; I heartily rejoyce (said he) together with your Majesty, at the happy news which I but now received by Letters from my Italian Academies, of the Match which his Highness Charls E∣manuel Duke of Savoy hath made of his two daughters, with the most
Noble Princess of Mantua, and Modena. What think you of the con∣junction of so Illustrious Princes, of the union so much desired, so much wisht for by me and you, of these your two beloved sons? Are not these contentments which do fully counterpoise your late troubles? Yes in∣deed, answered the Queen of Italy, and I confess unto your Majesty, that now all my desires, all my consolations are accomplished: for I never did desire any thing more earnestly, then that my Italian Princes should add the conjunction of bloud, as now they have done, to their joynt important Interests of State: So as I am wholly composed of joy, seeing that strong Gerion of many of my Italian Princes, formed into one body, which may secure me from those future evils, the fear wherof hath hither∣to so afflicted me. Then that powerful Queen, attended by all the Prin∣ces and Nobility of Parnassus, went to visit the Temple of Fruitfulness, which promis'd assured and happy offspring to these so fortunate couples. Being returned to her Royal Palace, she was congratulated by all the chief∣est Princes reciding in this State, and in the presence of so many great Heroes, she gave the honorable Title of first and chiefest Italian Warrier, to Charls Emanuel Duke of Savoy, the Father of so fortunate offspring, and Author of Italies so great felicity, to whom she immediately sent the usual signes of Golden Launce and Trunchion. Apollo, to witness his joy for this so gladsom news, caused it to be proclaimed by sound of Trum∣pet, that in respect thereof, extraordinary signes of joy should be shewed throughout all his Dominions; and upon this occasion gave leave at the earnest request of his Litterati, the which he had hitherto so resolutely denied, that Stage-players should be admitted into Parnassus. Tilting and Turney were in the next place proclaimed; and the first day the Paladines of Spanish Romansas, Amadisi, Don Florestano, and ma∣ny others appeared within the Lists, who gave such proofs of themselves as did exceed; and all men wondred to see Palaces made all of Diamonds, built by words. The second day the French Paladins, and those of o∣ther Nations, Orlando, Rinalde, Gradasso, Sacrapante, and many others ap∣peared at Turney, who behaved themselves so couragiously as they made all men know, that Ariosto had writ sparingly of them. The third day Caro, Molza, Sanga, and other polite Courtiers appeared in the field, who valiantly challenged those other noble Champions to the combat; but they, scorning to have to do with men who had not made profession of Arms, refused the Challenge; wherefore those Courtiers did by sound of Trumpet again denounce; they challenge a second time, which was still slighted by the other Paladins. The Courtiers published a third de∣fiance; which not being accepted of, all the spectators fel a hissing at them. Wherefore Apollo, seeing so great a scorn put upon those Pala∣dins who had been rendred so famous by the Poets, was much offended, and commanded them to put their Launces in their rests, and to quell the over-daring of those Courtiers. The Champions then suddenly obeyed; and it was a strange prodigious thing, to see how those spruce Courtiers, did with a dexterous lye, with an ill turn done in time unhorse those Pala∣dins, though their Arms were inchanted. Then the couragious Brada∣mante and Marsica, incenst to see those famous Paladins so dishonored, took their Launce, and with more then manly fury, spur'd on their steeds towards the Cavaliers, so to recover the Military reputation which the o∣thers had so shamefully lost; but both of them being incountred by great
purses full of gold, spread their legs abroad, forsook their saddles, and fell to the ground flat upon their backs; by reason of these signal acts, the Prize of the Tilting was awarded to the Courtiers, who had got the trick of un∣horsing people, and of setting them beside the saddle, not by their Laun∣ces or counter-bufs, but only by meer words. The LXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. The ancient Commonwealth of Rome, and the Modern Veneti∣an Liberty, argue together, what the true rewards of Ho∣nour be, by which well ordered Commonwealths do acknow∣ledge the worth of their well-deserving Senators. THough the flourishing Commonwealth of Rome, formerly the Worlds Mistriss, be now reduced by reason of her great misfortunes, into a far differing condition from what she was in; yet in memory of her pristine greatness she still lives well esteemed, and much honored in Par∣nassus; not only for that her politick Precepts are held by all men in pow∣er, as divine answers; but because she is believed to be the true Oracle of Military affairs: as also for that nor Princes nor privat men, take any more praise-worthy or heroick examples wherewith to adorn their minds more frequently, or more advantagiously from any other place. And though so splendid a Princess hath been sundry times deflowred and ravisht, as wel by her own ingrateful and ambitious Citizens, as by her barbarous ene∣mies, by Augusto's and Silla's Proscriptions; as by the general sacking of Ttilla and Atilla, and other Kings of forrein Nations; yet doth she ex∣cellently well recover her past dishonor, and her present misery, by the fame of her antient greatness. This so famous Princess, came some few daies since to visit the Venetian Liberty; a Lady of greatly famed Cha∣stity, and the best beloved and highest esteemed of as many as are in this Plebeian Court, for the opinion of her great wisdom, and for the re∣putation of her unexhaustible wealth. And whilst the Roman Liberty discoursed of her past greatness, and the Venetian Commonwealth of her present felicity, 'tis known that the Roman Commonwealth said to the Venetian Liberty, That she being purely Aristocratical, and consequent∣ly the most perfect form of a Commonwealth, did doubtlesly by her ex∣cellent Laws which promised her long life, surpass any, either past or pre∣sent Republick. But that though to maintain peace at home, and war a∣broad, the orders she observed were excellently good, yet had she not made such acquisition of States, as was expected from the wisdom, and as well publick as privat wealth of so famous a Republick; which was thought to happen by reason of her being very backward in giving such rewards as were usually given by well ordered Commonwealths, to her well deserving Senators; and that she, the Commonwealth of Rome, ac∣knowledged all the glory she had in having won the whole world in so short a time, to proceed wholly from the extraordinary worth of her Se∣nators,
whereunto they were awakened, not by any wealthy gifts, but by the rewards of eternal honor in erecting their Statues, by their trium∣phant Vestments, Trophies, by the building and dedication of famous Temples, Baselisks, and Theatres, and chiefly by that glory so much covet∣ed by those who do thirst after eternal fame of stately Roman Triumphs: Rewards which raised such Military valor, such excellent civil vertue in her Citizens, as the insuing Nations did admire, but could not imitate: And that the Venetian Liberty was so backward in rewarding the worth and merits of her honorable Senators, with the memorial of perpetual honors, as she might very well be termed ingratefull; and that infinite Noble men of Venice, having done things worthy the sublimest triumphs, both in times of peace and war, and all those rewards which eternize the memory of great Senators, she thought it very strange to see a Narnesan Statue on horseback in Padua, and one of Bergamasco in the midst of Ve∣nice, and that the famous services of Andrea Gretty, of Sebastian Venieri, and of a thousand other famous Venetian Senators, who had not only ex∣celled the Gatta Melati, and the Colleoni, in parts both of soul and body, but might deservedly be paralel'd with Pompey and Cesar, were not re∣compenced with the reward of perpetual memory, which their glorious actions had deserved. Menante, who writes all these things with great integrity and faithful∣ness, had it from a very good hand, that the Venetian Liberty, not any whit at all moved, answered the Roman Republick; That she had not so inlarged her Territories as the Romans had done theirs, not for that (as she gave her self to believe) the thirst after glory and fame was wanting in her Senators; but for the clean contrary ends which the two Common∣wealths had propounded unto themselves; for the Venetian Senators made peace the utmost bounds of their ambition, whereas the Roman Senat made war theirs. And that she had clearly learnt by her most unfor∣tunate end, that too greatly disproportionate atchievements made by States, did disorder all the politick Laws of whatsoever well-governed Commonwealth; but chiefly such as were Aristocratical, the Nobility whereof being to consist but of a few, and not sufficient to govern a great State, the wholsom Laws of living free, would be filled with confusion, should the number of the Nobility be rendred immensly great. As her Majestie of Rome had by her infinite calamities, made it appear unto the world, who by adding people whom she had subjected to the number of Roman Citizens, did happily aggrandize her State, but much lessen her Liberty. And that for her part she was satisfied with so much Em∣pire, as might serve to secure the Venetian Liberty from forrein Forces; and that she did not covet the greatness of State, out of an ambitio to command, but out of glory not to serve: That as for honorable rewards which well ordered Commonwealths ought to barter with worth, and therewith to reward the merits of her Senators, she took her self to be in∣jured by being stiled ungratefull; for eternal Trophies, and perpetual triumphant Arches were seen in Venice, not made of brittle Marble, or mettals subject to the violence of fire, but of incorruptible materials, wherewith she largely rewarded her well deserving Senators, as it very well became her to do; to the end that the memory of their worthy acti∣ons might be gloriously conveyed to futurity. To this the Roman Liberty answered, That she had often seen all the
rooms of her Highness's Palace, and does not remember that she ever saw any Trophies, triumphant Arches, or other things to perpetuate the memory of her Nobility. Hereupon the Venetian Liberty caused many of her Nobility of all ages to enter the room, whom she stript naked, and then opened their brests, and then much to her astonishment, the Roman Liberty saw all those triumphant Arches, Trophies Statues, and other stately triumphs, which they by their glorious actions had merited of their Country, erected in the hearts of her Gritti, Venieri, Capelli, Grimani, Bragadini, Basqualigi, and other of her deserving Senators: and that which encreased the wonder of the Roman Dame, was to see in the hearts of those Noble Venetians, a fervent charitable desire to reward the egre∣gious works of so deserving Senators, in their posterity; and a fire of e∣mulation to imitate those worthy Heroes, and to do acts which they saw were so gloriously rewarded. Then the Venetian Liberty with testimony of great affection, said thus unto the Roman Lady; Such as we, ought to recommend the vertue and deserts of our Citizens to posterity, by these triumphant Arches, and with these demonstrations which you, Madam, see written in the hearts of my Senators. These are the Statues, and o∣ther publick Memorials which wisdom awakens in the hearts of honora∣ble Senators who thirst after glory. These are the places where Tro∣phies, and other publick Memorials of deserving Senators should be ere∣cted, and not in Piazza's: For the memory which the Nobility of a Com∣monwealth keeps eternally in their hearts, of the deserts of such as have done glorious actions, is that which awakes emulation and true vertue: Things which alwaies produce good effects tending to the service of a Free Country; whereas Triumphs, Trophies, Statues, and such like things, which are so familliarly seen built in your streets of Rome, in me∣mory of your well-deserving Senators, hath served only to procure them that number of followers of the rabble sort of people, which occasioned the ambition of Reign in your unfortunate Senators, Silla, Marius, Sin∣na, Crassus, Pompey, and Cesar, which was that which put upon you the unfortunate and shameful chain of servitude, which you now drag at your heels: A great disorder, and from whence I know that you doe acknow∣ledge all those evils to proceed, which have made you so famous even in calamities. And know, that our Senators do very fitly resemble those young Virgins who marry, being chaste both of mind and body,: For as those careless husbands hazard the making of them whores, by send∣ing them abroad to all Balls and Festivals; so Free Commonwealths do imprudently infuse into the minds of their civil and well composed Sena∣tors, a desire of becoming Tyrants, by the rewards of publick Me∣morials, which purchase popular breath, and the attendance of the rab∣ble rout.
The LXXX. ADVERTISEMENT. The People of Lesbos, after Cornelius Tacitus ran away from them, chuse Anna Momorancy, by Apollos appoint∣ment, for their Prince. AFter the unhappy success which (as you heard by some of our last) Cornelius Tacitus had in his Principality of Lesbos, and his flight from that State, nothing was left unindeavored, neither by himself, nor by o∣ther Princes who were his friends, to induce Apollo to work so with the people of Lesbos, as that he might again return to his Principality, but all to no purpose; for his Majestie was ever constant in his assertion, that no good was ever to be hoped from the Government of Princes, who for such like offences grew bitter to their people. But for satisfaction to the men of Lesbos, who continually prest him by their Ambassadors, that he would propound unto them a new Prince; he nominated Anna Momo∣rancy, an honorable French Baron; who was received with great satisfa∣ction to the people of Lesbos, and proclaimed Prince of that State. 'Tis certainly true, that some Vertuosi who were very well acquainted with the affairs of Lesbos, made a long, and an exact series of many abuses which reigned in that State, from whence they said grew great inconveniences, and did accurately name the waies which were to be held to reduce the af∣fairs of Lesbos to a much better condition: And this they gave to Momo∣rancy, who told those his friends, that the amending of disorders in a Prin∣cipality by new Laws and Magistrates, was to be undertaken only in here∣ditary States, where the children, and other successors of the defunct Prince, did usually so tenaciously inherit their predecessors thoughts, as they esteemed it a secure foundation of their Government, and a necessa∣ry piece of Policy, to be very jealous in the observancy thereof; but that in elective Principalities, wherein successors used often to undo what their predecessors had done, either out of curiosity, or to cast dirt in the faces of former Princes, it was a difficult business to begin to reform those things which wholly depending upon an exquisite and exact obser∣vancy of giving orders, required that many successive Princes should be of the same mind; which being hard to be found in elective States, he said that the best advice which could be given to such an one as he in the Government of Lesbos, was to shun novelty, and resolve to live accor∣ding to the ancient Laws, whatsoever they were; and to leave things as he found them; for in houses that are rented, wise men are contented to live in the old rooms; and they are over-curious who build new apartements, which 'tis ods but that they will be thrown down, either out of the capri∣chiousness or ill-will of the next comer.
The LXXXI. ADVERTISEMENT. The excellent Bolognian Physitian, Jovanni Zecca, sels in Parnassus the true Antidote against the French Pox. THree daies ago certain papers were posted up in all the publick places of Parnassus, wherein were written these words; The famous Bolog∣nian Physitian Iovanni Zecca, is arived in this City, who having found out the true and secure receit to keep men from taking the French Pox, incites all men to provide themselves thereof; the rich shall have it for reasonable rates, the poor for Gods sake. This stirred up great curiosity amongst the Litterati to have a receit so necessary for these times; and so much the rather, for that they knew Zecca to be one of the rarest in his profession, and an excellent good writer. And believing all that the re∣ceit consisted of Oyles, Electuaries, Powders, and other such Medicinal ingrediences, they wondred exceedingly when they saw Zecca shew them a Picture drawn by the life, of a gallant Gentleman whose nose was eaten off with the French Pox; telling them the way how to use this receit, was, that just as they were about to lie with a woman whose health they suspected, they take this Picture out of their bosom, which he gave them, and which as many as should fixedly look upon, and seriously contem∣plate, they might be confident that this medicine taken in by the eye, would have such operation, as they should never be infected with that loathsom disease. Some were so curious, as they suddenly ran to make experience of this new receit; and they say they found it to be exceeding good: For they who in the greatest height of lust did fixedly look upon, and attentively contemplate this Picture, cashiering their carnal thoughts, and calling to mind how shameful a thing it was for a man to lose his nose, which was the ornament of the face, the seat and proper place of reputa∣tion; whilst they considered that men ran hazard of encouraging so great a shame, by eating a bit, which though it was savory in the chewing, proves stinking and unpleasant even to a mans very imagination, when it is swallosed down, it did so dead all carnal desire in men who valued their reputation, as the self inconsiderate instrument of lust, though it be whol∣ly void of judgement and discretion, was so apprehensive of the danger which his beloved correllative ran by that act, as preferring the health thereof before its own pleasure, it withdrew more speedily into its habi∣tation, then do Tortoises when stones are thrown apace at them.
The LXXXII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Litterati of Parnassus do with great solemnity celebrate the Holy day dedicated to the lowdable Lawrel-Leaves. YEsterday the solemn Festival dedicated to the Lawrel Leaves, was ce∣lebrated by all the Litterati with great pomp and joy; a Festival institu∣ted in Parnassus ever since Dafne's memorable accident, to exhilerate his Majestie, who was much afflicted at the remembrance of so sad a Meta∣morphosis; on which solemn day, only Poets, Emperors, and other He∣roes are permitted to come into the stately Colledg of the Litterati with Garlands on their heads, whilst those that have not deserved so great a prerogative, are not suffered to stir out of their own dores, lest they should profane the solemnity of so great a day by their naked heads. Petrarch, who had of old obtained the honor of that imployment from Apollo, made a Learned Oration in praise of those so honored Leaves; but whilst he was making his Oration, a strange chance befel that worthy Poet; for after having by his Encomium exaggerated the praise of that Plant so dear∣lypriz'd by his Maj. as that it is respected even by Thunder; and having spoken of the noble Prerogative which it enjoies, of being that where with the Temples of Emperors, and glorious Heroes are only surrounded; he fell to make a long and bitter invective against the ignorance of the pre∣sent times, wherein Learning having lost much esteem, those very self∣same so famous Leaves, which in better time were held in such esteem, was now so basely and scornfully used by the ignorant modern men, as they did not only make use thereof for the signes of their base Tipling∣houses, but were not ashamed to put it into their provocative sawces, gel∣lies, Eels, and even into their rosted Olives. Petrarch was so very fervent, and had such commotion of mind, and compunction of spirit, in recount∣ing these so strange neglects, as he fell down in a swound ere his Oration was perfected, nor could they bring him to himself again, till the fair Lady Lawra, all sorrowful as she was, was thrown into the bosom of her belo∣ved Poet. Petrarch was much honored for this accident, which made the whole Colledg of the Vertuosi plainly see how intirely and intimatly he loved that honour'd Lawrel which he had praised with such elegancy in his Italian Verses. But it hapned that presently after this swouning, a very bitter disticon, or caplet of Verses were fixt upon the Delfick Porch; wherein it was said, that that swouning fit had not befallen Petrarch for a∣ny sorrow for the injuries done to the Lawrel-leaves, but for remembrance of those savory Olives; and this was the Disticon: Non Amor hunc Laurae, sed amica jecusula Lauro Quem Memori spirant, examinavit Odor. 'Twas not the love to Lawra made him swound, But scent of Lawrel broths did him confound.
The publick garblers of Poetry, by express order from his Majesty, brought these two Latin verses to the test, and found clearly that they is∣sued from Martials abundant phancy, who was soon after imprisoned. Then Petrarch accompanied with a squadron of Italian Poets, ran towards the Royal Palace; and it being feared that he came to complain of Marti∣al, he was met by Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius, who first imbraced him, and then earnestly intreated him that he would add to the glory which he had received by the accident which befell him whilst he was ma∣king his Oration, the great good will he should get of all the Vertuosi, if he would pass by Marshals Disticon as but a merriment. And they moreover told him, that all men knew that injuries written by loquatious Poets, did not touch to the quick, when those that were concerned could laugh at them; and that truths did only nettle and seek revenge. Pe∣trarch would not be advised by the Poets, but angerly answered them, that he in his reading had learnt the vertue not to offend any; but that when he found himself so nearly touched, he could not forgive; where∣fore inraged with anger, and desirous of revenge, he came to Apollo, and with bitter words exaggerated the injury done him by Martial, and did so incense Apollo against him, as his Majesty banished him for ever out of Parnassus, and the Precincts thereof; and the Sentence was ready to be put in execution, when Martials Advocate produced a Motu Propriae, which had been published many years before by his Majesty, wherein it was ordained, that a Jest, though it were bitter, provided it were witty, eloquent, quick, facetious, and that it had salt in it, and that it were not spo∣ken out of premeditated mischief, but had escaped from a lively and ready wit, suddenly at unawares, deserved praise rather then punishment, as a fault which sprung rather from the vivacity of wit, then from the malice of mind; for that even the wisest men could not forbear breaking a witty and facetious jest, which proceeded from a ready sharp wit; and that though for many respects it ought neither to have been written nor said, yet it deserved to be listned unto, and read by men given to curiosity, for the quick vivacity thereof.
The LXXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having highly commended the King of Spains De∣cree, That no Advocates nor Proctors should go into the Indies: The Doctors of Law quarrel grievously with his Majesty for it. THe abode of Parnassus owes not its happiness only to Apollos excel∣lent Government, nor to its being inhabited by the prime select Wits of the world, but to the vertuous living of her inhabitants, the perfecti∣on of their manners, and to the exquisiteness of all the best Laws which cul'd from out the whole world, are diligently introduced, and observed in that State. For those who live there, are bound to bring with them the best Customs of their Countries: A thing which hath been so advan∣tagious to every privat man, and hath brought so great reputation to the Publick, as it appears evidently, that the Country is to be esteemed hap∣py, which lives not only by her own Laws, but by choice Laws pickt out from all other civil Nations. Wherefore Apollo being informed that the Potent Kings of Spain have upon several penalties prohibited the pas∣sing of any Proctors or Advocates into the Indies, intituled it a most ho∣ly Edict, and highly praised the piety of those Monarchs who have shew∣ed such charity to the new world, as to preserve it from that disease which hath filled the old world with so many sad controversies. His Maje∣stie moreover gave present order that so excellent an Edict should be re∣gistred in a Table of Brass, which should to eternal memory be fixt in the chief Market-place, next to the twelve Tables of the famous Roman Laws. I must not forget to let you know that the Doctors of Law were mightily scandalized hereat, who earnestly recommended unto his Majesty the indempnity of their reputations; saying, that if they might not obtain so much favour, as that this Law might not be published, it would afford occasion to many to imitate the Anconitans, Norcinans, Re∣canetesans, and others, who, with no little dishonor to Learning, had ba∣nished those professers of Law, who were held in so great admiration by other people, as they verily believed nothing could be well said, or done, without the liking of a learned-Lawyer: And that they did the more ear∣nestly beseech his Majesty to consider their case, for that the indempnity of the sacred Liberal Sciences, wherein the Students of Law had spent so much time and monies, was therein likewise concern'd. Apollo, con∣trary to the opinion of all men, was strangely offended at this their pres∣sure, and in great anger answered those Doctors. That he could not but very much wonder at their boldness, who durst affirm in his presence, that they had spent both time and monies in learning the Liberal Sciences, as if the Delfick Law were not sufficiently known to the whole world, wherein the study of the Law was declared to be no Liberal Science, but a meer mechanical mystery, introduced in the world to afflict manking, studied without any delectation of the soul, or speculation of the under∣standing,
and without the assistance of the sacred Muses, which was so ne∣cessary in all good Sciences, and only practised for meer avarice of gain, to fatten a fowl filthy beast with monies, who though he wholly wanted that vivacity of wit, which is so much loved by learning, it was sufficient to become a great Advocate, if he had but an Oxes brain, and a Porters complexion. The LXXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. The chiefest Litterati of Parnassus desire Apollo that Taci∣tus may re-compose those Books of his Annals, and Histo∣ries which are lost. YEsterday the chiefest Litterati of Parnassus met together in the pub∣lick Schools, and after having discoursed long together, they all of them presented themselves unanimously before Apollo, to whom the learned Florentine Pietro Vittorio, in the name of all the rest, said, That those Vertuosi whom his Majesty saw there, did most humbly desire a fa∣vour of him, which would be the greatest and most acceptable that he could ever grant to his Litterati; who bitterly bewailing the infinite loss which Learning hath had of the greatest part of the Annals and Histories of that Father of human wisdom, and true inventer of modern Policy; Cor∣nelius Tacitus did humbly beseech his Majesty to command that so ex∣cellent Personage, that he would amend the wrong which the injury of time had done to his honour, and to the publick profit of the Vertuosi, by re-making whatsoever is now found wanting of those his most excellent labours. Apollo, contrary to expectation, startled at this request which appeared so reasonable, and with an appearance of dislike, answered, O my ignorant Litterati! do not you think that the Princes of the world are sufficiently known in State-affairs, that you would have them more learn∣ed in that Science, in which, to your misery be it spoken, they already know too much? Since tis clearly seen that some of them by practising a devilish and infernal reason of State, have brought both sacred and pro∣fane things to utmost confusion. Hath not the common miseries and scandals occasioned by the severe and wretched Government of some Princes, made you see, that modern Policy, wholly framed by your so be∣loved Tacitus, hath like a contagious disease, infected the world? Do not you already sufficiently know that the now practised reason of State, by which the people are rather flead then shoarn, rather suckt dry then milkt, rather opprest then govern'd, is now grown so exorbitant, as it is great folly to desire it should rage yet more? Think you not that some mode∣rate Princes have learnt precepts enough to pill and poll their people from Tiberius his cruel Government, and Nero's ravenous life, so exactly writ∣ten by your Tacitus, that you would have them see whether they could pick out some conceal'd precept to imbitter the fifth Act of your sor∣rowful
servitude, in the lives of Caligula and Domitian, which God out of his great goodness to you, hath raced out of the world, only that the obscenity and cruelty used by those monsters of Nature, might be for e∣ver forgotten? The loss of the greatest part of Tacitus his labours, O my Vertuosi, hath been a happy gain unto the world: How happy would men be, if the unfortunate remainders of them, preserved for the utmost calamity of mankind, were no waies to be found; and that the world were governed according to the modesty and integrity of ancient Mo∣narchs, who thought men to be rational creatures, not beasts with two legs (as many modern Princes by their usages seem to think them) creat∣ed so by God for their good, as if he had made mice only to fatten cats. But you, Monsieur Vittorio, whom I find to be one of those that desire that acitus should be rendred intire; give me leave to have a word or two in privat with you, who have spoken in the name of the rest; Do not you think that your Princes are become learned Physitians to cure cancar of the Florentines seditian, by reading the very first page of Taci∣tus his Annals, which they have so well studied and put in practice? Hap∣py had the world been, if Tacitus had been alwaies tacit: Therefore fare you well, you and your posterity, I am sorry to see that men are no wiser then Thrushes, whose excrement proves their own ruine; urdus Malum sibi Cacat. The LXXXV. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo being advertised that ignorant men took up arms a∣gainst Learning, puts himself in posture to defend his Ver∣tuosi. THe suspitions of War which the Litterati have had for these divers months past, are at last proved true; for the Post which came to A∣pollo on Tuesday night last brought Letters from divers Princes well adicted to Learning, which said, that for certain the ignorant took up arms against the Litterati; and that they had already raised many thou∣sands of Barbarians, mortal enemies to the Liberal Sciences. Upon the hearing whereof, Apollo forthwith reinforced the Garrisons of the chief∣est Towns of Phosides, Pindus, and Libetrus, and then commanded Ori∣sto and Berni, that they should presently take into pay, two Brigadoes of Italian Satyrical Poets, and that the Brigadoes of the Latin Poets, Per∣seus, and Iuvenal, being muchlessened, should be recruited with Poets from Itally, who did abound in that sort of Militia: And then declared Torquatus Tssus to be Leader of the Heroick Italian Poets, who chose his Father Bernardo for his Lieutenant, and that good old Father thought himself much honored in obeying so gallant a son. Virgil was made General of the Heroick Latin Poets, and Lucan was his Lieutenant. Ha∣nibal Caro in a great Assembly of Poets, all of the first Classis, assisted
therein more by the favours of the house of Fernese, then by his own de∣serts, was declared General of the Italian Lyrick Poets; which place would have been bestowed on Petrarch, Guidicchion, or Monsieur de la Casa, if their habit would have permitted them to have worn a Murrion, or Brest-plate. Horrace had the free voice of the whole Army, to be General of the Latin Lyrick Poets. Vigetius was made Camp-Master General of the whole Army, and Iulius Frontinus Serjeant Major; Iohn Francisco Pico, Count of Mirandola was made Standard-bearer, and in his Standard-General, bore the famous Ensigne of an open Book; Ovi∣dius Naso was made Treasurer-General; and afterwards all necessary provisions and expedition for War were made: In so much as Apollo had already so formidable an Army of Vertuosi in the field, as he held him∣self sure of the victory. But to so great a body of Militia, the soul, mo∣ney, was wanting: Some propounded the raising of publick Taxes upon the people, to provide for so urgent a necessity; but that being found to be a pernitious way, and that it was dangerous to distaste the people with new grievances, who ought to be eased, that they might become their friends; and that it was impossible to preserve a State amidst the troubles of War, when assaulted by a potent Army, if it be inhabited by ill affe∣cted people: The care of providing monies, was referred by Apollo, to his general Councel of War; who soon fell upon what is infinitely mis∣liked by those who understand little, but loved and commended by good Polititians, to wit, to lay tribute upon places of small importance; but trusty, and far from the enemies confines. So great was the love which every one shewed to Learning, and their hatred against the ignorant so intense, as the people of Parnassus, to keep themselves from falling into their hands, and from seeing that horrid beast, that dreadful monster of Nature, which is so displeasing to the Vertuosi, of a man that can neither write nor read, as not only those places which were appointed by Apollo, but even those that were not put into the List, ran to his Majestie, and desired as a singular favour to be made tributary, and to pay Composition: Only Ephesus refused openly to obey Apollo: whereat his Majesty was so offended, as finding the more they were perswaded, the more obstinate they grew, he thought it necessary to use force; which they of Ephesus being made acquainted by some of the Vertuosi, who were their intimate friends, they forthwith sent 20 Ambassadors to his Majesty, all of them noted men, and prime Citizens; who told him that the Loyal City of Ephesus would so willingly run with their lives and means to the defence of the State, as they would think it a particular favour, and singular grace, if upon that occasion his Majestie would cause the publick and privat goods of the men of Ephesus to be sold to whom would offer most; and that what monies might be thereby raised, might be delivered into his Trea∣surers for the occasions of the War; and that their denial of becoming feu∣datory, or of paying Composition, was not occasioned out of any disobe∣dience to his Majesty, or disaffection to Learning; but for that they fore∣saw that they should assuredly be made feudatory to a cruel Tyrant, whose Government, for the love they bore their Country, their lives and ho∣nour, they were resolved to shun, though by the hazard of what they held dearest. Apollo was so well satisfied by those of Ephesus, as he embra∣ced the Ambassadors one by one, and thanked them very much for their readiness to serve him; and then told them, that to secure them from be∣ing
ill dealt withall by any new power; That though Seneca the Tragedi∣an had offered high for their Composition, yet he would make-them feu∣datory to Ovidius Naso, who was so affectionate to the Country of Ephe∣sus, as was well known to the Vertuosi, from whom they might expect to be dealt withall with all humanity. To this the Ambassadors answered; That they beseeched his Majesty to remember, that whilst Ausonius Gallus was their Prince, the people of Ephesus were at perpetual variance with him, which ended with their send∣ing him out of their State sorely and shamefully wounded; and that now that his Majestie knew how great reason the people of Ephesus had to abhor their new infeoffment, he might use his pleasure; for they were re∣solved willingly to undergo any calamity, rather then to give his Majesty any distaste. These reasons alleadged by the Ambassadors with such ge∣nerous humility, did so convince Apollo, as he told them they might live secure, that Ephesus should never be commanded by any but himself; because he very well knew, that those who had driven their Prince out of their State, and had dealt so ill with him, had much reason to apprehend the being made Tributary a second time; for every new Prince, how meek or gentle soever he were, must be necessitated to use seve∣rity, and exercise all those cruel resentments which the seditious Neo∣politan Baron received from the austere Kings of Aragon, so to secure himself from being treated as was his predecessor. The LXXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Justus Lipsius, to make amends for his fault in having accu∣sed Tacitus, is so intent thereupon, as he is accused before Apollo to have Idolatrized him; for which after a feigned punishment, he is at last praised, and admired by his Ma∣jestie. THe most observing Litterati of this State, have often noted, That when any Vertuosi hath through human frailty committed an error, he doth, for the hatred he beats to vitious actions, amend it by falling in∣to the other extream: And divers affirm that Democrits did not put out his eyes for the benefit of contemplation, but to make amends for a fault which he had commited in having looked upon a handsom young woman with a more wanton eye then became a Philosopher. And it is also re∣ported that Harpecretes, to correct an error which he had committed in having been too loquacious at a Feast, for which he was greatly blamed, fell into the other extream of never speaking again. Nor ought the Po∣ets Sentence to be held true; Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contria currunt: Since the dogg which hath been scalded with boyling water, is esteemed wise for staying within dores when it rains: As also it is the councel of a wise man, to hate Eels after a man hath been bitten with a Snake. This
is said, because Iustus Lipsius was so heartily sorry for, and did so repent his having so unfortunately accused Tacitus, as to amend a fault for which he was much blamed by all the Vertuosi of this State, he soon after went to Tacitus, and humbly asked him pardon for the injury he had done him: Who knowing what honour a man wins by being ready to forgive, which magnanimity becoming a Roman Senator, did not only freely forgive Lipsius, but did heartily thank him for having afforded him an occasion of doin so glorious an act, as sincerely to forgive an injury received. The wonder of so great indulgency, and the easiness in obtaining his so much desired pardon, being added to the ancient great devotion which Lipsius (who was alwaies very partial to Tacitus) bore to so sublime an Historian, did so much encrease his love and veneration, as he frequented Tacitus his house more then his own, delighted to discourse with him more then with any other of the Litterati, was not better pleased with any other conver∣sation, did not celebrate any Historian more, and did all this with such par∣tiality of inward affection, as he strove to imitate him in his quaintness of speaking more by conceits then words, in his brevity of succinct speaking, full of gravity, matter, sententiousness, and so as was only perspicuous to good understanders, procuring thereby the envy and hatred of all the Vertuosi depending upon Cicero, and the Cesarian Faction, who did not approve thereof, and presumed by an Antonomasia, to call him his Au∣thor, and not caring for what others said of him, he affected nothing more then to appear a second Tacitus. This unusual affection amongst friends, not used to Masters, and which did exceed all love born to consanguinity, begot such jealousie in Mercerus, Beatus Rhenenus, Fulvius Orsinus, Marcus Antonius Muretas, and in other of Tacitus his followers, as for meer envie, though under the colour of revenging the injury which Lip∣sius had formerly done their friend Tacitus, they accused Lipsius before Apollo of the same impiety, which he had accused Tacitus of: Saying to his Majesty, that he did not love Tacitus as a friend, did not honor him as a Master and Patron, but did adore him as his Apollo, as his God. This accusation, which as it fares in faults of high Treason, seems through the atrocity thereof, to be sufficiently proved by bare allegation, did much trouble Apollo; who esteeming himself offended by Lipsius, he made be forthwith brought bound unto him by a Pretorian Cohort of Lyrick Poets; and with an angry countenance, and threatning way, asked him what he thought of one Cornelius Tacitus, an Oylmans son of Ternio? To this ipsius answered, That he held Tacitus to be the chief of all In∣telligent Historians; the Father of human wisdom, the Oracle of the true Reason of State, the Master of Polititians, the Coryfeus of all such Writers as had arived at the glory of using more conceits then words in their Writings, the true rule whereby to learn to write the actions of great Princes, with the learned light of their true occasion; a great piece of art, and which was only known by the noblest sort of Historians, as that which rendred them very glorious, who knew how to make use of it, and him learned, who had the judgement to consider it, the Idea of Histori∣cal truth, the true Teacher of Princes, Schoolmaster of all Courtiers, the true touchstone whereby the world might try the genius of Princes, the Standard whereby men might exactly weigh the real worth of privat men, the Book which Princes who would learn how to command Subjects wel; who desired to know how to obey wel, ought to have continually in their
hands. Apollo knew by this so affected encomium, and by so exaggerat∣ed praises, that Lipsius did openly, and with a bare face adore Taitus: Wherefore being highly incenst, he said, What think you then of me, Lipsius, who am the Father of Learning, the supreme Master of all Sci∣ences, absolute Prince of the Liberal Arts, and the Monarch of Vertue, if with such impiety and impudence you Idolatrize a Writer who is so hateful to all good men, and so much detested by the professers of the Latin Tongue, for the newness of his phrase, the obscurity of his speech, his vitious brevity, and for his so cruel Political Doctrine, by which he rather forms severe Tyrants then; just Princes, vitious subjects, then such as are indued with that naked goodness which makes Government so easie to Princes; it being clearly seen, that he by his impious precepts con∣verts lawful Princes into Tyrants, transforms natural subjects, who ought to be mild and obedient sheep into, wily foxes, and creatures which Nature hath wisely ordained without or teeth or horns, into ravenous wolves and head-strong buls; a great Doctor of Fallacies, the only Artificer of Ty∣ranny, a new Zenofon of a cruel and execrable Tiberipedia; the true forger of cunning cheating, of saying things which he intends not, of per∣swading that to others, which he himself believes not; of seeming fer∣vently to covet that which he desires not, and of appearing to hate what he loves; an excellent Master to teach men the wicked Doctrine of con∣cealing what they think, and of speaking falshoods; the Architecture of Fallacies, and the only and so excellent Author of rash Judgements, as most commonly he interprets mens wicked actions for sanctified ones, and their good ones for diabolical? And wilt thou alone, amongst so many of my faithful Vertuosi, even to my very face adore one for thy God, who by his Writings shews he does not know that there is a God? who being composed of nothing but impiety, hath divulged that cruel and de∣sperate Policy, which doth so shame Princes that practice it, and so much afflict people that make trial of it? Who hath taught Princes as well as privat men, the wicked art of double dealing, the fraudulency to do what they do not say, and to say what they mean not to do; which is practised by some, only that they may learn the wicked doctrine to paint out that for black, which is white, how to wind people about by fair speeches, and foul deeds; of deceiving all men by laughing when a man is angry, and weeping when well pleased; and of measuring love, hatred, and all hu∣man vertue, only by the wicked compass of self-interest; one vvho is read by good men, only that they may knovv the nevv and deep fetches, by vvhich unhappy mankind in this present age, so miserably, and vvith such publick calamity vvhirld about, and to discover the execrable hypo∣crisie vvhich many Disciples of such a Master have practised, that they may be esteemed by the simpler sort of people, to live the lives of Saints, though by obeying Tacitus his precepts, they doe things vvhich even the devils of hell vvould blush to doe: Are not you, Lipsius, avvare, hovv since your Tacitus is so frequently read, many Princes svverve from the wonted fashion of governing their people with meekness and clemency, & many privat men have forsaken their former purity of life: many of acitus his Writings were not lost (as divers ignorant people affirm) by the de∣luge of Barbarians, which came to conquer Italy: they were missing be∣fore then, not by the ignorance of people, who in those troublesom times were busied in War; but for that those ancient people in whom the sin∣cerity
of soul, and purity of the new Christian Religion did reign, did detest that Writer which is now so much beloved; and set up by many (as I see he is by you) to be adored for their golden Calf. Tacitus is in all his parts unworthy to be read by honest men; for there be more im∣pieties in him, then leaves, lines, words, sillables, nay then letters: But it must be confest that the life which he hath written of Tiberius (a fit Prince for the pen of such an Historian) is altogether unsufferable; which to the great benefit of mankind, was for many ages hidden in some secret parts of Germany, till by the pestiferous curiosity of a German, which proved more fatal to the world then his compatriot, the inventer of guns, it was brought to light at the same time when that Noble Province be∣gan to be infected by the modern heresie; only that Tacitus might by so great a prodigie subvert profane things, when Luther molested the sacred ones: Writings integrally wicked, and lost for a while, because the anci∣ents liked them not: And now (to the great shame of the present age) only admired by those Polititians, who being followers of so great im∣piety, have learnt from the Master of fallacies, the doctrine of entertain∣ing men with words as long as they live, of feeding them with smoak; of filling them with wind, and of bringing them by vain hopes to utter beg∣gery. Certainly an infernal doctrin; which being sowed by the husbandman, Tacitus, only for the benefit of Princes, is now so greedily imbraced by eve∣ry privat man, as Tacitus, who was formerly esteemed an Author only fit for Princes, is now so frequently handled by all men, as Shop-keepers and Porters, seem to understand nothing better then reason of State; and to the great derision of an art so highly esteemed by gallant men, the world is full of base teachers of Policy. Lipsius was half dead to hear Apollo speak thus bitterly: Yet taking courage at his very last gasp, he beg'd pardon of his Majesty for any other fault that he had committed; and then freely said, That his obligations to Tacitus were such, so great the honor, which by means of this his beloved Author, he had won amongst the Flemmish, Germans, English, French, Spaniards, and Italians, as though he should love and honour him as his earthly God, he thought he should not do enough to discharge his duty to the full, and exactly shew his gratitude: For having left ordinary wri∣tings behind him in the world, they were only his labours upon Tacitus, which had made him merit an admittance into Parnassus, and immortal renown amongst men: And that if he who drove a great Trade with an∣other mans money, was to be born withall, if he did even adore him, who at his pleasure might make him turn bankrupt; how much more did he deserve at least to be excused, if not commended by his Majesty, if he were extravagant, and did exceed the bounds of duty, in his loving and honoring of Tacitus, since his whole stock of credit with the Vertuosi was founded only in him? And that since his entrance into Parnassus, he had been so beloved and respected by the Litterati, as his house had been as much frequented as those of the most famous Writers; but that since he committed the gross fault of offending Tacitus, Statim relictum illius limen, nemo adire, nemo slari: Tacit. lib: 3. Annal. That there∣fore he would rather hate himself, and die, then lessen the reverence he bore to that his Author: for he thought it a lesser loss to lose his life, then the height of honor which by Tacitus his means he was arived at. Apollo was scandalized to hear Lipsius speak thus; and growing still more angry,
blamed him, for that in his presence he had by so impudent an asseverati∣on, rather shewed his stif-neckt stubbornness of persevering in so wicked obstinacy, then repent and ask pardon for his fa ult: And chiefly his Ma∣jesty could not indure that he should term idolatry, gratitude, and obstina∣cy, constancy. Wherefore he commanded the same Cohort of Lyrick Poets to drag him out of dores, who was not worthy to look upon his Lord and Master, whom he had so highly offended; and that having first stript him of all his Learning, they should declare him to be shamefully ignorant, and then burn him as a wicked Idolater. Lipsius was already brought to the place of execution, when his dearest friends advised him to bethink himself better, and save both his life and reputation, by cra∣ving his Majesties pardon. Lipsius, whilst in this very desperate conditi∣on, did so increase in constancy and boldness, as he bad Apollo use his pleasure, he could not make him die ignorant, who was possest with gra∣titude, the Queen of all Human Vertues; that therefore the flames which should consume his body, would give a greater splendor of glory, then of fire; and that he protested at that very last minute of his life, he was so far from acknowledging the fault which was laid to his charge, of having loved and honored his Tacitus too much, that in commemoration of the infinite obligations which he ought him, it grieved him more then death, to think he should die ungrateful; and that the present agony which they might all perceive him to be in, arose not from the terror of death, but from his immense sorrow to have heard his Tacitus termed by his Maje∣sty, a wicked Atheist; an injury, which if it had been done to that most wise Writer by any other then his Majesty, he would not, though in that his last moment of life, have left it unrevenged, at least by words, and that with the liberty which most properly belonged to him who desired not to live, he witnessed to all the world, that Tacitus did so far know God, as being he alone, who of all the Writers of the Gentiles, had by his great wisdom arived at the knowledg, How much the faith of things unseen, avails in matters of Religion, or which cannot be proved by reason, he had said, Sanctiusque, ac reverentius visum, de actis Deorum credere quam scire. Tacit. de Morb. Germ. Most holy words, and worthy to be considered by those Divines, who in their Writings were at a loss through too sophistical subtilties. Apollo being full of wonder, and infi∣nitely astonished at the things he had heard, caused Lipsius immediately to be set at liberty, and straitly imbracing him, said, O my dear Vertuoso! with how much consolation to my self, and how much to your advantage have I tried your patience and constancy, and by the injurious speeches which I have uttered against Tacitus, which are the very same which they accuse him with, who neither study him nor understand him, have I made proof of your devotion towards that excellent Historian, who even de∣serves my wonder. And by what I have heard you say, I find that you have been delighted in reading him, and long studied him to your pro∣fit: For I know that the defence, which so much to your glory you have made, is your own, but taken out of my and your dearly beloved Taci∣tus. Apollo then turned towards the Vertuosi, who out of a curiosity to hear that Judgement, were flockt in great numbers to the Hall; and said, O my beloved Litterati! admire, and ever imitate the honored constancy of this my glorious Vertuoso, and let the infinite love, and everlasting
veneration of that Prince be ingraven in your hearts, who keeps up your reputation; and forget not that his power precipitates more easily, who loseth his Princes good will, then houses doe whose foundations fail. Therefore you who follow the Court, learn to know, that Nihil rerum mortalium tam instabile ac fluxum est, quam fama potentiae, non sua vi nixae. Tacit. lib. 13. Annal. A most certain rule which teacheth every one to imitate Lipsius in loving, honoring, and in ever faithfully serving their Prince: For as it is great impiety in holy things, to have any other God save him who created man, the heavens and earth, so ought you ne∣ver to have any devotion for any Prince, not expect or desire any good from any other Lord, save from him who out of confidence in your loyalty, and out of the extraordinary affection which he bears you, owns you to all the world, not for his servants, but for his dear friends, and by the Supreme Authority which he suffers you to exercise in his State, makes you appear unto his Vassals no less Princes then himself: And be∣cause the wisdom of Princes out of their jealousies of those that rule, is usually accompanied with suspition, and Court-favorits being alwaies en∣vied, alwaies narrowly observed by their rivals, and alwaies persecuted by such as malign them. That you may overcome so many difficulties, and still preserve your selves in the favors which you have won, love your Princes with all your heart, observe them with all your soul, and serve them with all possible loyalty: And like my Lipsius, chuse rather to die, then to think, much less to do any thing which may indanger the least loss of their favours. And believe for certain, that then your ruine begins, when you suffer your selves to be perswaded that you may better your condition, by using simulation and falshood with your Princes, who both know, see, and understand more then is possible to be exprest: For those who think to live securely by dissembling with Princes, who though they should know nothing themselves, have so many who can put them in mind, and who want not a thousand Malignant spirits to wake them when they are asleep, are like those fools who think to confine Gypsies, and hope to cheat Mountebanks.
The LXXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Queen of Italy being much intreated by her chiefest Princes, and by Apoll's self to pardon the injuries done by those Italian Commanders who took up arms against her, in assistance of Forrein Nations, denies to do it. DOubtlesly the Palace wherein the Queen of Italy keeps her resi∣dence, is even by the testimony of Vitruvio's self acknowledged to be the most magnificent, and richliest adorn'd Palace in all Parnassus. Here amongst other stupendious and delightful things, is the fore Court to a large Amphitheatre, at the upper end whereof stands the Statue of the Queen of Italy on horseback, all of pure gold, dedicated to the great Bellizarius, a Grecian; and that of Narses, a Grecian also, which was e∣rected at the lower end of the Court, for his perpetual glory, by the same Queen, but is now thrown to the ground, and is broken all in pieces, for that notorious injury which she received from him; so that whereas it was formerly the envie of great men, and served to put men in mind of so great a Commanders merit, it now serves to shew his shame, who out of the rage of privat disdain, did profane so great a merit, and observed that glory which deserved envie. On the right hand of the fore-front of this so miraculous Court, are the faces of those famous Italian Commanders, drawn by Apelles, and other prime Painters, who having by their arms, and by their expence of bloud, delivered Italy from the slavery of Barbarians, are by their grate∣ful Country kept in ever honored memory. And on the left hand of the same Court, to the perpetual shame of ungratefull persons, those Italian Captains are hung upon Gallowses, by the heels, who forgetting the ob∣ligation due to a mans Country, which equals that of children to their parents, took up arms in assistance of babarous Nations, and forein Princes, to put fetters upon their Italy. Then to the infamy of so shame∣fully ungrateful people, the opprobries and reproaches are added, which Poets in all sort of Satyrical Verses, and Orators in daily invectives make against such misdemeriting men; to the end that men may learn by those severe resentments, to shun committing faults which I ring eternal infa∣my with them: and to the end that Military men, who are wont without weighing what Princes they serve, to run where they may have best and most ready pay, may learn to love their Country so well, as that they may think it greater charity to kill themselves, then to take up arms a∣gainst her. Menante, who before he can send this weeks Gasetta to his loving Customers, is bound to carry it to the Urban Pretor, cannot give you (as he ought to do) the names of those Italians in his Papers, who are painted in so ignominious a posture; but he tels you that the posteri∣ty of those Souldiers who suffer the punishment of so long shame, when they enter into that Court, blush to think that their Ancestors have so shamefully villified their house, and do therefore with much compunction
of soul, continually bewail their predecessors misdemerits. These Gen∣tlemen by themselves, and by the intercession of the greatest Princes of this State, have, and do still much importune the Queen of Italy that she will be pleased at last to pacifie her anger, and give way that those nobly descended Souldiers may be freed from that shameful opprobry; and A∣pollo himself, at the intreaty of the best Princes of Italy, did earnestly mediate the same, but all in vain: For she still continuing her indignation, answered Apollo, and the other who had intreated her, even with tears which for meer anger fell from her eyes; that she had patiently born with the ruines, plundrings, affronts, and other utter desolations which she had received from the Goths, Ostrogoths, Huns, Vandals, and other barbarous Nations, which had so miserably torn and wasted her, as being accidents which all Princes were subject unto, and more particularly she, who by the pleasantness of her situation, fruitfull soyl, and great riches which she had got in time of peace, did not only allure, but even call in forrein Nations to her ruine; who thirsted after her wealth, and were de∣sirous to change their barren Countries with the fruitful fields of Italy. But that her dearly beloved children, should take up arms against her their tender mother, which they ought to have imployed in her defence, were wounds which perpetually cry'd for revenge, so wicked an ingratitude as was incapable of pardon, so sad a wickedness as could not be out-done by any whatsoever cruel hatred. That therefore finding her self so deeply wounded in the concernment of her Liberty, their intreaties made her the more obstinate in her hatred, was the reason why his Majesties medi∣ation did the more irritate her revenge, and why their humility who beg'd her pardon, made her the more to glory and wax cruel in her re∣venge, and that the very length of time made that injury continually ap∣pear more fresh, which she neither could nor would pardon: Not only for that she knew she had never deserved so ill at her Italians hands, but for that she knew she had been wickedly betrayed, assacinated, and so op∣probriously made slave by those on whose neck she had trampled, only out of their execrable avarice, who ought least to have done it, and from whom she did least expect it: And that therefore every one might learn from the punishment of others, and from her well put on resolution, That whosoever doth offend his Country in so shameful a manner, did not only commit an excess which was impardonable, but did so shamefully stain his honor, as the blur thereof was not to be washt away with any sope.
The LXXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The whole generation of Sheep, send their publike Ambassa∣dors to Apollo, by whom they make their desires known, that they may be allowed to have sharp teeth, and long horns, and their desire is laughed at by his Maje∣stie. THe vvhole generation of Sheep have sent four Ambassadors to this Court; who had audience given them this day by his Maj. wherein a great Apuleian Weather said, That Sheep did very vvell knovv, that God the Creator of all things had been so charitable to all creatures, and so just, as that he recompenced their imperfections and defects vvith gifts equivolent. So as amongst so great a multitude of bruit beasts, there was not any one who could with reason say he was ill dealt withal by his Divine Majestie. Onely the sheep thought he had treated them like a father in law, and dealt partially with them; for having created them with great imperfections, he had not bestowed on them any equi∣volent vertue, whereby though they might not secure their state, they might at least live in that peace and quiet in the world as other beasts did. For though he had made Hares unspeakably timerous, had given them sharp teeth, but not a heart to bite, yet he had made them so swift of foot, as he did thereby secure them from being injured by any other beast, how fierce soever; and that the Fox had no reason to com∣plain of his want of footmanship, since God had given him so wisely a pate, as he happily escaped the deceits of other wild Animals; and that he had also recompenced the wolfs slowness, by indowing him with so bold a heart, so sharp teeth, and with so circumspect a genius, as be∣ing a terror to other bruit beasts, he made himself be respected even by man; and that it was likewise clearly seen in the birds of the ayr, that his Maj. had used the like charity; for he had given those larger wings, and made them swifter of flight, to whom he had denyed the use of feet, with which he had indowed Pheasants, Partridges and Quails, in recompence for their short wings, and want of feathers in their tails: that onely sheep, being created with an unspeakable stupidity of wit, heartless, slow of foot, and without those teeth to bite with, which makes other creatures be so much respected, they thought they were abandoned by that divine charity, which had shewed great love even to harmful beasts: And the Weather further added, That for the utmost and greatest calamity of so unarmed sheep, God had given them Lyons, Tygers, Bears and Wolves, the most implacable and fiercest beasts that inhabit the world for their enemies; so as sheep seemed to be created on∣ly to feed those inraged beasts, who know not what satiety means. The same Ambassador also said, That to these insufferable injuries which the sheep received from their enemies, the ill usage was added which they
received from their shepherds, which was onely occasioned by their be∣ing altogether unarmed; for had they teeth wherewith sometimes to bite those indiscrete shepherds, who are so uncharitable in milking them, and so indiscrete in sheering them, perhaps they would deal more piously with them, and their sheerers would learn to handle their sheers without cutting their skins. Wherefore the whole generation of sheep, that they might no longer undergo such calamities and oppressions, did earnestly beglong horns, and sharp teeth, wherewith to procure respect. To this request Apollo answered, with a chearful countenance, That the sheep had in this their request shewed their simplicity, since they knew not that of all the four footed beasts that were upon the earth, there were not any that were more favoured by God, nor which received greater pri∣viledges from him then they: For whereas the rest were forced to seek their meat with cark and care, and a thousand dangers, many of them spending the night season, which was destined for sleep and rest, in eat∣ing, for that it was not safe for them to be seen by day; pasture grounds were reserved and bought at dear rates onely for sheep, by men who had the command of all beasts, and were Lords of the earth, that in the night season they were with great care and diligence defended from their enemies in their folds; and whereas other beasts were persecuted even by beasts themselves, and by men; and that to procure their death, many did nothing but make nets, feed dogs, and lay snares; sheep out of a par∣ticular grace injoyed the noble prerogative to have all these things done by men, to secure them from their enemies: And that the Creator of the world having hewed exceeding great love towards sheep instead of ravenous teeth, and swift legs, had granted them the powerful weapons of wool, cheese, and of their riches wherewith they did so aquire mans love, as that men did perpetually persecute Wolves, Lyons, Tygers, and all their other cruel enemies, with all sort of weapons, meerly for the affection which they bore to sheep. And that sheep being reputed the Worlds delight and wealth, for the singular advantages which they afforded mankind, they hapned to be the most numerous of any sort of beasts; so as sheep being fed and defended by their Shepherds vigilancy and charity, they were foolish to desire ravenous teeth and sharp horns. And finally, Apollo said, That they ought to revenge themselves for the severity which some shepherds used towards them, in milking and sheer∣ing them, onely by their obedience and humility, by yielding them great store of wool, and much cheese, and by studying how to be fruitful; it being sheeps greatest felicity, that those Shepherds that dealt ill with their flocks, were cheifly cruel to themselves; for it was a certain truth, that wounds shamefully given to sheep, did usually kill the Shepherd. Wherefore he wished them to keep more from being desirous to bite their shepherds, then they would do from the Wolves teeth. For such sheep could not esteem themselves so happy, who by their humility and obedience did secure their Shepherds from all harm, as those were un∣happy, who delighted to put them in fear.
The LXXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Nicholas Machiavel being banished Parnassus upon pain of death, was found hidden in a friends Library, for which his former sentence of being burnt was excuted. THough Nicholas Machiavel was banished Parnassus and the Territo∣ries thereof many years ago, upon severe punishment; as well to whosoever durst give receptacle to so pernicious a man in his Library, yet was he found the last week secretly hidden in a friends study, where he was made Prisoner. He was presently sentenced by the Judges of Assize, and was this day to have been burnt, when he signified unto his Majestie his desire, that he might first be permitted to say somewhat in his defence before the Tribunal-seat which had condemned him. Apollo using his wonted clemency, bad him send his Advocates, and he should have fair hearing. Machiavel replyed, he desired to be heard himself; and that Florentines needed no advocates to speek for them, and his de∣mand was granted. Machiavel was then brought to the Bar; where he spoke thus in his own defence, Lo here, you Soveraign of Learning, That Nicholas Machiavel, who hath been condemned for a Seducer and Corrupter of mankind, and for a dispercer of scandalous politick Pre∣cepts: I intend not to defend my writings, I publikely accuse them, and condemn them as wicked and execrable documents for the government of a State. So as if that which I have printed be a doctrine invented by me, or be any new Precepts, I desire that the sentence given against me by the Judges, be put in execution. But if my writings contain no∣thing, but such Politick precepts, such rules of State, as I have taken out of the actions of Princes which (if your Majestie will give me leave) I am ready to name, whose lives are nothing but doing and saying of evil things; what reason is there that they who have invented the mad de∣sperate policies written by me should be held for holy, and that I who am onely the publisher of them should be esteemed a Knave and an Atheist? For I see not why an original should be held holy, and the Copy thereof beburnt as execrable; and why I should be so much perse∣cuted, when the reading of History (which is not onely permitted, but commended by all men) hath the particular vertue of turning as many as do read them with a politick eye, into so many Machiavels: for peo∣ple are not so simple as many believe them to be, but that those who by the greatness of their wits have been able to find out even the most hid∣den secrets of Nature, may not also have the judgement to discover the true ends of all Princes actions, though they be cunningly hidden. And if Princes, that they may do what they will with their subjects, will have them to be block-heads and dunces, they must do as the Turks and Muschovites do, inhibit Learning, which is that which makes blinde understandings quick sighted, otherwise they will never compass their
ends; for Hypocrisie, which is now so familiarly used in the world, hath onely a star-like vertue, to incline, not to force men to believe that which likes them best that use it. These speeches wrought much upon the Judges, and they were ready to revoke the sentence, when the Atorney General told them, That Machiavel was deservedly condemned for the abominable and execrable precepts which were contained in his wri∣tings; and that he ought again to be severely punished, for that he was found by night amongst a flock of sheep, whom he taught to put false teeth, dogs teeth in their mouthes, thereby indangering the utter ruine of all shepherds; a people so necessary, as it was an indescent and an∣gersom thing to think that they must by means of this wicked Machiavel be forced to put on breast-plates and gauntlets, when they would milk or sheer their sheep; and to what price would wool and cheese grow hereafter, if shepherds were to be more aware of their sheep, then of wolves; and if they could no longer keep their flocks in obedience with th whistle and their wand, but must make use of a Regiment of mur∣rions, and make no longer hurdles of cords to keep them in by night, but walls, bulwark, ditches and counterscarfs after the modern manner. The Judges thought these accusations to be too weighty; wherefore they ordered, That the sentence should be executed against this wicked man, and published a fundamental Law, that he should henceforth be held as a Rebel to mankind, who durst teach such scandalous things; all of them confessing, that it was not the wool, cheese nor lambs which made men prise sheep so much, but their great simplicity and meakness, and that it was impossible so great numbers of them should be govern∣ed by one onely shepherd, unless they were totally deprived of horns, teeth, and wit. And that to go about to make simple men wickedly malicious, and to make those moulds see, which out of a great deal of circumspection, wise nature had made blind, would be to put the whole world in combustion.
The XC. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo visits the Prisons, and in his visitation dispatches the causes of many Litterati accused of sundry faults, and imprisoned for debt. BY ancient custom Apollo never intermeddles in civil affairs, but leaves them wholly to be proceeded in by the Judges; for (as it hath been said) he is so exactly diligent in chusing his Officers, as every one in this State may be sure to have justice rightly administred: but in criminal affairs, wherein the life and reputation of his Litterati are con∣cerned, he with great diligence and exemplary patience, will understand, know and see into every the least circumstance. So as his Majestie having reserved the whole power of Judicature therein unto himself, his other Judges have little to do in this Tribunal, but to give in information a∣gainst the guilty. Certainly a most excellent custom, and worthy to be known and imitated by those unwary Princes, who shamefully aban∣doning the protection of the accused party, which they ought to take so to heart, leave it to the discretion of one onely Judge, who is oft times corrupt, sometimes ignorant, and always passionate; a thing so detestable, as where good Laws are established, a hundred Judges are thought too little a number to judge the life of one man. Hence it is Apollo many ages ago did very wisely in Parnassus institute the custom of visiting Ptisons, where all criminal causes of the Prisoners are decided by his Majestie, and the civil of such as are in for debt. On Tuesday last then, his Majestie attended by all the criminal and civil benches, went to the Pegasean prisons▪ where the prisoners appeared. The first was Felino Sandeo, very famous in the Canonical Laws. Angelo de Malefiis, who was to open the cause, said, That that Lawyer was two years ago made Deputy of that Island by the Prince of Andro, where he shamefully suffered some chief men of his Government to ty∣ranize over, and to afflict the poor, the widows and orphans, and that he suffered these insolent people, to pay Artificers by bastonadoing them. This information being given in; Apollo turned to Felino, and asked him, How it was possible such a one as he could commit the ex∣cess which he stood accused of? Felino answered, That he had suffici∣ently witnessed his knowledge in the Laws, and his resolution to punish tyrants, in his other Governments which he had had of Focide, Pindus, Libetres and Mittilene; but that in Andro he had omitted doing his duty, not out of ignorance, but out of meer wisdom; and that the Prince of Andro's ill nature had been the onely cause of this his errour; for having found that many personages of singular worth, and gifts of mind, who had been Governors of the Isle of Andro before him, had endangered themselves onely for having administred justice exactly, and done their duty compleatly well; and this onely through the malicious persecutions of those who were not suffered to tyranize, he had of pur∣pose
neglected his duty, and what he knew he ought chiefly to have done: and that the Prince of Andro was not onely faulty in easily believing all sort of wickedness in his State-Ministers, upon the very first impression, but very desirous to hear accusations which malicious men do often make against able and honest Officers, and appeared a friend to the im∣peachers: Wherefore for such like proceedings, he had not onely not feared to treat his Prince so ill; but was glad to pay him with such  as he had deserved. Apollo mightily admiring Felino's defence, did not onely gratiously imbrace him as innocent; but commended his error, as one who wisely knew how to commodate his actions to his Princes genius, and iudged him innocent of the fault which he had confessed; and afterward said publikely, That Princes who were not eagerly ∣vent in protecting their Officers, and who were friends to such informa∣tions as was made against them by the scum of people, deserved not to be served by men of honor. Then because he turned his eyes upon  Baldo dalla Rovere, Duke of Urbine, he remembred all men of the good Government of his son Francisco Maria, and of the custom which he holds in his State, where he punisheth those Officers severely, who in the administration of justice hold not the ballance upright, as also those who persecute them without reason. Next Cornelius Tacitus, who had been imprisoned some weeks before, upon the accusations of the most famous Philosophers of the State, was brought before Apollo, and accused for having spoke a miss of Poverty, since in his Annals he had not stuck to call her summum malorum. Tacit. lib. 4. An. and Diogenes the Cinick, who pleaded against him; told Apollo, That it being apparent that men who were wealthy, hated to take pains, and sit up late to acquire learning, he would have all men to know, that poverty was the true foundation of all Science, which if it should be hated, would prove the greatest calamiy which could be∣fal the Liberal Arts. After Diogenes, the Attorney Bossio, demanded, That Tacitus his fault being evidently true, his sentence might be pro∣nounced. And Apollo decreed, That Tacitus should first abjure the words which he had said, and that he should be imprisoned for the space of four years in Saxum Seriphum. Then Tacitus with his wonted vivacity of wit, and his usual liberty of language, said, Sir, I know not why I should be commanded to praise poverty, when these Judges who are to con∣demn me, think her to be so shameful a thing, as they have not doubt∣ed to place her amongst the true tokens of torture which they would not have done if a wealthy mind might have been found in a poor man. This defence wrought such confusion in the minds of all the Visitors, as Apollo, lest the world might take notice of the shame that was put upon the Doctors, Judges and Tribunals, by an accused person, thought it a lesser evil to let him have his Liberty. Next to Tacitus, Nicholas Perenotta da Granuela was brought into the Visitation; and it was informed, That he was imprisoned for publish∣ing a volume De bono Libertatis. Of the which (as it appeared in his process) he was so capital an enemy, as that he was the chiefest cause why the Emperor Charls the fifth, did inslave many famous Common∣wealths of Europe. Apollo having heard the relation, decreed, That Parenotto should be banished Pernassus for ever, as he who had impudent∣ly gain-said the Delfick Edict, wherein the Litterati are strictly forbid∣den
to write of such things whereof they do not make publike profession. For that the vertues of Sobriety, Chastity, and other honorable moral Sciences were made ridiculous, when celebrated by men given to lust, and gluony, and to other vices. As if such vertues had not power I enough to drive vice from out the souls of men, and in lieu thereof to, introduce good and honest life; and as if it were  which wicked men whisper continually up and down the streets, that the Liberal Sciences are onely learnt to be made merchandise of, and to make men understand them, but neither believe nor practise them. Perenotto's cause being over, an unfortunate Doctor of Law, was brought loaded with irons, before Apollo, who was imprisoned, for that not being onely a very excellent Advocate, but very skilful in all other choice Sciences; either blinded by folly, or contaminated by lewd∣ness of mind, he from being a gainful Advocate in his Countrey, and a well reputed Litterato, was become a shameful and wretched Souldier; changing by so unhappy a Metamorphosis his pen into a sword, his book into harquebuses, the defending of men with his mouth, to kil∣ling them with daggers, and the reading of good discipline in a famous University, into the desperate exercise of assaulting strong holds. Apollo being very much offended with so undeserving a man, in much anger said unto him, Ah thou Traytor and Rebel to Learning, knowest thou not that the woful exercise of war is onely fit for such ignorant people, who like so much unuseful flesh, are onely good for the bles of war; and altogether unworthy to be followed by those to whom their deserving parents have left the rich and honourable patrimony of the Liberal Sciences; which some Princes have prohibited in their States, for no other reason, but that they open the eyes of the blind, and enlighten the souls of foolish people, making them know the cunning and im∣posturism which the Princes of the world have used to make an occupa∣tion seem profitable and honourable, which is so much to be abhorr'd. And this being said, his Majestie gave sentence, That that Doctor should for ever be inhibited admittance into any Library, that he should be for∣bidden the contentments of writing and reading; and that for the ex∣ample of others, he should be declared to be ignorant. The unifortu∣nate Doctor hearing so sad a sentence, pleaded loud for mercy; and said, That his error not having proceeded out of malice, but out of meer ig∣norance, he was a subject fit for his Majesties pitty; and that it was not the desire of riches, nor the thirsting after mans blood, which had made him gird the sword about him, and betake him to the mysterie of war, but onely that he might purchase glory thereby. Apollo was then more incensed; and replyed unto the Doctor thus, And what glory (thou wicked one) couldst thou hope for, by the unhappy practice of killing men, of plundering Countreys, burning Cities, deflowering Virgins and in murthering them that thou mayest make them consent to so barbarous dishonesty? knows thou not that my Litterati are those that with their pen eternize the names of military men? knowest thou not that all glo∣y won by the sword, uniess when taken up for Religion, or for the de∣fence of a mans Countrey is false Alchimy and merchandize, fit onely for hair-brained fools? When the honour which my Vertuosi win by their learning, and by handling their pen, is always the purest refined gold which will bear the Test.
The Doctors cause having received this end, Giovan Giorgio Tressino that famous Vicentian Poet, came before Apollo, and throwing himself down before his feet; said, Sir, Your Majestie knows that unfortunate I, to amend the many Inconveniences, which are in the Italian Tongue even to this day, was the first who when I published my Poem of Italia Liberaia endeavoured to bring the Omicron, Eupselon, Omega, and other Greek Letters, which I thought very requisite for that language, into my own Tongue; so to shun the frequent equivocations which are evidently seen therein, for want of such letters; in which enterprize having been at great charges, I contracted those debts for which I am now imprisoned; for men who by natural instinct, Veteribus, etiam quae sus evidenter arguit stare malunt did not approve of this my new In∣vention. And unless your Majestie put in betwixt my misery, and my Creditors rage, I, who have taken such pains for the service of Learn∣ing, am like to end my days in the stench of this loathsom Prison. Apollo was very sensible of Tressino's misery; and asked him, Whether he was in case to pay his Creditors any moneys by the moneth? To which Tressino answered, He could not assign over unto them more then five Crowns a moneth. Which Apollo, turning towards the Creditors, de∣sired them to be contented with. But they, who would have the whole sum, answered discourteously. And Apollo asking them, Whether or no they were so inhumane as to be paid by the price of blood? The Mer∣chants with their wonted incivility answered, That he must either re∣solve to pay the whole debt, or that parting with his personal estate, he should according to the Laws made against Bankrupts, wear a green hat, and they vvould be satisfied. Apollo was so very angry at this their in∣humanity, as rising up upon his feet, and turning towards Tressino's Creditors; Will you then (said he) be paid by this Vertuoso's shame, and loss of honor? What Law is that which you alledge, which will have men forgo their reputation, without which they are not worthy to live? and if even amongst the most barbarous Nations which inhabit the earth, there be no Law found that a man shoul lose his life for debt, how can there be a Law in my State, where all exquisiteness of Law is professed, which bereaves a man of his honor, which is much more dear to man then life? What crueller wilde beast can there be, what more venemous Asp or Viper, then he who regards not his reputation? good Lavvs, and such as ought to be obeyed, do never disrobe a man of his honor, but love that those who vvant it, should by all means possible en∣deavor the purchase thereof, that they should covet it more then any earthly Treasure, and set a greater valuation upon it. The Creditors mightily affrighted at these words, ran from the Visitation. Whereupon Cressino somewhat encouraged, told Apollo, That if his Majestie would endow him vvith a povver of making Knights, he vvas sure his Creditors vvould take the honor of Knighthood from him in full payment of his debts. Apollo at the hearing of this foolish request, broke forth into loud laughter; and told Tressino, He vvas sorry to see him still pursue ridiculous novelties. Tressino replied, That his request was no nevv invention, but a thing much used; and that the famous Roman Republique, and after them many great Lords, vvho might very vvell have paid their Creditors vvith ready money, paid the obli∣gations of blood, and debts due for long and costly service with Lavvrel,
and the Order of Knighthood. Then Apollo smiled again, and told Tris∣sino, that he built Castles in the arte; for he must be another manner of man then he, that would sell meer smoak for good Merchandize. Tressino being dispatcht, Process was read against a base humerous Doctor of the Law, whose name the higher Powers will have concealed; where it was said, That in Governments which he had had, he would of∣ten in publick audiences, with great pride and surquedry, behave himself insolently, even with noble and honorably conditioned personages, saying that he would send them to the Gallies, would have their heads taken off, and make them be hanged before the Palace Gate. The Doctor said in excuse of this his error, that he did this to make himself terrible to the people, and to make himself be obeyed. Apollo, after he had put him in mind that good Officers, and men of honor, made themselves dreadful to the people by an equally rigorous, and uncorrupt Justice, and not by in∣solent threats, gave order that that Doctor, whose genius appeared fitter to command slaves, then men of honor, should be sent to be Auditor of the Gallies. Immediately after, Nicholas Franco Beneventano's cause was heard, who shooting at a great Wolf with a gun charged with small hail-shot, the Wolf being lightly hurt, flew upon him according to his custom, and with his teeth tore his left thigh: Those that were present at the Visitati∣on, wondred very much why he should be questioned, who deserved ra∣ther to be comforted for the danger he had run, and cured of the wounds he had received. But Apollo, who was not well pleased that one of his Litterati should have committed so great a piece of folly, since he had alwaies told his Vertuosi that they must take off their hats to cruel and dangerous beasts, and suffer them to pass by quietly, or else shoot at them with a musket loaded with ram'd bullets, and so lay him flat on his back, condemned the Litterato to the usual punishment of imprudency, that none should excuse his error; none should pitty him, and that all men should laugh at him. This cause was no sooner ended, but Cratippus, the Athenian Philo∣sopher appeared at the visitation, and the Information against him was, That the Duke of Ephesus had given to him his only son to be brought up by him; to whom when he came to mature years, he relinquisht the Government of his State, wherein the young Prince proved as unapt, as he proved famous for Philosophy: for he was timerous in the handling of arms, and incapable of State-affairs; and the singular goodness and honesty which he had learnt of Cratippus, which would have been great∣ly admired in a privat man, was in him interpreted want of wit: That therefore the Philosopher not having instructed that young Prince in such things as were to be known by one who was to govern so numerous a people, the Duke of Ephesus re-demanded the sallary he had given him. Apollo was mightily displeased with Cratippus his imprisonment; and turning to the Duke who was there present, told him, that he should not blame Cratippus for his sons unapss to Government, but his own bad choice; for that Vertuoso having taught his Ppel the Science which he did publickly profess, had fully discharged his duty: And that such a one as he, ought to know that Arsenals, Armories, and State-Councels, were Schools for Princes children; and that the Scholarship which they ought to learn, was the Philosophy, the Poetry which was several times every
week read in the wise Senat of Venice, that Captains, Counsellers, and Secretaries of State, were the best instructers of Princes children; and the memory of their Ancesters, the glorious actions of such Princes, as both in peace and war had done things worthy to be admired and imita∣ted, the rods wherewith they ought to be whipt. Constantius Albicini was next brought before Apollo, whom his Maje∣sty did mightily abominate, as one who was publickly known to be a prime finder out of vexatious inventions. His process said, That he being re∣quested by an avaritious Prince, to invent some new way for him, how to raise money from his Subjects without offending or angring them, advised him to give out, that he was likely to be unexpectedly assaulted by his e∣nemies, who would possess themselves of his State; that therefore it was necessary to fortifie the Metropolitan City; to effect the which so re∣quisite work, he must proclaim a new Tax, which would be easily grant∣ed by them who apprehended the danger of their lives, goods, and ho∣nors; that then he should in all haste begin the works which he must con∣tinue for one year, that the second year he should proceed therein more slowly, and that the third year he should give it quite over; for that the people being accustomed for those two years space to pay such an Impo∣sition, would willingly continue the payment of it. And because the chief Magistrate of the City had a rich revennue worth forty thousand crowns a year, which this covetous Prince did much thirst after, he told him, that to make himself Master thereof, and to invite the Citizens to make a free gift thereof unto him, he was only to provide two friends, the one of which should stand up in a publick Councel, and should advise, that it were good and fit to reward the Prince for his excellent Govern∣ment, with freely parting with two years revennue unto him; and that the other friend, whilst the Proposition was discussing, should say openly, That to give their suffrages in secret, was an action misbecoming a faith∣ful people towards their Prince, where the ungrateful and disloyal had opportunity to obscure the fidelity of Loyal Subjects. That therefore men should speak their mind alowd, and the Votes be so decided; for the rabble-rout, allured by the shortness of the time, would grant that for a few years, which they should never regain. It was aver'd in the same process, that this same Constanso had confest that he had told the same Prince, that an exeellent way to get money of his Subjects, was to inhi∣bit somewhat which was greatly desired, and much used in his State, as the extravagancy in aparrel, costly Jewels, and too exorbitant portions; that if any one should afterward desire a dispensation therein, it might be granted him; but upon a good acknowledgment, and upon paying well for the Seals. Apollo having heard this wicked mans so great iniquity, and wondring that so much rascallity could be found in any one man, brake forth into these words; Puniendos rerum atrocium Ministros. Tacit. lib. 13. Ann. and then gave sentence, that this Divel incarnate should be thrown into the Boat where Melossus, Melampus, Lisisca, and other Poets Dogs were kept, by which he was presently torne in pieces and devoured. This being over, the Commendador Hanibal Caro, was brought to the visitation, and his Majesty was told, that the quarrels between the Com∣mendador and Castelvetro, were wel known unto him; which could no otherwise be accommodated, then by taking security that they should
not offend one another. After which Castelvetro passing one morning often before the Commendadors house; the Poet did so call to mind the injury he had received by that rigorous sentence, as by a railing Sonnet, which was a thing prohibited, he wounded Castelvetro's honor. Apollo, contrary to all mens beleef, commanded that the Commendador should be presently set at liberty; and said that Castelvetro deserved to be se∣verely punisht for his being so foolishly adventurous: For knowing that he had so hainously offended a revengful man, he did foolishly to trust his life upon money-security; and so much the rather for that Castelvetro knew that the Marchigiani, who were otherwise very gallant men, but ve∣ry bloudy, have less patience then discretion. Caro's cause being ended, Aristides, that great Athenian Senator was brought to the Visitation, who was imprisoned for having given out great quantity of Corn to the people of Athens in a very hard year. Aristi∣des imprisonment appeared altogether unjust to most of the Visitors; but Apollo, who was of a contrary opinion, told them in severe words, that in free Countries, where people are more jealous of the publick Liberty, then in any other sort of Principality, in exercising charity, men should observe that pious Precept, of not letting the right hand know what the left hand did: For in all Commonwealths, too vain-glorious alms, and done out of too much ostentation, were very dangerous; that therefore he should hereafter forbear to use such charity towards the poor, which smelt more of ambition, then of any true zeal or piety; and which might make men suspect that they were rather done out of a desire of purcha∣sing Principalities on earth, then to gain the Kingdom of Heaven. Pietro Pomponatio, a Mantuan, appeared next all besmeared with sweat, and very ill acoutred, who was found composing a Book, wherein by foolish and sophistical arguments he endeavored to prove, that the soul of man was mortal. Apollo, not able to look upon so wicked a wretch, com∣manded that his Library should be presently burnt, and that he himself should be consumed in the same flames; for that fool deserved not the advantage of books, who laboured thereby only to prove that men were beasts. Pomponatio cryed out then with a loud voice, protesting that he believed the mortality of the soul only as a Philosopher. Then said A∣pollo to the Executioners, Let him be burnt only as a Philosopher. A Prisoner was afterwards heard, who said that he being of Coos, had entred bond for one, who was not sent thither as Governor by his Prince, and who having committed many Larcenaries, fled from thence by night, wherefore he was forced to pay the whole summe which was laid to the charge of that thief-Officer. Apollo wondring at this mans imprisonment, turned to the Prince of Coos, who was there President, and told him, that the sure way to have an Officer rule well, lay not in his security to stand a Trial, but was only grounded upon the Princes good choice: That there∣fore the prisoner who had entred security upon firm belief that his Lord and Master would never have imployed such lewd men in places of such importance, should by all means be set at liberty; and that the punishment belonging of right to him that had done the fault, the Prince should pay his forfeiture, who had been so abusive in his charge, of whom he might at his leasure repair himself. To which the Prince answered, that his Of∣ficer was a stranger, another Princes subject; and therefore he could have no right against him. Apollo reply'd, That he having been so very a
fool, as to make use of a forreiner, whilst he might be served by his own subjects, he had no reason to complain of his loss: For that Shepherd who was so foolish, as to lead other folks sheep to feed, ought to blame none but himself, if when he brought them back at night to their folds, he could neither shear nor milk them. This was the end of that imprisoned security, which the Prince of Coos liked not, though all the Visitors were well pleased with it. Tito Strozzi, the famous Ferara Poet was the next that appeared, imprisoned upon the Suit of Francisco Filelpho, who having given him some mo∣neys to deliver to Cintio Geraldi, a Creditor of his; Strozzo, as soon as he had it; lost it at play; which Filelpho complained of in the Visitati∣on. Apollo, who knew that Strozzi wanted a leg, merrily asked Filel∣pho, whether if a man should have bought a blind horse in his Market of Tolentino, the buyer might redemand his money which was ill laid out? To which Filelpho answered, That whosoever bought a beast that was palpably defective, could blame nothing but his own folly. If it be so, saies Apollo, you have judged aright Filelpho in your own cause. Filel∣pho understood then whither his Majesties question tended, and being much afflicted, answered, that he was not ignorant of the common Pro∣verb, That one must be carefull how he deals with those that Nature hath markt; but that he did not hold it to be alwaies true: Know Filelpho, said Apollo, that Proverbs are nothing else but experimented Sentences, approved sayings; and I tell you, that Mother Nature in procuring men, may be fitly said to imitate a conscientious Potter, who when he takes his Vessel out of the Furnace, if he find any that have holes in them, that be not sufficiently baked, or that have any other imperfection, to the end that unwary people may not take them for good, he breaks off one of their ears, or gives them some other mark of being amiss. And because all men cannot be born equally honest, as nor can all the Potters pots come equally perfect out of the Furnace; as let a Garden be never so well look∣ed unto, and weeded, it is impossible but some nettles, or other weeds will spring up; Dame Nature, who greatly hates cheaters, and crosbiters, to the end that honest men be not deceived by hollow brains, crafty pates, and half-baked wits, as soon as she sees any such born, she puts out one of their eys, breaks an arm or leg, by which evident signs, tying a bel about the horses neck that is given to kicking, and fastning a board to the oxes horns which use to thrust therewith, she admonisheth all men to be aware of such. Giovan Battista Amalteo's Cause was discust immediately after, who was imprisoned for having called Nero's liberality which he used to Corne∣lius Tacitus, when he rewarded him for the praises he had given him, with 25 Mules loaded with Gold, foolish prodigality, that Ipsi non aderat infrae servos ingenium. Tacit. lib. 13. Ann. The fault committed by Amalteo, appeared to Apollo, and to all the Visitors to be so hainous; and the rather, for that all the Schools in Parnassus hold it for an undeniable maxim, That whatsoever excessive gift given by a magnanimous Prince to a Vertuoso, in reward for any favour received from him, should not be termed prodi∣gality: For a Prince that thirsts after true glory, of which, Unum insati∣abiliter parandum, prosperam sui memoriam. Tacit. lib. 4. Ann. The merit of one pen ful of that pure ink, which smoothly laid on paper, makes mens names glorious and immortal, cannot be sufficiently rewarded by mou of Diamonds and Rubies. Apollo was therefore so highly in∣censt
against Amalteo for this so great fault, as he adjudged him to live two years amongst the ignorant. Presently after appeared a Litterato in the Visitation, who did not only believe that damn'd and execrable opinion, That the man was happier who had his purse full of gold, then he who had his head full of knowledg; but did by all the industry he had, endeavor to insinuate it into other men. Apollo being much moved at the hainousness of this fault, sentenced the guilty person to be sew'd up in a sack, and to be thrown with his head down∣ward into the deepest part of Aganippa's well. It must not here be o∣mitted, that this rascal was so obstinate in his erronious opinion, as that he would not only not gain-say himself at the hour of death; but still affirm∣ed more obstinately then ever, that he died in the true opinion, that study was but Merchandize, and that Scholarship was only learnt out of a design to get money; and that therefore it appeared that Philosophy and Theo∣logy, were without all doubt the noblest; but Physick and Law, were the most esteemed, and most imbraced Sciences. Baiardo, one of the Judges of Assize of this Court, read afterwards the process made against Manfredo, King of Naples, wherein it was proved, that by night he had stoln Lisbia from Catullus, that so dearly loved her, whom he sent home stript, and rob'd of all her Jewels, after he had enjoy'd her many weeks: Which injury Catullus did so lowdly com∣plain of in the Visitation, as it grew near the point of insolency; for high∣ly incenst with anger, without respect either to the place, or persons be∣fore whom he spake, he called Manfredo a base bastard. Apollo, to shew his Judges that it was not possible to teach a too highly exasperated mind to keep within bounds, though he seemed to be much offended at the lit∣tle respect Catullus had born him, gave him but a gentle reprehension; and then commanded that Manfredo, Gratis ubique; should be set at liber∣ty, and said that bastards were most commonly vitious, and given to ri∣baldry, only to increase the glory and prerogative of holy marriage; and that wise Nature, to teach male. Asses to have only to do with she Asses, and Mares to couple only with Stallions of their own kind, had so order∣ed it, that from the coupling of he Asses and Mares, nothing should come but Mules, beasts so damnably given to kicking, only to the end that men, to shun the getting of spurious issue, might be the more ambitious to be∣get legitimate children, who might in coming from the mothers womb, bring down Gods blessing with them. And that therefore bastard-chil∣dren not being bound to live vertuously, it was of courtesie when they lived well. Catullus not being herewith satisfied, but growing still more mad, Apollo, with some appearance of anger, bad him hold his peace; for he who kept a piece of stinking flesh in his house, ought not complain if it were troubled with flies. Catullus being thus dismist, the same Baiardo read a Process made against Scipio Ammirato, a Polititian, who was convinced of having com∣mitted many hainous offences; as for having taught a Prince who pu∣nisht his people with new and vexatious Taxes, to honest them by the names of Donatives, Subsedies, and Aids, to the end that they might cause no innovation in his State; and who stuck not to term a most hate∣ful Imposition, the mountain of Piety. Moreover for that he had taught an eminent Citizen of Phosides, who desired to be attended by roaring Boys and Hectors, being backt by whom he might tyrannize, and
make himself be dreaded by all men; that he should keep in his house an open Apertiment with Dice, Cards, Tables, and have a Bawdi house the next dore to him, for that these were the true Dequois, or call-Ducks, which ticed in the scum of the City, and the lewdest sort of people: and that he should advise the Prince of Epire, who was a bitter enemy to the Laconians, and who sorely persecuted some Senators that were of a mili∣tary genius, and being gallant men, cared not to be assumed to the Princi∣pality of Laconia, lest the publick practice of persecution, might draw the hatred of the Senat upon them, which was exasperated to see the vertue and merit of the most eminent Senators in such sort persecuted, that I say, he should advise that Prince to colour over so great and apparent lewdness, with pretence that those Senators had deep designs. Apollo marvailed much at this Polititians so great perfidiousness, and after having freely de∣clared, that now much to his dislike, he had found that Polititians were Gypsies, Cheats, Coney-catchers, and Pick-pockets, he gave order that this Monster of Nature should be thrown headlong down from the Tarpeian Rock. This was Ammirato's end, when the same Baiard gave in process a∣gainst the Judge of Guido, who was not only convinced by the testimo∣ny of divers witnesses, but by his own confession, that he had openly made sale of Justice, to him that would give most for it. Apollo highly of∣fended at the immensity of such a fault, gave sentence that the guilty par∣ty should undergo the usual punishment for sale of Justice: which was, That he should be flead alive. The Serjeants did already drag the wretch to the place of execution, when he fetching a deep sigh, cryed out, O un∣fortunate man that I am, O my monies, by which I might have lived in all sorts of delitiousness, how through my want of wit, are you now be∣come the cause of my shameful and dreadful death. These words which were heard by all the Visitors, wrought very much with his Majesty; who sending to have the Judge brought back, asked him what it was he com∣plained of? and what relation his fault in the administration of Justice, which is granted to men of worth and merit, had to the money which he said he had spent so ill? Sir, said the Judge, The Office whereby I have deserved so ill at your Majesties hands, was not granted by the Prince of Guido to my Learning, nor to my deserts, but to 70000 unlucky crowns, which I gave two years ago for the place: So as I may very well com∣plain of having purchast so great misery by my ready-money. Apollo having heard this, gave order immediately that the prisoner should be set at liberty; and said that he judged and declared him to be innocent: That therefore he should presently return to his Charge, and to the eternal in∣famy of the Prince of Guido, continue the ignominious Merchandize of selling Justice; for it was impossible to keep a man from selling that which he had bought. The last that appeared in the Visitation, was the famous Bartolomeo d'Alviano, whom the Attorney-General accused, for that in a dispute which arose betwixt him and Iulius Cesar Scaliger, he had called him a scurvy Scholar. Apollo much resented this excess in Alviano, and said unto him, If my Litterati, adorn'd with so many vertues, full of Science, who have perfect knowledge of the course of the heavens, of the vertue of hearbs, who understand the propriety of plants, the worth of Mine∣rals, and all the Miracles of Nature, are not truely Noble, who are they
that deserve to be termed Noble? Perhaps those that are ignorant? Perhaps those vitious people, who being sunk even to the chin in idleness, sports, gluttony, and lust, have nothing praise-worthy in them; but the vertues and long series of their predecessors glory? And if gold, for the vertue it hath of not being consumed by fire, eaten by rust, corroded by Aquafortis, and for other rare qualities, was deservedly reputed the King of Mettals; if the Diamond and Ruby, for their incredible hardness, were the Princes of all Jewels; Why should not my Litterati, who know and understand so much more then all other men, deserve to be rather termed Demy Gods than Kings? and said that there was a great diffe∣rence between innobling the body by rich vestments, and cloathing the soul with pretious Sciences. Then Apollo turned toward Alviano, and said unto him, My alwaies famous Sabellico, Bembo, Giovio, Guicchardine, who have so by their pens illustrated thee, and the labours of my Vertu∣osi, which have rendred thee immortal: When did they ever deserve to be by thee rewarded by so inormous an injury, by such ingratitude? This so exasperated discourse of Apollo was the more efficacious with the Vi∣sitors, in that it was accompanied by the noise of all the Litterati that stood by, who incredibly incenst against Alviano, cry'd out for Justice: After this, the Court, by order from Apollo, voted for sentence, and pro∣pounded all sorts of severe punishments for the prisoners penalty. This was Alviano's case, when the State of Venice hearing of this so important accident, and being very tender of Alviano's honor, came in all haste to the Visitation, and prostrating her self before his Majesties feet, with a generous submission, said, That she would never rise from be∣fore them, till she had obtained full and free pardon from his Majestie, for that her couragious Captain: And that though she might plead a new Edict of his Majesties, wherein it was declared, That those who should have taken up arms against barbarous Nations in defiance of Free Coun∣tries, should never lose his Majesties favour for any fault they should com∣mit, though capital; yet she beg'd her dear Alviano's pardon, who had lost so much bloud for her, suffered so many hardships, and run so many dangers, from his Majesties meer grace, which all the world knew be∣longed to him of justice. When the Litterati had heard thse affectio∣nate intreaties, and had called to mind what gracious acceptions that no∣ble Queen had alwaies given in her Court to all the Vertuosi that repair∣ed thither, their conceived anger was so appeased, as they cryed out aloud, Orace, Grace. Whereupon Apollo raising up that Noble Queen from the ground with his hand, placed her first amongst the Illustrious Muses; and then told her, that he could not deny any thing that she demanded, he willingly forgave Alviano for point of punishment; but he would have him give fitting satisfaction to Learning, and to his vertuosi whom he had so offended. The Alviano, before almost half dead for fear (so much doth the fear of shame more terrifie a man of honor, then certain danger of death) took courage, and said, That being so low of stature as they all saw he was, he ought to be born withall, if his cholar was soon stirred, which was that which had caused him to do amiss; but that con∣fessing his error, he declared to all the world, that he who was of choice Learning, and good demeanor was as Noble as any one born of the house of Austria, or of the bloud-Royal of France, although his Father were a Hangman.
The XCI. ADVERTISEMENT. A Great Prince in discharge of a Vow that he had made, car∣ries a rich Vessel to the Temple; which the Priest recei∣ving with shew of great sadness; The Prince desires the reason thereof, and receives satisfaction. NOt many daies since, a Prince of great quality, carried a very rich Ves∣sel of God to the Temple, in acknowledgment of a singular favour which he had received from God. And because the Priest at the recei∣ving of it, appeared to be much afflicted, even to the shedding of tears, the Prince had the curiosity to know the occasion of his sadness, and de∣sired the Priest that he would tell it him. To the which, that man who feared God, in down-right weeping said, That he could not chuse but weep when he saw any gifts brought to the Temple, for that it put him in mind of the ancient piety of men in former times, who endeavoured to inrich the Temples with what they had of most pretious, and thought those Vessels of Gold and pretious Stones very necessary for Divine Worship, which men now adaies, unmindful of the true Religion, and more in love with their own accommodation, then with the honor of God, ap∣propriate to themselvs even in things of basest imployments: And that the present condition of the true Religion was in some States infinitely de∣plorable; for whereas formerly the wealth of sacred things served to aug∣ment true piety, and to add to the greatness and Majestie of Religion, they were now become Tumpets which summoned Thieves to come from wicked caves, and rob the sacred Patrimony of God and of his Saints. And that they were the more wicked thefts, in that their authors were not ashamed to gild them over with the spacious name of Reformed Religi∣on. Nay the ignorance of some people is grown to such a height, as they suffer themselves to be perswaded, that to deform the ancient Religion, so constantly believed by their Fathers, Grandfathers, and great Grand∣fathers, by gormandizing, thefts, and by all sort of libidinousness, is the next way to reform it: As if to plunder a man, to rob and kill him, would be believed by any man that is in his right wits, to be the next way to clothe him, to honor him, and to raise him from death to life.
The XCII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo forbids the Shepherds of Arcadia to fatten Hogs a∣ny more; and being earnestly intreated to revoke that his Decree, denies to do it. BY Letters of the 18 of this present sent from Arcadia, certain news is come of the Commandment given by Order from his Majesty, to Titerus, Coidon, Mias, Melibeus, and the rest of the Shepherds of that Country, that upon pain of severe punishment, they must no longer dare to fatten Hogs. The people of those parts were generally so trou∣bled at this news, as this morning, Montanus and Damon, two of the chiefest Shepherds of that Province came to Apollo in name of all the Arcadian Shepherds; who humbly desired his Majesty not to deprive them of their choicest cates, and of their hogs-flesh, wherewith they did so plentifully feed their Families. To this Apollo answered, that he loved Husbandmen and Shepherds better then Nobility, because men that bring in profit and advantage, deserve to be better beloved by Princes, then such as are rather prejudicial then of any use; but that having publisht his E∣dict for many respects, and by mature delibration, he would by no means recall it; for that Pagan avarice had learnt an execrable politick precept, from the usefull custom of Husbandmen, of fatning Hogs in the Autumn, that they might kill them at Winter. The XCIII. ADVERTISEMENT. It being observed that Pero Trasea, in company of his son in Law Elvidius Priseo, frequented the houses of the chief∣est Poet esses of Parnassus; He is severely reprehended for it by Apollo▪ IT hath been observed by such Vertuosi who delight to pry into other mens actions, that Pero Trasea, accompanied by his son in Law, Elvi∣dius Priseo, did very much frequent the houses of the Lady Victoria Colon∣na, the Lady Veronica Gambera, and other chief Lady-Poets of this Court: And although the extraordinary good opinion which is generally held of Trasea's honesty, makes it very hard to believed that so grave a Senator can commit a foul fact; yet the great frequency of his visits, and the length of them, hath occasioned such scandal even amongst the best men, as the unseemliness thereof hath come to Apollo's knowledg: Who to
quench the flames of murmur, sent for Tresea two daies ago to come to him, and charged him to acquaint him with the business which he had with those Ladies? Trasea answered, That he went to those Ladies on∣ly to exercise his charity in reading every day a Chapter in Boetius Seve∣rinus, De Consolatione Philosophiae. Apollo seemed to be much offend∣ed with this answer; wherefore he said, Trasea, if you will merit favour from God, and love from men, by using your endeavors to consolate the afflicted, go comfort those miserable wretches who lie perishing in Hospi∣tals, and those unfortunate people that are led to the Gallows: for to spend whole daies like Sardenapalus, amongst women, and hope to make men believe that you exercise there only your spiritual parts, is a piece of hypocrisie able to move laughter in fools, and to make those burst for an∣ger, who know that men who go often to the Mill are easily bemealed; and a man of your parts ought to know, that when a woman conceives twins, if they be both male children, they are wrapt within one Filme; and so likewise if they be both females: but if the one be male, and the other female, wise Nature parts the female from the male, in a particular Filme. So as Nature by not confiding in the cohabitation of a brother with a sister, in so tender age, teacheth all men, that people cannot be se∣cure even of such as you are: and he who relies upon his own strength, Trasea, in such like occasions, is more rash then wise. And because these disorders ought to be corrected, both for your reputation and mine; I straitly command you, That for the future you forbear such dangerous doings; for the world is not so great a blockhead (as I perceive you foolishly conceive) but that it very well knows that visits made to hand∣som women by such as you are, after a second time grow suspitious to those that know that all men are pleased with what is handsom, stimulus carnis is a natural vice in all men; and that lust is no waies better refrained, then by keeping far from fair creatures. Therefore let him that will keep from committing error, avoid all occasion. And all your Philosophy can∣not make a man believe, but that every man made of flesh, is pleased with a savory morsel: Wherefore I put you in mind, that one like you, who make such profession of not staining your reputation with the spots of la∣sciviousness, ought to shun all that allure thereunto: for it is not only a great piece of folly; but an infinite rashness, worthy to be punisht, to make gun-powder in a Smiths shop, with hope to make people believe there is no danger in it.
The XCIV. ADVERTISEMENT. A chief Senator of Poland, whilst he corrects another Sena∣tor, who is a friend of his, is made aware that be himself is he who goes astray, and needs amendment. THere are at this time in the King of Polands Court, two Senators, who are very great friends; the one of them professeth openly to be ill satisfied with his King, and therefore blameth the manner of his Go∣vernment, and even to the point of malice, censures and cavils at all his acti∣ons. The other Senator was much displeased with this his friends man∣ner of proceeding, and went so counter-bias to this his friend, as he did not only praise such actions of his Kings as deserved blame, but to purchase his favour; stuck not to do unworthy things himself. This man being much scandalized at his friends dangerous way of proceeding, told him one day, that it was not only imprudency, but great rashness, by thus carping at his Princes actions, to irritate his hatred from whom he might expect all good; and that to serve in Court, meerly to demerit the Princes favour, was the greatest folly that could be committed. The o∣ther Courtier answered him thus; Your so free reprehending me, clearly shews the cordial affection you return for the great love I bear you; and I thank you for it: But know that both we aim at the same end of acqui∣ring the highest preferments and dignities in Court, though we take con∣trary courses. You walk the usual and beaten way, but I take a neerer cut, which is only known to the most accomplisht Courtiers; and I fore∣tell you, that I am likely to compass my ends sooner then you. In here∣ditary Monarchies, where the brother, children, and others of the bloud∣royal, do together with the State inherit usually the friendships, enmities, and all the Interests of the deceased Prince, the way you take, and which was first taught you by Tacitus (that the favor of them that rule, must be forced from them even by indignities) is admirable good. But in an e∣lective State, as our Poland is, and particularly under an old King, who may justly be thought not likely to live long; the way I take to seem dis∣pleased at the Court proceedings, is the safer for such a one as I am. And the advertisement given to men, to be either exceeding hot, or passing cold in their actions; and that by all means they should shun lukewarm∣ness, was worthy of him that gave it. The first Court-preferments by which men proceed to the highest dignities, you see they are already pos∣sest by others: So as not able to work my self into the Kings favour by fervency of zeal, I have betaken my self to the other extremity of being all snow, by appearing mal-content. And you, who for what I see, have not the fortune to burn in the favour of our Prince, and do abhor to fly to the other extream of freezing in discontent of the present state, I prog∣nosticate for certain that by being lukewarm, you will part old and gray∣headed from the Court, just in the same condition as you came thither
young and beardless: For in Elective Kingdoms the new comer in, be∣ing usually an enemy, no less to the firiends, then to the actions of his predecessor; those who were friends to the former Government, are ab∣hor'd, as not confiding; those who are lukewarm, are shun'd as foolish; and the malcontents are diligently sought after, and allowed to come un∣der the Cloth of State, as deer friends, and secure instruments to perpe∣tuate their greatness. The XCV. ADVERTISEMENT. A Controversie arising between the Governors of Pindo, and of Libetro, in point of Jurisdiction: Apollo punisheth them both. SOme great fault being committed in the City of Libetro, the Governor of the place pursues the Delinquents with his whole rout of Serjeants and Catchpools, and overtakes them in the Territory of Pin∣do: He besiegeth them in a Countreymans house, which he soon begirts with his men, and threatnes to burn it, if they would not render them∣selves. This mean while the Governor of Pindo hearing of this uprore, comes to that place to defend his Jurisdiction; and brings along many armed men with him: And finds that the besieged had already deliver∣ed themselves up into the Governor of Libetro's hands, who led them to be imprisoned in his own Country. The Governor of Pindo complains bitterly of the injury done to him in his Jurisdiction, and demands that the prisoners be again assigned over unto him; which he promises to restore within a few daies; when by the former assignation, he might be some∣what repaired in his reputation. But the Governor of Libetro did not only deny to do so, but made the prisoners march the faster into his own Territories. He of Pindus, provoked by so great a scorn, commanded his men to fall on, and by force to bring back the prisoners, who being valiantly defended by those of Libetro, so foul and bloudy a scuffle insu∣ed, as many were wounded. The news hereof was soon brought to A∣pollo, who being highly distasted with both those his Officers, command∣ed the Provost-Marshal of Campagnia, Alvigi, Pulci, to bring them bound before him, in a shameful manner which was soon done. His Ma∣jesty with great patience first heard the reasons alleadged by both those his Officers; and then judging the Governor of Libetro to be in the wrong, for having rashly disturbed another mans Jurisdiction, he depri∣ved him of his Government, and declared him incapable of ever having any imployment within his Jurisdiction; and as for the Governor of Pin∣do, whom he acknowledged to have reason on his side, he condemned him to the Gallies for ten years; laying so heavie a sentence upon him, thereby to teach him, and all other Officers, that those who serve under the same Prince, must defend their right of Jurisdiction, only with their pen, and reserve their arms till they should be disturbed by Forreiners. The Governor of Pindo bewailed his misfortune bitterly, being sorry, that having so fair an occasion to deserve well at his Masters hands, by shewing his own modesty upon this occasion, and the others impertinen∣cy, he had ignorantly turned anothers rashness into his own fault. A sad thing certainly, and worthy to be considered by all Princes Officers, as that which shews it is a great error to refrain impertinences by insolen∣cies, and to amend a fault by a trespass:
The XCVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo sentenceth Hanibal Caro to pay his forfeited securi∣ty, for the wounds which he gave Castelvetro. AFter the disimprisonment of the Commendador Hanibal Caro, who, as you have heard, was pardon'd by Apollo, when he visited the prisons, Bossio, the Atorny-general, pretending that his Maj. had only pardon'd the punishment, for having wounded Castelvetro, but not the monies which he by breach of security had forfeited, De non offendendo, cited the Fernesi, who were his sureties to pay the 3000 crowns, which was the covenanted forfeiture. Caro, who conceiv'd he had received ful and plenary pardon for the one fault, as wel as for the other, put his Maj. in mind thereof yesterday, and complained of the trouble given him by the Atorny-general. Apollo answered, that he intended only to pardon the excess committed in wounding, not the monies covenanted for for security; and gave order that without further reply, the forfeiture should be paid to Castelvetro. The Atorney-general, when he heard his Maj. Order, hasted to Apollo, and told him, that the forfeiture being made payable to the Exchequer, it ought not to be paid to Castelvetro. This Custom appeared so new to Apollo, as he said in anger to Bossio, Shall Castelvetro be prejudiced by being wounded, and shal the advantage of the monies redound to me? Is there such a Cu∣stom as this introduced in Parnassus, the Laws wherof I intend should serve for a rule of the best government to all other places? Bossio told Apollo, that this was the custom, not only of all the Tribunals of Italy, but of the most places of Europe. Apollo growing still more incenst against Bossio, said, That the Prince who would maintain peace amongst his people, ought ra∣ther to forbid faults upon pain of severe punishments, then foment them with easie chastisements, and make base merchandize of mans bloud. And that in carnal pleasures, in pleasing the pallat, in delights of hunting, and for the enjoyment of other worldly contents, since men were too naturally given to evil, and were therein podigal beyond their power, who did not perceive that men were invited to revenge offences, by introducing so scan∣dalous a custom, revenge being to mans depraved genius, the greatest con∣tentment and satisfaction that can be taken: and therefore bad him go and see that Caro made paiment of the 3000 crowns which were forfeit∣ed, not into the Exchequer, but to Castelvetro's self; for it was reason that he should receive the advantage of the monies, who had been prejudiced by wounds. What his Majesty had commanded, was forthwith put in executi∣on: And because Caro made resistance, not only because he would not do the Office himself, but that he shewed a great deal of passion even whilst he told out the money, every one clearly perceived that his Majesty had very discreetly foreseen, that the vexation to do a mans enemy good, did much allay revenge, even in those that were most given to passion.
The XCVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Dante Aligieri being assaulted by night in his Country-house, and ill used by some disguised Vertuosi; is relieved by the great French Ronsard. VVHilst famous Dante Allegieri was the other day in a Country-house of his, which he had built in a very solitary place to exercise his Poetry in, some Litterati got secretly into his house, where they did not only take him prisoner, but holding a dagger at his throat, and har∣quebuses at his sides, they threatned to kill him, unless he would tell them the true Title of his Poem, whether he called it Comedy, Tragi-Come∣dy, or Heroick Poem: And Dante answering them, that they used him not like one of his quality, and that if they would ask him the question in Parnassus, he would satisfie them: The Litterati, that they might have their desire immediately, beat and buffeted him; and not being able by these insolencies to compass their intents, they grew so outragious, as ta∣king the rope which hung upon the bucket by the well side, they fastned it to a beam of the house, and went about to hang Dante therewith; who cry'd out, Help, help, murder, murder; and so great was the noise he made, as it was heard by Ronsard the Prince of French Poets, who had a Country-house not far from that of Dante: This generous Frenchman took up his sword immediately, and ran towards the noise; whereupon the Litterati fearing lest some others might be with Ronsard, ran away; but not so soon but that the Frenchman both saw and knew them. Dante was set at liberty, clothed, and brought to Parnassus by Ronsard; where the news of so foul a riot being heard, Apollo was very much grieved at it; and his honor pressing him to know the Delinquents, he first examined Dante, who told him all that had past, and said he knew not who they were that had dealt so inhumanly with him; but that it might be that Ronsard, who had not only seen them, but had severely reprehended them for that their insolency, might peradventure know them. Ronsard was forthwith sent for, who denied not only that he knew any of them, but said he had not seen them. The Judges, by reason of this contrarie∣ty between what Dante had said, and Ronsards Deposition, feared that the Frenchman, thinking it a base thing to accuse any man, would not dis∣cover the Delinquents. When Apollo heard of this, he was very angry with Ronsard, and commanded to give him the Rack: Wherefore Ron∣sard was quickly secured, who persisting in his denial, the Judges gave or∣der that he should be put to the rack, as one who was likely to know some∣what. Ronsard being stript, bound, and bidden to speak the truth, was raised from the ground. The generous Frenchman, instead of complain∣ing, as is usual in such cases, desired the Judges that they would not let him down all that day, affirming that he held it too inestimable a content, ra∣ther to suffer so, then to offend any one. The Judges finding by this his constancy, that they should do no good by the rope, caused Ronsard to be let down, and began to think upon some other torment; and of as many as were propounded, the Judges liked none better then that which Peril∣lo's devilish wit found out; who said, that a better way to torment a Frenchman, then either ropes or fire, was to set him without either spur or switch, upon a slow dul horse: and so they did. It was a miracu∣lous thing to see, that Ronsard was no sooner set on horseback, but bela∣bouring
him with his legs, wrying his body twenty several waies, and shaking the bridle to make the horse go fast, he grew to such impatiency, and was surprised with such an agony of mind, as being quite out of breath, he cryed to the Serjeants that were by his side, Take me down, friends, for I am dead; take me down quickly, and I will tell all; and let them suf∣fer the punishment that have done the fault: Those you enquire after, were, Monsignor Carrieri of Padua, Iacapo Mazzoni of Cesena, and ano∣ther whom I know not; but you may know from the other two that I have named. The XCIX. ADVERTISEMENT. All the Princes of the world beseech Apollo that he wil insert into their people the love of their Country. THe Ambossador from all the Princes of the Universe, who came long since to Parnassus, had on Thursday long audience from his Majesty, and the common report is, That in the name of all his Princes, he made a sore complaint, that their people committed every day such shameful ex∣cesses, so inormous actions, as that they had made the art of Reigning much more difficult then it was: That they were so far advanced in their disorders, as a Prince could not now give a City, or any strong Hold in custody to a Souldier, without running evident danger of being in a short time treacherously assassinated; and that they could not be so circumspect nor wary in chusing a Captain-General, or other Officer of War, but that they were soon brought into the sad condition of being forced to fear their servant friend, then their Prince enemy; and that the peoples iniqui∣ty was no less, then the Commanders perfidiousness: For their people were so shamefully given over to a vitious curiosity, as they began in a short time to hate any Prince, how good soever; shewing the same desire and liking to change Princes, as they had to change meat at their tables: That hence it arose, that Princes in their greatest needs were not only not assisted by their people, and defended by them with that affection and cha∣rity as they were bound to do; but it was every day seen how they were shamefully betrayed by them, and for a little money sold to their enemies. And that the Princes had at last learnt, that for certain all these evils were occasioned through the little love which people bore unto their Countries; and that Rome, the Queen of the World, and Mother of Empire, could suc∣cesfully extend the Confines of her Dominion from the East to the West, only by means of the cordial love which her Citizens bore her: That whereas amongst them, banishment was as terrible as death, many modern Princes, that they may not be without Subjects, nor have their Countries unpeopled, were forced to forbid men the forgoing of their Country, upon pain of forfeiting their Estates. That therefore all the Princes of the world did jointly signifie unto his Maj. that all the remedies they could use against this so grievous evil, had proved invalid, and that therefore they humbly intreated him that he would be pleased to insert into the hearts of subjects, that fervent charity, and that immence love unto their Countries, as was seen to be in the Subjects of Commonwealths, and wherein doubtlesly the
chief greatness, and richest treasure lay, of whosoever reigned. Apollo an∣swered the Ambassador, That Princes might make their Subjects love their Countries much better then he could by good Government, and e∣qual Justice, and by liberality, and procuring them perpetual abundance: For that all men, who by natural instinct, bore an excessive love to what∣soever Country they were born in, were easily induced not to love it, when it was made odious to them by incommodious living: For men would ra∣ther be benumn'd with cold, then stand by a fire, which filling the house with smoak, made their eyes water. The XCVII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo wakes a general hunting of Pismires and Tortoises, as being both of them Beasts of evil example to man∣kind. YEsterday morning Zenofon, Apollos Master-Hunt, gave order to Acteon, Adonis, and to the other chiefest hunters of this State, that they should be ready with their dogs the next day, for that his Ma∣jesty was resolved to make then a general hunting; and every one thinking that Apollo, according to his custom, would have gon to the Mountain Ida, or to the Hill of Helicon, were were great store of Gotes, Stags, Wild Bores, and other wild beasts; his Majesty, as he came forth of the Gate, declared the intended Chase to be against Pismires and Tortoises; which he said he intended to rout out of the earth, for the great benifit of mankind. Then many of the Vertuosi, desirous to know why his Majesty had conceived such anger against those animals, told him, that they thought the Tortoise was not only the emblem of mature delay, but the very type of those poor Vertuosi, who carried the houses of their patrimony, and the whole substance of Learning about with them; and that Pismires, which taught men to labour in the summer of their youth, to lay up food for the winter of their age, ought rather be assisted then pursued by his Majesty, as an admirable example of Providence. To these Apollo answered, That what they had said, was true; but that all men being more inclined to vice then to vertue, had learnt most scanda∣lous examples from those animals', and did not imitate them in their good things: for some passionately given to avarice, and being shame∣fully inslayed to their own Interests, had learnt the wicked custom of keeping continually with their head, feet, hands, and with all their mem∣bers, hid within the husk of their interest, and to carry about them the houses of their own commodities, with so much sordidness and obstina∣cy never to come out of them, as that they had made the sole interest of peculiar utility their Idol, only from the Tortoise: Whence it hap∣pened that such as these, when they wer made use of to take upon them
the care of widows and orphans, they presently turned them to their own advantage; and that the same men, if they were imployed by Princes in publick affairs, the very first day of their Magistracy they be∣gan to draw the water to their own Mill. And that as for the Pis∣mires, many had learnt from them the unhappy example of toyling and moyling both day and night, not ever taking so much as one hour of lawfull recreation, to the end that they may heap up by all, yea though unlawful means, the grain of that wealth, which was afterwards mar'd by the rain of Gods anger, or stolne away by mice, by thieves, Serje∣ants, Judges, Atorneys, who alwaies lie in wait for the wealth of these avaritious wretches, who like Pismires, not caring (though they abound in all things) to be lean and ill-favoured, suffering like dogs in their life and reputation, did so drown themselves in their sordid scraping, as they cared not though they were persecuted, ill treated, and troad upon by all conditions of men, even as Pismires were. And that God ha∣ving placed that vertuous providence which is void of all defect, in the miraculous Bees, men should look upon those, and imitate them, who with the love of all men, and without doing any the least harm, build their houses full of honey taken from flowres; whereas with the gene∣ral hatred of all men, Pismires stole grain from others grainaries; and that the Bees made both honey and wax, not only for their own accom∣modation, but for the general good of mankind: A most pretious in∣struction; that those exercises, and those imployments are holiest and most blest by God, which have the publick benefit joyned to their own advantage; whereas Pismires accumulated riches stolne from others, only for their own use. The C. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo refuseth to receive a Censure presented him by a Lit∣terato, which was made upon the Poem of an Italian Ver∣tuoso. APollo had already ended the toilsom course of day, when descending in his radient Charriot to the West, a Vertuoso, whose name Menan∣te doth wisely conceal, for fear of drawing some mischief upon himself, came before Apollo, and presented his Majestie with a very severe cen∣sure which he had made upon the Poem of an Italian Vertuoso. Apollo did openly appear to be so little satisfied with that present, as manifest signes of anger were seen in him: in so much as turning to Petrach who was by him, he said that it was great folly in men who not considering how they were addicted to whom they presented any thing, would offer spectacles to those that are blind, a lute to him that is deaf, or wine to an abstenious man. His Majestie then turned towards the Litterato, who would have pre∣sented him with the Book, and told him, that the good of Melloans was
given to such as he was, and the outside to hogs; that therefore he should carry such trash as those in a cart to the common-shore, or throw them into the river, and that he should present him with what of good and vertuous he had found in that Work; which he would not only very willingly read, but be beholding to him for it. The unlucky fellow answered, That he had only minded the errors of the Poem, not taking notice of such things in it as deserved praise. Whereat Apollo was so incenst, as though at that time (as it falls out continually in his setting) the beams of his face were very much sweetned and allaid; yet through anger his countenance grew as fiery as if it had been noon-day, and answer'd that unlucky wretch thus; It grieves my very heart to have met with one of those malitious fools, who labour by their pens to purchase that shame, which wise men so much abhor: And though your shameful demeanor deserves a much greater pennance, I will at this time be content with this which I now give you: Pick out with your hands, without the help of a sive or fan, all the darnel and chaf which you shall find in a bushel of corn, which I will presently cause to be given you by my Factor General Columella, and bring it to us, we will tell you what you shall do with it. The bushel of corn was forthwith delivered out unto him by Columella, which was so ful of darnel and chaf, as he spent much time in cleansing it, and presented it to his Majesty in a great hand∣basket. Apollo bad him carry the darnel to the Market and sell it, and he would freely give him all the money he could make of it. The silly soul said he did not only dispair to find any customer for that despicable com∣modity, but that to appear in the Market with a basket full of such vile stuff, would make him be laught at. Apollo bad him then go give the dar∣nel to somebody, and thereby purchase a new friend; the wretch reply'd, he durst not present so poor a thing to any man, which if he should do, he should be but derided. Then Apollo's fury being very much over, he said, if the refuse cul'd from such things as were good, were not fitting merchandize for wise men, and that they were neither worth selling nor giving, he was convinced out of his own mouth that he had been ill advised when he un∣dertook the business of leaving the roses which he found in the Poem by him censured, to make an unuseful and shameful collection of the thorns or prickles: And that in the reading of other mens labours, the wary Ver∣tuosi imitated the Bee, which knew how to gather honey even from bit∣ter flowres. And that there being no sublunary thing which was not knead∣ed with some imperfections; some bran would be found in the Works of Homer, Virgil, Livy, Tacitus, and Hyppocrates, who were the wonders of writing, if a man would be curious in sifting them; but that he was satis∣fied if the flowre of his Vertuoso's Composures were currant merchan∣dize: That the defects of good Authors were conceal'd by the juditious and friendly readers, and publisht only by such as are malitious. And that to make profession of taking out the worst things only out of other mens writings, was the office of base beetles which spent their lives with much gusto amidst the filth of excrements: a thing very far from the practice of those honoured Litterati who feed advantagiously upon good things. And that since his beloved Poets thought Time the most pretious Jewel which the East produced, he could not well see how he could be so very a fool as to believe that they would cast away their hours in perusing his maliti∣ous detractions, which they might advantagiously spend in reading the Works of Pindarus, Sophocles, Ovid, and of his beloved Heracli. This
unfortunate Censurer was no sooner parted full of confusion from Apol∣lo, when he against whom the Censure was made came hastily in, earnestly desiring permission that he might reply by way of Apology to his malevo∣lent friend. Apollo smiled, and told him, that he appeared as little wise, who would by his Apology put a value upon other mens prating, as Cen∣surers appeared malitious: That it was the greatest part of gross ignorance, to lend an ear to the back-biting babling of those whisperers, who not having sufficient parts to publish their own talents, foolishly believe they may win credit by carping at others; and that the Travailer who being annoi'd with the noise of Grashoppers in the midst of scorching Iuly, should alight from his horse to kill them all, were a very fool; whereas he were wise, who though he had a pair of good ears, would seem to be deaf, pass on his way, and let them sing and burst. The end of the first Century.
THE SECOND CENTURY. The I. ADVERTISEMENT. The Province of Phosides, doth by her Ambassadors complain to Apollo, that his Majesties Officers do not any whit observe their priviledges; and are not onely not listened to in what they do say, but receive a harsh answer. THe well peopled Province of Phosides, vvho rebelled some years ago against the ignorant, and voluntarily submitted themselves to be governed by Apollo; from whom they ob∣tained such ample priviledges, as those of Phosides might be said to live in a sort of liberty, hath now sent her Am∣bassadors to this Court, to complain of his Majesties Of∣ficers, who do no vvays observe the priviledges granted them, desiring that they may be better observed. Apollo not being vvell pleased with this business, referred it to the Council of State, from vvhom tvvo days ago the Ambassadors received their final ansvver, That the Lords of the Council did very much vvonder, and vvere scandalized, that the people of Phosides should understand the affairs of the World so little, as not to knovv that Priviledges, Exemptions and Immunities given to people nevvly purchased, vvere like those cherries vvhich vvere given to little children to quiet them vvhen they cry; vvhich vvhen they vvere quieted, vvere taken from them. The Prime Ambassador stoutly replied, that if it vvere the custom of Pernassus so foully to abuse simple people, Phosides vvould quickly cry again that she might be pacified vvith cherries of nevv priviledges. To him Francis Guichardin, Lord President of the Council ansvvered, That they should do vvell first to consider their present condition, for they should find that they had suf∣fered themselves to be brought to such a point of slavery by the Cita∣dels
and strong Holds, which in time of peace they had permitted to be built amongst them; as if they returned to complain and cry, they might be quieted by scourges, without any danger to Apollo's affairs. The II. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo makes use of the unfortunate Count St. Paul, to frighten the Nobility in Kingdoms from rebelling against their natural Lords, at the pressure of Foreign Princes. APPOLLO much to his displeasure hath learnt, how that some Princes that they may vanquish their enemies, do not use open force (as was the custom of ancient Hero's) with armed men in the field, but make use of fraud and cozenage; whereat they are so good, as they have been thereby able happily to atchieve very great enterprizes: for the first arms that these draw against their enemies, is shamefully to corrupt the Loyal∣ty of other mens subjects, and to incite the Nobles to rebel. Apollo to remedy so great disorders, gave command to Iovanni Francisco Lottoni, Register of his Majesties Moral Precepts, that the miserable Count S. Paul, for a publique example of very great misfortune, should be carried in an open chair by beggars, and set before the Porch of the Delphick Temple: This great Prince, with his hands without fingers, and so shamefully torn, as they seem to be mangled by dogs, is shewed by Lottoni to the people, who in great numbers pass in and out through that Temple, to whom he crys aloud, Faithful Vertuosi, lovers of learn∣ing, and holy moral records, take example by the calamity of this so miserable Prince, who hath lost the use of his hands, which God pre∣serve still free to you; and learn at the cost of others, what it imports to be always pulling of Crabs out of their holes with your own hands, for the advantage of other men.
The III. ADVERTISEMENT. Great Euclid, for having distated some powerful men, is cruelly beaten by their Bravoes. THe freshest news from Libetro brought by the ordinarry post from Ephesus, bears date the fourteenth of this present moneth; and they tell us, that on the sixth of the same, about noon, Euclide, that Prince of the Mathematicks, was set upon by some under the Uranian Porch, who beat him so cruelly with sand bags, as they left him for dead. Apollo was mightily disturbed at this novelty; and the rather, for that though Euclide was better beloved, and more made of by the greatest Princes of this State, then any other Litterato, yet this so great excess appaared to be made by the command of some powerful person∣ages; for Euclide was first seized on by two of these Swash-backlers, and held fast, whilst other two beat him, who were seen to be backed by many armed men. There are many occasions alledged for this so great resentment; but the most generally received opinion is, that some po∣tent subjects of this State are very much ill satisfied with Euclid, for the Mathematical Instrument which he some few days before publish∣ed in the Schools, wherein was conclusively shewed, that all the lines of the thoughts, and actions both of Princes and private men, meet in this centre, how to take money handsomely from another mans purse, and put it into ones own. The IV. ADVERTISEMENT. In a Duel which hapned between an Italian Poet, and a Ver∣tuoso of Spain, the Spaniard being wounded to death, did so gallant an action before he expired, as Apollo gave order that he should be solomnly buried at the publike charge. A Great dispute arose some few days ago between a Spanish Vertuoso, and an Italian Poet touching a certain Lady, who challenging each other, met in Bellona's Forum, and the business being to be di∣sputed without defensive weapons, proved vrey cruel. For being arm∣ed onely with two short and sharp Terzetti, at the first encounter they grapled, and the Spaniard having received two mortal wounds, fell to the ground, and said these words to a friend of his who run in to
help him, Hermano azeme plazer d'enterarme, sin che ninguna mi desnude, Do me the courtesie friend, to bury me before I be stript naked. Which being said, his wounds bled so much as he dyed. The de sire which this Spaniard made to his friend, that he might not be stript, being noised abroad in Parnassus, made all men (as it commonly falls out in things forbidden) the more desirous to see him naked; especially since it was made by one of that wise Nation, which doth not onely never speak by chance, but never suffers a word to escape their mouthes which carries not mistery and great sense with it. And Apollo's self had the curiosity to know why that Litterato at the very point of death, did so earnestly desire not to be stript naked. So as commanding him to be stript, it was found that he who went so sprucely drest, and had a ruff about his neck so curiously wrought as it was more worth then all his other clothes, had never a shirt on; which caused much laughter throughout all Par∣nassus; only Apollo was much astonished at this novelty, and did mightily exaggerate the gallantry of this Litterato, who in the very agony of death was so sensible of his honor, as he closed his eyes with zeal to his reputation. For which excessive worth, which vvas a clear evidence of an extraordinary great mind; he commanded that he should be solemn∣ly buried at the publike charge, con la pompa censoria: the which was done with so great a concourse of the Litterati of all Nations, as more were never seen to be at any Roman triumph. Afterwards Flavius Quintillian; in a Funeral Oration which he made in praise of this Ver∣tuoso, did much exaggerate the happiness of the powerful Monarchy of Spain, whose greatness lay not (as he said) in the gold and silver shops of Peru, of Nova Spagna, Rio della plata, and in the Castiglia dell'oro; nor yet in the numberless number of Kingdoms which she was master of; but onely in the honorable condition of her Nation. Since it being clearly seen that this Spanish Vertuoso, in that his great calamity, en∣deavoured first not to suffer in his reputation, before he took order to have his wounds cured, it was an evident proof, that it was peculiar to the honourable Spanish Nation to prefer honor before life; and that the Spaniards were more careful not to commit any unworthy act, then they were of life. And Quintillian concluded his Oration with a cruel invective against Philosophers, who will not admit that two con∣traries can be found in one and the same subject, when great appearance and infinite substance, vain glory and sollidness, were visibly seen to reign, even in their greatest extreams amongst Spaniards.
The V. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having used great diligence to come by any of the Idols of Princes, proceeds with severity against one, who fell into the Iudges Power. APOLLO, much to his displeasure, perceiving the great disorders, occasioned not onely in great Empires, but also in little States, by the blindness of those Princes who assubject themselves to some one of their servants: Since neither his Majesties exhortations, nor the sad calamities which many Princes have undergone by so great folly, hath been able to make them avoid the hard destiny of being violently hurri∣ed into Hell by these inconveniences: his Majestie, not to abandon his protection of the Governors of the world, resolved some moneths since, to proceed with severity against such servants; who by their prodigious ambition, and devillish cunning, go about to command their masters; insomuch, as some years ago, he laid great fines upon such, and promised great rewards to any who would discover them to his Judges. And about a fortnight since, the Magistracy was told of one of these. who being afterwards taken, had the rack given him; whereupon he confessed all the wicked tricks which he had used, not onely to enslave, but even to make his master adore him. When Apollo saw the process made against this wicked one, he was much troubled to find that those very Princes who are jealous of their own children, either through their own blockish∣ness, or by the fraud of others, can bring themselves to the shameful infamy of becoming a slave to one of their ignoble servants; and he thought it very strange, that a Son or Nephew of a Prince, who that he might rule his Father, or domineer over his Uncle, had shewn himself to be infinitely ambitious, and to thirst after Government, and who at last had compast his desires, could then so metamorphose himself, as to relinquish that power which he by so many practises had gotten over a Superior, to one who was so far beneath him, a great wonder certainly, and which mans vvit can give as little reason for, as for the hidden ver∣tue of the Load-stone. Apollo, to the end that Princes might learn to keep themselves from committing such indignities, by seeing vvhat pu∣nishment vvas inflicted upon this Court-favorite, caused all the Princes that are resident in this Court, to meet tvvo days ago in the great Hall of Audience, in vvhose presence, and to their greater confusion, he caused Atorney Bossio to read aloud the shameful process made against this vvicked one; wherein vvhen he vvas asked vvhat tricks he had used to get the command over his Master? made ansvver, That from the very first day that he came to Court, he used all possible diligence to ob∣serve his Princes genius, and finding that he vvas mightily given to lasci∣viousness, he used all his Rhetorick to praise a vice so misbecoming a King, making it appear to be an egregious vertue, and then all his in∣dustry to be imployed by him therein; vvhich vvhen he had obtained,
he studied diligently hovv to fit him vvith those vvho mig ht satisfie his lust. That aftervvards under divers pretences, as that they vvere either vitious, or enemies to the Prince, he had by degrees removed all the Princes honest servants from the Court, vvho he knevv might have re∣duced him to have lived vertuously, and that he had put Confidents of his own in their places, who were likewise given to carnallity, and to all other sorts of vice, by whose means he had endeavoured that his Master should quite lose some signal endowments which he had by nature, and which he had received by his former good education. That then under pretence that they were unfaithful, he had so wrought it, as all the old State-Ministers were turned out, whose just sorrows for their Prince his loose life, he had made the Prince believe were but seditious backbitings, and so had made their places be conferred upon men void of counsel or wisdom, and who cared not for their Princes interest; for he onely de∣sired confidence in them, and that they would stick close to him: and that he had so surrounded his Master with such as these, as it was impos∣sible for him to hear truth from any one that was faithful to the common good, which truth ought always to be joyned to a Prince, as is his sha∣dow to his body. That then, to the end that he himself might alone go∣vern the State, he had brought his Prince to be so in love with idleness, as taking delight in nothing but pleasant Gardens, Conntrey-houses, and hunting, he hated to hear of business, or of any thing that concerned his State. That moreover, he had brought him to believe, that his having made him fall out with his own son, and the Princes of the blood, pro∣ceeded from his great zeal unto his service, and his love to the publique good of his people; and that he had so besotted him by his cunning tricks, as the unfortunate Prince called that the vigilancy of a faithful servant, an ease to his labours, charity towards the publike affairs, which was known by the veriest fools of his State to be Tyranie, and as such abhord: And had made him believe, that his idleness, slothfulness and negligence was honourable repose. That besides all this, to the end that the Prince might never awake out of so shameful a sleep, and opening his eyes, might be aware of his own simplicity, and of other mens wicked ambition, he had filled his house with flatterers, who by their infamous perswasions, cryed up his folly for great worth; the peoples universal hatred, for immeasurable love; publique fault finding, for exagerated praise; confusion, for excellent Government; the tyrany of a wicked personage, for excellent service; termed extortions, justice; prodigal∣lity, liberallity; his slothfulness and baseness in having quite given over the Government of his State, honorable labour, and diligent rule. All the Princes who heard the wickednesses confest by this perfidious man, were so astonished at the hearing thereof, as they said, it was charity to hang him; and that therefore Perillous should be desired to invent some new torment whereby this monster of nature might be by piece-meal torn in pieces, and made to dye a lingring death; to the end that no man might ever commit such wickedness hereafter. And the Princes were so moved with the foulness of this process, as they earnestly desired his Majestie to use extraordinary rigour to such who should suffer them∣selves to be so shamefully treated by their fraudilent servants. And be∣cause Apollo being so touched at the very soul, with the vertuous desire made unto him by these Princes, let fall some tears: the foolisher sort
of people believed that it was occasioned through his great joy to see the Princes so much detest that vice, which he desired they might shun: but the wiser sort of Vertuosi who were there present, knew very well, that Apollo bewailed the blindness of Princes, who are so drunk, as hating their own errors in others, did earnestly desire that those vices should be punished with extraordinary severity, in which the most of them, without being aware of it, were dipt even up to the eyes. So pernitious is it in Princes to idolatrize Minnions, as knowing it, and blaming it in their companions, they are not aware of it in themselves, but do highly commend it; and they who boast themselves to be the onely Aristarchi of the world, are those who fall into this shameful error. The VI. ADVERTISEMENT. All the Monarchies of the world affrighted at the over-great power and successful proceedings of the German Common∣wealths, consult in a general Dyet how to keep themselves from being in time opprest by them. THe general Dyet which all the Monarchies of the World intimated four moneth ago, to be held at Pindo the 15 of the last moneth, and which by excluding all the Commonwealths of Europe, occasioned great jealousies in them, lest a general league might be concluded against all free Countreys. Being at last dissolved, on the 20 of the present moneth, and the Princes being already returned to their own States, it is known for certain, that it was called for no other end, but against the infinite number of Commonwealths which have of late been instituted amongst the Switzers, Grisouns, Bearnois, and other people of Germany; particularly against those which with so much scandal to Monarchy, be∣gin to rise between the Hollanders and Zealanders in the Low-Coun∣treys. When all the Monarchies of the World, according to their custom were set down in a great Hall; it is said their Lord Chancellor spoke thus: Most high and mighty Monarchs, and Rulers of mankind, it may clearly be seen, by the sad and dangerous condition which you are in, that there is nothing under the Sun which is perpetual, nor which doth not threaten present ruine. Since Monarchy her self, which by all under∣standing Polititions hath always been held for the sovereign Queen of all Policy, hath got so great a rent and cleft in her Fabrick, as it is not onely evidently seen that she is not of that Eternal Foundation which those who understand State affairs, have continually asserted her to be, but seems to be neer ruine. Monarchies from the very beginning of the
World to this present day have governed so happily, and won such re∣putation, as of all sorts of Governments, they have been cheifly praised, and have always had the victory over Commonwealths, their enemies. And though it was thought that the immence Roman Li∣berty, by having destroyed so many famous Monarchies, would have put the whole World at Liberty, yet at last (though after a long time) she her self turned into a Principality, which is the certain end, and in∣evitable death of all Commonwealths. And though the prime wits of the world have laboured sufficiently to institute long lived Common∣wealths, against the eternity of Monarchy, yet could they never com∣pass their intent. Olegarchies being known to be the insufferable Ty∣rany of a few, have been soon turned to Principalities; and the Insti∣tutors of Democracy could never find out a good way how to curb the people, so as it might have the chief Authority to command, but after bloody seditions hath precipitated into cruel slavery, and hath nursed up a Serpent in her bosom; some ambitous Citizen, who by the certain way of the universal affection of ignorant people hath known how to get the chief Lordship over the free Countrey. Moreover, we have often seen popular Government prove so hateful to the Nobility, as first the Romans, after the death of Caesar; and then the Florentines when Alexander Duke of Medecis was slain, chose rather to live under new Princes, then return to the cruel servitude of the Plebeians, who are always seditious. And the very Aristocratical Governments, which of all others hath cost so much sweat, have at last ended in Monarchies; for the founders of such Republicks, could never perfectly compass those two important qualities, which make Aristocracy eternal; of maintaining such an equality amongst the Nobility, but that there would arise an odious disproportion of honours and riches amongst them, the fruitful mothers of Tyrany; and of giving such satisfacti∣on to signal subjects, to the haughty minds of Citizens excluded from publike Government, so as they may be content to live servants in that Countrey, which hath the name of being Free. And those who have boasted to make mixt Commonwealths eternal, have been like∣wise mightily deceived; for as in humane bodies, the four elements whereof they are composed, after an agreement of long health, do at last alter, and that which proves most predominant kills the man; so the mixture of Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy in a Common∣wealth, one of the three humors getting at length the upper hand, she must needs in length of time alter; which alteration changing the form of Government, at last bereaves Liberty of her life, as we may have seen a thousand examples in former times; for all that learned men have set down in writing, and proved by good grounds of reason, doth not prove true in practice; it being clearly seen, that Licurgus, Solon, and other Legislators for living free, who have thought to tame the unvanquishable spirits of men by the excellent provision of holy in∣stitutions, and to curb the malice of the ambitious by severe punish∣ments, have been more then much abused in their opinions. But now (nor can I speak it without great terror and grief of heart) we plainly see with our own eyes, that the Germans, being excellent Artificers, no less of Commonwealths, then of Clocks and Watches, have at last invented those eternal Liberties, which for so many ages the wisdom of
ancient Philosophers have in vain sought for, and from whence Monar∣chies have great reason to apprehend their death and utter extirpation. Never was there a more golden sentence said (most glorious Monarchs) then that, That every least despised sparkle is apt to occasion great com∣bustions. For who would ever have believed that that little spark of of liberty which first arose amongst the Switzers, would have been able to kindle a fire, which should afterwards dilate it self so far in Ger∣many, as the World now sees and wonders at? And what man how wise soever, could have foretold, that in so short a time it would have caused the combustion of so many Cities and warlike Nations; which to the great shame and infinite danger of Monarchy, have vindicated their liberty? Certainly it is a thing almost miraculous to believe, that the little liberty which began to have a being amongst the Switzers, a poor people, and husbandmen of a very barren soyl, and which was so much despised by you, should afterwards be able to infect the most warlike Nations of Germany with the same disease; and which is yet the greatest miracle, who could ever have foreseen, that these Com∣monwealths should in so short a time win such credit with all Poten∣tates, as well in civil affairs, as for matter of Arms, as that they should not onely be held the supreme Umpires of peace and war in Europe, but the very greatest Terror of the chiefest Princes of the World. The Commonwealths of Germany (most illustrious Princes) are Trumpets which should awaken you from the too supine sleep wherein you have so long lain. Know your evils, look upon your dangers, which cry aloud for speedy remedy. Since in the German Commonwealths you see not onely Aristocracy grounded, with so wise laws, as they promise long life, but that which all men thought impossible, quiet and peace∣ful Democracy. The Commonwealth of Rome, which with an un∣paralel'd ambition proposed unto her self as her ultimate end, the abso∣lute Dominion of the World; that she might arive at so immense an tent, was forced to be continually in arms, and to put weapons into her Citizens hands, who by continual command of Armies, and by the long Government of large Provinces, filled their private houses with treasures befitting any King, but very disproportionable for Senators of well regulated Republiques; and by the too great authority which was unwisely and fatally given them by the Senate, of bestowing even whole Kingdoms on whom they best liked, they swole so big with the wind of ambition, as that equality of Authority, which is the soul of free Countreys, was wholly disordered in the Roman Nobility. By reason of these disorders it was, that first the Silli and Marii arose in Rome, and then the fatal Pompeys and Caesars, who after long and bloody civil wars, slew that so famous Liberty. And for the last calamity of Monarchy, it cannot be hoped that this wide gate should ever be open∣ed in the well-regulated German Commonwealths, where all ambition of commanding over vanquished people, and neighbour nations, be∣ing utterly banished, the glorious resolution and firm purpose reigns onely in them, of not yielding obedience unto any. A happy resolve, which maintains that necessary equality between the Citizens of those Hans-Towns, and between the chief Senators; and works this effect, that whilst they wage not war to impose that slavery upon others, which they themselves seem so to shun, their neighbours do neither hate them,
nor are they jealous of them. So as it is no wonder if they promise un∣to themselves long lives, and think themselves unvanquishable by the power of whatsoever Potentate; for they are of opinion, that the best Politick precept which by others is to be admired in the German Hanf-Towns, is to detest the acquisition of neighbouring Nations; for with like wisedom they enjoy that publike peace with Foreigners, and that private agreement amongst their Citizens, which makes their freedom formidable abroad, and safe at home. This that I say, is clearly seen by the miseries into vvhich the Roman Liberty, after six hundred years, did at last fall; vvhich not to speak any thing of the infinite acquisiti∣ons vvhich she made in Italy and elsevvhere) by the last conquest vvhich she vvoud make of France (a Kingdom vvhich hath alvvays proved fatal to Foreigners vvho endeavoured to subjugate it) fell headlong in∣to Caesars Tyranny: And the Florentines, by their obstinate ambition of making those of Pisa slaves, did so disorder their ovvn Common∣vvealth, as they may serve to teach the World, that it is better and safer for Republiques to have their neighbouring Cities and Nations Confiderates and Friends, then subjects and enemies. This disorder is not seen in the Hans-Tovvns of Germany, vvho resting content vvith their own liberty, suffer those who joyn vvith them to live free under the Government of their ovvn Lavv; vvhence it is, that in Germany, and in universal concerns, there appears but one onely Commonvvealth to be in Germany, but many in particulars; and the Arms of the Freemen of that Warlike Nation, serve onely for instruments of peace, and to preserve their ovvn, not to intrench upon the liberties of other men. A thing which certainly forbodes much evil to Monarchy; for what more pernitious or cruel enemy can a Prince have, then he who assaults him with pretence of communicating liberty to a subjugated people: These are the arms by which the German Hans-Towns have so dilated them∣selves: And certainly not without good reason; for people cannot kill that enemy, who instead of death, fire and plunder, brings them li∣berty, which by instinct of nature, is so much desired by all men. Lo then, illustrious Monarchs, how the German Hans-Towns are little in particular, each of them contenting themselves with their own liber∣ties; but immensly great in general, for that they do all communicate in the interests of publique liberty. So as a Prince cannot have to do with one, but he must offend all; a disorder which is so much the great∣er, for that like a contagious disease, or enraged cancer, it every day encreaseth by degrees, taking in new Cities, and new people, and as∣sembling them all to their own liberty the first day of their purchase, naturalize foreign Nations, make enemies dear friends; wherefore it may well be doubted, that in a short time the whole world will be in∣fected with this contagious disease; and the danger is the more dread∣ful in these unfortunate times, wherein the liberty of Commonwealths is gotten into so high an esteem, as our own subjects fear not to call it the onely filicity of mankind. Whence it is, that (when men can think to enjoy it quietly, and that as it is in the Hans-Towns of Germany, every one may live in liberty under the Laws of their own Countrey) it is so infinitely coveted, as it is purchased, though at the expence of much blood. And if such a disease hath been able to enlarge it self so far in so short a time amongst dissolute people, people so given over
to gluttony and drunkenness, what shall we think it may do if it should fasten in Italy or Spain, or in the other sober Nations of Europe, the most of which, as we all know, are so affected to Monarchy. The bu∣siness about which you are here met, is as you have heard, most mighty Monarchs, of importance, and requires the more speedy remedy, for that if the Hollanders and Zealanders shall once have laid a good foun∣dation, and shall have perpetuated themselves in that liberty which they have usurpt against the powerful King of Spain, their natural Lord, you may well, from so foul a scandal, fear your utter extirpation. And you as well the most Christian, as the most powerful Kingdom of France, which in this so majestical an Assembly do deservedly hold the first place, amongst the greatest Monarchs of the world, you very well knew that in your last troubles, it was oft talk of; and per∣haps agreed upon by your seditious enemies, how to kindle in your bosom; and amongst your faithful French men, the fire of the German liberty; so far are the evils advanced; which to those that understand so much, it may suffice me to have touch upon. This Discourse made by the Lord Chancellor did infinitely trouble those great Monarchs. And many Princes, whose States lay neerest those Republicks, finding what danger they were in, were extraordi∣ly afflicted. Wherefore they fell suddenly to think upon remedies; and as the most immediate, a strait League was propounded to be made by all Monarchies, against Commonwealths, hoping that by open force of so many Princes joyned together, they might easily be mastered. But in this opinion, which at first seemed very plausable to every one, great difficulties were afterwards discovered: for some Princes put the Dyet in mind, that it was not onely indiscretion, but great rashness to af∣front with mercenary Souldiers, whose interest in the war was but the poor pay of six pence a day, a Nation which took up Arms for the defence of liberty; and which was that important reason of mens proving so couragious; And to this purpose, Charls Duke of Burgundies unfortunate case was instanced in; who though he was held to be the thunder of War, the Orlando and Mars of his times, was notwithstand∣ing, together with the greatest part of his Army, cut in pieces by the Switzers, onely because each man that fights in defence of liberty, hath twenty hands, and as many hearts. And it was considered; that it being impossible for the Princes to van∣quish so many Commonwealths in as short time (as the business re∣quired) the expence of much time would likewise make it altogether in∣feasable; for that the Hollanders and Zealanders had taught all Princes, that if people who defended their liberties were long trained up in war, they became unconquerable; and this was said to happen, because the charity of a free Countrey, doth not onely make the hearts of the Citi∣zens thereof undaunted, and their hands nimble, but makes their souls faithful, and quickens their wits. And it was further said; That that Prince took a bad business in hand, who could not fight his enemy with Canons loaded or charged with gold, which was that which routed all Armies, and won all Bat∣tels, and which had the wonderful effect of destroying a mans Loyalty
And concerning this particular, reflection was had upon the modern actions of the Hollanders and Zealanders, who out of the very great affection which they bore to the liberty of their Countrey, had so gal∣lantly resisted, not onely the steel and iron, but even the gold of that valiant and rich Spanish Nation, which knows so well how to make use both of the one and the other, as it was held a thing almost miraculous; that at one and the same time they could defend their new Common∣wealth, no less against the open force of the Spaniards; then against the concealed designs of the French and English; and cheifly against the subtil cunning of that crafty Fox the Prince of Orange: All which (though under various and specious pretences of liberty) had as great a mind to make themselves masters of those States, as the King of Spain had to re∣duce them under his ancient Dominion. To this, a second, and much more important difficulty was added; for consultation was had, what the Colleague Monarchs should do with the German Commonwealths, when by their forces they should have conquered them. For answer to which, the common reason of Nations, and the ordinary use of leagues was urged; which is, that the acquisiti∣on of enemies States made by Colleagues, if any of them be of the number of the colleaguing Princes, that they should be restored to their ancient Lords: by vertue of which law, the Roman Empire desired, that when the victory should be gotten, those Cities and Hans-Towns should be restored to her, which had withdrawn themselves from her authority. And the house of Austrea pretended with good reason, to repossess her ancient Dominion over the greatest part of the Switzers, and other people, who to make themselves free, had shook off the yoke of her Government. Though all these pretensions were by the Senate ac∣knowledged to be just, yet did the Princes so much stomach them, as after a long dispute, it was at last resolved, that no more should be spoken thereof: And it was then said, that it being impossible for the two afore∣said reasons, that the Monarchies should by open Force subjugate the Commonwealths of Germany, they should for the future so wisely strengthen and fortifie themselves, as that the malady of the German Hans-Towns, which till then had made such and so prejudicial progress, should grow no greater. And it was resolved, that it being very palpa∣ble, that the many large priviledges which were granted by some too prodigal Princes to their vassals, in a middle way of living free, and this not without great occasion, had made them affect total liberty; that therefore such priviledges, as being scandalous, and very pernitious to Monarchy, should not onely not be granted hereafter, no not to any de∣sert, how great soever; but that every Potentate should cunningly by little and little, endeavor to take them from their people, and bring them so wholly into servitude, as they should not have any the least ken of those priviledges which had heightned their minds to affect total Freedom: And hereupon some former Emperors of Germany, and Dukes of Bur∣gony, were severely reprehended, who were not onely fools in granting their people prejudicial exemptions, but ignorantly avaritious in selling them for a small sum of money, vvhereby they had put themselves and other Monarchies upon great difficulties. And for their greater severity, these Princes decreed, that all form, all footsteps of levelling, should from the very root be extirpated from amongst their subjects; the wisest
of the Dyet affirming, that the great inequality of the Gentry in a King∣dom, was that which secured them from ever bringing in a form of free Government: and the Monarchy of Spain was so stiff in this Opinion, as she freely said, she spoke it knowingly, that nothing had more pre∣served the Dukedom of Millan from living in that freedom, after the death of Philip Maria Viscount, which was then talked of being insti∣tuted therein, then the great disproportion of wealth, which hath al∣ways been observed to be in that noble Dukedom, not onely between the Nobility and people of Millan, but even between the Nobility it self, which had also been the reason why, in the rich Kingdom of Naples, no speech was ever heard to be made by those Barons, of levelling or living free, no not when they had so fair an occasion presented them of doing so by the failing of the blood Royal, and by many other inter∣regni which they had had in their troubles; for that the Nobility of King∣doms had this of natural instinct, rather to admit of any subject how bar∣barous soever for their King, then to see not onely Barons of late editi∣on, but even Doctors and Shop-keepers made equal (which liberty would do) like to them. Moreover, it was hinted, as an excellent means where∣by to weaken the German Hans-Towns, that the Potentates of Europe would forego the so pernitious custom of buying at a deer and dishonor∣able rate the schum of the Switzers, Grisouns, and other German Nations, it being sure that if they should be left in their own Countreys, those unquiet, seditious and disorderly spirits, which much to their pro∣fit, they send abroad, would cause such fractions at home, as they would be seen to turn those weapons upon themselves, which now they sell to unwise Princes at the weight of gold. But the many jealousies which have always reigned, which reign now more then ever, and which it is to be believed, will for ever reign amongst the greatest Kings of Chri∣stendom, wrought so, as for fear, lest the one might leave all the refuse to be made use of by the other, so salutiferous a memorandum was pub∣liquely praised by all, and in private abhorred by every particular. But it is true, that to make Monarchy as pleasing to the people as it was pos∣sible for Princes to do, these underwritten Articles were with great so∣lemnity penned, established, and sworn unto in the Dyet to be inviolably kept. I. THat since to love and fear God with all ones heart, was the wisest piece of Policy, and the most perfect State-Reason which could be learned and practised by Princes, they should not for the future make use of his most holy name (as many had formerly done) as a means whereby to get money from their people; and to hurry them or wheel them about with divers Sects, and new Religi∣ons, such as made most for their worldly interests; but to obtain that favour from his Divine Majestie, which brings abundance of all that is good to Princes who fear God, and to people who obey his holy Laws. II. That for the future they should be content so to milk and shear the sheep of their Flock, as that they should not onely not flea them, but not so much as touch a bit of their skin, being mindful that men were crea∣tures which had understanding, not beasts which knew nothing; that
therefore there was a great deal of difference between Shepherds who shore and milked sheep, and Prince-shepherds, who shore and milked men; the latter being to use the shears of discretion, instead of those of meer interest, which are onely made use of (and that always unfor∣tunately) by greedy Shepherds; it having been often seen, that pub∣like hatred hath been able to metamorphize the simple sheep of subjects, into skittish Mules, who have driven their indiscrete shepherd out of the fold with kicking. III. That they should keep their people within the bounds of fear, not with such a caprichious beastiality as makes the Government of one man alone dreadful, and then totally pernitious, when he will judge mens lives by his sole arbitrary power; but by being inexorable in those faults onely which not deserving pardon, had need to be punished with all the severity that the Law allows. IV. That they should be spairing of publike moneys to unworthy personages, prodigal to such as did deserve well; for that they being so hardly drawn from the subjects, every Prince who would deserve the name of a good shepherd, was bound to give them so much satisfaction, as to see that their moneys were not prodigally wasted in hunting, tilting, feasting, in inriching Bawds, Buffoons and Flatterers; but that they were judiciously laid out for the advantage of publike peace. V. That they should for the future confer Dignities and Magistracy to such as were most worthy, having respect onely to the merit of the desirer, not to any affection of the recommender; for that he did truly deserve to be accounted a fool, who to honor or advantage another, shamed himself, and disparaged his own gifts. VI. That they should bury their own odd conceits, and for ever banish their private passions: And to the end that they might put on that excellent resolution which makes Princes so happy, and King∣doms so flourishing, of absolutely submitting themselves to the good and publike interest of their people, they should totally abandon their own wilful opinion. VII. That they should appear to be absolute Monarchs of their States, in executing the results of their most important affairs, but in consulting thereupon, onely the heads of a well ordered Aristocracy; being sure that four fools who did advise together, made better resolves, then any the best greatest wit could do alone. VIII. That making God their example whose Lieutenants Princes were on earth, they should pardon Homecide onely out of compassion, born to minority in yerrs, to the greatness of the offence received more in honor then in life, to certain sudden furies; wch makes a man not master of him∣self bereaving him of all judgement and reason; but not for greediness of money; for that Princes could not introduce a more wicked Traffick in their Tribunals, then to make merchandize of mens blood. That there∣fore fraudulent Homicides committed out of premiditated malice should
by no means be forgiven, not onely for not drawing down Gods anger upon them, but for the administration of that right justice which they were bound to give unto their subjects; for that Princes by pardoning hainous offences, purchased onely the praise of being avaritiously and wickedly merciful. IX. That they should firmly believe themselves to be absolute Lords and Masters of their subjects; not as shepherds are of their sheep, who may sell them to the shambles; but onely utendo, not abutendo, by using, not by abusing them; for people imbittered by bad usuage, could not live long with that ill satisfaction, which is the fruitful mother of bad resolutions. X. That they should think the true heaping up of riches consisted in giving content unto their people, and in making them of subjects, bro∣thers and children; and that the excellent art of taking Sturgions with Pilchards, was nothing else, then to purchase the rich treasure of mens hearts by a wise liberality, and to cheapen love by clemency: for to fill their coffers with gold, raised out of the taxes and exactions (as some Princes do) was not onely to swell that spleen which did so impare the health of a sound body, but did oft times serve as sharp spurs, and loud sounding Trumpets, to make Foreigners arm themselves that they may make themselves masters of so great wealth. XI. That in their insolences and extravagancies, they should by no means relie upon their subjects love, which was as soon lost by using an impertinancy, or by a distaste given, as it was won by a courteous or li∣beral action. Neither should they build upon their peoples former pa∣tience; for that the minds and humors of men did change and vary with Times, Places' and Persons. That therefore they should not wax proud of their peoples being grosly ignorant or that they were altogether un∣armed, nor should they presume too much upon them; for there was ne∣ver any Kingdom yet, which was not very full of such unquiet, ambiti∣ous and male-content Nobility, as would serve for sure guides to blind people; and for learned School-masters, who would teach ignorant peo∣ple the important precept, and the seditious doctrine, that to come out of the laborinth of the slavery of Monarchy, which was governed on∣ly by insolency, and the irregular fancy of a hair-brained Prince, like These's, they must follow the clew of arms; which was more dangerous to a Prince, for that despair caused in people by such proceedings, though they were weak, unarmed and ignorant, would make them find arms, courage and judgement in every corner. XII. That they should wear the powerful Militia of boundless Em∣pire (which the Laws will have Princes to have even over the lives of men, for terror of the wicked) by their side, for the security of such as good; but that they should never make use of it, & that they should free∣ly deliver up such as were guilty, to the power of sacred Justice, for the ranker of hatred and revenge was never a whit lessened by inflicting cruel torments upon the guilty. That therefore to the end that Delinquents might appease their so incensed souls, even at the bitter point of death,
they should let all favour in criminal causes proceed from themselves; and that the sword of justice should be onely exercised by their Magi∣strates. XIII. That in laying on of Taxes, as great caution as could be should be had to such things as tended to the feeding and cloathing of the poor, who live out of the sweat of their brows; and that they should lay the heavier impositions upon such things as belonged to the delights, luxuries and superfluities of the wealthy, who living idly upon their rents, minded nothing but great gaming, and inventing new vices. XIV. That above all things, they should be very careful, that all pub∣like provisions should be modestly exacted, and by discret parsonages; for it hapned oft times, that people were more troubled with the condi∣tion of him that gathered the taxes, and the violent manner of gathering it, then with the tax it self. XV. That they should use all possible industry in feeding the com∣mon people with bred, the Nobility with degrees of honour; and that to arrive at so happy ends, they should suffer free commerce amongst their subjects of selling and buying the fruits and incomes of their lands, and the gain of their Traffick: but that they should be very careful to fill their State-Magazines with corn, and all things necessary for the life of man, bought and brought in from foreign parts; which was a rich and happy Traffick, which paid Princes the use of a hundred for one, when by the great plenty occasioned thereby, they had lost their principal. XVI. That for the better content of their Nobility, who always thirst after glory and honor, they should confer places of Magistracy, and other chief dignities onely upon the Noble subjects of their States. And that they should keep, as from fire, from giving them that mortal wound, which had caused woful subversions in the greatest Kingdoms of Europe, of admitting foreigners into places of imployment, thereby to inrich and aggrandize them, and of exalting mean and ignorant persons to a higher degree then the jealousie of the State will bear, meerly out of their capretious affections; and that in a particular of so great concern∣ment, they should imitate the wisdom which wise nature had taught dogs, who cannot endure that a strange dog should come within the doors where they live, onely out of fear that they should steal their ma∣sters favour from them, which they are very jealous of, and that bread which is deservedly their due for having by their continual watchfulness, kept the house in safety. XVII. That in the Edicts which they should publish, they should imi∣tate well governed Commonwealths, the end of whose Laws is always seen to be the common good, not private interest, as it is often found to be in Principalities. XVIII. That they should for ever banish from out their houses, those Flatterers, Buffouns and Minions, who do so stain the reputation of any
great Prince; and that they should not onely be inamored of the ver∣tue, worth and merit of their Magistrates, and deliver themselves wholly up unto their power, but that they should even worship them. XIX. And because to be cast in suits, did redound as little to the re∣putation of private men, as for Princes to go to law with their vassals, and carry the cause against them, be it right or wrong, all such disputes should be first made known to men learned in the Law, and commence no suit, wherein their right did not evidently appear to all men. And that to free themselves from the stain of rapine and tyrany, they should ap∣pear more content when they had not onely lost the cause, but were con∣demned in damages, then over-joyed when the sentence went on their side. XX. That answerable to the custom of good Commonwealths, the ultimate end of their thoughts should hereafter be the peace and quiet of their States, which makes the people that enjoy it so happy; and that they should vent their over much ambition in acquiring the singular glory of well governing their people, which God hath given them, and not to affect other mens Dominions by fire, rapine, and the effusion of mane blood. That they should make poormens faults pecuniarly punish∣able; but that they should punish proud wealthy men in their lives, making them pay composition of blood, that they might make the whole world see, that they punishmens faults out of zeal to justice, not for greediness of money; he being a great enemy to publike peace, whom riches made proud, and spurred him up to commit faults. XXI. That they should endeavour to effect the good and vertuous living of their subjects, more by their own examples, then by rigour of law, it being impossible to keep people from committing those faults which their Princes are addicted unto. XXII. That in the Government of their States, they should not use that carelessness which is proper to Princes who possess great Kingdoms, or that too exact diligence which doth so disquiet the people, and which is usually seen in Princes, who having great wit, command over a little, State, but that they should sail with the safe north wind of Nequid Nimis. XXIII. That they should punish onely great aults with the rigour of the law▪ and seem not to see, or take notice of little ones, or (as be∣comes Princes who govern men, not Angels) freely pard on them; that for faults of a middle sort, they should use such punishments as were suitable to the misdemenors; and that they should shun, shewing them∣selves too severe in punishing at the present, to deter future excesses; that they should chifly study that the Princes clemency might clearly be seen in the punishment of any guily person, either in mitigating the pain, changing the punishment, or by pardoning confiscated goods. XXIV. That private injuries, as well as publique offences should always be vindicated by the chatable arm of justice; and that when
any of their subjects should offend them, they should not hate the whole family, but onely the party offending, with whose punishment their an∣ger should cease, and should shun the custom of preserving rancor, and of transmitting those eternal fewds and immortal defiances to their heirs, which making men dispair, were not onely very dangerous to Princes, but made Monarchies be hated. XXV. That all of them should as soon as may be, endeavour to free their people from the disease, which so much molests their minds, afflicts their bodies, and consumes their estates of the eternity of law suits; and that of all things they should keep themselves from that foul fault of reaping profit out of yearly revenues, that so they might shun the pub∣like hatred which they would incur, when people should see that these so great disorders served only for Leeches, to suck money out of the very bowels of their afflicted people, who finding no greater hell in this life, then the torment of pleading, and of being in the hands of ravenous Judges, Advocates, Notaries and Sergeants, it was the duty of every good Prince, rather by his own expence to free his people from being so pilled and pooled, then to make use of them for a rich, though very wicked commodity. XXVI. That they should preserve such grain, oyl and wine, and other things which appertain to the food of man, as grew in their dominions, yea even in years of greatest abundance; and when their was much su∣perfluity of them, and should by no means make sale thereof to foreign Nations; for since no man can secure himself of the next years plenti∣ful harvest, Princes could commit no greater folly then to be blamed for that scarcity which even God himself sends. XXVII. That the greatest advantage which Commonwealths have over Monarchies, lying in their being free from the impediment of wo∣men. All Princes should keep their wives, and all other women of their blood, from having any thing to do in Government, or in publike affairs; as those who by their indiscrete and avaritious proceedings, had caused sad Tragidies in many Principallities. And that they should firmly believe, that the great Polititian Tacitus, had never said a greater truth then Non imbecillem tantum, & imparem laboribus sexum: sed si licentia adsit, saevum, ambitiosum, potestatis avidum. Tacit. 3. Annal. That it is not onely a weak sex, and unfit for business; but if permitted, cruel, ambitious and greedy of power. These Articles being agreed upon, and sworn unto, the same Lord Chancellor heartily desired the Monarchs of the Diet, that (to the end that the world might not see the scandalous example of the States of Holland and Zealand) they would quite lay aside all other whatsoever kind of private interest; and that if (as they were obliged to do, both out of wisdom and State-policy) they would give no assistance to the Spaniards, so as they might the better witness to the world, that it was impossible for rebellious people to purchase liberty by seditious arms; that they would not at least assist the Hollanders and Zealanders, it
being great folly, and very bad counsel, to precipitate or overthrow their own affairs, by so shameful an example, to the end that they might dis∣compose the affairs of other men. All these Monarchs, with a won∣derful consent, answered the Lord Chancellor (so possitively can Princes, who are born, brought up, and have continually lived in the Tiberian art of Simulation, promise that with their mouthes, which their heart never dictates to them) that that should by all means be done, which they in private knew they would never execute. The VII. ADVERTISEMENT. The People of Phocides treating how they might rise in Re∣bellion, by reason of the relation which their Ambassadors made unto them, who were formerly sent to Apollo, to pray that their Priviledges might be observed: The re∣medy fittest to be applyed to such a disorder, is discust in his Majesties Royal Council. IT is not to be believed, how much the Inhabitants of Phocides were incensed, when they heard the relation which their Ambassadors made, who were sent by them to Parnassus, by reason of the breach of their Priviledges; for they could not endure that to boot with the pre∣judice of loss of priviledges, they should be scornfully treated, like boys. Wherefore horn-mad with anger, they stormed, and freely profest that they would by arms defend the priviledges of their Countrey, and that even with the loss of their last drop of blood, they would therewith en∣deavor to recover their lost liberty; and that if any thing of ill should befal them, they should deerly pay for it, who were about to enslave them. The nevvs of this sedition was soon brought to Apollo; and the business was argued many mornings in his Majesties Council; and though some of the chief thereof said, it was requisite to dispatch away immediately a Legion of Poets to Phocides, who might keep that in∣censed people in obedience; yet the opinion of Isabel Queen of Spain pre∣vailed, who for the excellency of her wit, hath deservedly the prime place in that Council. She said, that to provide soon for the prevention of insurrections in States, which were wholly in slavery to their Princes, was excellent Council; but that in such States, as by reason of many large priviledges, lived in a medium between slavery and liberty, rather then to prevent them with dangerous remedies, it might be wisely done, to tarry till the disorders were begun, whereby wise Princes might much advantage themselves; for then they might justly take from them all those priviledges, which are sharp thorns in the eyes of those that go∣vern.
The VIII. ADVERTISEMENT. A great controversie arising in point of Precedency, between the Prince of Bisagnano, and Dr. Juliano Corbelli of St. Marino. Apollo refers the consideration thereof to the Congregation of Ceremonies, by which it is decided. A Difference arose a while ago in point of Precedency, between the Prince of Bisagnano, and Iuliano Corbelli, Doctor of Law at S. Marino, a little Castle in Romania, but very famous for the great Pre-eminency of liberty which it enjoys, for it is governed like a Com∣mon-wealth: and though the Doctors pretensions were so despised by the Neapolitan Barons, as it was thought presumptuous, yet was not Corbelli any whit discouraged; but appealing to Apollo, his Majestie re∣ferred the business to the Congregation of Ceremonies in Parnassus; be∣fore whom the Prince scorned to appear, complaining, that in a cause which was so clear on his side, he should be made to appear in judge∣ment against a man born in so base a Countrey, as produced nothing but Swine-herds, he himself being an illustrious Neapolitan Baron. Yet lest sentence might be given against him for his contumacy, he was forced to acquaint the Congregation with what he had to alledge for himself; who having very diligently perused the evidences produced by both parties, gave judgement six days since on the Doctors side, who being born in a Free-Countrey; was (as they said) to walk hand in hand with Kings; much more to be preferred before a Neapolitan Ba∣ron. Then, as for the Fee or Tribute which the Prince possest in Bisag∣nano; they said, that it was declared by a decree made long before by his Majestie, that he did truly deserve the name of Prince, who obeyed no King; not he who in anothers Lordship, commanded over poor vas∣sals, by vvhom he might be daily accused, abused and persecuted in Court Leet, and other Tribunals; in which case the titles of Prince, Duke or Marquis was no real thing, but a kind of false Alchimy, which was very like those glass eyes which squint eyed people wear to honest the ill-favouredness of their faces, not to make them see; then, as for his noble blood, upon which the Prince, being descended from the noble family of Sanceverini, did ground his best pretension, they said, that the Congregation did not at all consider it, the clear Testimony of the Anatomists being produced by the contrary party; wherein it being clearly proved, that the bones, nerves, flesh and bowels of men were all made after the same manner, it denoted evidently that true Nobility vvas placed in the brains, not in veins.
The IX. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo publ shth a very severe Edict against some Littera∣ti, who under a cloak of feigned piety, cover downright a∣varice. APollo finding for certain that a new race of wicked men are sprung up in Parnassus, and in his other States, who though they have made Gold their Idol, yet to cover their unquenchable thirst after rich∣es, do so confidently make use of the cloke of feigned goodness, as they have dared to exercise the devilish art of hypocrisie bare faced; his Ma∣jesty to provide for the indempnity of those silly ones, who think all to be gold that glisters, and of those blockheads who cannot discern an Eel from an Adner, by an Edict of his published on Tuesday last, doth in the first place affectionately exhort all souls living, to walk by the so beaten way of honoured Antiquity, of bene vivere, & Laetari; which proceeds from Gods great grace to good men; assuring every one that men may win favour from God, and good will from men, even amongst great rich∣es, if they be honorably gotten, and well distributed: Wherefore he exhorted all men, that forgoing fiction, and all manner of double▪ dealing, as things which gave an ill savor even to good things, and which made mens devotion appear hypocrisie, they should live with that purity of soul, and that candidness of manners, which made even stones look love∣ly, much more men; and that if there were any one, who would by a holy life make that profession of piety, which is so suspected in men who have avarice joined to their great riches, that their devotion should by all means begin from the contempt of money, distributing it out unto the poor, and laying it out in pious works; which if they should not do, they should be held from those crafty companions who make use of piety more to deceive men, then to please God.
The X. ADVERTISEMENT. The City Pretor, or Chief Iustice of Parnassus, complai bitterly before Apollo of the Triumviri; a Magistracy newly instituted by his Majesty, That in an Edict of theirs published against Mignus and other Ministers of Princes obsenities, they have violated his Iurisdiction. APollo having learnt by many sad examples which have hapned, that Printing, which it is to be believed, was at first by Divine Councel suggested into the Cavalier Iohn of Mentz, only to facilitate the lear∣ning of the most illustrious Sciences, to such as are desirous of know∣ledge, is made use of by wicked men, not onely as an excellent in∣strument to staine mens minds, with impiety, obsceneness and e∣vil speaking; but that ambitious men serve themselves thereof for damn'd weapons to make people rebel against their natural Princes: Apollo, I say, by wholsom and Divine Councel (as the event hath shewn) did many years ago institute the remarkable Magistracy of the Triumviry, whose Office it is to send such books as are infected with impiety, sedition, and such obscenities as corrupt good manners, to the Pest-house. This Ma∣gistracy some three daies ago, under pain of grievous punishment, sent express command to all favorits, bawds, flatterers, and others whom their Princes do Idolize, who live desolutely, that they should not dare any more to stir out of dores, to the end that these monsters of nature might not (to the great scandal of good men) be seen to go so vain-gloriously trampling the street upon their pacing horses, and in their rich Coaches, as if they triumphed over the world, who by their lewd manner of living, having extorted those rewards from vitious Princes, which are only due to deserving men, are not worthy to eat bread. The City Pretor made a great complaint to Apollo of this novelty, accusing the Triumviry of having exceeded the bounds of their Authority, and very much in∣trencht upon his Jurisdiction. The Triumviry were immediately sent for by his Majesty, who defending their cause exceedingly well, said that they had by length of time clearly learnt, that certain obscene living books which walked up and down the streets, caused greater scan∣dal in well composed minds, and free from all pollution, then did Ma∣chiavil, Bodin, Aratin, and other writers of wickedness, and obsceneness, which were found hid in many Libraries; a disorder which ought the ra∣ther to be corrected, for that the wicked manners of living men, made a much greater impression in mens minds; then the filth that was read in dead Authors, whose damn'd writings many forbore to read, out of meer abhorition of such things, many for fear of offending God, and of being punisht by men, many for that they had not many of those forbidden books, or for want of curiosity, or love of idleness; but that men of ho∣ly lives, much against their wils, and not without offence, were forced to
read, study, contemplate, and honour these Bawds, Flatterets, and other Ministers of vitious Princes, who neither cared for Gods honor, nor their own reputation, who were scandalous two leg'd books, which were daily seen to walk the streets; and that he must be armed with more then humane vertue, who would not be contaminated and scandalized to see the sole aspects of these hateful men. The XI. ADVERTISEMENT. The Inhabitants of Phocides fall into open Rebellion, by rea∣son that the Priviledges of their Country are not observed by Apollo's Officers; they are pacified by a Senator, and send new Ambassadors to his Majesty. THe Polititians precept is very true; That people who have lived long in a half Liberty, with large priviledges, are very hardly reduced to tollerate whole slavery. This is said, because the uproars of Phocides occa∣sioned by the not observancy of their priviledges (as you heard at large by the last Post) have still increased more and more, in so much as on the ninth of this present month, more incenst then over, since such satisfaction as was desired, was denied them by Apollo's Officers, the Phocidians took up arms, and running through the City, cryed out, Liberty, Liberty. When the chief Magistrate of Phocides, much troubled at such a novelty, desired a Parley of the people that were in arms, who when they were all assem∣bled in the chief Piazza; tis said, that the uprightest and most experienced Senator of Phocides spake thus; The most dangerous enterprise (my most beloved Phocidians) which Subjects can undertake, is to grow stubborn, and rebel against their Prince: For Princes are not so merciful as to pardon injuries of so high a nature; which though they sometimes forgive, they never forget; Whence it is, that such excesses never pass without their condigne pu∣nishment: For as it falls out in all offences which are either through wisdom winkt at, or pardoned per force, they are in their due time and place, the more severely revenged, by having their vindication retarded to a more opportune time. And God deliver us, and all other people that suffer such calamities as we do, from those cruel revenges, which Princes who are offended in State-affairs, use after long meditation to take, against their disloyal people; and rebellion is so far from being forgotten (even by most merciful Princes) as an amendment of many hundred years loyalty cannot so cancel it cut of exasperated minds, but that the memory of such signal injuries are transmitted over to the twen∣tieth generation; since by their importance they infuse such diffidence into him that reigns, and such suspitions as occasion perpetual odium be∣tween the Vassal and the Soveraign Lord; from whence afterwards
the great disorder ariseth, as that natural subjects, which are no other then the Princes beloved children, and therefore ought to be treated with terms of fatherly love, and governed by Laws of Charity, are re∣puted cruel enemies, conquered people, subjugated by force of arms; and therefore according to the politick Precept, treated like slaves: Which things at last produce that great inconvenience, that even lawful Princes, grievously moved by such hainous offences against their re∣bellious subjects, become cruel Tyrants. I (fellow Citizens) speak not now as an Officer of the Prince, in aggravating the condition of our slavery, but as one who would produce peace in this our Country; and if you shall not think my councel good, I will willingly be one of the first who will joyn with you in your resolution, being better con∣tented to err with many, then to be wise with a few. But before you proceed further in a business of such importance, I earnestly intreat you, and heartily beg of you, even by these tears which fall so abundantly from mine eyes, that you will maturely consider, that for the most part, popular insurrections meet with unfortunate ends: Which happens not only because resolutions in so weighty affairs are taken in hot bloud, when men are most incenst, and when mens minds are most incombred with the foolish passion of fury, whereas they ought to be put on in cold bloud, and when the mind is most maturely setled; but because upon such like occasions, rash and precipitous councels are more willingly im∣braced and listned unto, then such as are mature and quiet. For with people that are up in commotion, he is alwaies thought wisest, who is most adventurous, and he most zealous of his Countries Liberty, who adviseth to things most headlong. Here (beloved Citizens) is a busi∣ness in which consists the total of our safety, the good of our children, the happiness of our Country, which ought to be so dear unto us, being all of them things of great importance, wherein surely we ought to proceed with much circumspection, since repentance will not serve the turn, nce the punishment of such a sin is never pardoned, but the infamy thereof indures for ever, and the danger of punishment grows then greatest when the Prince hath taken a thousand oaths to pardon it: For Princes think it no shame, nor breach of word, to revenge re∣bellion in their subjects, though it be pardoned, but great honour, and an obligation which they owe unto their honours. We know for cer∣tain that Apollo will take from us those priviledges, which we are bound to defend with the effusion of our blouds, and loss of lives▪ great is the injury that is done us, and such as ought by no means to be suffered by us, who upon other occasions have proved our selves to all the Vertu∣osi of Parnassus, to be resolute; the injury his Majesty doth us, is noto∣rious, and peradventure fit to be rescented; but in revenging offences given, and in preventing such as are feared, we must be sure to pro∣ceed so, as not to fall upon such resolves, as may be more prejuditial to us then the loss of our priviledges, which now we go about to de∣fend by force. For very foolish and unfortunate is that rescentment which brings with it more loss and shame then the injuries which are de∣sired to be vindicated. A most true rule, which admonisheth us not to enter upon so dangerous a game, without assured hope of overcom∣ing; for unpardonable injuries ought either never to be done to any whosoever, more especially not to powerful men, or upon certainty
that they can never be revenged. I urge this, for that whosoever puts on the fatal resolution of taking up arms against his Prince, must be sure to have sufficient forces of himself to resist his Princes power, or so rea∣dy and lustly forein aids as may secure him from being supprest. We (my fellow Phocedians) know very well our forces are but weak; and that no Prince will assist us; it therefore appears to me to be a horse∣like piece of beastiality, when we find our selves fast bound to the Char∣ret, to kick against the wheels, and so spoyle our legs. It is rash folly to doe that which brings with it certain and severe punishment: We may truely say we have been assaulted in the streets by those rascally Officers who thirst after the goods of their fellow-subjects, who would take from us the rich Jewels of our Priviledges; they are armed by the Princes power, we unarmed passengers; will it not then be unwise∣ly done of us to exasperate them by resistance? Tis great wisdom wil∣lingly to part with our Jewel so to save our lives. The minds of Prin∣ces who are born and brought up in the ambition of reigning, are al∣waies in motion, are continually working, nor are they ever quiet till they get total domination over their subjects; and it is an experienced proposition, that all things are loosned with the same cords wherewith they were bound; and it is very observable upon this our occasion; for if it be true, that we must all confess, that Princes grant priviledges to their people more out of necessity, and when forced so to do, then out of free will; who is he that knows not that it is the same necessity which keeps them from breaking them? And doth not every one know that the effect cannot keep on foot, when the cause faileth? Apollos desire of depriving us of our priviledges, ariseth not (as we complain) from dis∣courtesie, not from ingratitude, not from falcifying his word, but from the alteration of this our afflicted Country. Phocides (as you all know) confined formerly upon the ignorant, who are capital enemies to Apol∣lo and his Vertuosi, and therefore were we honored with the gift of Pri∣viledges which we now endeavor to defend; the which he gave us (as it is usual with Princes to do) because we had lately, of our own accord, put our selves under the Dominion of Parnassus; we are now by pro∣cess of time become natural subjects; and (which hath more impaired our condition then any thing else) we are, by the Litterati's dilating their Dominions, become no longer confiners, but inland inhabiters; all which things gives us to understand, that Princes observe other mens priviledges inviolably, as long as the cause why they were granted remains. By these things which I have told you (my beloved) you may know that your taking up arms of rebellion, will, as they usually do, aggri∣vate their evils, who have boldly, but unwisely taken them up. But before we proceed further in these our tumults, I earnestly desire every one of you, not to mind so much the just reason which we have to resent the apparent injury which is done us, as the unfortunate end which this our insurrection will have: For men cannot more maturely shun com∣mitting errors, then by meditating long upon the evils which they may produce. And above all things, I straitly conjure you all to remem∣ber, that non tantum est Decora Victoribus Libertas; quantum intolle∣rantior servitus iterum victis. Tacit. lib. 3. Annal. This Senators perswasions prevailed so much with these inraged peo∣ple,
as after a short consultation, four Ambassadors were sent to this Court from the Senat and people of Phocides, who presenting them∣selves this morning before Apollo, told him, that the people of Phocides, who were his Majesties most devout servants, having learnt at last, that nothing can be more foolishly nor more rashly done, then for a servant to capitulate with his Master, found that the priviledges, exemptions, and immunities which people owe unto their Princes goodness, were nothing but occasions of scandal, and seminaries of discord between the Prince and his Vassals; that therefore the Phocidians being very unwilling that any thing should fall out between his Majesties love, and their loyalty, which might hinder their delight in their Soveraign Prince, did volunta∣rily renounce all priviledges, immunities, and exemptions formerly granted them, and that with all the humility that became most devoted Vassals, they did only presume to put his Majesty in mind, that Princes who did command their subjects lovingly, were alwaies faithfully served by them. The XII. ADVERTISEMENT. Whilst some Poets paralleld the greatness of Rome with that of Naples, a dangerous dispute arose between them; A∣pollo, to the end that his Vertuosi might know what to say and believe in a business of such importance, commits the Cause to the Rota of Parnassus, who decide it. VVE hear from Pindus by Letters of the tenth of this present month, that some Poets speaking before the Perepatetick Por∣tal, of the greatness of the City of Rome, in comparison of that of Na∣ples, Luigi Tansillo let these words fall from his mouth, That the Su∣burbs of Naples was bigger then all Rome; which petulant falshood be∣ing gainsaid by Caro, he gave Tansillo the Poetical lie; That the Nobili∣ty of Parthenope being thereat much incenst, would have used violence to Caro; who being succoured by the Marcheggian Poets, his Countrey∣men, both parties fell to prohibited Rhimes, and even to Sonnets with stings in their tails, with which they were likely to have made a bloudy bickering, when the City Recorder, who was soon advertised of the up∣rore, sent Mutio Iustinopolitano speedily thither, who did not only quickly appease the tumult, but made both parties pass their words not to offend each other. And because the Litterati have formerly taken up arms upon the same occasion, and therewith caused bloudy business, A∣pollo, to the end that for the future men might know how to speak and believe touching these two great Cities, committed the cause to be con∣sidered on by the Rota di Parnasso, whom he commanded suddenly to fall upon the business, and to decide it. Wherefore upon several daies
hearing of both parties, the Rota three daies since publisheth this decis∣sion. Coram reverendo patre Domino Cino, die 10 Maii, 1612. Domini una∣nimes tenuerunt. That the City of Naples should alwaies yield for Ma∣jesty to the City of Rome, and Rome to Naples, for pleasantness of situa∣tion. That Rome should confess there were more people in Naples, and that Naples should firmly believe there were more men in Rome. That the Wits and Wines of Naples had need to be sent by Sea to Rome, to receive perfection in that Court, and to be made more pleasing to the pallat of gallant men; whereas the Roman only was perfectest at home; as one which without ever going out of the City, might be said to have travailed all the world over. That Naples should be held the Metropoli∣tan amongst all Cities of the Universe for breaking of Colts, and Rome for managing of men: That there were more Cavaliers in Naples, in Rome more Commendums. That in Rome they only deserved the title of Cavalier, who bore the badg upon their Cloke; whereas all the Gen∣tlemen of Naples, without having any badg upon the Cloke, were de∣servedly called Cavaliers, the Cross which they bore upon their naked skin, making them sufficiently worthy of so honourable a prerogative. The XIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Theodoricus, that famous King of Italy, having ofttimes prest very much to be admitted into Parnassus, is al∣wayes denied by Apollo for a very important reason. THe powerful King of Italy, Theodoricus, from the very first day that he came upon these Confines, hath by several Ambassies con∣tinually prest Apollo that he might be admitted into Parnassus, but still in vain; for as oft as the proposal was made, he received a favourable de∣nial: Which put him at last into such a rage, as he had the boldness to burst forth into these blasphemous words, That Apollo was partial in ad∣mitting such great Princes into Parnassus, who by their vertuous acti∣ons had merited eternal fame, since many Princes were seen to have glo∣rious places in his Court, only because they had governed petty Princi∣palities in Italy; and he who for many years had had the whole and sole Government thereof, was shamefully kept out. When Apollo had heard the complaints of so great a Prince, he gave him to understand by the Delfick Chancellor, that he should do well to be quiet; for to be plain, he did not think him worthy admittance into Parnssus; since the world ought to thank none but him for the horri∣ble Atheism which was of late introduced in many Provinces of Europe; for whereas the doubts about Religion risen up amongst Divines, were after some dispute cleared, and their errors taken away by the Councels, which were made capable of declaring what was truth, and were all extir∣pated out of the world, by making bonefires of such as were obstinate.
When he, as the head thereof, took upon him the protection of the wick∣ed Sect of the Arrians, he did not only turn Heresies, which require whole Armies to root them out, into Interest of State, but with un∣heard of affrontedness, he made the whole world see, that he made use of heresie, to work division amongst people, to weaken Princes who were his enemies, to have adhearers in his neighbours States, to make himself head of new Sects; and to steal away the hearts of other mens subjects; and that in his heart he had no other esteem of holy Religion, but as of a powerful means, and excellent way to obtain Government. The XIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo, according to his usual custom of the first day of eve∣ry month, hears the Petitions of such as desire to be admit∣ted into Parnassus. APollo thinks nothing more unworthy of himself, then to retard, though for never so little a space, the deserved reward of glory from those Vertuosi, who by their learned writings have deserved eternal fame. Whence it is that his Majesty doth not only give such continual audience as is requisite, to such Litterati who have occasion to desire ad∣mittance into Parnassus, but hath deputed many ages ago the first day of every month, for the examination of their writings and persons, wherein all other affairs being laid aside, he only attends that business. 'Tis true, that not to profane those vertuous places of Parnassus, by bringing there∣into such as have not been yet adjudged worthy of so honorable an aboad, the solemnity of so famous an action is not cellebrated in his Majesties u∣sual Residence or Palace Royal, but without the walls of Parnassus, in the famous Phoebean field, where yesterday morning, being the first day of September, great store of Pavillions being erected for his Majestie, for the Illustrious Muses, Prince Poets, and learned Lords of this Court, Apollo attended by a glorious Train, came very early to the appointed place, where without any delay, Commencement was given to the busi∣ness. It is not to be believed how great a concourse of Litterati of all professions, desirous to purchase so honorable an habitation; appeared there that day: In so much as his Majesties Guard, who are strictly charg∣ed to carry themselves civilly to all men, had very much to do to keep back the infinite number of those who prest to be admitted into the Au∣dience. And though the number of pretenders be infinite, yet such are the indowments which are required at their hands who are to be admitted into such an habitation, as there are but few that attain their desired ends: For in this affair, where neither the favour of friends nor yet riches avail any thing, his merit who is to be admitted into the fruition of so great a happiness is weighed very censoriously in a just scale. Here, before he pass further in the narration which he is to make, Menante must acquaint
all those who will read these his Advertisements, with Apollo's usual and laudable custom, never to begin any action of importance, without first using some of those Acts of Grace to his Litterati, which makes Princes be so beloved by their people. You must all know then, that before a∣ny Writer, or Illustrious personage, who in his life-time hath done any action worthy of eternal fame, be admitted to make his request known, the Heads of all Sciences appear before Apollo, who draw forth each of them a Ball from forth a well closed Urne, where amidst as many other Silver Balls as there are Sciences, three only Golden Balls are placed, with this order, That they who have the luck to draw forth the Golden Ball, shall enjoy the Noble Priviledg of nominating what Vertuoso of their profession they best please; to whom (yea though he be yet alive on earth) Apollo doth by particular favour give that immortallity, and e∣ternity of fame, which is usually only granted to such who have put a pe∣riod to their humanity: A custom certainly as noble as profitable, and altogether worthy of his deep judgement, who brought it into this State, as that which serves for sharp spurs to those thirsty souls after glory, who by their honorable writings, or signal actions, have purchast that fame which is the first rise, and utmost bounds of every vertuous soul. So as since Apollo doth liberally reward the pains and merits of his Vertuosi before their due time, 'tis no wonder if they so greedily affect the preti∣ous coyn of eternal fame, as they think it great consolation, to consume themselves in continual managing their pen, and even killing themselves with perpetual study, esteeming it great and honorable usury to pass by some few years of their present life, to purchase that eternity which will make them live gloriously in all future ages, in the memory of men. The first who had the good fortune to draw the Golden Ball out of the afore-named Urne, was Francisco Berni, the head of those Italian Poets who have wittily written facetious things in Triplets. The second was Petrarch, the Prince of Italian Lyrick Poets: The third Cornelius Taci∣tus, the chief of Politick Historians. Francisco Berni being gotten up upon a very high seat which is set of purpose in that place, for such like affairs, said with a loud and audible voice, That the prime man in these present times for pleasant Triplets, was Girolomo Magagnati, the flowry wit of Venice, whose savory rhimes he read in publick, and were much admired, not only by all the Litterati of Parnassus, but by the Illustrious Muses, and by Apollo's self: and divers of the Litterati taxed Berni of imprudency, for that having pro∣pounded a personage of such eminency to Apollo, he was not aware that he might peradventure nurse up a Serpent in his bosom. But both Apol∣lo and the Muses, and greatest part of Poets did commend Berni's inge∣nuity even to the skies, who like a loyal and honest Florentine, could prefer another mans merits, though with hazard of his own repu∣tation. After this, when they came to voting, all the Litterati were favoura∣ble in their voices; wherefore the Delfick Chancellor proclaimed aloud, Eternal fame, and endless glory to Girolomo Magagnati; at which words the whole Colledg of Vertuosi did with general applause answer Placet. The writings of so fortunate a Poet being consecrated to eternity, they were delivered out in a Bason of Gold to all the publick Libraries from whence they were afterwards with the accustomed ceremony, to the Del∣fick
Library. But because the Illustrious Ferdinand, Cardinal and Duke of Mantua had taken La Boscareccia Clomira, the last and best of Magnati's Poems into his protection, Apollo, in favour to so learned a Prince, who was a publick lover of Learning, and a liberal Mecenas to the Vertuosi, would have so lovely a Pastoral appear in his presence; wherefore Berni, the solicitous promoter of all this business, came pre∣sently to the dore of the Pavillion, and took that fair maid by the hand, who being waited upon to the Court, not only by the rest of the Noble Princes, and learned Mantuan Barons, but even by great Virgil's self, was likewise attended by Dametas, Corridon, Titerus, Niso, Mirtillo, and other famous Shepherds of Arcadia, together with their fair Nymphs; a spectacle so acceptable to his Majesty, and so pleasing to the Muses, and to the whole Colledg of the Vertuosi, as they did not remember that they had ever received any greater consolation. When the fair Clo∣mira was presented to Apollo, she fell down at his feet, and adored his Royal presence; and then rising up to the Muses Throne, she humbly kist the hem of their garments; then returning to her place, she undaunt∣edly related all the misfortunes of her love, which she had suffered to attain the marriage of her beloved Igeta. Then Apollo, having greatly praised the constancy of so lovely a Shepherdess, fell to expatiate him∣self upon the commendations which she deserved, for having preserved her chastity untoucht, in her so long peregrination, though cloathed in mans aparrel, in this so corrupt age. Whilst Apollo spake these words, a voice was heard, which amongst the infinite number of Vertuosi who were flockt together to see this delightful sight, said these identical words; If she should come into our Country, she might bid her virginity goodnight. The most excellent Pietro Vittorio, one of the publick Censors, rose up then, and asking who it was had been so rash as to ut∣ter such misbecoming words in that sacred place, commanded that he should be found out. Apollo, with his acustomed gravity, admonished the Censor, that it became good men, even by wresting the words, al∣waies to interpret another mans sayings in the best sense, it being the signe of an ill affected mind, to understand those things sinisterly, which might admit of a good construction; and that he who had spoke so, de∣served rather to be thanked by the Judges, for the severe correction which he gave to the wicked men of his Country, then to be reprehend∣ed: That therefore he who had received publick admonition, should a∣mend his manners. And this being said, gave order that an honorable place should be allotted to the faithful Clomira and her beloved Igeta, a∣mongst the other famous Shepherds of Arcadia. Then Berni drew from forth his bosom, Magagnati's special Writ of Proxie, and gi∣ving it to the Delfick Chancellor, first kneeled, and then in Magnaties name took the Oath of Allegiance which is wont to be given to all the Litterati who are judged to deserve place in Parnassus. Wherefore Ber∣ni, in the behalf of Magagnaty, swore, That as he formerly had done, so for the future he would make it appear by his actions, that he did believe with his heart, and profess by his mouth, that mans true wealth lay in pos∣sessing the rich treasure of knowledg; that he would in all places, and at all times, shew himself to be an implacable enemy to the Ignorant, a rea∣dy friend to the Vertuosi. And this being said, his Majesties Lord Trea∣surer came to Berni, accompanied by the chief Exchequer Officers of this
State, who by the agreement made by the Lord Chancellor, obliged his Majesties Royal Delfick Treasury, that when the pleasant Tersets, Clo∣mira, the life of St. Longinus, La Vernata, La Meditation Poetica, a Noble Panegyrick upon Cosmo the second, great Duke of uscany, and the other elegant Works of the Vertuoso Giorolimo Magagnati should be lost either by fire, deluges, or any other imaginable way, Apollo should out of his own Royal Patrimony, alwaies keep the name and fame of so famous a Poet alive and glorious amongst men. The solemnity of this Covenant being ended, the famous Petrarch mounted the same Chair; and turning towards Apollo, said, Sir! The most polished, neat, polite Writer which we in these times have of I∣talian Lyrick Poetry, is that reverend Father Don Angelo Grillo, a No∣ble Vertuoso of Genua, whom I so much glory to have amongst the number of my followers, as I find a particular ambition in me, that I may now name him in this place, and in this age, wherein the Guidiccioni, the Bembi, and my beloved Iovan di Casa failing, and all the rest of the most observed former Italian Poets, nothing is usually seen in the modern ones, but a certain natural abounding vein, without the solidity of those Poetical precepts which put a difference, in the opinion of the Litterati, betwixt the Verses of one that is born a Poet, which are sung on the sodain, from those which such Vertuosi who having study and art joyned to the natural Talent of Poetry, are continually filing, and by candle-light severely censuring their Composures. This being said, every one might perceive by a certain humming that was heard amongst the Litterati of so honorable a Senat, how much every one was pleased at the nomination of a personage of such splendor: Wherefore Apollo, in whose face great joy might be discerned, said to Petrarch, Well be∣loved! you have named a Vertuoso who is indeed worthy of your choice, and wholy conformable to our desire: And though we love Don Ange∣lo dearly, and consequently wish such length of daies unto him, as he him∣self desires; yet great is our curiosity of quickly enriching this our Se∣nat by the purchase of so cryed up a personage; to the end that my Ver∣tuosi may see and know how they are qualified, who deserve to be be∣loved by stones, much more by men. Then the Rime Morale, Pietosi affetti, Pompee Funebri, and other sa∣cred Poems, together with the Prose of so flourishing a Wit, being read in publick by Petrarch, they for their delicacy deserved so the publick praise, as (though it were unusual) the Senat not being able to tolerate that where there was so much worth, Votes should be given in privat, Viva voce, vivisque suffragiis, Immortality was with extraordinary ap∣plause granted to the name and writings of the reverend Father Don An∣gello Grillo, with all the solemnity of Proclamations, Oaths and Allegi∣ance, and the Lord Treasurers obligations before mentioned. Petrarch being retired to his own place, Cornelius Tacitus mounted the aforesaid Chair, but with great trouble of soul to his Majesty, the Muses, and the whole Colledg of Litterati; for, remembring that after the entrance made by so miraculous a writer into Parnassus, so many ages ago, he having enjoyed the prerogative of taking out the Golden Ball 46 times, he had never had the fortune to name any Latin Historian who might be truely stiled a Polititian, they were very much troubled that modern Histories, which write the naked bare narration of things, should
want that Politick salt, which makes the Reading of History very de∣lightful, and him very wise and Learned, who delights in such like stu∣dies. But wary Tacitus being much pleased with the trouble which he per∣ceived to be in them all, said to Apollo, At last most serene Monarch of the Stars (though to my great affliction, it hath been long first) that hap∣py day so much by me desired, is come, that my detractors, who have im∣puted the failing or want of Politian Historians of my Classis; to my harsh, short, and therefore obscure stile, to my defect of alwaies joyning the reason of things, to the things written; a way of writing which they said was shun'd as vitious and rash, rather then not imitated for its difficul∣ty, shall have reason to know their great error, and to be quiet, when at this present time, in that famous Court of Rome, which having alwaies been that true Trojan horse, hath sent forth continually Heroes of singular vertue, and more then humane valour, there lives an Elegant Po∣litick Historian at last, a well relishing Latin Writer of the Annals of his times, one who for the shortness of his stile, for his frequent Sentences, for the pith of Policy, his handsom way of Narration and document, and for knowing how in the very Narratives, to shew in two words, the oc∣casion thereof, hath known how to imitate me so, as for the grace of this Senat, and for the glory of the Liberal Sciences (far be all boasting from these my expressions) I will not call him by his own proper name of Pau∣lus Emillius Santorius, a famous Prelat in the Court of Rome, but I will boldly term him another Tacitus. It is not to be believed how over∣joy'd Apollo and all the Litterati were, when Tacitus nam'd one who was as acceptable to them, as the imitaters of Tacitus are rare to be found. So as Tacitus having with a lowd audable voice read the Annals of so delight∣som an Author, they gave such satisfaction to ever one, as with publick and gracious suffrages, the name of Paulus Emillius Santorius, was judg∣ed by the Colledg of the Litterati, to deserve the same Immortality of Fame, and the same glory, with which Maximus Cornelius Tacitus had formerly been honored. When Tacitus had given the accustomed Oath of Allegiance, and the Lord Treasurer had performed his part for the greater security of the Immortality of so famous a Writer, an end was put to t he nomination of such Writers as were yet alive. Whereupon they fell immediately to the admission of such Litterati as had arived at Parnassus, after their deaths, for the writings, and actions which they had done whilst they were living. The first then who presented himself before Apollo, was Marius E∣quicola, who spake thus unto his Majesty, I (most gloricus Prince of Planets) very well know my own affrontedness in pretending for the rich reward, and pretious Patrimony of that eternal fame which they enjoy, who you think worthy of the glorious patrimony of Parnassus, by my weak endeavors in those my writings, wherin I was made to shew the na∣ture of Love; but the great benignity which your Majesty useth towards the lovers of Learning, doth so largely supply the smallness of mens me∣rits, as I do thereby dare to crave the exorbitant usury of receiving much, for the little that I give. When Apollo had heard the request of this Vertuoso, If you have brought nothing else with you (friend Mario) said he, then that little volume which you have there of the nature of love, I am sorry that I
must tel you, you have taken pains to no purpose; having laboured to shew the world the nature of that love, which is so well knon to all men, as that there is not any one that knows not in some sort how to conceal it; you might have deserved a chief place in this my State, I tell you, if you had bestowed your labour in writing the nature of hatred, which every ignorant common person knows so well how to palliate with the name of good-will, and cover with the false cloke of love, as the world is full of the complaints and appeals of those unfortunate people, who for having trusted too much, exclaim of being assassinated by their friends. Marius Equicola departed much afflicted from the Court, by reason of this his Majesties resolute answer, next to whom came Sforza Oddo, a fa∣mous Perugian Doctor of Law, who laid at his Majesties feet, his com∣pleat Treatises, Della Compendiosa sostitutione, and Della restitutione in Integro, and the Volumes of his learned Conciglis; which in a short, but pithy Oration, he desired might be consecrated to Immortality. This Litterato was very acceptably and graciously received by his Majesty, and by the Colledg of the Vertuosi; but, but little honour was done to those his Works; not for that they were not compleatly learned, but for that Treatise of Law being of very little esteem in this State, Sforza was only admired for the sweetness of his disposition, and for his being very much verst in all the most commendable Sciences. Immortality was therefore, but coldly, and with weak applause decreed to Sforza, and to his writings; and when he had taken the accustomed Oath of Alle∣giance between the Chancellors hands, he was told by the Master of the Pegasean Ceremonies, that his business being ended, he might be gone. Sforza replyed, that he could not, nor ought not to be gon before his Majesties Exchequer was bound to keep his name and fame alwaies alive in mens memories, as he had seen done to Magagnati, and others. A∣pollo hearing this dispute, he spake thus to Sforza; Know most honor∣ed Litterato, that I willingly bind my Royal Exchequer, for security of perpetual fame to those my Vertuosi who are admitted into Parnassus; but this belongs not to Doctors of the Law, with whose writings I out of good reason proceed otherwise; for knowing that the infinite volumes of modern Lawyers, have put those Laws into so great confusion, in the clearness and perspicuity whereof mans greatest felicity lies, as to end suits which are made everlasting; the capricio s of privat men are more imbraced and followed, then the Decrees of Princes, and in the multi∣tude of the variety of common opinions, the opinions of writers are ra∣ther imbraced then weighed: I foresee that within a short time Princes will be forced to free mankind, afflicted by so great disorder, with extir∣pating out of the world the writings of those Iurisconsulti who by their infinite cavilings, have turned the administration of sacred Justice into an execrable Merchandize. Wherefore I should too much injure my Ex∣chequer, if I should oblige it to keep the fame of those infinite volumes written by the Doctors of Law, perpetually alive, which I foresee for certain will shortly all be burnt, as being publike prejudicial enemies to mankind. Sforza, by reason of this unexpected answer of Apollo, looked very pale, and being much afflicted, reassumed his Writings consecrated to im∣mortality; and putting them under his left arm, took from out his bo∣som,
three excellent Comedies made by him, De Morti vivi, and Della Erofilamacchia, and della Prigione d'Amore: Andshewing them to his Maj∣held up in his right hand, said; Most Illustrious Prince of the Zodiack, I rather desire to obtain certain Immortality amongst the Italian Comick Poets, then that of the Doctors of Law, which, as your Majesty hath said, is so manifestly exposed to the danger of fire. I am so delighted with the sight of this so glorious abode in Parnassus, as I will not leave any thing unindeavoured, that I may never depart from thence. I there∣fore humbly beseech your Majesty not to think me unworthy thereof. Apollo then commanded the Vertuosissimo Alexandro Picolommeni, called Lo Stordito Intronato, the Prince of Italian Comick Poets that he should acquaint the Colledg of the Litterati with his opinion of those commo∣dities, which Picolommini having done, and therein highly exaggerated sforza's wit, Immortality was again decreed unto him, by all the Litte∣rati of Parnassus; and all the aforesaid solemnities being performed, Sforza departed very much joy'd from the Royal Audience. Giovanni Desputerio, a Dutch Schol-master, presented Apollo next with his Grammer, and earnestly desired to be admitted into Parn ssus. To whom Apollo answered, That being cloy'd with so nausty a genera∣tion, by reason of the musty, mouldy disputations and questions which daily arose in Parnassus, between the Pedanticks, he was resolved rather to lessen their number, which was grown too great, then ever to adde any one more to them, that therefore he might depart when he pleased. Though Apollo had so clearly excluded Despauterius, yet was not he a whit discouraged; but with a Pedantick petulancy, answered, Sir, if your Majestie shall please to give such satisfaction to my demands, as I desire, I am so far from intending to displease your Majestie, or any of your Litterati in Parnassus, as I promise and oblige my self to teach my easie Grammar to all such children as shall come to my School Gratis. Appollo replyed, That he was not the first, who under pretence of so charitable a work, had intruded themselves into Parnassus; that Donato first, then Guarin, Scopa and Mrcinello next, and many other Gram∣marians, who by their excessive number had so defiled Parnassus, had made use of the same fair pretence, who being afterwards grown wealthy by the profuse liberallity of their Schollars Parents, whereas their large Donatives, ought to have encouraged them in so good a work, they con∣trary to all mens expectation, had wrought the contrary effect; for be∣ing already become rich, as soon as they saw they could live plentifully upon their own incomes, they abandoned their profession of teaching, and impiously spurn'd at that charity which seemed first to be so deeply graven in their hearts; so as such being become unuseful in Parnassus, were a visible incumbrance to him, and to his Litterati. Apollo fur∣ther added, that notwithstanding all that had been said, that he would willingly allow Despauterius an abode in Parnassus; but upon condition, that whensoever he should shut up his school, he should restore all the moneys to the Parents, which he had taken for instructing their chil∣dren. When Despauterius had heard this proposal made by Apollo, he, without further replying, made all the haste he could out of the Court; and answered Iohn Baptist Guarina, who reprehended him for his shame∣denying to accept of his Majesties offer, That it being usual with all men to be soon glutted with any one, and to love new things, the usual
custom of Curtizans, to put forth part of their moneys which they had got in their youth, to keep themselves thereby from being necessitated to turn Bawds when they grow old, was more then Platonick wisdom, and therefore worthy to be admired and imitated by every one. And that it became a wary man, so to consider his own interest, together with his charity used to his neighbour, as that that love failing, wherewith all men were at last cloy'd, a man might live commodiously of himself, without running the hazard of being forced to beg his bread when he should be old and decrepit. Dispauterius was no sooner gone from the Audience, but Olao Magno the curious Writer of the Gothish affairs, and of the other Northern Nations, and the Historian of so many famous Kingdoms of China, came joyntly thither; who when they had presented their writings un∣to his Majestie, made the usual request That they might be consecrated to immortallity. Then Titu, Livius the Soverain Prince of Latin Histo∣rians, who was appointed by Apollo to give his opinion of them, did mainly oppose them, accusing them for fabulous, and rather written to shew their own curious capacious inventions, then the solid truth which he was obliged to do, who would deserve the name of a perfect Histo∣rian. All the Litterati to whom Apollo also referred it, joyned in this opinion with Liy; for they thought it a very scandalous action to ad∣mit of the slack compositions of those vainly curious wits, who had fill'd their writings with incredible things, and therefore meerly fabu∣lous, amongst the strict Historical writings. Onely the Polititian Ta∣citus differed from the opinion of Livy, and of the other Historians, who said, That these men who had described, and recounted the acti∣ons of the most remote Northern Nations, and of the furthest Eastern people, ought not to be proceeded with, with such rigour, as was exact∣ly observed with those who wrote the Histories of known Nations, and neighboring people, for that with every one, Omne Ignotam pro Magifico est, Tacit. vita Agric. and that it was very true, Majoracredi de abn∣tibus, Tacit. lib. 2. Hist. This opinion of Tacitus, though it were singu∣lar, was approved of by his Majestie, whereupon the Northern Histo∣ries, and those of China, together with the names of their Authors, were with the wonted solemnities consecrated to eternity. 'Tis true, that Apollo told Olao, that by all means he must moderate the greatness of those Northern Eagles, which prey'd upon Elephants, and carried them up into the ayr; which appeared so disproportionable to him, and his Colledge of Litterato's, as it would not be born withal, no not in Plinies mouth. And he said to the Author of the China History, that he should reduce the immence Metrapolitan City of so many Kingdoms, inhabited by many millions of men to some credible measure; and par∣ticularly, that he should bring the Palace of that King, which he had affirmed to be many miles long, to such a form, as Vitruvius should not laugh at him for it, saying, that if that building were so great as he had described it to be, the Halls must needs be half a mile long, and the Chambers little less; which if it were true, the whole Academy of Ar∣chitects had reason to say, that to bring the meat hot to the table, the servants of so great a King must ride post. These two mens business being ended, Thomaso Bozio entred the Court, a noble Aggobine Vertuoso, no less famous in the Court of Rome for
his sanctity of life, then for his learning, wherewith he was abundantly endowed; and was therefore received, and looked upon by Apollo, and by the whole Colledge of Vertuosi, with extraordinary demonstrations of love. This so famous personage presented Apollo with his learned writings, De signis Ecclesiae Dei, and his other noble pieces, which were all of them exceedingly praised and celebrated by the Censors. They onely said, That in his book Deruinis Gentium adversus Machiavellum, there were many things observed, which deserved to be censured and corrected, in that wicked writers desperate policy; but that notwith∣standing, since they saw not that there was any the least mention made in all that book, of the ruines of any Nation or people, they were of opi∣nion that those words De ruinis Gentium should be cancelled as superflu∣ous, and placed in the Frontispiece of the book, onely to make the title more stately and glorious. This Caveat of the Censors was so readily pursued by Apollo, and the Colledge of Vertuosi, as Apollo complained very much of the great abuse of many writers, who to make their works seem more learned and curious to others, do fraudulently give them glo∣rious and stately Titles, not minding that they were very far differing from what was contained in their Works: A cheat which being only committed for the advantage of the Book-sellers, to make the Books more vendible, was much like the falshood of those Merchants, who sel∣ling their Corn in sacks, lay the worst and rotten stuff in the bottom, and cover it over with very good grain which they put at the top: And the Writers who were truely Vertuosi, ought to think, that noble matter, learnedly handled in the bodies of their Books, did render their Titles (though not so curious) as famous as a Title unlike the matter treated on, did infinitely shame whatsoever elegant Composition. Apollo having said these things, Immortality (according to the custom of this Court) was graciously granted to the Name and Writings of this renowned Litterato. Bozio's admittance into Parnassus being had, as hath been said, an Ita∣lian Poet appeared before the Pavillion where Audience was given, on horseback, with a guide before him, who that he might come time e∣nough to the daies solemnation of admittance of the Litterati into Par∣nassus, had taken Post at Corinth; this man, as soon as he got off horse∣back, presented himself before Apollo with his boots and spurs on; to whom he delivered a Book of Songs made by himself; and then desired that the glory of eternal fame might be decreed to his Name and Stan∣za's. It is not easily to be believed with what joy this Litterato was re∣ceived by the whole Senat: Wherefore Apollo having received his Song∣book with shew of extraordinary affection, as soon as he had read certain Madrigals, and Sonnets full of lascivious and obscene conceits, he, as if he had had a Serpent, or some other perilous beast, threw the Song-book into the midst of the room; and afterwards growing very red in the face, through anger, Go (said he) and publish these your lascivious Ri∣baldries in the Stews and Bawdi-houses; for in my State, which is the habitation of all chaste Vertue, such Ruffion pieces as this are not admit∣ted. I myself (and I glory to speak it in this place have been a lover, and consequently I love amorous Poetry; but this must be when love is handled with such terms of civility by modest Poets, which I so much admire in my most modest Petrarch,: Nor can I sufficiently wonder
how some modern Poets can be so shameless as to make use of Learning, which was wholly brought into the world to sow vertue amongst men, therewith to teach others the use of wicked lust; and the practice of every most detestable vice: Nor can I imagin how it can be possible that any man should be so sullied with the sluttery of uncleanness, as that he dare publish those obscenities with his pen, in clear day-light, and in the sight of the whole world, which are committed by libidinous men, not with∣out blushing, and remorse of conscience, in the dark, secretly within sheets in close Chambers; and that they do not only not acknowledg such slips to be actions which bring with them eternal infa∣my, but that they are grown so blind, as that they hope to win same un∣to themselves, and purchase eternal glory by those things which deserve perpetual punishment. Apollo had not made an end of speaking, when the unfortunate Poet went out of the Hall, and he and his guide getting upon the same horses whereon they came, left Parnassus as fast as they came thither: And to his greater scorn, his book, which no man durst touch with their hands, as if it had been infectious, was by the publick Aparators kickt out of the Court. In this interim a base Mountebank forced the Guard at the dore of the Pavillion, and with a Box which he had under his arm, and a Dog which he led in his hand, entred the Court; the dore-keepers ran immediately to keep so unworthy a fellow from coming before his Majesty, and ta∣king him by both the arms, pluck him out of the Pavillion: The Moun∣tebank being very strong, strugled hard to keep in, and cryed out aloud that he would be heard: Apollo was sorry to see the poor wretch so hand∣led, and commanded the Souldiers to forbear further troubling him; the Mountebank then spread his Cloke upon the ground, and opening his Box, drew forth a great sheet of Vellum, at which a large seal was hang∣ed; and shewing it to his Majesty, to the Muses, and to the Colledg of Litterati, said, Sir, To prove that the Sope which I for the general good deliver out to every one, to take away whatsoever stain of shame or disho∣nour (unless it be the disgrace of having married a whore) out of the vest∣ments of peoples reputation, is miraculous, and the only thing in the world; let all men behold this my priviledg, granted me by the invin∣cible and alwaies glorious Prince, Charls the first, King of France; who thought this my secret worthy so singular a favour, only because I took a∣vvay that great spot of Oyle from off his Royal Robe, with this my sope, not any waies injuring the stuff, which Ariadeno Barbarosso threw upon it. Wherefore I earnestly beseech your Majesty, and all those who are in this consecrated place, that my commodity may be fully tryed; and if every one find it not to be the rare thing which I have said, I desire it may im∣mediately be burnt. Apollo seemed to be much taken with the vivacity of this bold mans wit, whom he asked what his dog was good for? The Charletan answered, That the modern world being become sensual, he gathered company together to hear him, with this his dog which could shew tricks. If it be so (said Apollo) this your occupation seems to me to be much like to the catching of birds; for you with your prating play the fowlers part who whistle; your sope is the bait which is put upon the bird-lime, your dog the owle, those that hear you and believe you, the guls, who leaving some feathers of small money in the bird-lime of your Merchandize, makes your Quarry good. But since you are unfortunately
falne upon this place, where such as you are, are but little credited, and your commodities not like to go off, for that my Litterati have no stains at all in their aparrel, do me and my Vertuosi the pleasure to see your dog play: The Charletan obeyed, and made his dog, which was singu∣larly well taught, shew many tricks, which it did so handsomly, and with such understanding, obeying whatsoever his Master bad him do, as he seemed to have human sense. The graver sort of the Senat wondred very much to see Apollo waste the time appointed for businesses of such weight, in looking upon such trivial pleasure, especially since his Majesty seemed to be much delighted with the dogs tricks, which continued a good while: But their wonder turned soon into admiration, when Apol∣lo, whose property it is to extract excellent documents, and useful pre∣cepts, even out of the vilest things that he looks upon, cryed out, Oh the glory of Knowledg! Oh the great felicity of my Illustrious Vertues! the only rich patrimony of mankind: O my dearly beloved Litterati, rejoice with me, cheer up your hearts, since now you see with your eyes, the great power of Knowledg, the worth of Science, when a little knowledg which a man hath been able to teach a dog, is sufficient not on∣ly to make both him and his Master live plentifully, but to cause him to enjoy the greatest content which can befall a large soul, of seeing the world, and getting good gain thereby, and yet there be some who value them not, who despise them, and persecute them as being preju∣ditial. The Mountebank being liberally rewarded, and dismist by order from Apollo, a Vertuoso appeared before his Majesty, who whilst he lived in the world, by reason of his pleasant pregnant wit, and his graceful comport∣ment, having been the delight of the Roman Court, was by all men known to be that Baldo Cataneo, who was so admired by the Vertuosi of that Court, for his pleasant witty conceits, and his gravity in more se∣rious affairs, both in Prose and in Verse, as he deserved the munificent Allessandro Peretti Cardinal Montalto for his liberal Mecenas. This Poet presented Apollo with the first Canto's of his Argonautica, a Po∣em composed by him in eight lined Stanzas; and bitterly bewailing his misfortune in dying in the flowre of his age, said, his death was for no o∣ther cause displeasing to him, save only that he must now lay before his Majesties feet, that immature fruit of his brain, which if he had lived longer, he hoped would by increase of years have been so perfected, as it would have been more then meanly pleasing to the Litterati: Which calamity was the reason why for his small desert, and by reason of the mis∣fortune of this Poem, he now desired that Immortality unto his name, of meer grace and favour, which he had hoped to have been able to have challenged of right and justice. Apollo with great humanity, but in words and gesture, answered Cataneo, That both himself, and all the Ver∣tuosi of Parnassus were very sensible of his immature death, both bad him comfort himself in the benign Laws of Parnassus, since thereby for the better encouragement of his Litterati, the good mind, and vertuous intention of his beloved Poets being had in more regard, then the quality of the Compositions which they brought to Parnassus, they gave with the same liberality the reward of intire Immortality, to Poems which were but begun by the pregnant brains of the Litterati, and which were interrupted, not by lasiness, but by death, as if they had been brought to their full perfection.
Thus was Immortality favorably decreed to the Name and Writings of Baldo Cataneo, who being with wonted solemnity, placed by the Ma∣sters of the Pegasean Cerimonies, amongst the demi. Gods who enjoy the signal Prerogative of Immortality to their Names and Fames; a Lit∣terato appeared in the Royal Audience, who by his Gown, after the Grecian fashion, and by the evident signe of his beard, was known by the greatest part of the Senat, for that famous Timotheo Greco, who having gaged his beard about the dispute of a syllable, with Francisco Filelfo, that famous Poet of Marcha, it was by the severe Victor cut off; where∣upon all the spectators began again to laugh, and greatly to wonder how Timotheo, who had never been very wise, had so much to his prejudice, dared to present himself in that place, to demand a Residence in Parnas∣sus, which is only granted to the Litterati of highest esteem. Yet Timo∣theo, spake boldly thus to Apollo: I may truely say I have been rather a lover of Learning, then that by my perpetual study I may have deserved the name of a perfect Litterato, though I come empty∣handed before your Majesty, and I dare demand a place in Parnassus a∣mongst your Litterati; yet I hope I shall not part from your Royal pre∣sence, without receiving some favour from that your immense benignity, which doth largely reward the bare intense desire which men have of knowledg. Timotheo was upon his knees (as the custom is) whilst he made this his Petition to Apollo, when (a thing that was never at any time before observed to be done to any personage how eminent soever) his Majesty beckned to him to stand up, and bad him be covered: And then commanded, that according to the custom, the Senat should give their suffrages touching Timotheus admittance: The Litterati, who had but an ill opinion of Timotheo, and therefore were sorry to see him enter the Court, firmly believed, that by the extraordinary favour done to one whom Filelfo had so affronted, his Majesty would try the stedfastness of his Senators opinions in giving their Votes; and whether they would be diverted by his extraordinary usage towards any whosoever: Where∣fore they did not only all of them joyntly give him the repulse, but ma∣ny of them shewing themselves more zealous of the glory of Parnassus then they needed, said freely, that the great affront put by Filelfo upon Timotheo, did not only mark him out to every one for an ignorant per∣son, but for a great babler, a thing which his Majesty and the whole Se∣nat did much detest. You my faithful Litterati (answered Apollo) have given a very ill Judgement of this my Vertuoso, one, than whom (and let not this be offensive to any one) mine eyes never beheld a more glori∣ous personage, and to whom the glory of eternal Fame, with all the most priviledged prerogatives, ought rather to be given. O how signal, how immense, how praise-worthy was the glory which thou (my dear Timo∣theo) didst get in the loss of the wager which thou didst lay with Filelfo, how much ought it to be commended, admired, and rewarded by me, and by these my Litteratio more then all the actions ever done by any whoever thirsted after glory. Thou art he alone, who to this day hast known how, by keeping constant to thy Oath made, and by making good thy word, to purchase that Crown of glory of maintaining pro∣mise both to God and man, which most commonly is so abusefully mea∣sured by the compass of Interest, both by Princes and privat men, as there can no so strict form of Oath be found, no faith whereby to bind
men, from which they cannot tell how to acquit themselves, not only by a thousand evasions, but even by affronted impiety. Thine then Ti∣motheo, be the chief and most honorable place of this my Senat; and let all men learn by the glory which  this day adjudge thee worthy of, that men win so much honour by constantly keeping their word when it is once given, yea though it be prejudicial to their own affairs; as glory is by all men esteemed beyond comparison, greater then the love of any thing that is earthly. This was the end of fortunate Timotheus his business, when Ferdinan∣do of Aragon, the Catholike King of Spain, appeared with great gravity in the Court, and attended by a great many Lords, who complained grievously, that it being a hundred years since he had earnestly prest to be admitted into Parnassus, he could never obtain his desire; and that it was not only he alone, but even all those that knew him, that thought it a great injury done him, to be denied that abode, which was easily grant∣ed to many that were inferior to him, both in merit and State. Apollo answered King Ferdinando, That it was the antient custom of Parnassus, that Princes who desired to be admitted into his State, should be chosen by the Votes of the Litterati of their own Nation, as those who knew best their Kings deserts, and that he would by no means break those or∣ders which by so long a concourse of time had still proved good; and then his Majesty having commanded that they should again go to their votes, he in a grave manner minded the Nation of Arragon, how strait∣ly she was bound, both to God and man, to weigh the merits of her Kings, with the ballance of a soul free from all passion: The Votes be∣ing given, they were all found to be negative; for which reiterated in∣jury, Ferdinando being highly incensed, Sir, said he; Can then such a King as I be so ill dealt withall, and scorned by his ungrateful Nation, without being able to receive remedy for such injustice, for so manifest injury from Apollo's self? What other Nation, either in antient or modern times, is there in all the world, which ought to acknowledg it self more obliged unto its Prince, then is Arragon to me its King, and so great Benefactor? who from that obscurity of fame which every one knows she was in, have made her to be held in high esteem by all the Na∣tions of the earth, by the glorious union which I made between the pow∣erful Kingdom of Castiel and her, by Queen Isabels Marriage. Whilst King Ferdinando with strange alterations of mind, said these things, it was observed that some of the chief Arragon Senators shook their heads, which he, taking to be done to his yet greater disgrace, grew so incenst, as Apollo observing it, to avoid some foul inconvenience which might ensue thereupon, made him aware of his great error, which blinded with passion, he committed in that his Cause; telling him, That Princes did then make their Nations great and powerful when they united them to an inferior Nation (as the Kings of France had done by the important acquisition of Britany) and not to a more numerous and potent King∣dom. For in the first case, by aggrandizing her Empire, men made their Nation Mistriss; whereas in the other, by lesning her Dominion, they made her a slave. Whilst King Ferdinando departed the Audience, no waies appeased by this his Majesties wise answer; to the great admiration of the whole Colledg, a Sparrow-Hawk came flying into the Court, and lighting up∣on
the publick Chair, infused wonder into all the spectators, who took it for some prodigious thing, which signified some great matter. And the Souldiers of the Guard running to drive her out of the Pavillion, his Majestie commanded them to let her alone. Then the Roman Au∣gures or Southsayers rose up and desired Apollo that they might inter∣pret that Augury▪ Apollo laught at the request of those vain men, and told them, that futurities were so hidden by immortal God, from men, as he was a meer fool who pretended he could foretell them by the fly∣ing of birds, or any such like thing which hapned by chance; and that if they would make use of their Art of Augury, by their ordinary inter∣essed ends of making ignorant men more obedient and ready in the exe∣cution of such things as they desired, shewing them that the will of God concurred with mans command, they should know that Parnassus was no aboad for such fools as could be whirld about by the holy and sa∣cred pretences of malitious interessed men. Apollo having said these things, and great silence insuing thereupon, the Hawk spake thus: That Vertue which is thought to be only peculiar to man, is not only known by other Animals, but loved by them, and greedily imbraced, is clear∣ly proved by the aptness which is seen in birds, to learn several tunes which they hear sung by others, and by their learning to speak like man; by the corveting and dancing of four-footed beasts, and by other things which they see, or are taught, the which they do as gracefully imitate, as they do easily learn. This truth (most glorious Prince of the Planets) is sufficient to make the wonder cease in all those that hear me, why I, a savage bird, who live by rapine, and am therefore thought to have a cruel heart, and to be fiercely minded, should desire the so happy and blessed aboad of Parnassus. To adorn the soul with vertue, the desire of good conversation is not only infused by God into men, who are in∣dued with an understanding able to know all things, but into all sorts and conditions of Creatures: And since I very well know that those are only admitted into Parnassus, who by their words and acts, either have taught, or are able to teach holy precepts, good doctrine, and ver∣tuous things, I certainly may with much reason pretend to be thought very worthy to live in these fortunate habitations. I know that all these glorious Litterati will grant me, that mans subsistence, that the good beginnings, better progress, and best end of all vertuous life depends upon the education which parents give their children; this as necessa∣ry, as badly known Science of breeding up children well, is notwith∣standing very ill practised by men, and very well known by the instinct of nature to bruit animals: I, if it may stand with your Majesties ap∣probation, am come to instruct in Parnassus; listen therefore Gentle∣men, and admire; Amongst us birds there is no more immense love then that which children bear to their fathers: but I find mans igno∣rance to be so gross, that amongst them the greatest enemies which children have, are their fathers: For the unbowel'd love which they bear unto them, is more prejudicial to them, then is their enemies impla∣cable hatred. Love even to ones own children, hath its bounds and limits, which those who exceed, occasion ruine to their children; and that you may judge of other animals, by the example which I shall shew you of us birds; we do so affectionately love our young ones, as to feed them upon urgent necessity with flesh torne out of our own breasts, is
not our utmost charity to them; but we do notwithstanding (as men un∣fortunately do) love them when they are old; but by the wise instinct of nature, only so long as they must of necessity be fed by us; for when we find their claws begin to grow sharp, and their wings strong, the first fit for prey, the other for flying, we use the last and most perfect bounds of charity in not loving them any longer; not for that that pater∣nal affection which lives in fathers even after their childrens death, ceas∣eth to be amongst birds, but because that infinite affection of parents to do what is best and most convenient for their children, requires it should be so; the love of fathers to their children is not only useful, but ne∣cessary; but only so long as they are not able of themselves to get their living, and harmful, and directly pernitious, if they assist them when they are able by their own labours and industry to live plentifully of themselves: For certainly mens children would be very industri∣ous, if their parents would only love them till that time which God hath prefixt unto us, and that they would do like me, who when I see my young ones can fly currantly, I shew them hedges full of Sparrows, that they may live plentifully: So men, when their children are be∣come men like themselves, should shew them Princes Courts, and chief Metropolitan Cities, wherein much business is transacted; to the end that they might maintain themselves not like idle and unusefull lumps of flesh buried in sloathfulness, and total ignorance, but by their own vertuous industry. Apollo having heard so necessary a lesson for men, after having highly praised the Sparrow-hawk, and deputed it a safe and honourable place in Parnassus, he said, Now at last, my belov∣ed Vertuosi, we find clearly, that the immortal God having infused full and perfect wisdom into bruit-beasts, for what concerns their preserva∣tion and propagation; the true Philosophy which makes men wise, and to which by continual study and speculation they ought to attend, is to observe their natural instincts, and diligently to practice them in what concerns themselves; for so they might lead their lives happily, not by the capriciousness of several sects of Philosophers, so far differing in opinion amongst themselves, but by living according to holy and pru∣dent natural precepts; and as it would be a foul disorder if birds, and other bruit animals should feed their children till they grow old in their nests and dens; so it must be confest that parents do very ill, who ta∣king more care how to accumulate wealth and riches for their children, then to leave them the pretious and alwaies permanent patrimony of Learning, which fire cannot consume, deluges devour, nor Tyrants take away, instead of breeding up men that may be useful for their own Fa∣milies, and serviceable to their Countries, and to the world, do most un∣fortunately breed up unuseful and vitious lumps of flesh, who not know∣ing wherein else to spend their lives, girting their swords about them, that to the end that they may appear true Gentlemen, imitate those un∣fortunate pismires, who are then sure to fall into rain, when they put on wings. For it is evident that those great patrimonies which are got by Learning, are ruined by the use of Arms. Thus said Apollo, when the famous Philip Commines, Lord of Ar∣genton, appeared before his Majesty, and shewed his Memorials to the Senat of Litterati; and then desired, that together with their Author, they might be consecrated to Immortality. When Argentonne had
made his demand, Apollo commanded Titus Livius, Prince of the Colledg of History, to give his opinion upon Argentons Memorials; who said, he saw no reason why that French Lord should desire that his Writings should be placed amongst the Learned Labours of Histo∣rians which were preserved in the Delfick Library; since there was in them no gravity of stile, no strength of eloquence, no good contexture of times, no frequent Sentences, no Orations, nor any other thing wor∣thy an indifferent Historian: But that he having woven these his Memo∣rials according to the vain fantastick way of Romance, in sundry Chap∣ters, wherein are handled the weighty matters of fact, between the two glorious and potent Princes, Lewis the twelfth, King of France, and Charls, Duke of Burgony, the first known by all men to be wise, the o∣ther valiant, he thought him fitter to be placed amongst the Writers of Romances, then in the Historical Classis. Apollo was so little satisfi∣ed with this Relation of Livy, as not without some commotion of mind, he answered, Livy, those requisites which as I perceive by your relation, you think ought first to be had in consideration in a perfect Historian, are those which I think ought to be considered last in my Vertuosi. History is meat not only well seasoned to please the curious pallat, but substantially and magnificently served in to please the soul; and therefore more respect is to be had therein to profit, then to pleasure: And you are very much deceived if you believe, that to the study of History it be requisite to have a neat polite phrase, either in Latin, Greek, French, or Italian; the sole end of so honorable a study, is to come by that wisdom, which is only drunk in by the reading of past affairs. And though I highly commend your stately stile, and Ce∣sars so polished speaking, yet I would have you know, that those things which you hold the first; are the last in a perfect Historian. Truth is the soul of History, which makes it long liv'd, and well esteemed of a∣mongst men, as also the knowledg how to explain the deep Councels, most secret thoughts of Princes, all the cunning Intriegoes used in times of peace and war, in the Government of their States; which though they be written in poor Law-Latin, affords such content to vertuous minds, as doth eternize his Writings, who hath wit enough to weave such Histories. And amongst these I esteem judicious Commines the chief, and doe not only think him very worthy a place in Parnassus, but command that the first place amongst French Historians be assign∣ed to him. It grew now very late, and Apollo having taken great pains in listning to the reading of so many writings, and hearing so many requests, was very weary; when Berni, Mauro, Molza, and other pleasant and jovial Poets, to make his Majesty merry, brought a Poet into the Court, so sordidly aparrelled, with his clothes all tattered, and smelling of smoak, as he was not unlike a Chimney-sweeper: This man having moved great laughture in the Senat, came before Apollo, to whom with a rude discomposed reverence, he presented a very greasie Poem. His Maje∣sty asked him who he was? who answered, That he was the Author of the famous Poem di Bovo d' Antona. Apollo seemed then to have heard of him, and told him that he was the Ariosto of Ballad-makers; Apol∣lo listned then so attentively to one whole Canto of that Poem, scowl∣ing sometimes, as he made all men wonder that his Majesty could so
much as cast an eye upon so foolish a thing. Apollo, who observed his Litterati's amazement, said, that he much admired that Writer, whom they so much scorned and laught at, since knowing so little, he had the courage to write so much. A thing which might make many of them blush, who knowing much, had writ little: And that the excuse made by many was very naught, and altogether unbecoming a Vertuoso; That there was no more need of writing Verses, since Princely Virgil had writ, that matters of Physick being treated on by Hippocrates and Galen, ought not be toucht upon by any others; and that he spent his time in vain, in writing about the Mathematicks, who had well considered Eu∣clids writings; for there was no book which had not somewhat of good in it; and that conceits and doctrines were found in many Latin Poets, in more writers of Physick, and in some Authors of the Mathematicks, which did not only equal, but exceed any in Virgil, Hippocrates, or Eu∣clid; and that he hated some wits, who having noble Talents in several Sciences, able to eternize their names, did cloke their sloathfulness, and hatred of writing with the name of modesty. But when Apollo gave order to Platina to take that greasie Poet in∣to his Pastery to make him clean, to the wonder of all men, all the bels of Parnassus were heard to sound an alarm, and presently after Mu∣tio Iustinopolitano came out of breath into the Court, and brought the dreadful news, that the Monarchies and Commonwealths of all the world being falne at ods, a bloudy battel was likely to insue, unless some speedy remedy were found out. Apollo, though at the very instant hearing of this so sodain chance, he was able of himself to put on a reso∣lution worthy of his own wisdom; yet in a business of such danger, he would hear the opinion of his Council of State, though tumultuary gi∣ven. And though most were for quenching the sparkles of so dange∣rous a fire, with the usual guards of the Palace, with two legions of Saty∣rical Poets, and with the Pretorian Lyrick Souldiers, and that his Maje∣sties Royal Person should be reserved for a more urgent remedy, when all other hopes failed, yet Tacitus his sole opinion prevailed with Apollo, who resolutely said, Ire ipsum, & opponere Majestatem Imperatoriam de∣buisse, cessuris ubi Principem longa experientia, eundemque severitatis, & munificentiae summum vidissent. Tacit. lib. 2. Ann. Wherefore Apollo marched speedily toward Parnassus, where the ordinary Guards of Provincial Poets, and the Company of Curasiers of Italian Litterati, who were in all haste sent before, found not only the chief streets chained up, and the Foro Massimo secured with good Corps de Guard, but the habitations of all the Monarchies and Common∣wealths well fortified, and furnisht with armed men; and the Monarchs, as well as the Consuls, Dukes, Standard-bearers, Burgamasters, and o∣ther Chieftains of Commonwealths, were even then with their Pikes couched ready to fall on: when the Princes and Commonwealths hear∣ing of his Majesties approach, bore such reverence to his Royal presence, as throwing their weapons on the ground, greatly fearing to be seen and known, fell flat down: Which made every one see how much the pre∣sence of a Prince who is well beloved and feared by his people, prevails with his subjects in such and other like cases of urgent danger. The Tu∣mults being thus quieted, as soon as Apollo came to his own Palace, he sent for all the Monarchies and Commonwealths that were resident in
Parnassus; and all of them readily appearing, he bad the Consul Mar∣cus Marcellus acquaint him with the true reason of those Tumults. The Consul said, that at a certain meeting, wherein were many Monarchs, Roman Consuls, Dukes of Venice, Florentine Confalonieri, and Dutch Burgamasters, it fell into discourse whether Monarchies or Republicks were the better Government; that Philippo Maria Vissinte, Duke of Millan, had the boldness to say, that all republicks, especially Aristocra∣cies, were insufferable Governments of many Tyrants; that the Illustri∣ous Dukes of Venice, as those that enjoy the perfectest Aristocracie that ever was, having given him the lie, all Monarchies and Commonwealths, being concerned in common by this difference, were, as his Majesty might see, falne together by the ears. Apollo was the more displeased hereat, for that by an Edict of his publisht long ago, he had commanded upon pain of grievous punishment, that this so ancient question, and which had been so often discust by the Litterati, should be no more disputed; but that every one should rest content with his present condition. Then turning to Duke Philip, who was the sole Author of this disturbance, he said, That having spoken too inconsiderately of Aristocracies, he ought to know, that well governed States were discerned from such as were Tyrannical, by their peaceable and long life; for Tyrannical Govern∣ments being alwaies full of conspiracies of the Nobles, and of the Com∣monalties rebellions, lasted but awhile, and that it might easily be seen what satisfaction the people of Venice enjoyed by the long time that that flourishing Commonwealth had lived, and by the continual peace that she had enjoyed at home: And that to make this truth appear the more plain to all the Monarchies that were there present, he would put them in mind of a business which had lately falne out in Venice, whereby every one might see with what, and with how much modest liberty people did live in that well governed Commonwealth: For Vettore Calergi, a No∣ble Venetian, having left behind him one only daughter with the rich portion of half a million of crowns; yet the marriage of this so rich maid was so modestly endeavoured by the Venetian Nobility, as her mother might quietly marry her to whom she liked best; who wisely chose Vi∣censo Gremani, a Noble Venetian, and next akin to her daughter, for her daughters husband. Now tell me ingeniously; Philip, what would have become of this young maid, if such a thing had hapned in one of your Monarchies? To answer your Majesty (said the Duke) with that ingenuity of soul, and liberty of Language as becomes this place, doubt∣lesly if such a thing had hapned in any Monarchy, such designs would have been had upon so rich a Dowry, well befitting any Queen, as with much violence (covered over notwithstanding with the cloak of charity towards the young maid) they would have imprisoned the mother, shut the young maid up into some Monastery, or other place, only to inrich some of their favorites with this great Dowry, for more then three or four such things as this, hath been done in the like case, both in Italy, and elsewhere in my time, and formerly, well vvorthy to be joyned to the Letters of Phalaris of Agrigentum.
The XV. ADVERTISEMENT. At a publick meeting, Force (contrary to the custom of the Plebean Court) pretending to take place of Reputation: That Beautiful Lady, with excellent resolution, finds a remedy for her reputation, which was in great hazard. IT is very well known in Parnassus, that in all publick meetings, Re∣putation hath alwaies had the precedency of Force, and taken the right hand. But it hapned the last morning when Apollo made his so∣lemn entry into Leo, Force had the insolency (wherewith he is alwaies accompanied) to contend for place with Reputation; who, had she not been able by her excellent dexterity to overcome so dangerous a rub, had certainly received some notable affront; yet was she very much di∣stasted at that her enemies petulancy used toward her. Wherefore the Vertuosi, who were wholly devoted to that most excellent Princess, in∣couraged her, and exhorted her, by no means to indure the insolency of that rash fellow; and bad her moreover remember, that she was the right hand of all Potentates, and the only instrument wherewith Princes did rule and sway the world: That therefore she should take heart, and resolve to buckle with that hairbraind companion, whom she would so bear down, with the Majesty of her countenance, at the very first in∣counter; that (as it had hapned a thousand times) she would easily throw him down at her feet. The Lady-Reputation answered those her be∣loved Vertuosi, who so incouraged her, with much meekness and civili∣ty, that she greatly cherished their good will; but that she could nei∣ther praise, nor follow their advice: Wishing them to remember, that her whole power, authority, and greatness, being grounded only upon mens opinions, which was so uncertain and various, and not upon the strength of armed men, nor upon the security of inexpugnable Citadels, she must in this her adversity, proceed with great circumspections, and ad∣mirable dexterity: And that there was a great disparity between her and Force, who though once discomfeited, might easily recover, and the second battle be made with greater strength, which would be the more dangerous for her, for that her enemy would to his former violence, add disdain and shame for the first discomfeiture; but that if it should so fall out that she should not with the sole Majesty of her Person, and Authority of Aspect, bear her enemy to the ground, or worst her ene∣my at the very first incounter; like an Elephant which falling to the ground, cannot get up again, she should be wholly rob'd of all her greatness, which purchast her the reputation which she had amongst men: Which considerations were the more necessary for her, for that she had found nothing to be more dangerous to her, then to go about to maintain that Authority and reputation in strength and vigor, by force of Arms, which was only grounded upon Opinion: But that she would provide for the indempnity of her Authority; by her usual remedies,
and would incounter force with her usual Arms, and would be sure to o∣vercome him. Then she added, that Force used those extraordinary terms of insolency against her, not because his own power was increased, but for that by reason of some privat disorders of her own, he found her not to have that Grace and Majesty which she had wont, nor to be had in such veneration by men, as formerly. Having said this, the Lady-Reputation departed, and withdrew her self to her Chamber, from whence she was not seen to stir forth for the space of some months; but with great severity studied her amendment, banishing all privat interests for ever, clearly finding that her credit was much lesned, for having given her self too much over unto them. In the next place she wholly busied her self in sweeping with the besom of se∣vere Reformation, all sordid baseness out of her house, from whence she also extirpated avarice, over-much ambition, and all other privat, disho∣nest, and scandalous passions. This Princess having thus corrected her privat disorders, upon a certain morning when she was to be present at some publick action, she adorned her self with purity of soul, sincerity of heart, liberality, and with other her choicest vertues; and taking up∣on her the Noble Mantle of immence love to deserving persons, and of publick Charity, she appeared with such Majesty at the place where she was expected by the other Illustrious Vertues, and purchast such ve∣neration and respect from the lookers on, as even Force himself (so great was the devotion which that sight wrought in him) was seen to trem∣ble, and upon that occasion did not only give her the precedency of the right hand; but beg'd it as a high prerogative, that he might at that so∣lemnity carry up her Train. The XVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Giovan Francisco Pico, Count of Mirandola, that he might the more quietly attend his studies, entreats Monsignor Dino da Mugello, Auditor of the Exchequer in Par∣nassus, that the Reformers, by reason of the too great noise which they alwaies make in their profession, may be removed further from his neighbourhood; and is not heard in his desire. THe Contentions, which now are greater then ever, and more obsti∣nate between the two chief Lights of Philosophy, Aristotle and Pla∣to, having produced the two mighty Sects of Platonicks and Peripate∣ticks in Parnassus, which fill the Colledg of Litterati with troublesom disputes, and dangerous controversies; Apollo, who joies in nothing more then in the peace and quiet of his Vertuosi, imployed Giovan Francisco Pico, Count of Mirandola, and Lord of Concorde, many months agoe,
in according so important controversies, who he hears hath laboured so much therein, as that the business is already brought to some good ac∣commodation. But such a business requiring very much quiet, Pico is much molested by the House of the Reformers, which is next to his A∣partiment; for by the continual great noise which they make, in beating water with Morter, they do much annoy him; wherefore Pico came yesterday before Dino da Mugello, Auditor of the Exchequer in Par∣nassus, and desired that he might enjoy the priviledg of Scholars, in ha∣ving all noisom occupations removed from his neighbourhood. The Reformers answered Dino, that there being no proportion to be held be∣tween their reforming the ignorant, who were drowned in the dirt of so many corruptions, and the agreeing the frivolous controversies of Phi∣losophers, they ought not to be any waies incommodated; and that it was known to all men, that Princes wrought strange effects in their States, only by keeping the House of Reformation open. Miran∣dola reply'd, That he did not only much marvel, but was scandalized at the Reformers foolish pretention, the vainness of whose employment was easily known, in that their long endeavours had produced just no∣thing but infinite noise. Dino said then again with much freedom, that there was nothing more necessary, nor of greater consequence in any whatsoever State, then that the House of Reformation should still be kept open, and should make a noise, for very great was the good that redounded thereby; but that all men had not judgement enough to di∣scern it: For Reformation was not introduced by wise Princes in their States to do the world good, and to make men vertuous, but that it might serve for a curb and rampire against abuses, and to keep them from growing so powerful, as that in a few years they might overrun the whole world: Moreover it wrought the excellent effect of keeping a Prince continually in reputation with his subjects, by shewing them that he had a careful eye to the general good; for men were as well contented with their Princes good-will, as with the good effects which they see proceeds from thence: A thing so true, as the greatest error which could be com∣mitted by any that rule, was to let men see by their leaving the Reyns loose to all corruption and abuses, they cared not how the world went.
The XVII. ADVERTISEMENT. Tacitus being excluded from out the most famous Common∣wealths of Europe, makes a grievous complaint to Apol∣lo; and is by them with much honour received again, and much made of. THough the most excellent Caius Cornelius Tacitus be esteemed the Oracle for Policy in this Court of Parnassus, and therefore is highly reputed by the greatest Monarchs of Europe, yet Envie being alwaies a ca∣pital enemy to Vertue, some malitious people by their continual ill Offices, have rendred this so illustrious personage, so hateful to most of the chastest Commonwealths that reside in this State, as some few daies agoe they joyntly forbad him their houses. In so much as the very Venetian Li∣berty, which professeth exact chastity before all others, and is farthest from suspition, shut her dore upon him the other day; for these chaste Princesses think it stands not with their honour to converse with him who is held by men to be the only Architect of Tyranny. Tacitus soon resented this so signal affront, both in words and writing, not only with all the Republicks that are resident in this State, but even with A∣pollo's self, to whom with great commotion of mind, he grievously complained, that he had been most wickedly assassinated by his ancient ill-willers, and that in very deed, the ancient and modern Republicks were not more obliged to Plato, Aristotle, Licurgus, or to any other Legislater, or Instituter of living free, then to him, if his Annals and Histories were examined and well considered by learned men, not over∣byassed with passion. These complaints took deep rooting in the minds of these famous Li∣terato's, who not too much to distate so excellent a Writer, and that they might be sure not to prejudice their own peculiar Interests, resolved to meet together in the Temple of Concord, to the end that they might jointly resolve, whether it stood with their reputation to hold Dome∣stick conversation with Tacitus. And after long dispute, they all agreed, That the familiar acquaintance of so politick, and so wise a Writer, was more requisite for Commonwealths, then for Monarchies; for they had clearly found, that Tacitus his end in writing Tiberius his life, was not (as many who understood little of State-affairs had given out) to form the Type of a Tyrannical Government; but that that excellent Writer, by his so particular Narration of the enormous cruelties, not only of inhuman Tiberius, but of Caligula, Claudius, Nero, and of the other most cruel Tyrants which were Emperors since, used against the Roman Nobility, had no other intention, then to let the Senators of Commonwealths see, into what deplorable calamities they run, when pre∣ferring the hatred of their privat passions, and their own self-interests before the publick good, they suffered the pretious Jewel of their Coun∣tries
Liberty, which they ought so diligently to keep and preserve, to be stoln away from them by cruel Tyrants. For it being a precept ex∣actly practiced by Tyrants, wholly to extirpate the Nobility which for∣merly bore any sway, that so they themselves might reigne securely, the inhumanity of Tiberius, and others such as he, who succeeded him in the Roman Empire, was not used by them out of any thirst they had after human bloud, but out of meer politick necessity, and Tyrannical prudence. The XVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The blind man of Forli, that famous Italian Mountebank being, to the wonder of all the Senat of Vertuosi, admit∣ted by Apollo into Parnassus, is by his Majesty put upon an imployment of importance. CHristofano de Sordi, called the blind man of Forli, a famous Italian Mountebank, him to whom it is said, That the Illustrious Euterpe gave the fluent vein of singing Verses ex tempore, in guiderdon, for a receit which he gave her where with to make her hair yellow, hath these many years been standing at Parnassus Gate, where he hath still been troublesom to Apollo, sometimes by submiss prayers, sometimes by fer∣vent pressures, and many times with importunate complaints, was so bold the last week (which caused much laughture in the Litterati) to post up certain papers in the chiefest places of Parnassus, wherein he divulged, that if there were any sprightly wit amongst the learned Poets, who durst contend with him in singing Verses ex tempore to his Harp, he chal∣lenged him to meet him in Euterpe's open field, where he would make it evidently appear, that there was never a Poet in Parnassus of so flow∣ing a vein as could hold up against the fluency of his Verses sung ex tem∣pore, or that was worthy to carry his Harp after him. Apollo, who had ever formerly laught at the fond pretensions of this unworthy fellow, did on Thursday last, of his own meer motion, in publick Senat decree Immortality to his name; and commanded, that with the usual pomp of solemn attendance, he should be admitted into Parnassus, and brought into his presence. The next morning the Triumphant Gate of Parnas∣sus was thrown open to the blind man of Forli, by which such Vertuo∣si enter, who by his Majesty are judged worthy the glorious abode in Parnassus; whereat the learned Barons, the Prince-Poets, and all the Po∣tentates of this Court did so rage, as just when he set his foot upon the threshold of the dore, a great Monarch was heard to say, That Parnassus began now to be an aboad for trivial companions, since Mountebanks and Quacksalvers were admitted thereinto. These words being spoken somewhat aloud, were heard by the blind man; who presently asked his guide who that was that had spoken so ill of him? Be quiet, said the
guide, take off your hat, and, as it becomes you, make a low leg to him that hath injured you, for it was the powerful King of England, Henry the eight. Then said the blind man boldly, Master Henry, If you will play Orlando's part, and choak me with your bravadoes, get you back to England, for we are all equal in Parnassus; and if Mountebanks be not worthy of Parnassus, I wonder how you came thither, who very well know with what Ballads you cheated the English. King Harry grew highly incensed at so sharp an answer, and would have taken the blind man by the beard, which was very long, and would have pul'd it off, but he withheld himself when he considered better, how unwise men of honour are, when they contend with such as have no honour to lose. As soon then as the blind man was come before Apollo, he bad his guide give him his Harp, and then desired his Majesty that he would favour him with a Theme; whereupon (to the teeth of all hidebound Poets, who are half a year in squeesing out a woful Sonnet) he offered himself to sing a hundred octavoes ex tempore: Apollo laught at the blind man, who did pretend to give satisfaction, with his silly ex tempore verses, in that place, where the best Poets, with their well filed, and long studied verses, could scarcely do it; and said unto him, I did not admit you into this place, for any pleasure I take in your Verses sung ex tempore, but only that you may teach my Litterati, in a publick School, which shall be as∣signed you, the Important Art of Walking Well and Safely. Gioro∣lomo Morone, Secretary to Sforzo, Duke of Millan, when he heard that blind men were to teach such as could see, how to walk; broke forth into loud laughter; to whom Apollo, without any manner of alteration, said, moreover, I bear with this your wonder, which by the astonishment which I see in the faces of these my Litterati, is common to many: But know that the waies of this present Age, being so stony, and full of bad passages, as you all find them to be, blind men who walk leasurely, lean∣ing upon a guide, and with a staff in their hand, who raise their feet high, and grope their way as they go, are excellent good to teach those hasty wits, those lively, inconsiderate, rash, and impatient spirits, how to walk safely, who being impatient of all circumspection, do abhor considerate mature delay; and I am well pleased that you are not only an example of this truth unto your self, but unto all others. Then turning to the blind man, he bad him take Morone by the hand, and that he should walk two hundred paces with him; which was done: And it fell out, that whilst the blind man and Morone were walking thus, the blind man found by his staff wherewith he tryed the way before him, that he was come to a bad passage; wherefore he held back Morone, and bad him (who was heedlesly walking over it) Stay: For, said he, Morone, we are come to a place where we may break our necks; lift your foot high, and let us be careful how we pass over this dangerous place: Try every place of it with your staff, as I do, and diligently measure the length, breadth, and depth of this hole, unless you will have us fall into it. Open the eyes of your judgement, which is the true Lanthorn, which in dark∣est times, and places of greatest danger, serves for the Sun. Morone punctually obeyed the blind man; and though with some trouble and expence of time, they at last overcame all hindrances, and past over the dangerous passage. Apollo then bad Morone turn back, and to consi∣der well the dangerous hole, which, guided by a blind man, he had hap∣pily
escaped; which when he had done, he run full of amazement and apprehension, and threw himself down before his Majesties feet, and humbly craving pardon for his having laughed, confest that by the gui∣dance of a silly blind man, he had prosperously past over that deadly Ford of the fraudulent Marquiss of Piscara, wherein himself, who was judged to be one of the best guides of all the Italian Princes, broke his neck. The XIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Luigi Alemanni having in an Elegant Oration set forth the Praises of the French Nation, repented that his action afterward, and desired leave of Apollo, to make his Re∣cantation, but was not permitted so to do. LUigi Alemanni, a Noble Florentine Poet, gave himself to hate the Spanish Nation deadly, ever since his Country was overcome by the Forces of the Emperor Charls the fifth; an action which would have purchast him much love amongst the Italians, had he not obscured this his glory, with the common ignorance of many modern Italians, of not knowing how to hate the Spaniards, without declaring partiality to the French, of whom Alemanni grew so inamoured, as much to his Maje∣sties admiration, he asked leave to make a publick Oration in Praise of them; a resolution which did not only redound to his own particular shame, but to the shame of all Italy; every one being scandalized that so famous a Florentine Poet should extoll the praise of that Nation, from whose sole ambition Italy may justly acknowledg all her present slavery to proceed. Alemanni made this his Oration, and did therein very much exagge∣rate the glory of the French Nation, terming it the overthrow of the famous Roman Liberty, only because it gave the Arms of Tyranny in∣to Cesars hands, wherewith that ambitious man did afterwards slay the Liberty of his Country: He said that the French had in their Wars perpetual victory, in Africa, Asia, and Europe, and ruled with infinite glory. He stiled the French Monarchy, the Triumphant Princess o∣ver the whole world, her enemies scourge, and the only means and in∣strument of the yet remaining Liberty of Italy: He attested for truth, That France was the most numerous Nation that was under the Sun; he said it was rich, fruitful, well armed, united, strong, well peopled with such as were most devoted to their King; all which he said were things requisite in a Kingdom, which will be held to be formidable and lasting. This Oration made Alemanni be followed by an infinite number of French; so as being made strangely much of, by many of the Barons of that Nation he was easily perswaded to go into France, where he found that true, which his best friends had taught him, that if he desired to love
the French men, he should by all means shun going to France; for he had not been twenty daies in the French Court, when he was so used by those people, and so distasted at them, as he was forced to fly from France, as full of ill affection to it, as he went thither with ravishment; insomuch as he presented himself the other day with a much imbittered mind before Apollo, and told him, that having in that his Oration very falsly exaggerated the praise of the French Nation, to the end that truth might prevail, he desired leave to make his Recantation; for by the un∣fortunate experience which he had made of the French, he had found them to be so indiscreet, so furious, impertinent, and so phantastically humerous, and ingratefull beyond all human creatures, as that they were no less capital enemies to the Italians, though they knew they had many there that sided with them, then they were to the English, Spaniards, Germans, Dutch, and all other forein Nations. To this Apollo readily answered him, That he did not only deny him the leave he had asked, but straitly charged to repeat the same Oration again in praise of the French; and that amongst the other singular ver∣tues of that Warlike Nation, he should mention the infinite glory which they had won by appearing to be mortal enemies to all forein Nations. Which singular vertue he said the Italians were so far from, as they were not ashamed to become the apes of all the most barbarous parts of the world in their discourse, aparrel, feeding, and in all other their actions: In so much, as if the Jews did rule in any part of the earth, it was to be believed, that to curry favour with that base generation, many of them would not be ashamed to wear yellow hats. The XX. ADVERTISEMENT. Corbulone having with much honour ended his prefixt time of Government in Pindo, a Patent to continue the same Iurisdiction for one year longer, is graciously sent him by Apollo; which he refuseth to accept of. DOmitio Corbulone having happily ended the first year of his Go∣vernment of Pindo, Apollo, who was very well satisfied with him, sent him his Letters Patents to continue in the same Government the next year; though Corbulone knew very well that all the people of his Government did very much desire his continuance in Pindo, yet he had importuned Apollo to send one with all speed to succeed him in that place: And though he foresaw that Apollo would interpret his refusal sinisterly, yet he again desired to be changed; and had his request grant∣ed. Being returned to Parnassus, his friends desired to know why he had refused to continue still in that imployment, which many other great personages were ambitious of? Corbulone answered them, That he who would preserve his body in health, and keep up his reputation, must
be so much master of himself, as to be able to rise from the Table with an appetite, and to quit Governments when people seemed to be best satisfied with him: For Officers (though they were foolish and untoward, were alwaies adored by the people the first six months, well enough be∣lieved the second six months; but that though they were good, they were hated the third six months; and at the end of two years, the peo∣ple grew sick of those that were best; not for any misdemerits of the Governor, but through the peoples too great curiosity, who as easily grow weary of good things, as they do of bad. That therefore that Servant or Officer of a Prince deserved to be esteemed wise, who havng done some special good service to his Prince, could resolve to leave the Court, and leave his Master in love with him, and not to tarry till that unfortunate time, which will at last happen in all Courts, of being shamefully driven out of dores; either for some small fault, which is a∣ble to cancel any former merit, how great soever, or else for that not on∣ly privat men, but Princes are subject to be glutted with the same con∣versation still, and do daily love new things, and take delight in growing worse. The XXI. ADVERTISEMENT. Sebastian Veneri, Duke of Venice, after his admittance into Parnassus, desires Apollo that he may have the pre∣cedency given him before Hereditary Kings and Mon∣archs; and obtains a favourable Decree from his Majesty. THough the Illustrious Prince, Sebastian Venieri, Duke of Venice, had a place alotted unto him in Parnassus by Apollo's extraordinary favour, worthy the magnanimity of so great a Prince, before he made this his desire unto him; yet would he not appear in publick, before the controversie was decided which was on foot, before his Majesties own Tribunal, to which of the three Colleagues the glory of the Naval Vi∣ctory which he obtained at the Scogli Corzolari did of due belong: The which being afterwards decided by Apollo, in manner as shall be hereaf∣ter said, Prince Venieri made his publick solemn entrance on horseback, which was in this regard very remarkable, because none were suffered to honour, accompany, or serve this Illustrious Duke at his entrance, save free-men, who were looked upon in Parnassus with envy, tenderly be∣loved, and honoured with such observance, as that they are deservedly called by all the Vertuosi, Princes of privat persons. The whole Col∣ledg of the Vertuosi were extraordinarily joy'd to see to what sublime degree Venieri's merit had brought a privat man, and infinitely honour∣ed the immortal Venetian Commonwealth, which by having so largely rewarded the desert of one of her Senators, had thrown the Gate of Me∣rit and gallant actions wide open; which many Monarchs either keep
close shut, or else out of a capricio, open it rather to unworthy, then to deserving men. It was afterwards observed for a very rare thing, that at the Princes entrance, the Grecians, who since the fall of their Empire, have lived in a perpetual melancholy, never taking joy in any thing, be∣ing now overjoy'd, were seen to dance and rejoyce upon this occasion, as if Prince Veniero had been one of their Nation; and that all the jol∣lity of that shew had belonged to them. Some said that this was, be∣cause the Grecians being reduced into great calamity, could not hope to be freed from their slavery by any other Potentate then by the State of Venice, at whose victory obtained by this Prince against the Tyrannical Ottaman Empire, they did rejoyce as if it had been an act of their own: To boot, they were mightily gladded to see the Duke of Venice wear the ancient stately Grecian Habit; as if it were a happy and secure Au∣gury, that the greatness of the ancient Grecian Empire would be renew∣ed in the Immortal Commonwealth of Venice, when God should be ap∣peased in his just anger against the Schism of that Nation. Not long after this solemnity, when all the Princes, together with the Senat of Poets, went in good order to visit the chief Temple of that State, to beg of God to stir up the hearts of Princes to be liberal towards the Vertu∣osi: Prince Venieri, who was placed by the Master of the Pegasean Ceremonies (according to the ancient custom) amongst the rest of the Dukes of Venice, boldly said, That he ought of right to have preceden∣cy before the greatest hereditary Kings and Monarchs of the world. The Masters of the Ceremonies did then humbly beseech Venieri, that he would be content with his accustomed place, and shun both giving and receiving great distastes in Parnassus by this hateful novelty. Venieri answered resolutely, that common men observed customs, such as he would have what was just, who very well knowing what was their due, did not live according to past errors, but did correct them. Some great Princes laughed openly at this novelty endeavoured by Venieri; but o∣thers who were of a more refined judgement, began through apprehen∣sion, to look pale, and were heard to say, that it belonged to fools to laugh at great mens pretentions, who being excellently well nosed spannels, never wag their tails till they be very near the Partridg: For wise men thought, that were the business never so hard, it might be effected when it was taken in hand by such a one as Prince Venieri; and that it was to be considered, that so great a personage as he, would not set his rest of reputation upon a game, unless he were sure of five and fifty in his hand. When the Masters of the Ceremonies found Venieri to be so resolute, that they might prevent the scandal which they feared such a novelty might occasion, hasted to Apollo, and acquainted him with what had hapned. His Majesty did not only not abhor Prince Venieri's preten∣tion (as many thought he would have done) but contrary to the opinion of most of the Vertuosi that were about him, did mightily admire it; and wondred very much that that singular man should find out an incon∣veniency, which was not observed by as many Elective Princes as were in Parnassus. And because manifest danger of great scandal appeared to be in delay of resolution, and that the business required expedition, without citing the parties to appear, using the Plenipotentiary power which he hath over his Litterati; he at the very instant decreed, That Prince Venieir should be placed according to his desire, above all Here∣ditary
Monarchs; and said, generari, & nasci Principibus fortuitum, nec ultra aestimator. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist. That to be begotten or born of Princes, was chance, nor was it otherwise to be esteemed of; that it ap∣peared not only to be high injustice, but infinite ignorance; that here∣ditary Monarchies, which without any precedent merit, fell to Princes only by blind fortune, or by the relation of bloud, should in his State, where vertue was only had in consideration, be preferred before perso∣nages of worth, who by their rare vertue, and singular merit, knew how to get a Principality in a well regulated election of worthy Electors. The XXII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo being greatly moved to compassion, by seeing a poor Souldier, who had lost both his hands in the Wars, goe a begging, doth sharply reprehend Princes for their ingra∣titude to Military men. THis morning, as Apollo went out of dores, a souldier who had lost both his hands in the Wars, came before him and beg'd an alms: Apollo asked him how he came to be so maimed; the souldier answered, That whilst he was handling his Pike in a battel, in the service of a great Prince, both his hands were shot off by a Canon. Apollo commanded a liberal alms to be given to the poor man, and bad some Princes who were by him, remove away that unfortunate witness of their ingratitude, from the eyes of the world, that sad example of the miserable condition of souldiers in these modern daies: For it was a spectacle which did too much afflict the soul of the Vertuosi, to see that miserable souldier beg his bread, who had deserved from the Prince whom he had served, a rich patrimony, whereby to give that alms to o∣thers, which he was now forced to beg for himself.
The XXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo greatly compassionating the lamentable shipwrack which his Vertuosi make in great Princes Courts, to secure their Navigation, Commands some of the chief Litterati of his State to make a Card whereby men may sail by Land. APollo being every day more grieved then other, at the sad ship∣wracks which many of his Litterati do often make in the Courts of great Princes; who having loaded their Vessels (their minds) with the sweat of Sciences, thereby to merit their Princes favour, are unfor∣tunatly lost upon the sands of some hired lodging, drowned in the Whirl∣pool of a shameful Hospital, and sometimes split upon the rocks of beg∣gery and dispair, the wealth of infinite vertues not being able to free them from so lamentable calamities, would by all means find out a re∣medy for so great evils, that his Vertuosi might make safe Navigation in all Courts, but particularly in that of Rome, which is placed in so dan∣gerous a climat; and all this for the advantage of Learning, which loos∣eth much reputation, when men see how little they get thereby, who spend their whole life in obtaining it. Meditating therefore maturely with himself, that since Portugal Pilats, and those of Biscay, England, Holland, and Zealand, by only observing the Sun, Moon, and Stars, with a little stone in their hand, knew how to bridle the dreadful Ocean, which they so freely cut through into all parts, and at all seasons, as they had made road-waies all over it; why his Vertuosi by their powerfull aids of Astronomy, Cosmography, Mathematicks, Meteors, and chief∣ly by their dexterous wits, sharpned by perpetual reading, could not invent as safe a Navigation by land, as the Pilats of the aforesaid Nations had found out by sea. To secure therefore Land Navigation (for as much as might be done by Learning) Apollo some months ago instituted a Committee of choice men in all Sciences, necessary for such a business, and made Ptolomy, that Prince of Cosmographers, the Chairman; to whom he gave A∣ristotle for his Companion in the Meteors, Euclid in the Mathema∣ticks, Guido Bonati in the Astronomy, and to these he added Count Baltazar of Castiel, one very much verst in the deep Court Oceans; and for the better carrying on of whatsoever was requisite to so weigh∣ty a business, his Majesty gave order that the famous Carthaginian Hannae, Palinurus, Columbus, il Cortese, Terrante Magaglianes, Americo Vespuci, Vasco di Gama, all of them being the chiefest Pilats that ever sailed on the Seas, should be admitted into this Committee. In the first place then (as was very fitting) an exquisite Card where∣by to sail by land, was made by Ptolomy, which with singular skill, was struck through with lines on all parts; and not only divers learned A∣stralobes,
but a new artificial Quadrant was invented, to learn the true elevation of Courtiers deserts, and the latitude and longitude of re∣wards with which their service ought to be acknowledged: 'Tis true that Guido Bonati took very much pains to find out the true height of the Court of Rome's Pole; yet nor he, nor any other of the Committee, could ever by any Astralobe adjust the course of the sun of any humerous Princes phantastical wit; but the genius of a Prince being the true and safe North Star, which Court-Marriners ought to observe in their land-Navigation; these gallant men did all of them much wonder, how a Star which was so certain for Navigation by Sea, was not only not firm and stable in Land-Navigation, but was continually carried about by the two contrary motions, of Interest, and Passion, whence such dangerous Court-difficulties and troubles doe arise, as doe often occasion fowle shipwracks. They discovered greater difficulties in the motions of the wandring Stars (Princes Officers) for they were so far from being carried about, as they ought to be, by the primum mobile (their Princes service) as they were often seen to go retrograde thereunto, nay the Committee were past all expression amazed, when they by their observation found for cer∣tain, that the inferior heavens (the Officers) did by the course of their privat passions and interests, often hurry about the aforesaid primum mo∣bile; so as by reason of these accidents, the business grew so confused, as the Committee could never come at the perfect knowledg of the motions of so many sphears, as was necessary for those to do, who were to publish the certain and assured rules thereof. Their obstacles grew greater, when they came to score out the compass of winds, whose num∣ber they found not to be certain and bounded, as is seen in Navigation by Sea; but that they were little less then infinite: For besides the four Master-Winds, the Princes Will, his childrens desires, the Authority of his Brethren, and other Princes of the bloud, and the opinion of the Councel, an infinite number of half-winds were discovered, Court-Of∣ficers, Princes favorits, make-mirths, flatterers, and even Pandors, all of them so irregular, and upon some occasious so boysterous as they begot great difficulty in contriving the Compass: So as these Pilats thought the condition of Court-Navigators to be very miserable, who were to fit their Sails (their Wits) to such a multitude of winds. Yet for all these difficulties, these famous men were never disheartnep, but buck∣led themselves closer to the business by how many the more flats, sholes, and quick-sands, Silla's and Caribde's, vast Whirlpools of rivals, enviers, malcontents, persecuters, and heteroclite spirits they found in the vast Ocean of the Court. The Astralobes and Quadrants being made, and the Compass being brought to the greatest perfection that might be, the Committee thought to make trial: Wherefore eight spruce Courtiers were listed, all of them well provided of Patience (a necessary Biskat) for such as have courage enough to plough the tempestuous Ocean of the Court. And whilst these were ready to hoist sail, and only staid for a favourable wind, there hapned a thing altogether incredible; for a favourable North wind blowing, to which all the eight Courtiers suddenly spread abroad their Sails (their Hopes) the Sails of only one of them were seen to swel, and make a prosperous Voyage, whilst the rest of the Courtiers stirred not one whit from their place.
The Gentlemen of the Committee were strangely confused, when they found that in Land-Navigation, prosperous winds (the Princes fa∣vour) did not blow alike in all the sails of equally deserving Coutiers: Much greater was the wonder, when the same prosperous wind return∣ing to blow again; to the which some other Courtiers who were ready for their journey, displaid their sails, there was one, who being without either mast or sail (without any merit) who stood idle in the haven, to learn before he put himself upon so dangerous a Navigation as Court∣service; this man I say was by a blast of that prosperous wind, hurried from the haven of his quiet, carried into the high sea of imployments, much above his capacity, and yet did make a happy voyage, got great riches and honors. A novelty which appeared so strange to these Pi∣lats, as Magaglianes being astonished at so great a wonder, said, Gentle∣tlemen, I should never have imagined there had been so great a diffrence between Sea-Navigation, and that of Land; and these extravagant pas∣sages which I see, makes me greatly doubt the good success of this our enterprise; but patience overcomes all difficulties; therefore let us pro∣ceed. Then a Courtier that was a great Vertuoso displaid his sails (his faith∣ful service) to a prosperous West wind (his Princes favour) and by his swolne sails (fair words from his Master) thinking that he had made a long voyage, when he had calculated what way he had made, found himself to be just in the same place as he was before he hoisted sail, having been still fed in all his long journey (his assiduous service) with false hopes and expectation, not meeting with any real substance. But a stranger thing then all this, was, when they saw both the South and the North wind blow at one and the same time so furiously from the fantastick brain of an extravagant Prince, as that the unfortunate Courtiers being molested by two contrary winds, knew not which way to turn their Tacklings; so as between these two winds, many Vertuosi were miserably drowned. At this so strange a novelty Columbus cryed out, I now find for certain Gen∣tlemen, that Navigation by Sea, wherein these extravagancies are not met with, is so safe a business, as it may be compared to travailing by land in a Litter. Columbus had no sooner said these things, when the whole Committee were aware that certain Courtiers that were Vertuosi, lying in the Haven, were in great danger of being drown'd in the Court-Sea, which was swolne much more then usual, raised a great storm, the great∣est Anchor-Cable-Ropes of the most exquisite Court-patience, broke short in two, every thing threatned shipwrack; and yet the air of the Prince his countenance was very calm, the pleasant West wind of his content was only seen to blow; the danger appeared plainly, no wind of the Princes anger was discerned, and yet the Court-Navigators ran ha∣zard of perishing in the Haven: Notwithstanding all this, in this so in∣raged Tempest, one bold Courtier had courage enough to put out of the Haven, and was not only not drowned, as every one believed he would have been, but that horrible cross wind which would have indangered any other man, though never so well experienced, proved so prospe∣rous a wind to him, as in a short time it brought him to the Haven of great Dignities: A thing certainly very strange, and which did much a∣stonish the Gentlemen of the Committee, who wondred that those tem∣pestuous storms should in Land-Navigation prove prosperous winds to
some few, which even in the safest Harbours did shipwrack many. But it seemed yet more strange, when the skie being clear, no claps of thun∣der heard, no lightning seen, some thunderbolts did notwithstanding fall, which burnt two unfortunate Courtiers; this unusual accident made the Members of the Committee muse, why thunderbolts shot from an incensed Prince, should not be preceded by such thunder and lightning, whereby to admonish Courtiers to escape them, as those are which are shot by the all powerful hand of God against mankind, when he is angry with them. Soon after a Courtier was seen to be assaulted by a terrible Tempest (Persecutions) who after having long defended himself from the fury of the high going Sea (his Princes anger) and from the boysterous winds of cruel calamities, that he might keep himself from being swallowed up, was forced to throw all his Merchandize overboard, and after having spent the main mast of his hope, and that his deserts leaked water of dispair, split himself upon the Rocks (the ingratitude of an not acknow∣ledging Prince.) Then (which appeared very strange) the Vessel of this Courtiers service being after so hard an incounter, broken and sunk, the tempest of Court-persecutions ceased, the sea of the Princes anger was appeased, the rock which had been the cause of his shipwrack, turned to a safe haven, the Courtiers sunk ship rose again from underneath the wa∣ter, fairer, stronger, and better tackle then befored, and was again load∣ed with the Merchandize of his Merits, the which he afterwards barter∣ed at dear rates, for great dignities, and rich revennues. This appeared very strange to these Pilats, and to the whole Committee, neither could they sufficiently wonder, how in land-Navigation, shipwracks could prove fortunate to Navigators. But continuing to make new experiences, they commanded a very wary Courtier, that he should display the sails of his talent to a wind which blew from the South, and he steering his course fortunately full North, after many daies sail, the Court-Pilat, to find where he was, took the altitude of the Pole of his desert, with his Astralobe, and not without much wonder, found, that though he had still kept the fore-ca∣stle (his good service) directly towards the North (his Princes Interests) he had sailed Southward. The Courtier at first alloted the cause of this disorder, to his not having kept the rudder of his soul faithful (as he ought to have done) towards the North of his Masters service; bu when he found both by the Card, and by the Compass which he held in his hand, that he had alwaies steered the ship of his actions aright, he clearly found that the error of his unfortunate voyage was occasion∣ed, because the North-star of his Princes mind was turned by malignant men, which are alwaies about him, towards the South. Then Vespucci, Gama, and the other Pilats, desired the Committee that they would give over the business, as being a desperate cure; and said, that nothing made the Navigation by Sea so certain, as the immu∣tability of the North-star: And that having clearly found, by the last unfortunate experience, that Princes minds (which was the certain North-star of land-Navigation) were carried about and diverted by ma∣licious Courtiers, to saile on the tempestuous Court-seas, was not a re∣solution to be put on by wise men, but by such as were desperate. At this instant the Committee saw a spruce neat Courtier, who had
sailed so prosperously in the Court of Rome, and in other Courts for seventy years space together, as that he had not only overcome tem∣pestuous storms, and boisterous winds of persecution, but had even broken the hard rocks which his ship had given against; this man pur∣suing on his voyage prosperously with a most favourable wind, was drowned for having only unfortunately falne upon a company of sedges (a Catchpoles impertinences) an accident which did so astonish the Gen∣tlemen of the Committee, as they resolved to make trial only of one other Courtier who was outward bound, and then to be quiet: They commanded him therefore to put to sea; and it hapned that whilst he was sailing in a road which was held by all men to be very safe, his ship at unawares gave against a rock, and split in pieces; the Committee ve∣ry much blamed the Courtiers ignorance, who knew not how to shun that rock; but he clearly shewed them that it was not specified in the Card, Wherefore all the Pilats fixt their eyes upon the Chairman Pto∣lomy, as if they did tacitly accuse him of ignorance, having left out that rock in his Card, which had occasioned so great evil. But Ptolomy ha∣ving well viewed and considered the place, and all the coast about, shew∣ed them clearly, that no man living that had ever made that passage be∣fore, had ever seen any rock in that place, therefore he could not speci∣fie it in the Card which he had made, and that it arose up at that very in∣stant that the unfortunate Courtier fel upon it. The Committee finding then that in Land Navigation, rocks arose every moment in the midst of Medows, and other places, which were held to be so safe, as that they might be passed over with great securi∣ty in the obscurest nights; they broke up the Committee, accounting the undertaking to be desperate and unfeasable, and commanded that none should presume to sail by land, except it were at full noon, carry∣ing the Lanthorn of discretion every one of them in the fore-castle of their proceedings, morning and evening, with their bare knees on the ground, and their hands lift up to heaven, beseeching God to grant them a good voyage, for to bring the ship of hope in safety into a Court Ha∣ven, depended more upon the immediate help from heaven, then upon any humane wisdom.
The XXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Ariadeno Barbarossa being driven by a sudden storm, splits upon the Scogli Cursolari, and Maturino Romagasso, Captain of the Guard of the Gulf of Lepanto, endeavours his escape, when he might have taken him prisoner. ARiadeno Barbarossa, a great Pyrat, being overtaken some daies ago with a cruel storm, fell upon the Scogli Corsolari, whre he lost many ships, and an infinite many of men: yet he suddenly betok him∣self with those that were escaped, to repair those his Gallies, whi were yet unsplit; when the news of such a wrack being brought to   forthwith gave order to Maturino Romagasso, who had the custo  the Lepanto Gulf, to go and seize upon that publick Thief. It is known that vigilant Romagasso did at that very instant charge a trusty Mariner to go with all possible diligence and secrecy to those rocks, and to wish Ariadeno to remove from those rocks, and save himself as well as he could. The Mariner wondred very much at Romagasso's resolution; whom he asked why he would save the life of that his deadly enemy, whom he had now so fair accasion to seize upon; and that if he who was held Apollo's right eye, only that he might keep the Rivers of Lepanto free from so pernitious a Pyrat, what other man, how great soever, should be paralel'd to him, when he should have vanquished Barbarossa? 'Ts said that Romagasso repli'd in these ientical words; My friend, The greatness which you see I am now in, is so annext to Barbarossa's power, as I cannot discomfeit him without ruining my self. And know, that the very first day that I should have committed this error, thou shouldst see me be the most abject fellow of all this Court: For faithfulness in Officers is almost banished out of the world, more through the ingrati∣tude of who commands, then through his falshood who ought to obey. Whence it is that disorders are grown so great, as that Officer whose ulti∣mat end is not to keep his Prince in perpetual need of his service, is more man, then a wise man. And the modern Militia of us Captains, is turn∣ed to publick Merchandize; which is not occasioned out of any fault of ours, but for the defect which is even graven in the bones of many Princes, of making no account of clothes, but when it rains.
The XXV. ADVERTISEMENT. Epictetus, a Stoick Philosopher, who finding his Sect to grow much deformed, asks leave of Apol∣lo to ground a new Sect of Reformed Stoicks; and is rather reprehended by his Majestie, then commended. EPictetus, that famous Stoick, had this day long audience of Apollo, to whom he was overheard to say with great submissness, that the exemplary life, certainty of Doctrine, holy customs, quiet and fruitful leasure, that he had formerly seen in the Sect of Stoicks, had forced him to imbrace that Sect, in which he had lived with great satisfaction for the space of 25 years; but that it being now much falne from the former severity of life, and good behaviour, nothing of good remain∣ed in it, but the bare and still reverenced name, at which he was both much afflicted and scandalized, and was forced to forgo it, that he might still live in his antient purity of demeanour, poverty of life, humility, and peace of mind. That therefore (if it should stand with his Maje∣sties approbation) he, and some other of his fellow-Philosophers who were of the same mind, desired to withdraw themselves, and to ground a new sect of reformed Stoicks. Apollo, not without some apparent signes of displeasure, answer∣ed Epictetus, That he was so far from being willing to multiply the Sects of his Philosophers, as for the good of Sciences, unity of Opini∣on, and for many other weighty respects, he was resolved to reduce them to a lesser number; and that if the Stoicks were any waies fallen from their former good orders, he wisht him to know, that such a one as he, ought rather to hide their defects, then scandalously publish them to the world by new Reformations; it not being possi∣ble to admit of a sect of Reformers, without necessarily acknowledg∣ing a deformation: And that a Philosopher so cry'd up for Wisdom, and sincerity of soul, as was Epictetus, should not endeavour to pur∣chase reputation to himself, by defaming others; and the rather, for that by the laying a foundation of new reformed Stoicks, he made it appear evidently to the whole world, That the Stoicks disorders were grown so great, as that they were become incorrigible, even by the exemplary life of such a one as himself: That therefore it was the duty of every good Stoick, when he saw his Sect forget their Rules, to strive to reduce them to their duties by his own good example, it not being only shameful ingratitude, but wicked impiety to abandon his Sect in its most urgent occasions, and greatest necessity:
For certainly that Pilat were very wicked, who seeing his Ship ready to be lost in a fearful storm at Sea, should abandon his companions, and seek∣ing to save himself in the Ship-bot, could find in his heart to laugh at those that were in distress: And that if he should open the dore in Par∣nassus to reformed Sects, that progressus in infinitum, must of necessity follow, which ought to be so shun'd by every wise Prince. For every thing necessarily growing old and corrupt in time, by consequence the reformed Stoicks transgressing their rules, would in time divide them∣selves into new reformed Sects. And because the planting of Vinyards, and founding of Sects of Philosophers walked hand in hand, it was to be considered, that the wise Husbandman, when he saw his Vinyard, which before was very fruitful, go to ruine for want of dressing, did not suddenly fall to plant a new one, but endeavoured by dilligence and assi∣duous labour, to make it fruitful again, and never resolved upon the planting of a new Vinyard, till he clearly found, that it was impossible to reduce the impair'd Vinyard to its former condition, by any whatsoever diligence. In which case, at the same time that he plants his new vinyard, he plucks up the old one by the very roots, and turns it into earable ground; for otherwise, in a short time, he would have foolishly encom∣bred his whole Patrimony with wild Grapes. Apollo said also, That Epictetus should reflect much upon the unfortunate condition of the pre∣sent times, wherein the whole world being infected with the pernitious disease of Polititians, whose particular profession it is, not to adhibit faith to such actions as have a certain affected appearance of extraordinary goodness, it was shrewdly to be feared, that they would interpret his good will, and excellent intention, of laying a new foundation of reform∣ed Stoicks, to be but Hypocrisie; giving it out (as it is their custom to do) in every corner, that Epictetus, a Philosoper of so well a compos'd soul, would forsake the old Stoick Sect, whereof he was but the tail, out of ambition to become the head of a new one.
The XXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. The Nobility of the Commonwealth of Achaia, not being able any longer to indure the insolency of the Commons, who Governed the State, send Ambassadors to Apollo to obtain a Prince, who may govern them; and receive a gracious answer. THe Modern Commonwealth of Achaia, which (as all men know) is meerly Democratical, is by reason of the insolent peoples great sedition, so full of tumults, slaughters, rapine, and all other sort of confusi∣on, as the Nobility, opprest by the violence of the seditious people, to free their Countrey from so cruel Tyranny, thought it a more tolera∣ble condition to live under the command of any one Prince, how cruel or avaritious soever, then to suffer the insolency of a domineering peo∣ple: Insomuch as they said it was necessary for the common good, to call in a Forreign Prince, who might govern the afflicted State, and might curb the insolency of the rabble-rout: And to this purpose they summoned the people to a Parley, and deplored the publick miseries; the sole remedy whereof they said was, to submit the Countrey unfor∣tunately free, to the command of a Prince. The ignorant people, who in weighty resolves know not what they grant, nor what they deny, easily assented that a Forreign Prince should be sent for, who re-ordering the confused State, might govern their Country, which was incapable of living free. In this Assembly two Ambassadors were chosen, who were to obtain from Apollo, a Prince fitting for their urgent affairs. The Ambassadors came to this Court three daies ago, who having made their desires known in a pub∣lick audience, they were answered in his Majesties name. That he would quickly send them away contented. Many prime Subjects of this State, used all the means they could, to be sent to command so Noble a Prin∣cipality; amongst the most remarkable whereof, were Anna Momoran∣ci, a famous French Baron, very much assisted by Francis the first, King of France, and Don Ferdinando di Toledo, Duke of Alva, befriended by the most Catholike King Philip the second; not so much out of any affection he bore to that his servant, as to rid his Court of one, who not able to tolerate an equal, much less a superior, was very troublesom to him and to his Court. Apollo resolutely chose the Duke of Alva; wherein he did so highly displease the King of France, who complained grievously that Apollo's Majesty had preferred the Duke of Alva, a man in rigour of Justice not only severe, but inexorable, as had plainly appeared in his Government of Flanders, before one of so exquisite goodness, and of so exact judgement in State-Government, as Momo∣ranci was known to be. Apollo answered King Francis, That he had preferred the Duke of
Alva before Momoranci, who was a Gentleman of a mild and sweet spirit, only by reason of his extraordinary severity; which was very re∣quisite in this present occasion, the other being unaccustomed to the dif∣ficulty of taming a coltish people, born free, with the cudgel of new servi∣tude. And the K. of France not being herewithall satisfied, but saying with some commotion of spirit, that his French men, when occasion did re∣quire, could also not only be severe, but cruel: Apollo in an angry tone, bad him hold his peace, and told him, he wondred that sheep and lambs should pretend to play the part of wolves, as if there had never been any Gaspero Colonni, any Monsieur de la Nove, and so many other great and little flies, which none of his generation could ever find the way how to keep from about their noses. The XXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having for a just cause removed Gulielmo Budeo from the Lord Treasurers place; confers the aforesaid place upon Diego Covarruvia, a Noble Spanish Literato, and Dean of the Colledg of the Grand Sages of this Court, though he was much gainsaid therein by the French Mo∣narchy. GUlielmo Budeo, a Parisian, who for his being very expert in the knowledg of monies, hath for many years, and with much reputati∣on, exercised the place of Lord Treasurer in this Court, was on the sud∣den on Munday last, not only with great disgrace removed from that place, but by express order from his Majesty, banisht for ever out of Par∣nassus; which affront was the greater, for that it is said, that the occasion of this so high resentment was, because he was infected with those mo∣dern heresies, which being invented by ambitious men, only to make sub∣jects rebel against their Princes, are not worthy to be followed by those who professing Learning, ought to let the world see that they do not on∣ly know, but do infinitely abhor the popular errors of the ignorant, who are apt to be carried about by the impostures of impiety. After Budeo his expulsion, it was suddenly noised in Parnassus, that his Majesty had de∣stin'd Diego Covarruvio to be Treasurer, a great Spanish Lawyer, a man as excellent for Learning, as for his plain-dealing, and sincerity of an irre∣prehensible life. As soon as this Apollo's resolution was known in Parnas∣sus, it begot great jealousies in the French Monarchy, who thought it stood not with her advantage, that a Spaniard should be called up to so high a Magistracy, wherein she was much interessed. The jealousie and suspition of so great a Queen, was the more augmented by Covarruvia's austerity, his steadfastness to what was just, his inflexibility, and for that alwaies preferring his Princes honour and service before all other re∣spects, he seemed to value the favour or hatred of any whatsoever Prince
in this Court, very little, or not at all, as long as he with uncorrupt since∣rity discharged the place of primo Savio Grande. This powerful Monarchy sent first (according to the fashion of great Courts) divers of her friends to Apollo, who appearing to be well wish∣ers to Covarruvia, and very zealous of the publick good, did in a seem∣ing way of praising him, blame him, and persecute him by the cheat∣ing way of feigned favours. But this way of proceeding being too well known to Apollo, these hypocrites did easily receive a repulse from his Majesty, in so much as the very French Monarchy her self, taking off her mask of Court-dissembling, did at an extraordinary audience which she obtained from Apollo, appear so implacable an enemy to Covarruvia, as she could acquaint him, not only with the greatest faults that he had committed even from his birth, but with every his least imperfection (so narrowly do Princes observe the waies of those who were likely to come to advancement in great Courts.) Apollo, who infinitely wondred to hear the French Monarchy make so strict a scrutiny into the life and manners of Covarruvia, with that freedom which is proper to her; re∣ply'd, That he did not so much abhor human imperfections in his Vertu∣osi, but that if amongst a hundred defects, they had put one pair of per∣fections, one only rare vertue, he thought he had got an excellent Officer for his service, it being his custom to counterpoise vices with vertues; and that Covarruvia (whatsoever he were in other things) in his Charge of Savio Grande, which he had for many years discharged with such since∣rity and discretion, had not only proved himself worthy of the Lord Treasurers place, which he was resolved to give him, but of any other whatsoever better place in Parnassus; and that he would honour so high a place, by removing that signal subject from the sublime Senat of the Savi. To this the French Monarchy answered, That the Lavi Grande of Parnassus were twelves, so as his Majesty had scope enough to satisfie her in what she desired, by chusing other instead of Covarruvia; which would be the easilier done, for that the Savi Grande were all of them men greatly learned, and of singular worth. All the standers by perceived that Apollo was highly displeased at this pressure, who angerly answered the French Monarchy, that it was a very wicked resolution to give distaste unto, and take from the reputation of such Officers, who by their assidu∣ous service, had deserved chiefest imployments from their Prince; and that when a Prince took out any person from a Senat, or from a Colledg, to advance him to a higher preferment, it was a dangerous thing to chuse the worthiest; for in such elections, the Prince his intention, were it ne∣ver so good, was interpreted partiality; and that upon such occasions, the true Judge of worth was Senioriti, and that Covarruvia being Dean of the Senat of the Savt Grande, he had such a vantage of labour, and such advancement of merit, as he could not without some apparent in∣jury, be left out by his Prince; for in all Senats, that Senator deserved the prime preferment, who had laboured longest at the continual duties of his place: A just and good precept; which when it was inviolably ob∣served, every honored Vertuoso propounded to himself his Princes ser∣vice for the ultimate end of all his labours; whereas by doing otherwise, to the ruine of Justice, and confusion of all business even the Savi Grande (a Senat whereon did consist the good Government of the State) and all
other his good and best Officers, forgoing the honorable way of merit, and vertuous endeavour, would betake themselves to the shameful Ido∣latry of adoring such as by their favour in Court, were likeliest to help them: That therefore for the aforesaid weighty respects, he, not out of any passionate affection which he bore to Covarruvia's person, but for the duty he ought unto his merits, would reward that Vertuoso's labors with the Lord Treasurers place, and encourage the other Savi Grandi, willingly to take pains in their places, since they saw their reward was not only certain, but (which was a thing of more importance) lay only in the Prince his bosom. To all these things the French Monarchy answered, That his Majesty was Patron and supreme Arbitrator of all rewards and punishments in Parnassus; That therefore without any prejudice to his honour, he might gratifie her in her request. To this new pressure, A∣pollo more incenst then formerly, reply'd, Nor am I, nor any man in the world, master of that reward which is proposed by just Princes, to the la∣bours and deserts of faithful Officers; for the highest dignities are by good Princes conferred upon their servants out of obligation, though modest Officers acknowledg to receive them out of their Princes favour∣able liberality. And know, French Monarchy, that that Prince who doth not reward him that hath deserved well at his hands, commits a greater tyranny then he, who without any reason, sheds his subjects bloud, and takes away their livelihoods. After so resolute an answer, the French Monarchy confest ingenuously, that Covarruvia being by Nation a Spaniard, he was consequently one whom she could by no means confide in. Apollo was so incens'd at these words, as he broke forth into sudden fury, and said, Get you hence, you who will play the Master in other folks States, and learn confidence at home; I, for my part, glory at my home to be an humble slave to mens merits, which when nothing but it is found in an Officer, although he be naturally never so discour∣teous, yet God, whose will it is, that he who does well, should be reward∣ed, takes it in good part. Whereas on the contrary, his Divine Majesty (the true Master of Metamorphosis) hath made those self-affectionate people, in whom Princes, in the collation of their highest dignities, do only require confidence, prove perfidious, and so strangely ingrateful (only to confound mans depraved judgement) as they have revenged themselves of received benefits, as if they had been mortal injuries, as is clearly known to all men, by so many unfortunate examples which have hapned in Princes Courts; by which you Princes may learn, that to do righteously, is to be preferr'd before all other human interest; for when a Prince exalts one that is ungrateful, though otherwise known to be de∣serving, all the shame redounds to him that hath received the reward; whereas when it falls out otherwise, all the shame and loss redounds unto the Prince, who foolishly thinks that he may receive advantage from men by offending God.
The XXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Monsieur Jovanni de la Casa having presented Apollo with his most usefull Galateo, meets with great difficulties in many Nations, in having it ob∣served. THe Reverend Signor Iovanni della Casa, who (as you have heard by our former Letters) was with extraordinary pomp, admitted into Par∣nassus, after having visited all the illustrious Poets, and ended his Comple∣ment with all the Principi Literati of this Court, presented Apollo with his beautiful and useful Gallateo, which was so much approved of by his Ma∣jesty, as he forthwith gave strait charge that it should be inviolably ob∣served by all Nations. And at the same instant commanded Casa to make presently a Galatea, for that the women of this modern age, had as much need of amendment, as had the men. This Edict caused great commotion in some that were subject to Apollo's Dominion; for neither intreaties, nor threats, were able to make those of Marca give way to the receival thereof, who freely profest they were resolved rather to forgo their Country and their children, then leave their laudable custom of honouring their Masters with sincerity of heart, and loving their friends with candor of mind, rather then with coursies, and other Court∣ceremonies, gotten without book. It met with greater difficulties a∣mongst Princes; for the most powerful French Monarchy would never give way to the observancy of Gallateo's rules, Nisi si, & in quantum: which she ingenuously profest she would rather mind, then good manners, which she would only observe with a certain outward shew. The Spa∣nish Monarchy promist to submit to Gallateo's rules, provided Monsieur de la Casa would leave out one Chapter: That when she should be at Table with other Princes, she would not have it be reputed ill man∣ners, if she should take a bit with her hand, from off her neighbours trencher; neither would she be thought to be over-greedy, if she should chance to eat all her next companions whole part. The Venetians said, that they would willingly admit of Gallateo, if that Monsieur de la Casa would declare, that to endeavour by all means possible, to know another mans affairs, was not ill manners, but are∣requisite point of policy. All the Italian Princes readily imbraced Gallateo, only said they would be allowed to eat on both sides their mouthes, without being held ill-mannered. But the Dutchmen stormed mightily, for they did not only deny being bound to the Italian sobriety in dinking, but did obstinately require Gallateo to declare, that the Dutchmens over∣much
drinking, and being continually drunk, was one of their chief∣est vertues, and one of the most requisite things that their Princes and Commonwealths did for their safety-sake, desire in their people. The which request was blamed by all the Litterati, as impertinent and absurd, and therefore gainsaid: Wherefore the Dutch were very much exhorted, and desired to submit themselves to Gallateo, touching the particular of Sobriety; because they were even point∣ed at by the best Nations of Europe, for their immoderate drink∣ing, and being so often drunk. To which the Dutch did stoutly answer, That those sober men deserved to be esteemed drunk, that living under the slavery of Princes, were hardly used, and grieved every day by the capri∣ciousnesse and beastly passions of one man, and that the drunk∣en Dutch ought to be highly esteemed, who had wit enough, both to vind cate their Liberty, and to maintain it when they had got it. And added, That they were to be chained up for fools, that did not believe that the drunkenesse of the German Nati∣on, was the true foundation of so many famous Republiques as were seen there. For the safety of a State, and the peo∣ples universal peace, depending wholly upon the fidelity of State Officers, and upon the candor and sincerity of every mans soule, what greater Jewel could there be desired, then to see the Germans by their drinking too much Wine, continually vo∣mit up their very intimate secrets, and most concealed thoughts: They added, That it was clearly seen by long experience, that those did best counsel their Countreys, who having drowned their private Interest, and choaked their fair pretences (which sobriety useth to beget in mens minds) with good store of Wine, spake like Germans from their hearts, and not as doe the Italians, and those of other sober Nations, from the mouth outward onely, with false and feigned words. They said also, That the Dutch, which did so much affect the glorious name of Souldiers, as was well known to all men, had not patience to listen unto the counsels and deliberations of of sober men, which were usually apprehensive, and full of lewd circumspection, covered over with the vaile of wisdome; but to the end that their resolutions might be bold and generous, they would not suffer any man to counsel his Countrey, whilst he was fasting; but when by having drunk much Wine, they had inflamed their hearts with generosity: It being the proper vertue of Wine, rather to drive fear from the heart, then to rob the understanding of judgement. And that therefore the Ger∣mans with much reason, De reconciliandis invicem inimicis, & jungendis affinitatibus, & adsciscendis Principibus, de Pace denique, ac Bello plerunque in convi∣viis consultant: tanquam nullo magis Tempore ad simplices cogitatio∣nes pateat animus, aut a magnas incalescat. Tacit. de Mor. Germ. That whether it concern the reconciling of enemies, the making of affinities, the chusing of Princes; finally, be it about Peace or War, they for the most part consult upon it in their cups; as if the soule were at no time more open for civil thoughts, or set on fire
for great ones, And they further added, That if the Italian so∣briety were introduced amongst the Germans, those false hearts, and double minds, those deep thoughts, those turn-coats, full of treachery, conspiracies, plots, of false souls, masked over with hidden hatred, and feigned love, would begin to be found in that faithfull and sincere Nation, wherein the Nations which glory in their sobrietry, do so much abound; a thing so true, as the French, who have been held to be so glorious by all the world, for their ancient candor and sinceriy of soul, in being alwayes faithfull to their King; since many of them have given over the laudable custom of taking off their Cups, and being drunk after the Dutch fashion, had suffered themselves to be wound about in∣to such treacheries as the world took too much notice of. And that if that little window to be contrived in the breasts of men, the better to discover the hearts of certaine damnable chea∣ters, who being Devils inwardly, study to appeare outwardly, Angels, was thought to be so necessary for the good of mankind; with what ground of reason could any man blame the laudable custom of being drunk, it being clearly seene, that by drink∣ing of too much Wine, mens bodies became Diaphanous and transparent. For these reasons, which were very much approved of, and praised by Apollo it was resolved, That as touching the parti∣cular of sobriety in drinking; the Noble German Nation should not be subject to Gallateo's Precepts; the use of being drunk, be∣ing rather a piece of publick cunning amongst the Dutch, then a vice of private men: It being apparently known, that those Nations are very well advised, both in times of Peace and Warre, who, like the Dutch, Deliberant, dum fingere nesciunt; constitu∣unt, dum errare non possunt. Tacit. de Mor. Germ. Deliberat whilst they know not how to counterfeit, and doe ordaine whilst they cannot err.
The XXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo finding that wicked men, by making use of the Sword of Iustice to injure honest men, do make his Tribunals become very hatefull, to remedy so great a disorder, institutes a Committe of the greatest Sub∣jects of this State; but hath but bad success therein. THe perfidiousness of wicked men is arrived at that height, as that the sacred Seats of Justice, erected for the safety of good men, and to punish the wicked, are made use of to persecute and afflict those that are honest, and mean well; a disorder which his Ma∣jesty is very angry at; who can by no means tolerate, that through the so much mischief of wicked men, the Seats of Justice should be∣come hatefull: Wherefore Apollo, to try whether the wit of man could find the true Antidote to this raging Poyson, chose many moneths agoe, some of the best Philosophers, skilfullest Politicians, and men most esteemed for wisdom, that are in the State of Parnas∣sus; all which he caused to be shut up in that Apartment which stands by the Delphick Library, and straitly commanded them not to stir from thence, till they had healed so dangerous a wound by fit∣ting remedies. All the Vertuosi of Parnassus thought such a business might be dispatched in a few hours; but it was eight months ere these men o∣pened their dores, at which time they desired Audience of Apollo, whom they told, that after having been so long shut up in that place, wherein they had diligently examined a thousand opinions, and mature∣ly sifted an infinity of applications, they could find no expedient means whereby severely to punish false accusations, without affrighting true ones.
The XXX. ADVERTISEMENT. Marcus Brutus desires Justius Brutus to shew him the per∣fections of the Conspiracy which he so happily brought to pass against the Tarquins, and the Imperfections of that Conspiracy which he so miserably executed upon Caesar. And receives desired satisfaction from him. MArcus Brutus, who lives still discontented in this Court of Par∣nassus, because that important business which he undertook of re∣covering the Roman Liberty, by the murder of the Tyrant Caesar, did not succeed well; went the other day to finde out Lucius Brutus, whom he earnestly desired to aquaint him with the reason, why both of them, be∣ing spurd on by the same generous thought of reducing their Countrey into Liberty; they did so much differ in the effect, adding, that he should be very much satisfied by knowing the excellency of his Conspi∣racy and what the faults were of that which he himself plotted against Caesar. Menante, who by great good fortune was by, when this demand was made; assures every one that Lucius Brutus did thus answer his kinsman. A good intention is not sufficient Cozen Marcus, to reap renown by great actions, it must be accompanied by judgment. Know then that in purging the Roman Empire from the ill humors of Tyran∣ny, wherewith I found her greatly opprest, I successfully imitated the art which skilful Physicians use in restoring health to a body that is sick of a Malignant Feaver: which had you done, you would not only not have committed that great error which caused so many mischiefs to your self, and to our whole Country, but should have happily acquired that glory, which hath made me immortal. Know then, that when I resolved to restore Liberty to our Country, I did first exactly consi∣der the body of the State of Rome in its sick condition, the quantity, and quality of the humors which she did abound within her sickness of servitude; and like a wise Physician, I prepared the peccant materials, and digested the crude Humors, with the syrrop of discontent and bad satisfaction which I dayly sowed in the People of Rome against the Tarquins; and the insolency committed against Lucretia, proved very lucky to me: for the unbridled lust of the Tyrant Tarquin, brought the people of Rome to that point of hatred and dispair, which I had al∣ways desired, so that finding the materials of discontent to be excel∣lently well prepared, by the water of the common peoples continual exclamations, with two onely ounces of laxative syrrope of Roses (re∣solution) which I knew how to make, by appearing head of the inraged Romans, with permition of the sick Commonwealths Militia, the bad humors of Tyranny were purged out, without the pains of death, or a∣ny alteration of Tumults, in lieu whereof the health of Liberty return∣ed to our Country. But you Cozen did not duly consider any of these
important particulars. For having with a rash resolution given your self over in prey to the zeal of recovering lost Liberty, the light of your understanding was so blinded, as made you fall into a more cruel servitude, and this was, when by the immature counsel which you put into action against Caesar in the Capitol, you gave the Roman Liberty a strong Purgation, compounded of Colloquintida, and Antimony, and other violent ingred ents, with which whilst you thought to evacuate the Crude humors, you did infinitely increase that malady, which having first wrought your ruine and the like of all your associates, occasioned at last that so famous sickness (the sad proscription) which did kill out∣right the most excellent Roman Liberty; and the Proverb is as true as common, that Conspiracies are not made out of curiosity of changing the Prince his Face, but for the important interest of changing Tyran∣ny into Liberty. And therefore in a business of such concernment, a man must confine himself by the Charity which he bears unto his Coun∣try, within the bounds of the love of Liberty, and hatred of the pub∣lick Tyrant; and among other considerations which ought to be had in a business of so great concernment, the chiefest is, to consider with exact diligence, the means whereby a Tyrant hath possest himself of his Countries Liberty, which whilst they continue in their vigour and strength, that Citizen wishes no good unto his Country; but is rather a cruel enemy thereunto, who by plotting against the Tyrants life, is cause of greater slavery to his fellow Citizens, and of much greater scandals to his Country. The Tarquins maintaind themselves in their usurped Liberty, by the love which they had cunningly won from the Romans, which when by their cruelties, libidinousness, and avarice, they had lost, the foundation of their greatness failed; and therefore it was not hard for me to restore my Country to her ancient Liberty. For I did not drive the Tarquins out of Rome by my Conspiracy, till being ready to be thrown headlong down by the publike hatred, I gave then a justle. But you did not do so; for it is evident that Caesar had pos∣sest himself of the publike Liberty, by the great good opinion he had in his Army, of which he had so many years been head, and by the mi∣raculous affection of the people of Rome, which he had won by his pro∣fuse liberality. And by killing him whilst he was master of these two powerful means, you did nothing else but change Caesar (who did study to secure himself in the State, onely by his clemency, and by his obli∣ging every body) into Augustus, who having seen the unfortunate end which Tyrants make, by using the indulgencies of Pardons, thought it a safer way for the perpetuating of his Dominion, to make use of that cruel great Proscription, the onely cause whereby after having reigned happily so long, he had power to transmit the Roman Empire, as Here∣ditary, into the Person of Tiberius.
The XXXI. ADVERTISEMENT. Marcus Cato having to the infinite dislike of Princes, writ the word Libera underneath the Motto, Pugna pro Patria, which was set upon his gate, is commanded by Apollo to put is out. SInce the first day that Marcus Cato, one of the Lavii Grandi of this Court built his house in Parnassus, he made these words Pugna pro Patria, be ingraven, and written in gold Letters upon his Portal, to the which some few days ago he added Libera: which the Princes of this State observing, they made great complaints to Apollo, protesting that unless that seditious word, which might set all the world on fire, were rased from off the Portal, great mischiefs were likely to arrive in Parnassus. And did further very much desire, that Cato, being the first in∣stituter of that wicked generation of men, who that they may appear to the base Plebeians to be lovers of Truth, do practice an impertinent Liberty, and superstitious pride over men, might for the correction and dread of others, be severely punisht. Cato was immediately sent for by Apollo, whom his Majesty blamed for having given just occasion of complaint and rumor to Princes, by the addition of that word. Cato boldly answered, that good men ought not to forbear to do or say any thing that became them, and what their Consciences bad them do, for the threats of whatsoever Princes; that it was a cruel thing, and which onely became ignorant and malicious men to cozen others with, senten∣ces which were onely specious in words: and that he thought it was great impiety to make the common people understand, that they were bound to defend that, even with their lives and faculties, as a thing pro∣perly belonging to them, wherein they had not the least interest: that therefore the word Libera was necessary, to declare the full signification of the sentence: for as it would be a great folly in one to take upon him to defend the title of a House, which he had onely hired, so that Country deserved to be defended by teeth, and hands, even to the effu∣sion of the last drop of blood, wherein a man commanded like a Master, not that wherein he obeyed like a slave. Apollo answered Cato, that he was in a great error; for it was not onely gross ignorance, but tending to sedition, to affirm that Princes had not Authority to compel their peo∣ple to take up Arms, and to defend their common Country, when they were assaulted by their enemies. Cato replyed, that he did not deny but that Princes had such Authority, but confest he said that there was nei∣ther any power or violence, which could inforce a man who took up Arms against his will, to shoot right forward, but that he might let his first shot flye rather towards his friends then towards his enemies. To this Apollo answered, that Princes had likewise Authority to force their souldiers to shoot justly, and to behave themselves couragiously, but
that they must be good Princes who have this Authority, such as by their Liberality, and great love, shown in their excellent Government, did force their subjects to defend their Princes Dominions, with the same gallantry and undanted valor, as they did their own private Patri∣mony: and that onely avaritious Princes, and such as thirsted after their subjects blood were too far from reaping any good by those soldi∣ers, whom they forst to go to the wars; as that they found them to be cruel enemies. That therefore he commanded him, to take the word that was added to the Sentence, immediately from off his gate, which was not onely superfluous for the Reasons which he had given, but for that when it was otherwise, gallant men understood it to be there, though it were not written; it not being fitting that the baser sort of people should be acquainted with the great secret, that that is onely the freemans Country where he is born; the slaves, that where he is best ac∣commodated. The XXXII. ADVERTISEMENT. Socrates being found dead in the morning on his bed, Apol∣lo useth all possible diligence ta learn the true reason of so suddain a death. THis morning Socrates was found dead in his bed, who, was well when he lay down the last night; and his body, being exceedingly swoln, many do more then suspect that he was poysoned, and the Pere∣pateticks, bitter enemies to the Socratical sect, were very much blamed; the rather, for that every one knows that Aristotle, the Prince of so great a Sect, is very well verst in handling poyson. The very same morning, Socrates his whole family was imprisoned, out of which nothing could be got, but that some days before Socrates was seen to be very much troubled, and seeming to be exceedingly grieved inwardly, he oft times cryed out, O corrupt world, O depraved Age, O most un∣fortunate mankinde. Apollo who was exceedingly grieved at the loss of so famous a Phylosopher, commanded that his body should be carefully opened, and that it should be seen, whether any signes of poyson were to be found by his bowels, which being done, all his intrails were found to be open. Whence it was cleerly known, that Socrates, having taken too much wind of scandal, at the great dis∣composures, and infinite misbehaviors which he was necessitated to see in this depraved age, did even burst. Great were the Obsequies which were made for this noble Pesonage; and Marcus Tullius Cicero, (one who was very affectionate to the Socratical Sect) having in an e∣laborate Oration infinitely praised the truth of so famous a Philosophers Doctrine, and his exemplary life, did with many tears bewail the sad calamitie of these present times, wherein it being under pain of severe punishment, forbidden to play the Satyr, gallant men who saw things
every day committed, which ought to be publikely declaimed against, were forst to see, to say nothing, and to burst for vexation. The XXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Hereditary Princes in Parnassus, do very much press Apollo, that the Emperor Tiberius may be removed from their Classis, and placed in that of Tyrants, and he defends his cause Victoriously before his Majesty. IT is above 1500 year since Tiberius, who succeeded Augustus, was admitted into Parnassus, and had an honorable place alotted him, a∣mongst the Legitimate hereditary Princes, where he hath lived with such glory and splendor, as he hath always been held by the greatest Potentates of Parnassus, to be the Prince of wisdom, the very picture of vigilancy, not onely the Counceller, but the Oracle of all those Princes who go about by violence and severity to establish not onely a new Tyranny, but the mastery of any newly conquered State. For though it be to be confest by all men, that Caesar the Dictator was he who laid the first foundations of the Roman Empire, and that Augustus raised up the walls thereof even to the highest Cornish, it is not yet to be denyed but that Tiberius, when by happily transmitting it over to his Nephews son Caligula, he made it hereditary in the blood of the Iuli and Claudii, did wisely establish it, and gave it compleat perfection. A great action certainly, and onely becoming that Tiberius, who knowing so excellenly well how to conceal his own private passions, made him∣self be known to be an excellent Dr. in the cunning Art of discovering other mens thoughts; by which he may be said to have set the roof over the Roman Monarchy. A great Conspiracy was discovered some few days ago against this so mighty an Emperor, which was long before plotted against him by the greatest Princes of this Court, who accused him before his Majesty of being a Tyrant, as he who to the prejudice of Augustus his heirs, had by wicked means possest himself of the Empire, which they said he had governed with unheard of barbarous cruely for the space of two and twenty years, shewing himself always to be an im∣placable enemy of the Nobility, ravenous over the wealthy, bloody to men of great worth, and ungrateful to those that had served him faithfully; and this shameful accusation was aggravated by the Testi∣mony of Cornelius Tacitus, who having ever appeared by all his actions in this Court, to be circumspect, suffered himself notwithstanding to be so far carryed away by the violent Passion of hatred against Tiberius, as he made Affidavit before his Majesty, that under the rigorous go∣vernment of this Monster of Nature, Nobilit, opes, omissi, gesti∣que honoris pro Crimine, & ob vertutus certicimum exitium. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist.
This accusation wrought much with Apollo, who truely said that it was a great error, to have placed so cruel a Tyrant in the honorable Classis of Legitimate Princes; and at the same instant gave command that Tiberius should have notice given him, to appear in the Court the next day, and defend himself against that accusation. Then did all men call to mind the unfortunate condition of Princes, when Tiberius was seen to come out of his house alone, and forsaken by all his friends, to appear before the Judges; who though he thought that disertion to be an evident sign of his condemnation, yet entered he the Court with an undanted spirit; where though he was received with severe looks, and threatning jestures, both by his Majesty and the whole Senate of Ver∣tuosi, yet he seemed even then to be fullest of courage, when his danger appeared to be greatest. Silence being then proclaimed, Egiddio Bossio the Atturney General, read the accusation to Tiberius, and then Tiberius was commanded to say what he could in his own defence. Whereupon he thus began: Prince of Learning! the accusations laid unto my charge by my ill-willers, are two; that I possest my self of the Ro∣man Empire by bad means; and that by the Government thereof I have used much cruelty towards the Nobility and other subjects of much merit and worth: the first is false; for how can it be objected that I came by the Roman Empire fraudulently, since by his last will and Testament Augustus made me his Heir, I confess that Agrippa Posthumus, and Germanious were neer allyed in blood to Augustus, but it must be considered that Augustu, was not so great a fool, as to be de∣ceived by any, how crafty and fraudulent a wit soever, in so important an affair, as the leaving of an Heir who might succeed him in so great an Empire. It must be believed that some weighty respect moved him to prefer me, who was not at all akin to him, before his Nephews: and thought I could upon this occasion, much to my praise, relate the ex∣cellent Art I used to work my self into the good will and affection of this great Prince, I will in this place onely mention this, that if Augustus had found such qualities in those of his blood, as he knew were requi∣site in him who was to be his heire, and which by all exquisite dili∣gence I endeavoured to make appear to be in me, neither would the love which Tacitus says Augustus bore to my mother, nor her allure∣ments, nor all my cunning, ever have been sufficient to induce that wise Prince to do so cruel an act as to disinherit his Nephews, and make a stranger his heir. But it will make for me, in this place, and upon this occasion to make known that my action, from whence I have always acknowledged my access unto the Roman Empire, as that which did compel Augustus to love me so immeasurably. It is wel known to al men that after the death of Marcus Agrippa, Augustus gave me his daughter Giulia for wife; it is likewise known to all men, what a one that great Princess proved; so as being scorned, by the pride and lasciviousness of that unchaste woman, when I found my honor wounded, I knew how to make use of that very occasion for my greater advancement, which was likely utterly to ruine all the hopes of my good fortune, wherein I had made so good a progress. For considering, that if (as my ho∣nor bound me to do) I should revenge the injury done me by my wife by putting her to death, the little respect which I should have born to Augustus his blood, might alienate him from me, and make him give
over his intentions of exalting me: and long arguing with my self the great difference that there was between an injury received from a wife of a disproportionable greatness to her husband, and that which is done by ones equal, I put on the bitter resolution of preferring the glory which I should win by obtaining the Roman Empire, before the shame of being publikely cuckolded by Iulia. Tiberius had gon thus far in pleading his own excuse, when a lowd voice was heard in the Court to cry out thrice, O Traytor. Tiberius thinking that this was meant by him, protested to Apollo that that scorn was put upon the Court, and not up∣on him; Apollo finding how little he was respected by that rash fellow, whosoever he was that had said those words, commanded that he should be diligently sought for, and imprisoned, which was forthwith done, and it was found to be Iacomo Count of Marcia, a famous Prince of the blood of France; yet Apollo preferring the injury done unto him∣self, before the linage of that Prince, commanded him to be led to pri∣son. Then the Count did publikely profess, that he had not said those words either to injure his Majesty, or Tiberius, but that to unburthen himself of somewhat which lay heavy in his heart, he had called him∣self Traytor, not meaning Tiberius, nor any other person; for when he was marryed to the unchaste Queen Iane, by his foolish proceeding against her, (who had brought with her the Kingdom of Naples for her portion) as if she had been a private Gentlewoman, and by the severity which he like a Coxcomb used towards her, he to his infinite shame, lost both his wife, and Kingdom and consequently his reputati∣on; and was forst to flye from Naples, and to bury himself alive in a Monastery in France, where he dyed for meer madness; and that he had learnt by Tiberius his wise demeanor in the like case, that it had been more honorable for him to have lived a cornuted King in Naples, then a private man of honor in France. Apollo did then pardon the distur∣bance which that noble Frenchman had occasioned, and bad Tiberius proceed to make his defence, who said: And because the too great connivance at the shameful life which my wife led in Rome, would cer∣tainly have rendred me contemptible both to the Senate and people of Rome, (a thing which would have been of equal danger to such a per∣sonage as I, who lived in hope of that greatness which I afterward ac∣quired, as the resentment of such an injury by way of revenge would have been) I chose the middle way between these two dangerous ex∣treams, which in dubious resolutions proves always best. So as not to be an eye-witness of that injury which I could neither revenge nor tolerate, I went from Rome under a pretence of living privatly, and hid my self in Rhodes. This my modesty, this great respect which I bore to Augustus his blood, was the true and chief cause which did not only induce him to love me, but which did oblige him to demonstrate that his love, in such sort as the world hath seen since his death, For this Pr. who was as wise as he was glorious, pittying my so much scorned con∣dition, and infinitely loathing his daughters infamous life, behaved himself so rigorously towards her, as his demeanor may serve for a rule to every wise Prince, how to handle their unchast daughters. If then so great Patience, if the respect, reverence, and perfect obedi∣ence, and so many other lawful pieces of cunning, which I continual∣ly used to work my self into Augustus his affection, be vitious com∣portments,
and fraudulent deceits, (as my enemis have represented them to your Majesty) I refer my self to those who are to judge upon my reputation. I now come to the second Article of my impeach∣ment. I acknowledge the cruelty which I am accused to have used towards the Romish Nobility to be true, and all that Tacitus hath said of me in that point, to be very true; but I desire that such difference as ought to be, be put between the cruelties used by a new Prince, and those which are practised by an ancient and hereditary Prince: for if I have taken away any mans life out of an innate cruelty, or thirst after humane blood, or out of any capricious inhumanity, I submit my self to the rigour of the Cornelian Law, as if I were one of the meanest and most abject plebeians of this State; but if it were meer State ne∣cessity which forced me to be cruel to those of Augustus his blood, to the chiefest Senators, the commanders of any extraordinary worth, and in fine, even to worth it self; I desire every one to consider how new Princes are necessitated to do horrid and cruel acts, though it be much against their Inclination. And upon this occasion, I will for my defence make use of my implacable accuser Tacitus his words. He hath openly profest that the horrible Proscription made by Augustus (which I confess did surpass all the most immense cruelties, that were ever commanded by cruel man) was done not out of any inclination to severity by those who of themselves did infinitely blame such an act, but onely out of meer State necessity. Sane Proscriptionem Civi∣um, divisiones Agrorum, neque ipsis quidem qui fecere Laudatas. Tacit. lib. 1 nnal. These are Tacitus his words. Which if it be true, am I to be con∣demned for having wisely known how to establish my self in a new Principality, and for having had the wit to execute those precepts, which not only every other Politician, but even Tacitus hath publisht? and if it be true that indulgence, mansuetude, and clemency are then vices in a Prince, when such signal vertues are used towards those, who though they be pardoned, keep malice in their hearts, and covet re∣venge; is there any one here present who thinks that if I should have suffered Agrippa Posthumus, Germanicus, and the others of Augustus his blood, to have lived, that they would ever have sincerely loved my greatness? and if it be a grounded precept in Policy, that Princes ought to indeavour above all things, to reign void of jealousie, and if a Prince can never be said to be safe in a State, whilst those live who were driven out of it, or who pretend more right thereunto then he, will not every one, how little knowledge soever they have of worldly affairs, confess with me, that it was not any innate cruelty in me, but meer necessity of state Policy which forst me to appear so severe to∣wards those of Augustus his blood: for a Prince is wise in his cruelty, when (as Tacitus himself says he runs danger by being merciful. More∣over, the many slaughters, which I, and after me many other Empe∣rors gave order for, against the chiefest of the Roman Senators, ought not to be imputed to our cruelty, (as they do unjustly affirm who do now persecute me) but to the indiscreet pride of those Senators, who though they law Liberty banisht from out their Country, yt through a proud stubbornness of not putting on the cloak of humbleness, or rather through a foolish ostentation of free speaking, when they
were inslaved, and of commanding in subjection, did every day more and more irritate Princes to use all sorts of severity and inhumanity, against people so proudly spirited. Hence it is Sir, that neither Taci∣tus, nor any other who writes my story, could ever say that I was se∣vere against any Citizens, or any of the Roman, or Provincial Plebei∣ans; for they never gave me any just occasion of suspition, but onely say that which I confess to be true, that I did persecute the noblest of the Roman Senate, the which I did to abase them, to terrifie them, to make them mistrustful one of another, to disunite them, and to make them indure that slavery, which I saw they did abhor: nor can any Politician teach me any better rules then these, to be made use of to the Nobles of a Country, which being but a little before bereft of its Li∣berty, will not onely not accommodate it self to servitude, but foolish∣ly pretends to limit the Princes Authority in commanding, and in ser∣vitude keeps the pride of freedom, and an inraged mind, upon any good occasion, to revenge the injury done unto its Liberty: whence it is, that hang-men, spies, and Atturney-Generals are the fittest in∣struments to establish a mans self in those new states which but a little before hath lost the Liberty of a free Commonwealth; for every cruel action is held a prudent resolution, when it secures the life, the state, and honor of that new Prince, who knows how to use it. More∣over I heartily desire every one to consider, that those who boasting of their worth and great vertue in the Roman Senate, would be known to be of a better condition then the rest did it not for that they were inamored of Vertue, not out of that onely nobleness of minde which ought to be in every one, who can be content to dye a private man, but that they might have a noble retinue, to win popular favour, & the Armies love: a great truth, & which hath not been better taught to such a Prince as my self by any writer, then by thee Tacitus: for thou freely sayst, that new Princes meet with no worser nor more wic∣ked a subject, then that worthy Senator, who makes use of Vertue, to chalk out the way to the ambition which he hath of Government. For after thou in thy Annals hast painted to the life the demeanor of that Traytor Sejanus, thou sayst these following words, which cleerly prove my intention. Palam compositus pudor, intus summa adipiscendi libido; ejusque causa modo largicio, & luxus, saepius industria ac Vigilantia, haud minus noxiae, quoties parando Regno finguntur. Tacit. lib. 4. Ann. And thou hast said well: for in a new State, not being yet secured in an hereditary descent, and where the tumultuous choosing of a Prince hath so large a scope, as it is lawful even for him that murders the Prince to aspire unto the Empire, those great subjects, those worthy, and all-deserving Officers, who are so much admired by private men, as they are thought by them to merit their Princes integral love, the highest preferments, best rewards; are notwithstanding known by him that reigns to be most pernitious, & fit to be rooted out. So as, the con∣dition of the Roman Empire being no less disorderly in her hereditary succession, then greatly tumultuous in her election, required in me that severe way of proceeding, which was onely able to save my life and preserve the State. Nor can I see how any man can blame the cruelty which I used towards the Roman Nobility, and the worthiest subjects of the Empire, since it would have been thought a great defect, and
much mis-becoming such a one as me, if I should have used that cle∣mency towards them, that mildness, and familiarity, which Caesar to his cost did, whose miserable end, dos cleerly teach all men, that states which are fraudulently possest, ought to be establisht by extraordinary severity. For the Nobility of subjugated Commonwealths, make use of the new Princes Clemency, only as of an excellent means to suppress him by Conspiracies: nor doth it any whit at all avail (as a man would think it should do) for the allaying of that rage of hatred, or quenching the great and perpetual desire which they have to vindicate the injury done them in their lost liberties, though thereby they run the greatest hazards and danger that can be incur'd. The Judges did much approve of Tiberius his defence, for they did not onely allow of Augustus his last Will and Testament, and consequent∣ly of the legitimacy of Tiberius his succession, but they also considered that he being a new Prince, no ways allyed in blood to Augustus, and there being many Roman Senators better born then himself, according to the true rules of Tyrannical Policy, he was forced to use cruelty there where that veneration and Majesty was wanting, which the being born of Royal blood brings with it, and made his way, by sword and poy∣son, making himself be dreaded by those, who presumed too much upon themselves, and dared to paragonise their privat Nobility, with his im∣mense fortune who reigned; and that where to use clemency was preju∣dicial to the new Princes, the use even of unusual severity ought to be esteemed lawdable. The XXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Hyppocrates having advised Apollo how to prevent the frequent deaths of sick folks, occasioned through the igno∣rance of Physicians, and proving unfortunate in that his advice, is in great danger of being severely punisht by his Majesty. HYppocrates, that great Physician told Apollo some few days ago, that the world was so pesterd with ignorant Physicians, as unless some suddain remedy were taken for it, all mankind would be destroyed: for that sick folks were cured by ignorant Physicians, by new experiments, by contrary medicines, and rather by Mounte banks receits, then by ca∣nonical and true rules of Art; whence it was that many sick folks dyed, who if they had been administred unto by learned Physicians, might ea∣sily have been restored to their former healths. Apollo being advised by so famous a man, resolved to remedy so great an evil. Wherefore some six months ago he constituted a Colledge of the most famous Physici∣ans that the world ever had, the chief whereof were Cornelius Caelsus, Galen, Avesine, Fracastoro, Filopio, l'Altozmari, and the most merito∣rious
Girolimo Mercuriale, and made Hyppocrates, that Prince of Phy∣sick, head of the Colledge, which he endowed with ample Authority to provide experimented Physick, and of known vertue for mankinde. These Physicians first distributed out their orders, and Physicians were sent into all places, who for the greater safety of mens healths and long lives, were commanded to use nothing to their Patients, but common Glisters, Roman Oyntments, usual Purges; and in pestilent Feavers pectoral waters; but that when they should have occasion to let blood, to cure malignant Feavers, double Tertians, or other grievous maladies, they should be commanded to acquaint the Colledge speedily with eve∣ry particular accident that befel the sick party, with the condition of his sickness, with his several accesses of Feaver, and that in such cases they should be very careful of sending the water and excrements of the sick person every morning and evening to the Colledge, to the end that they might with better satisfaction to the sick party, take order for necessary Medicaments. The Physicians very willingly did what they were com∣manded by the Colledge. But it was not long ere the world was aware that those orders which were given with so much zeal to the publike good, wrought not that good effect which his Majesty perswaded him∣self they would have done; for the Physicians who administred Physick to the sick, were so perplext in putting on due resolutions in their ob∣servations of the several alterations and changes of the maladies, as they durst not upon any suddain accident that should arrive, succor the sick parties with any requisite and speedy help, but shewing more obedience to the Colledge, then charity to their Patients, refused to meddle with those maladies which would admit of no delay, without express Order from their superiors; and truely it was sad to see, that the time which should have been spent in the cure of their Patients, was imployed to no purpose by those Physicians in writing eloquent relations, and many learned advices to those of the Colledge, to whom with all dilligence they sent the water and excrements of the sick, which altering by rea∣son of the length of the way, it unfortunately fell out that the Colledg not being able to make any perfect judgement thereby, the Recipes which they sent proved oft times clean contrary to the malady of the Patient; moreover, the sickness whereof the Physitians had given an exact account, changed also before the answer could be brought; wherefore they were forced to send new relations, and new advertisements, which occasioned the necessary ruine of the sick parties, and oft times whilst they lay expecting medicaments from a far off, they arrived after the parties were dead, to whom they should have been ap∣plyed. All which were so foul inconveniences, as many men dyed more then had wont to do, insomuch as Apollo hearing thereof, he marvelled how so charitable a resolution could have so bad success. Wherefore Apollo thinking himself much abused by Hyppocrates, who under a pre∣tence of publike Charity, minded chiefly his own ambition, said in a publike Audience, that he now found, that Physicians neer at hand, though peradventure ignorant, were better for sick persons, then those that were more learned, if afar off; and afterwards dismist the Colledge, resolving to take some notable revenge upon Hyppocrates. But was dis∣swaded from it by Esculapius his earnest intreaties, who confessing Hip∣pocrrtes ambition, excused it by alleadging the common desire which all
men of Honor have to command, that they may not seem to hold the candle unto others, but be held to be somewhat more then ordinary. The XXXV. ADVERTISEMENT. Francisco Mauro, a Noble Italian Poet, having marryed the most vertuous Lady, Laura Terecino, is soon after jea∣lous of her, and kills her. FRom the very first day that the lovely L. Lauro Terecina was admit∣ted into Parnassus, & that the most excellent Euterpe had taken her to be her waiting woman, she began to be much courted by many Amorous Poets, but those that made oftnest addresses to her, and which she per∣adventure liked better then the rest, were Francisco Maria Molza, and Francisco Mauro, being both of them very famous Poets of this Court. Illustrious Euterpe considering Laura's youth, her exquisite beauty, and how she was courted by so many Vertuosi, resolved to mary her speedily, and acquainting Laura with her intention, she found her very ready to obey her. Euterpe left it to her choice whether she would chose Mauro or Molza for her husband. Vertuous Terracina who would not resolve upon a business of such importance, by what was most pleasing to her eye, as many foolish women use to do, but, as the wiser sort do, by what appeared best unto her judgement, desired that she might see both their Poetries; which after she had perused several times, and duly consider∣ed them, she laid aside le Fitche del Molza as related in a weak and lan∣guishing stile, and chose Mauro's Fava, wherein she thought she found quainter conceits, and that it was more solidly written. The match be∣ing concluded, the marriage was soon celebrated. And Maurus being so meanly stockt as that he had nothing to trust to but his Capitola della Fava, had by his wife by way of Joynter, 150 Octavoes ready paid down, besides an infinite number of Madrigals, Sonets, and Songs, made by that vertuous Lady. They had been marryed above a year, when Mauro observed that his wife wore a very rich Garter imboidered all over with pearl on her right leg, and on the other an usual slight one; and not being onely moved thereat, but greatly scandalized, for that he had often marked, that his wife was very proud of that Garter, and that when she met with any Vertuosi she would hold up her coats on that side higher then in modesty she ought to have done, he askt his wife what the meaning thereof might be, and whether there was any thing of secret therein or no? Lawra told him, that Edward the sixth King of England, in acknowledgement of her devotion towards him, had given her that Garter, which for her greater honor she wore upon solemn days, and that as being very affectionate to that great King, she had sworn to serve him upon all occasions, and to be always his most devoted faithful servant. Mauro grew so mad hereupon, as flying upon her, he said. Hast
thou then been so affronted thou wicked baggage, as (being the wife of an honorable Poet) to shame me, under the colour of Honor, by knowing an other man, and by receiving gifts from any other then thy husband, and shall not I, being thus injur'd in my honer, revenge my self? and this being said, it nothing availing the unfortunate and mise∣rable Terecina to beg pardon, nor to protest that she had never in any manner whatsoever injur'd her Nuptial bed, he laid hold upon a prohi∣hibited verse of six syllables, which he had about him, wherewith he stabd her sundry times in the throat, and kill'd her. This bestial resent∣ment did not only mightily displease all the L. Poetesses of this state, but did very much trouble all the greatest Litterati of Parnassus: so as both of them in great numbers appeared before Apollo, and with bitter words aecused Mauro, who was there present, that without having any just oc∣casion, to the great scorn of the honor of Knighthood of one of the greatest Kings of Europe, he had vilanously slain the most vertuous La∣dy of all Parnassus. To this Mauro couragiously answered, that it was true, he deserved to be severely punished by his Majesty; not for the just revenge he had taken of his unchaste wife, but for that he had so long deferred the revenge due to the reputation of a man of honor, it being many months since he was aware of the lewdness of that Garter. All the Princes that stood by were strangely moved to hear Mauro utter these words, who not being able to indure that honors conferd by them upon noble Forraigners, who did adhere and were affectionate to them should be accounted Vituperius, raised a great Noise in the Court, when Apollo to quench the fire in the beginning, which he foresaw was likely to break forth into a great combustion, said thus unto them. WriteO you Princes, in you hearts, with characters not to be rased out, this misfor∣tune which hath befaln Laura Tercina, for which Mauro ought rather to be remunerated by me, and commended by you, then punisht by my Judges, and by you blamed: and believe it for a certain Truth, that these favors, and honors which Princes confer upon Forreigners, are plain preludiums to their wanton desires of domineering, which they continually meditate how to bring about. The souls of subjects are linkt to their Princes by the straight bond of chaste, and holy Matrimo∣ny, and therefore, as chaste wives, they ought not so much as with their eys, to acknowledge or know any other P. then him whom Gods Laws hath set over them and the Laws of men, so far is it from being lawful for them to love them with their hearts, and vow loyalty to them: and you are great fools, if to revenge the infidelity of your subjects you wait the time till you can take them in the very act of adulterous Fel∣lonies. For wounds which cause dishonor, are warded, and put by by good Fencers before they hurt, they are fools that cure them when they are received; the very self same hour that you see any subject of yours but cast an eye upon a Forrain Prince, do as Mauro did, hold not your thumbs underneath your girdles, but imploy Gallowses and Ropes; and if upon your greatest occasions, and particularly when you wiil appear with honor before an Enemy Prince with your subjects Arms in hand, be not seen with a pair of horns on your head.
The XXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Thais, that famous Curtizan of the Comick Poets, is at last though after much debate, admitted into Parnassus; who much to Apollo's satisfaction, tells what good she hopes to bring to his Court. IN the great Councel which was yesterday held in Parnassus by all the Litterati, and the most famous personages of this State, many, learned in all the Liberal Arts, who were lately come to this Court, were propounded to have honourable places allowed them in Par∣nassus; amongst which Thais, that common whore of the Comick Poets, was named for one, and found favourable suffrages, being extraordinarily assisted by Publius Terrentius, who was so partial on her behalf, as he held secret practice with all the Poets. And it hap∣ned that whilst the gates of Parnassus were opened to her, to the end that she might present her self before Apollo, and the Senate of the Vertuosi, to thank them for the favor she had received, the illustri∣ous Cardinal Alexander Fernese, accompanyed by a train of Pre∣lates, withstood Thais as she was about to enter, crying out a∣loud, that if so unworthy a person, from whom nothing but pub∣lick scandal could be expected, should be admitted into Parnassus, he for his part would rather be gone from thence, then see vertuous places profaned with such polutions, which were onely aboads for those Litterati, as by their words, writings, and exemplary lives, could prescribe wholsom Precepts unto others, and that he knew there were many Vertuosi who would put on the same resolution. Whilst the Cardinall spoke thus, and that he endeavoured by force to keep her out of the gate, she was so strongly assisted by a numerous squa∣dron of Poets, who backt Terrentius, as there began a very dangerous dispute at the gate. But wary Thais, who knew that she had al∣ways come by the worst in all the quarrels that she at any time before had ever been the occasion of, said aloud, that she did no ways intend to enter into Parnassus by force, but with the goodwill of every one, and more particularly by the approbation of those most illustrious and Holy Prelates: and that if they were thought worthy of an aboad in Parnassus who could give excellent Councel unto others, and wise Precepts, she should be unjustly dealt withal if she should be denyed to inhabit in those venerable places, and that though she knew she might of right claim an aboad in Parnassus, yet she would acknowledge it as a singular favor, and especially from those that did most withstand her: and that those that did not love to see her in Parnassus, were much deceived in the ill opinion they had of
her, for that there was not any one in those blest habitations, to whom she was not able to give such advertisements, as wiser nor more necessary, could not be given by any whatsoever Moral Phi∣losopher; and that it was not so much for the purchasing of Eter∣nity to her name, that she desired to live amongst the Vertuosi in Parnassus, as to be assisting unto many by her perpetual walking in the streets, and admonishing every one to live modestly ever a∣mongst their neighbours; and to shun the foul vice of calling their companion whore, as they would shun death; if their own Consci∣ences were not cleer: for that there being many wrangling Courti∣ers, they had oft times faln at such odds, as by blows and calum∣nious speeches they had wounded their reputations: and that Offi∣cers who went to have the Government of Provinces, could not learn the important and difficult Philosophy of getting monies in their governments, with reputation, from any more learned in∣structress, then from her, for that onely Thais knew the accurate Art of fleecing the flock with such diligence and dexterity, as they would rather seem to be tickled and rejoyce, then exclaim or make any noise, in which practice she boasted her self to be so singular, as she had seen her sweethearts a thousand times, to be then most in love with her, when being flead to the quick, and galled to the very bones, she had sent them raw and naked to the Hospital, from whence they have notwithstanding sent her amorous Epistles. That they who were greedy of riches, who did everywhere, and by all means, sweat and labour after the accumulating of Gold, might learn by her onely unfortunate example, that wealth ill got, through Gods just Anger vanisht into smoak; for of all the innu∣merable monies which she had suckt from out the veins of her lo∣vers, and the great riches which she robd many families of, she had now nothing remaining but those four lashes which every one might see upon her back; when if God had given a blessing to the mo∣nies which had past through her hand, instead whereof she had had a thousand curses; she might have vyed for wealth with any Prin∣cess. Next, that every one might learn, by her face which was so pleasing to her friends, by her flatteries, and falacies with which she used to delude and allure and intice those ill advised young men which she got into her hands; by her continual smiles, by which she covered her ravenous minde, and that sharp Rasor, wherewith without any manner of discretion or piety she did shave, nay, even flea her lovers; never to trust appearances, grateful acceptance, fair words, and offered courtesies, and never to give themselves over into any ones power, unless they had first perfectly anatomised them. For many such as she, had pleasing aspects, good looks, and sweet breaths, whose disguises being taken off by discreet persons, and their inside of their souls discovered, they were found to be stink∣ing carren, full of festered wounds, and to have false souls, and fraudulent hearts, and infinitely interessed. Then turning towards Cardinal Fernese; Thais said, And who when I shall have opened my house in Parnassus, ought more to frequent my schoole then your Excellency my most illustrious Sir, wherein you may learn
that important vertue of newtrality, which the Popes Nephews, such as your self, have so much need of: a Science wherein I am so well known, as I may read it in the schooles; for never being whilst I lived in the world, without twenty Pamphilioes, all ina∣mored of me, who all of them hated one another by reason of the jealousie which useth to be among young rivals, yet by my sagaci∣ty I have always known how to behave my self so dexterously with them, as I have rather taken their weapons from them, then put them into their hands: by which means I was able to reap great advantage from them, without ever loosing any one of them. A rare Precept, and a piece of cunning as singular, as hard to be put in practice: and the more necessary for such as your Lordship, for that you do not like me, who keep my lovers fast imprisoned by the strong chains of Lust; but you hold those whom you have been a Benefactor unto, by the weak thred of gra∣titude; which is broken by every least shadow of distaste, though it be unwarily given. And I have known many such as you, who by having unwisely been inamored on some one person, have not onely lost their own interest, but greatly ruined that friends Fortune whom they would exalt, by the jealousies which they have raised in all the rest of their followers, foolishly furnishing them with weapons, whereby they have forced those, who would other∣wise have been very grateful, to change the defect of partiality, with the vice of Ingratitude. All which are so true and necessa∣ry Advertisements, as if they be observed as they ought to be, by such as you are, you shall never have any reason upon any dis∣like, to complain more of your friends infidelity, then of the ha∣tred of those that love you. It being an observed rule by such as I am, that he who will be attended by many loving followers, must not be adulterously in love with one onely person.
The XXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Ambassadors of the Province of Marca being sent to this Court, in a publike Audience complaine unto his Majesty of an unfortunate affair which hath befaln his inhabitants of that Province, for which Apollo provides sufficient remedy, with singular demonstration of true love and affection. THe Marchian Orator who came the last week to this Court, made his solemn entrance yesterday, being attended by the greatest part of the Nobility, and being clad in a long mourning weed, he appear∣ed in the Colledge of the Litterati, where after having made his low reverence to Apollo, he spoke thus. Monarch and Father of Learn∣ing, and you other Princes of the Cujus who hear me speak, whilst learning flourisht in the world, la Marca was so famous therein, as she had the fame to have Poets, Philosophers, Orators, and other great per∣sonages no whit inferior to those of Mantua, Athens, or Rome; in so much as she hath been by some great wits compared to Greece her self, that fruitful mother of all Sciences. But since her Litterati have been hewen in pieces and starved by Barbarians, Learning hath been also so trampled upon by them, as after the burning of so many famous Li∣braries, wherein the labors of the most learned writers perisht, having lost the Noble Latin tongue, the very rase of Doctors were quite lost, whose ruine hath occasioned the very last displanting of the noble Pro∣vince of Marca; for the noble Marchians being first called by the fa∣mous City of Iesi Piceini Aesini after the lamentable loss which they had of Dipthongs, as I have said they are remained Piceni Asini: so as truely I do not know any other greater calamity that ever befel any Na∣tion, which can be compared to this of ours, which by the loss of one onely Dipthong, hath so far lost her ancient reputation, as the unfortu∣nate Marchians cannot traffick, nor appear in the company of any gal∣lant men, but they must be twitted in the teeth with Asino. Here the Orator with abundance of tears ended his discourse, nor was there any one Litterato in that Audience who were not very sensible of the Mar∣chians misfortune, insomuch as Apollo himself being much moved at the misery of so noble a Province, called for some Paper and Ink, and with his own hand did again set the Dipthong to Iesi; and command∣ed Virgil, who was the Regent of scanning Verses, that the first sylla∣ble of Iesi should be pronounced long; and ordained upon pain of grievous punishment, that no man for the future should dare to call the Marchians Asini, since it was very true that mother Nature had sowed L'Asinita in so just a measure amongst all the Nations of the world, as every one had a share thereof equal to her companion.
The XXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Gonzalvo Ferrante Cordova desires Apollo that the title of Magno or Great may be confirmed unto him, and in∣stead of being granted his request, receives a very unsa∣tisfactory Answer. GOnsalvo Ferrante Cordova, called by the Spaniards il Gran Capi∣tano, appeared some days ago in Parnassus, with a noble train of many Castilian Gentlemen, and having in a haughty Oration related unto his Majesty, his famous actions in war, demanded the confirmati∣on of the Title Magnns, which was given him by the consent of the whole Militia, and by all the Historians of Europe. Gonzalvo was graciously received by Apollo, who bad him give in in writing all his Military enterprises, and commanded afterwards that they should be diligently examined by Giovani Giovanno Pontano, by Francisco Guic∣chardin, and by the most reverend Paulus Iovius, and that they should make an exact report thereof to the Senate of History, to the end that if they should be found to be such as did deserve the Title of Magnus, they might confirm it unto him by his Majesties Authentick Letters Pattents. Gonsalvo delivered unto those Historians a very perfect Com∣mentary of all his Actions, which were by them diligently examined, and weighed; and afterwards made a full relation thereof in open Col∣ledge, where they resolved what answer should be given to Gonsalvo; who being sent for into the Court, Titus Livy the Master of the Col∣ledge, told in the name of the whole Senate; that they had very ex∣actly considered his war enterprises, and had at last concluded that for what he had done in Granada, being things done under the command of a C. who was his superior, according to the stile of the Court of Parnassus they were not to be reckoned upon, the whole glory of victory in such cases being given to the Captain General, who commanded the Army in chief; and that though he had been General at the business of dri∣ving the Moors out of the Kingdom of Granada, they thought the acti∣on was not such as might deservedly confer the glorious Title of Mag∣nus upon the Commander in chief; for it was no great business for all Spain to drive out a few Moors, who were divided amongst themselves, out of Granada. Then Livy added, that his enterprises done in Affrica, in the taking in of some small places, were not thought worthy to be considered in a subject, who demanding the high Prerogative of the Title of Magnus, must make it manifest unto the world that he had at∣chieved enterprises which were tly Great; and that it appeared cleerly by his writings, that he had won all his reputation in Military affairs, in the war which he managed in the getting of the Kingdom of Naples, wherein two field battles were famous and worthy considerati∣on; the one given at Saminara, the other at Garigliano; which if they
were sufficient to purchase a man the Title of Magnus, there were so many Bellisarii, Narsetti, Carli Martelli, Scanderbegs, and other famous Captains in Parnassus, who had done more memorable acts, as their would be more Magni in the world then Parvi, to this Gonsolvo replyed, that he thought that in the Neapolitan war, they ought not to reflect upon particular actions, but to the whole noble work and enterprise which he had gloriously brought to an end, by winning a flourishing and strong kingdom unto his King and Master. Livy replyed, that they had also taken into their consideration, his winning of the whole King∣dom of Naples, wherein he seemed to suffer much in his reputation, as having therein used more fraud, then true Military valor; and th at therefore the History Colledge, had adjudged that Neapolitan enterprise not to deserve the name of an honorable atchievement; and that he was therefore to know that the glorious Title of Magnus was by a par∣ticular Prerogative onely granted to those who had atchieved valiant enterprises, by their meer Military worth and vertue: that therefore the Colledge could not possibly think that Gonsalva could pretend to have won the kingdom of Naples by force of Arms, whereinto being called but a little before as a friend, by the ill-advised Neapolitan Kings; and that he might defend them, afterwards when those unfortunate Kings stood in greatest need of help, and just then when they had put the whole kingdom into his hands, he had the heart to declare himself their Enemy, which whether it was an action fitting to confer the Title of Magnus upon him that did effect it, the History Colledge would make Gonsalva himself judge. Livy said moreover, that his obscue Cata∣strophe, might be added to what had been said; misbecoming such a one as Gonsalvo, who desiring to be stiled Magnus, desired to be the Protosavio of the world, since after the acquisition of such a kingdom, not knowing how to secure his reputation, he most ignorantly suffered himself to be disarmed, to have the government of Naples afterwards taken from him, and to be brought back to Spain and be confined, and dye there mad. Gonsalva then exclaimed, and said: That Pompey had made a much more unfortunate end then he, and yet had obtained the title of Magnus. To which Livy answered, that according to the in∣stitutions of Parnassus, those who to compass an Empire lost their lives, or came by any other unfortunate end, lost no reputation; nor had Pompey the great any ways done so, who had always the same generous thought, (though he knew how to conceal it) as Csar had. In fine, Livy said, That the two inexcusable errors which Gonsalva made in his managing the taking of the kingdom of Naples, did much derogate from his desire, for that he did not onely exceed the bounds of a Com∣manders Liberality, and Authority, when after the conquest of so great a kingdom, by rewarding so many Barons. Commanders, and other deserving men, he had purchast unto himself an attendance of so ma∣ny signal subjects, not having the requisite head of leaving means unto his King to shew himself thankful to those who had served him: and that with affability, and behavior far differing from the austerity of his Nation, he had appeared openly to affect that attendance and love of the Neapolitan Barons, which ought mainly to be avoided by such a oneas he, who was the Officer of a King naturally very jealous, by which foolish proceeding he raised in him those jealousies, which he
could not free himself of without Gonzalva's ruine of reputation; and that the apprehension of affecting the government of other mens kingdoms, was neither given, nor born withal in wise men; for to be lukewarm in such cases, proved always a mortal advice to them that u∣sed it. Gonsalvo was much incenst to hear Livy speak thus, who could not forbear saying that he had served his King with such Loyalty as be∣came a Castilian Baron, that the cunning how to betray a mans Prince, was not known in Spain, and that the Lords of his Nation reputed it a greater honor to receive injuries from their Kings, then to betray them. To this Livy replyed, that if he were of so well a composed mind, he might do well to desire to be stiled an honest man, which should willing∣ly be granted him, and not Magnus, which he should have then deserved when he should have thought it more glorious to dye King of Naples, then to be confined to a poor Castle of Spain, onely for having deserved such a reward as could not be countercambiated by any thing else, then by the ingratitude which was used towards him. Then Gonsalva, with∣out bearing any respect to the place wherein were so many eminent per∣sons, said, that they proceeded unjustly with him; for that blaming his constant loyalty, they affirmed unto him in publike, that he should have received a better reward in arnassus; if he had been guilty of a thousand trecheries; and that King Ferdinando's ingratitude did not onely not obscure his reputation, but did infinitely add unto his glory; and that the reason of state which taught men that to measure their actions one∣ly by the compass of interest, not by the yard of reputation, was a Do∣e which better became great Kings and Princes, then such Cap∣tains as he was, in whom Perjuries, Treasons, and I recherie, were al∣ways accounted infamous, whereas the gaining of kingdoms by su∣preme Potentates, though by foul means, were termed glorious at∣chievements. Livy then replyed unto Gonsalva in bitter language, that the Italians were not so ignorant but that they very well knew that the Title which was given him in the business of Naples was Capitano Ma∣jor, which in Italian or in English is General, not Magnus; that he put too great a value upon himself; and that the History Colledge had ra∣ther bereave Bawdy-houses of the Title of Signoria, where it was bu∣ryed through the vanity of Ambitious men, then that they would send the so highly esteemed name of Magnus thither.
The XXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Many of the French Nobility intreat their Monarchy, that according as the Nobility of Commonwealths do, it may be lawful for them to use Marchandizing; and are by her shamefully denyed. MAny of the Nobility of France, went some few days ago to visit the illustrious Venetian Liberty, and though they did much ad∣mire the Laws of living free, the excellent orders by which she maintains her self in that Liberty, which is now so hard to be found amongst men, yet they infinitely admire, and envy the greatness of the Noble Venetians, and did chiefly wonder, that the prime Senators of so excelse a Commonwealth, did freely exercise marchandising, which their Kings of France had declared to be mechanick, and they thought it very strange that the French Nobility should be made to believe, that the exercise of Arms, wherein men usually lose all their own estate, should be more Noble then that of Marchandise, which doth very much inrich men. Wherefore some of the prime Nobility of France, appeared not many days ago before their Monarchy, humbly desiring that she would be pleased, to declare by publike Edict that it was as honorable for her Nobility to follow Traffick and Marchandising, as it was held to be in the famous Commonwealths of Venice, Genua, and in many other Re∣publicks. The French Monarchy was much moved at this unexpect∣ed request; and as if something of unseemly, or misbecoming had been asked her, she with injurious words and an angry countenance, bad them be gone; and they thinking themselves greatly wronged, by be∣ing in so severe a manner denyed a request which they thought to be so just, appealed presently to Apollo, to whom they gave a particular ac∣count of all that had past between them and their Monarchy, and made the same request unto his Mjesty. Apollo, who thought the French Nobility had demanded nothing but what was just, signifyed uno the French Monarchy, that if she should not satisfie her Nobility in the point that they might follow marchandising, without any ble∣mish to their honor, he could not choose but gratifie them therein. When the French Monarchy heard so great a novelty, that she might prevent so great a rne which she foresaw was likely to fall upon her, came presently before Apollo, to whom she said, that his Majesty knew the true basis of her greatness, and her chiefest power lay in the swords of her Nobility, who having drunk in the opinion together with their milk, that merchandising was a thing as becoming Mechanick men, as mis-becoming those that were nobly born, and that the mystery of war, the managing of Arms, were the true Traffick, and proper Merchan∣dise of the Noblesse: and that to overthrow those solid foundations, would be no better then to annihilate not onely the kingdom of France,
but those likewise of Spain, England, Poland, and other Monarchies; which knowing very well the great necessity that powerful Potentates have of always keeping their Noblesse armed, had by mysterious cuning kept them from any thought of Merchandising, and that it was most certain that as soon as her Noblesse should taste the sweets of Trading, they would presently throw away their Arms, whereunto they were bred up, preferring the continual gain of Traffick, before the perpe∣tual expence of war; and that the effect which the use of Merchan∣dising produced amongst Senators, was plainly seen in all Common∣wealths, where for greediness of maintaining Traffick, they were seen to be too much inclined to peace. The same Monarchy did likewise put his Majesty in mind of the necessity she had of keeping her Noblesse in Arms, for she had found in all her most important actions, that a few of the Noblesse had overcome great Armies of Plebeians; for there was no comparison to be made between the valor and fidelity of the Noblesse who fought to win their Princes favor, and to purchase glory; and those foot taken up in the streets, who took up Arms onely for the poor gain of three Crowns a month. Apollo was much satisfy∣ed with these reasons alleadged by the French Monarchy; wherefore he not long after told those French Noblesse, who were returned to re∣ceive an answer of their business, that having reflected maturely upon their request, he thought it not convenient, that the French Noblesse famous throughout all the Nations of the world, for being born war∣riers, and whose true element was the perpetual managing of Arms, should now obscure their glory by the sordid gain of Merchandise; and that the ends of Republicks did very much differ from those of Monarchies: for the exercise of Merchandise, which by its continual gain did evidently abase mens spirits, made the expence of war seem odious and disarmed those who gave their minds thereunto, was not only good, but very excellent in Commonwealths; where such Senators whose Genius led them to the wars living in perpetual jealousie of their liber∣ty, were not a little suspected in free Countries, who desired that their Senators should rather be prudently wise, and greatly given to peace, then overmuch warlike; and thus were these French Noblesse dismist by his Majesty. And tis publikely said in this Court, that they were so exasperated by this repulse, as one of them was heard to say, O great God! What cheats, what cozenages are these which are put upon the Noblesse in Monarchies? and how can it be conceived by any man, what humane Law, what justice of God doth command, that to gain for a mans self by Merchandise should be thought shameful, and to plun∣der by Arms for others, should be held an honorable imployment.
The XL. ADVERTISEMENT. The Honorable Title of Messere, being faln into a miserable condition, is shamefully driven out of the Kingdom of Naples; and not being received into Rome, (as it thought it should be) for its last Refuge hath its recourse to Apol∣lo, who assigns it a very satisfactory aboad. IN the publike meetings of the Seats of Justice at Naples, (which the Neapolitans call Chiazza) it was two months since resolved, that the Title of Messere should be expel'd that kingdom, upon pain of grie∣vous punishment if his worship were not gone within three days. And because that honorable Title thought it had not deserved so scorn∣ful usage, to appease those Princes and Lords who were so highly in∣censt against him, he alleadged the Authority of Giovanni Scopa, An∣tonio Mancinello, and other excellent Grammarians, who did all agree, that the Barbarians, who from the Northern parts overran Italy, they had not onely through their ignorance of the Latin Tongue, corrupted the supreme Title of Here into Sire, but that those that followed after, changed that likewise into Messere which signified as much as My Here which is my Master; and that such a Title with which the Kings of France are pleased to honor their sacred Persons, was unworthily so abu∣sed by the Italians; but it being hereunto answered, that in the impor∣tant business of Titles no respect was had to the true worth thereof, but to the rate according to which it went in the Market, unfortunate Mes∣sere was forced to hide himself in the houses of some worshipful very old men, who complained very much that worshipful Messere should be so hardly dealth withal, even by shop-keepers, with which they remem∣bred that in former times the Kings of Naples made their own stile to be honored, and reverenced. But the business growing at last desperate, Messere took his journey for Rome by the weekly Carryer, at the same time that those honorable Titles of agnifici, Spectabili, Sereni, and Ge∣nerosi, fled secretly from the kingdom for fear of the like affront. When Messere was come to Rome, he was but badly received, by those Cour∣tiers who long before had thought it much scorn to be cloyed with the jacket of Illustre, Molto Illustre, and who hoped shortly to manumit l'Il∣lustrissimo. Wherefore Messere took his way towards Parnassus, whe∣ther he came some few days ago, and presenting himself before Apollo, acquainted him first with all his persecutions, and then earnestly intreat∣ed his Majesty, that he would appoint him out some aboad, where he might rest quiet, till such time as the flood of Ambition, which had infected even good men, were parted from the world. Apollo did much compassionate the persecutions of that honorable Title, and having first
communicated the business to the Censors, he resolved to recommend him to the care of the Ambassador of Marca, by whom being recei∣ved with great demonstrations of Love, and carryed home into his Country, letters of the twelfth of this month, are come by the ordina∣ry Post from Marca, which say that that kinde and loving Nation hath not onely willingly received Messere, but hath in great pomp admitted him into its Country, under an imbroydered cloth of state; and that Messere in recompence of that very great civility, taught the Marchi∣ans the very next day after his arrival, the true way of rosting the leaf of a Hog, and of sopping their bread in the Dripping-pan, letting that smoak go up the Chimney; which the Neapolitans, and other Nati∣ons which study appearance more then substance, feed much upon. The XLI. ADVERTISEMENT. The Censors of Parnassus, having by order from Apollo, published a rigorous Edict against Hypocrites, are forced to moderate it, by reason of a weighty particuler discove∣red unto them by Plato. THe publike Censors of this Court, having learnt for certain, that a kind of goodness which is lately discovered in some of the Litte∣rati of Parnassus, is but a composure of artificial appearances, and real falshood, and that hellish hypocrisie gets every day more footing in mens minds, to the end that all Parnassus may not be infected with so contagious a disease, published by order from his Majesty, a severe Edict six days ago against Hypocrites. And is it not a great wonder that Plato himself who is held by all the Vertuosi of Parnassus to be the true Idea of all purity and sincerity, and the very pattern of goodness, should presently appear before the Censors Tribunal, and openly oppo∣sing himself to the Edict which was so generally well received, saying with his wonted freedom, that through the manifest ignorance of mo∣dern men, in judging upon the true condition of mens manners, it was a very pernitious resolution which was tane in Parnassus, to extirpate all that Hypocrisie, by which in these unfortunate times, even good men were forced to keep up their reputation; for plain-dealing men, peo∣ple of open hearts and cleer mindes, enemies to cunning and double dealing, who in former times were honored and admired like so many Demi-gods, were so far from being well esteemed of in this present Age; as to speak the naked truth, and to proceed in all a mans actions with sincerity, were nor esteemed good nor vertuous things, but rather scurrility, a relaxed life, a licentious way of proceeding, an unpolisht be∣haviour; wherefore even the best men, and those that formerly walked
in the approved way of bene vivere, & Latari, and who appeared to be capital Enemies to Hypocrisie, yet that they might by so wicked a vice maintain that credit and reputation, which they saw they lost by living honestly, were much against their will inforc'd to use Hypocrisie. The Censors did so much approve of this Counsel given by Plato; as they soon embraced it, and by a new Edict which they published, com∣plained, that in this so depraved Age, to the calamity of good men, and great good fortune of knaves and varlets, words freely, and merily spo∣ken in publike by jovial people, were more censured, then all the wick ed∣ness done in Privat by modern Hypocrites; wherefore Apollo, (though much against his will) granted leave to all gallant people of whatsoe∣ver sex to use, without incurring any punishment, the four-scoreth part of one grain of fine Hypocrisie. The XLII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Immense bulk of the Ottoman Empire which was thought by the wisest men to be everlasting, doth now of it self so destroy it self, as it threatens present ruine. THe vast Fabrick of the Ottoman Empire, (as is well known to all those that deal in Pernassus) is of so large a circuit, as it seems to be a great City, the walls whereof being built (though the Princes thereof be barbarous and illiterate) in an excellent way of politick Architecture, are of so solid materials, and with so corresponding Bul∣warks, Courtines, Platforms, Ditches, Ravelins, Scarfes, & Counter∣scarfes, as it was not onely thought by many of those who of late did consider it, to be as eternal as the world, but seemed as if by means of those Emperors who are still more and more ambitious to make it greater by the addition of new appertiments, it would like Nero's golden house, possess whole Pernassus; the strong Bulwarks of Tauris, Servan, Giorgia, Darbecca, and most of all those of Armenia, are not only almost all of them faln to the ground, but that strongest Bastion of the lesser Asia, hath lost so large a collop, as it threatens sodain ruine; so as those walls which seemed to be everlasting, do now of themselves moul∣der away and fall to ruine. A novelty which makes the beholders wonder very much, and puts them in minde of the instability of hu∣mane greatness; for though nothing appear more potent and immor∣tal to the eyes of men then great Empires, yet we see they sodainly and easily are overthrown. For if a man will demolish a Tower which is strongly built, he must labour long about it with Canon and Pick-axe; but to the ruine of any Empire how great and potent soever, one onely puff (though but very weak) of a Princes folly, or of a
private mans ambition, who hath good store of Followers, Mony, and Wit, is able to make it totter, and fall, before the ruine be expe∣cted. The XLIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Prince of Helicon desires by an Embassador of his, from Apollo, the priviledge of ordaining birthright amongst the Nobles of his State; which his Majesty denies to grant. THe Prince of Helicons Embassador, who came three days since to Pernassus, had audience given him yesterday by Apollo; whom he acquainted that his Prince, after having imbellished his flourishing state, with all those singular Ornaments which render great kingdoms respected, wanted nothing, but that the numerous Nobility which he had instituted there, might keep up their greatness perpetually; and be∣cause he knew that it was riches which onely preserved the splendor of great Families, he foresaw that the gallantry of his State would through peoples usual fruitfulness, in a short time turn to its former mean condi∣tion, if the fathers estate should be divided in equal parts amongst many brethren: and that the famous Nobilities of France, Spain, Germany, Po∣land, and other kingdomes, had maintained their greatness many hun∣dreds of yeers, onely by the advantage of birthright; wherefore his Prince (who was much his Majesties servant) did humbly beseech him that he would vouchsafe to grant him the priviledge of instituting the Law of birthright amongst the Nobility of his state. Apollo answer∣ed the Embassador, that he perceived his Prince did not consider what he asked; for it seemed he did not well know what it imports in a state, by rich patrimonies, and Pretence of Nobility to put the Bulls horns upon the head, and Woolves teeth in the mouths of meek sheep, ready to be milkt with both hands, and shorn to the very quick, when they wanted the pretension of that vain-glorious Nobility, which teaching o∣thers onely how to command like Lords, made the base slavery of obey∣ing known; and that those Potentates who had indeavoured to found and maintain a great Nobility in their states, by the institution of birth∣right, were at last aware that they had foolishly made them the heads of those people, who when they had wealthy men for their guides, and such as were remarkable for their Nobility, were dreadful to all Princes; and that great Families in all States served onely for Lan∣terns, which in the obscuest times of revolutions, gave light to the common people who walked in the dark. Wherefore in States where there was a numerous Nobility, it behoved Princes to live with the
punctilio of respect which was an unsufferable burthen; which those kingdoms wanted, where no such impediments being found, their pos∣sessors might justly and with much reason term themselves true and ab∣solute masters of their States: and that there wanted not examples of Noble men in France, Flanders, and elsewhere, who in foul Insurrecti∣ons made by themselves, durst take upon them the Title of Fathers of their Country, and the peoples Protectors; and who that they might Tyrannise over the people, and give Laws even to their natural Princes, were not ashamed to guild over their seditious taking up of Arms against their King, with the specious and charitable pretence of publick good. To this the Embassador answered, that the example of the warlike No∣bility of France, was the only thing which had induced his Prince, to de∣sire it so much in his State, for he found cleerly that the trechery of those who had made insurrections against their King, had been over∣come by the glorious French Noblesse; and that the noble kingdom of France, being armed by a no less numerous then warlike Noblesse, had taught the whole world, how much a numerous Noblesse imports in a kingdom; for 'twas they alone who by their unvanquishable swords had quenched the fire of those French Insurrections, which in a kingdom that had wanted so great a benefit, would have burnt eter∣nally. Apollo answered, that all this would have been true, if the French Insurrections, of which he spake, had been raised onely by the people, but that being apparently kindled by a great many of the Noblesse of that kingdom, the Physician would prove very ridiculous who should glory in the cure of a malady, of which through his gross ignorance he had been the onely cause: and that every wise Prince ought to keep from the fault of nursing up and nourishing Companions and brothers in his kingdom, since those Monarchs reigned most securely, who put the greatest distance between their greatness, and the lowliness of their subjects. That it nauseated his Majesty, as much as ignorance it self did, to see that there should be so arrogant and vain-glorious subjects in one of the chiefest kingdoms of Europe, who by the proud pre∣tence of their Nobility, durst affirm they were as nobly born as the King himself; as if any comparison which was not infinitely ridiculous and hateful, could be made between a spindle, and the Mast of a Tree, between Flyes and Elephants, between commanding, and obeying. And Apollo added, that it was this monstrous petulancy which made the Ottoman Emperors hold it the chief means of their security and great∣ness, and that not without reason, not to allow any the least shadow of Pretence to Nobility in their Dominions: and that those who would see narrowly into the effects which the Noblesse occasion in a kingdom, did not so much blame the resolution of those Emperors, as some did who understood very little of worldly affairs. For those great Princes, who in their affairs minded onely substance and not appearance, did in∣finitely abhor the boasting and vain-glory of those things which seem∣ed to be, and were not: and they abhord to see that a Nobleman who had no experience, or was not any ways skild in the affairs either of war or peace, should notwithstanding through the sole pretence of his empty Nobility, think those qualifications in the Militia to be due to him, which a Prince is so necessitated to confer upon the only worth and
merit of such Commanders whose hairs were grown gray under a Mur∣rion, and who by perpetually wearing of Curasses in actions of war had made their breasts and backs as hard as horn; and that that which a∣bove all other things made such people hateful, was to see them so wil∣ful, as not to obey antient Commanders of a less noble extract, though they themselves were but young; it being certainly an insufferable pre∣tension, to desire thorow foolsh ostentation, that the gifts of fortune should be esteemed by a Prince to be indowments of minde. In fine, Apollo said, that he though tit was greater cruelty, & high inustice, that the estate should not be equally divided amongst those brothers who had one and the same Father and Mother. That he thought it fit some Prerogative should be given to the Primogeniture, but that it should be such as should make him appear to be the head of his house, not the Master of his Brethren: and that the rich and just right of Eldership which Fathers ought to leave in their Families was love and concord be∣tween his Children. And that it would be both great folly, and cru∣elty to introduce that primogeniture amongst private men, which oc∣casioning such scandals in the blood of Princes, as might be seen regi∣stred in history, was onely born withal for the publike peace sake, which the people would not enjoy, if kingdoms were divided, and that Pri∣mogeniture being onely advantagious to Princes, subjects who were ex∣cluded from Paternal Inheritance, were necessitated for their subsistance to take pay of them, and to be trained up in war, by which Princes secu∣red their States; that they might be furnisht with the same abundance of Military men as now they had with high injustice and the peoples ill will, if they should admit all Brothers to Paternal Inheritances; for that was onely the laudable Primogeniture which neither Princes, nor Parents, but brothers themselves by joynt agreement do erect in their Families, when one onely of them betaking himself to propagation, all the rest labour to augment the common Patrimony. Apollo conclu∣ded his answer with this, that he absolutely denyed to grant the Prince of Helicon the Primogeniture which he desired, because he could no longer behold those horrid Tragedies, and cruel machinations which were plotted amongst Brethren in those States where the use of Primo∣geniture was practised; for those who were excluded from paternal In∣heritance, left no sort of cruelty, or trechery unindeavoured to recom∣pence the foul injustice which was done them. Moreover, that all Pri∣mogeniture being grounded with much loss of blood, he feared he should not be able to find out any form of priviledge with so strong and strict proviso's, as would be able, to keep people excluded from their inheri∣tance from making, by a dagger in their hand, their Fathers last Will and Testament ineffectual.
The XLIV. ADVERTISEMENT. The Duke of Alva being accused of cruelty, for having with exquisite diligence caused two of the prime subjects of his new Principality of Achaia, to be imprisoned, slain, and afterwards secretly buryed in their very prisons, de∣fends himself stoutly before Apollo. SOon after the Duke of Alva had tane possession of the new Princi∣pality of Achaia, of which you heard at large by our late Letters, that severe spirit, who being wholly composed of wariness, and vigi∣lancy, seemed to be indowed by nature with all requisites in a Prince, who will with security govern States newly acquired. After he had ex∣actly observed the humors, and behaviors of some chief men of the State, he indeavoured to know who they were who had occasioned those many popular insurrections which had so much indangered the free State of Achaia: and at last he found apparently that all the for∣mer evils had had their rise from the ambition of two principal men, who being wealthy, liberal, courteous, and more ambitious of government then became subjects, to be: qualities, which in any whatsoever cor∣rupted Commonwealth, or newly founded principality, make him who possesseth them formidable, and by those means infinitely beloved by the people; the Prince, to secure the quiet of his State, thought it very necessary to rid the world of so dangerous subjects; so as with admi∣rable dexterity and secrecy he got them both into his hands, and with necessary resolution, made them be put to death and buryed the very hour that they were imprisoned. This cruel and resolute action, not u∣sually heard of, nor seen, in a State, which never having known what be∣longed to servitude, was not acquainted with those severe resentments which Princes through jealousie of State use to take, gave that bad sa∣tisfaction to the Nobility, which the severity of a new Prince usually doth, when it is exercised against those ambitious popular Chieftains who by their seditions abuse Liberty, and precipitate it into Tyranny; and was of great terror to the common people; who though they were much incenst against their Prince, yet when they saw their leading men vvere tane from them, they neither had courage nor vvit to move; but as is usual upon such like occasions, changed their insolency into admi∣ration or vvonder, their boldness into fear, their acting of resentments into complaints by vvord, and to threatning that revenge, vvhich of themselves they had not vvit to execute. The end of their rancor vvas then, the making of such appeals to Apollo against their Prince, as his Majesty straitly commanded him to make his present appearance in Parnassus, and plead his justification against those imputations. Alva obeyed, and having acquainted his Majesty vvith their tedious conditi∣ons, shevved him cleerly, that to secure himself in the Government of
his new Principality, he was necessitated to use the wonted remedy of taking off the heads of the seditious people, which Apollo seemed to be but little satisfyed with; but told Alva, that though the death of those two seditious men might be requisite, yet he could not approve of the manner; for that Princes who in the important resolution of putting any of their subjects to death, did not proceed by the rules of known Justice, injured their own reputation, and interest; and that Princes were obliged to make known to all the world, the true reason which made them proceed with severity against their subjects; and that the Delinquents punishment ought to be publick, not onely for the Prince his Justification, but to terrifie others, and keep them from doing amiss. The Prince grew pale, to hear Apollo speak thus positively, and answer∣ed, that the aforesaid two persons were so mightily beloved by the People, as if they should have been proceeded against by the usual course of Justice, and that they had been executed (as he acknowledged they should have been) in the publike Piazza, it was odds but that the People would by violence have taken them from the hands of Justice; which disorder though it might have been prevented by guards of arm∣ed men, yet it was most certain, that the publike death of such prime men, and who were so dearly beloved by their State, would have caused such compunction, & such alteration in the minds of his Vassals, as, if not at that instant, they would at least at some other time leave no∣thing unattempted to revenge it. Which respects made him keep from purging the body of his State, from those malignant humors which it abounded in, by approved Medicines; for certainly he should have stirred up such store of more pernicious humors, as would have much aggravated the malady. That it was a trivial politick Precept, to fright∣en the meaner sort of people from committing wickedness, by the spe∣ctacle of mechanicks in the Piazza's, and other publike places; but that personages of quality, who were beloved by the People, and whom Princes put to death, onely for the safety of their State, their deaths and burials must ensue their imprisonment, in secret places; for to punish signal men publikely upon scaffolds, did not beget fear in men, but rage of revenge. Apollo then asked the Prince, how long it had been since he had learned that Precept; the Prince answered that whilst he was a young man he learned it of a Florentine, who was his Master in the Po∣liticks; Apollo asked him again, why he practised the contrary in the memorable, and fatal resolution which he took in the business of Prince Egmont, and Count Horn; Alva boldly answered his Malesty, that the interests were different in him who governed a Province as an other mans substitute, and in him who was absolute Prince thereof; and that Nature had made men wiser in governing their own particular affairs, then those of their Masters; and that many who seemed to be blinde in the government of other mens States, were more then Argus-eyed in their own affairs.
The XLV. ADVERTISEMENT. A chief subject of the Province of Macedonia, being hi∣red by the Prince of Epire at a great salary, when he came to know the right cause why that pension was given him, doth magnanimously refuse it. THe Prince of Epire, who gives great Pensions to the chief Coun∣sellors of divers of his neighbouring Potentates, hath for a long time past, paid great sums of money yearly to a chief Baron of Mace∣donia, who is very well beloved, and hath many followers in that Nati∣on: who believing that this the Prince of Epires Liberality, proceeded from meer love, & sincerity of mind, to free himself from the superio∣rity of any other Prince, which might disturb him in his service, that he might be the more able to serve the Prince of Epire to the utmost of his power, sold all his estate in Macedonia, and by the monies which he got for it, purchast great store of Land in Epire, whither he went to make his aboad, intending for the future to make Epire his Countrey; and applyed himself with such assiduity, and so faithfully to the service of that Prince; as he surpast all the rest of his Highness servants in his diligence, and care in all those things of importance, wherein he was trusted. But going to the pay-masters to receive his wonted half years Pension, he much to his astonishment found, that by order from the Treasurers, his Pension was taken away. Which he presently acquaint∣ed the Prince with, and complained that whilst the merits of his ser∣vice increased, his reward was lessened. The Prince answered, that he having changed his Country, and being of a friend become his servant, his case was altered. That he could purchase that of his equals which though he named it not, yet the Baron might be wise enough to under∣stand; that upon all occasions he could purchase loyalty, and diligence a great deal better cheap of his own vassals. The Baron understood then whither the Pension tended that had been assigned him by the Prince of Epire, and blushing very much, stoutly answered him, Sir, the reputation which I live in in my Countrey, hath cost me an ounce of blood for every ten pounds worth thereof, in all the war that hath hap∣ned in Europe since I wrote man; let not your Highness think me so great a Prodigal, as that I will sell it you for 3 shillings the pound. And after this having withdrawn himself from his new Barony which he had purchast in Epire, he took his leave of the Prince, and returned to his own Country, admired and commended by all men for that his noble resolution, but imitated but by a few.
The XLVI. ADVERTISEMENT. The tenth of June is observed as a sad and mournful day in Parnassus; in memory of the unfortunate loss of the De∣cads of Titus Livy. YEsterday which was the tenth of Iune, was (according to custom) observed as a day of mourning in Pernassus; for that on that un∣fortunate day, by the burning of the Library in the Capitol, the great∣est part of Livies Decads were lost; which loss is bitterly bewayled, and will ever be so by all the lovers of learning. On which day, in sign of extraordinary sorrow, the Royal Palace dis-robes it self of all its Majesty: and together with all publick Schools, and chief Market places, is lined with mourning Bays; and the very Delphick Library, (a thing not done upon any other sad occasion) is shut up all that day. Honorable Obsequies were made to so famous writings; and the Cere∣mony being ended, Rafael Volaterano in a mournful Oration lamented so great a loss: and just as he was in the height of his inveighing against the ignorance of those sacrilegious persons, it happened that a nimble Poet, were it either out of meer compunction of mind, or that he would purchase reputation, by shewing the whole Colledge of Vertuosi, how very sensible he was of that loss, broke forth into so loud lamenta∣tions, as the Orator could be no longer heard, and not being able to quiet himself, though he was willed to do so by the Censors; Apollo who was present at the Obsequies, and who upon this mournful occasi∣on had covered himself with a dark Cloud, being impatient to hear that noise, and that he might the better behold his face who wept so down∣rightly, by the violence of his beams rarifyed the Cloud, and found it to be Caesar Caporali, who not caring to see the yet remaining Decads of that admirable writer, did with such lamentations bewayl those that were lost: which extraordinary affection caused so lowd a laughter in all the standers by, as Volaterrano's Oration, which in the midst thereof was interrupted by the general lamentings of the Literati, could not be ended by reason of every ones great laughter.
The XLVII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having appointed Hospitals to every Nation, for their fools, puts down that of Florence, by reason of the few fools that are found amongst the Florentines, and adds the Revenue thereof to the Lombards Hospital, which by reason of the greater number of fools that flock thither, was run far in Arrears. IT being found by long experience, that there is no Nation in the world, wherein there are not great store of fools, Apollo, that he might find timely remedy, according to his custom, for mens miseries, erected many hundred years ago, an Hospital for fools in every Nation; which he indowed with rich Revenues; to the end that they might be furnished with all things requisite for the cure of such as Divine Justice had for their misdemerits punisht, by making them shallow braind. And because the Hospital of the noble Florentine Nation, by reason of the very few fools that it produceth, is at little or no cost, and it being on the contrary seen, that there is so great a concourse of Lombard fools, as their Hospital is not able to receive them all, nor can supply the great expence which it is forced to be at; his Majesty some few daies ago, of his own meer motion, put down the Hospital of the Florentine fools, and gave the Revenues thereof to that of Lombardy, the Lombards being for the most part besotted with the foul indignity of playing the Hectors, holding it to be a great honor, to be followed by a great num∣ber of Swashbucklers.
The XLVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo's Sea-Captains, having in one of their Assemblies made many usefull Decrees for their Militia, his Majesty orders that they be made known to Courtiers, and com∣mands the punctual observancy of them. THe many meetings had by his Majesties Sea-Captains, ended not before yesterday; whereupon the General, Andrea Doria, came this morning with the Constitutions therein established to Apollo, to have his Majesties Royal assent thereunto: It is known that his Maje∣sty received great satisfaction by the Decree made touching the Galli∣slaves, who when they are beaten by the Masters Mate, may not turn a∣bout to look upon him, not fence the blow, not complain, and much less rail at him that beats them, upon pain of undergoing thrice as ma∣ny lashes; but they must so patiently, and so contentedly receive their correction, as their great humility moves the Masters Mate to be rather charitable then severe unto them. After Apollo had much com∣mended this Decree, he gave order that it should be judiciously inti∣mated to all those miserable creatures, who for their secret misdeserts, are by Divine Justice condemned to tug at an Oar in the Court of Rome, or in any other Court, to the end that they may learn with patience to suffer the blows (the misusage) the lashes (the distasts) which they in Courts receive from their Masters; and that they do not murmur there∣at, but may rather thereby with courage suffer tribulation, and betake themselves with the better will to the oar of slavery, and by so doing, inforce the Prince to be rather liberal and gracious towards them, then to redouble their blows (their discourtesies) their lashes (their ill usage.) For to murmur, complain, or call their Master ingrateful, doth beget in him such obstinacy, not to reward one who may otherwse be of some desert, even as the curses and blasphemies which the Gally-slaves use to those that correct them, are the true causes which draws on their more severe correction. Which is so true a thing, as Princes hold it for an undeniable maxim, That an open enemy, and a distasted Courtier, Dif∣ferant nomine, nonre.
The XLIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Natalis Comes, an Historian, is severely punisht by Apol∣lo, for having said somewhat in an Assembly of the Li∣terati, which did hainously offend his Majesty. VVHilst Natalis Comes, the Latin Historian discoursed some daies since under Melpomenes Porch, together with many other Literati of this Court, of the glory of those great Princes, who have left eternal memory behind them, of their honorable actions; accor∣ding to the custom of Historians, tearmed the seisure or getting of a Kingdom, made by a Potent Prince, without any title of right or justice, a glorious atchievement: Which being suddenly carried to Apollo's ear by those malignant spirits, which both the air and earth doe continu∣ally abound in, his Majesty grew so incenst against Natalis, as at the very instant that he was brought prisoner to him, he forbad him entrance into any of the Libraries for three year: And though his Majesty hath been intreated by the chief Historians of this State, to shew some mercy to this his Vertuoso, he hath not only denied to doe it, but hath freely said, that since there could be no greater wickedness committed, then the unjust liberty which some Princes have usurped to bereave one ano∣ther of their States; an action which hath filled the whole world with those sad disorders, wherewith mankind is so much afflicted; he thought it too sore an iniquity, that any so perfidious Literato should be found in his State, who should dare to call those wicked thefts, which are not committed without a million of aggravating circumstances, glorious at∣chievements. The L. ADVERTISEMENT. The chief Monarchies of Europe and Asia, which now reside in Parnassus, fall sick at one and the same instant, and not being to be cured by Esculapius, Hippocrates, or any o∣ther able Physitian, they are restored to their health by a skilful Farrier. EVery one in Parnassus did infinitely wonder, that upon one and the same day, all the chief Monarchies of Europe and Asia should fall desperately sick, which many thought occasioned through the putrifacti∣on of the air, or by some unauspitious aspects of the heavens. Apollo
did not only send excellent remedies to all those Potentates, but all the chief Physitians of this Court; and commanded that great Esculapius should himself be assistant to their cure, so as no remedy was left untri'd by so rare Physitians, that so eminent personages might recover their healths; but all proved to no purpose; for all the Physitians did infi∣nitely wonder, that though their Medicines were most generous, and ve∣ry proper for the malady, yet they did not work according to their particular vertues; that their Manna, Laxative Syrup, and Sena it self, though given in great quantity, should rather prove restringent, then cause usual evacuations; by reason of which strange novelties, wise E∣sculapius, and the rest of the rare Physitians, thinking that Nature yield∣ed to the malady by reason of her weakness, gave over the cure, as de∣sperat. It hapned in this interim, that a learned Politician went meerly by way of visit, to see one of those sick Princes, who had ben his antient Master; from whom he understood the condition of his sickness, and then desired to know what remedies were apply'd unto him; and when he was satisfied in this his desire, he found fault with the Medicines which were given him, and exclaimed mightily against the Physitians, not sticking to call them all ignorant puppies, and forthwith sent with all speed for the Farrier of Parnassus, who is trusted with the cure of Pegasus. Who suddenly appearing, he staid not to hear the relation of the sickness, from the Patients own mouth, as Physitians use to doe, but without either feeling of Pulse, or casting of water, he presently knew the quality of the infirmity, and straitwaies made a composition of Dragons bloud, Bolearmenick, whites of Egs, and spreading it upon lint, made Plasters of it, and applyed them to those Princes, and then made large swathes for their legs and arms, afterwards he gave them a Laxative potion to drink in a syrup, ordained by Galen. These Medi∣cines which were very much blamed and laught at by Esculapius, Hip∣pocrates, and all the prime Physitians, did in a few hours work so well with these Princes, as they soon forsook their beds, and ran skipping and leaping about more nimbly then ever they had done before. Where∣upon all the Vertuosi of Parnassus, when they saw such admirable effects, were much astonished, that Empires, Kingdoms, and great States which could not be cured of the disorders which they were run into, by skil∣full Physitians, with their Rubarbs, and other Canonical Medicines, should be so soon restored to their healths, by a drench for a horse, given them by a silly Farrier.
The LI. ADVERTISEMENT. The Achaians being much incenst against the Duke of Alva, for his cruel proceeding against their two Chief∣tains, take up Arms, and drive him out of their State. VVHilst the Duke of Alva, after the execution of the two chief Heads of the People (whereof you lately heard) sought to se∣cure his State, by using great severity in the taking away of mens lives, his Countrey grew still more and more unquiet, it not being alwaies true, That to fall at the first, in new gotten and jealous States, to the ex∣tirpating of such as are most eminent, either for birth, attendance, worth, or riches, does free Princes of the jealousies which they have of the No∣bility and people: For some chief men of Achaia, as soon as they saw those two Ring-leaders of theirs put to death, only because they were much esteemed and beloved by the people, began to apprehend their own ruine: And because gallant men cannot live long in fear of danger, they thought it not only a safe way to be speedy, but (not being able to live quietly and void of suspition) they fell chearfully upon rash counsels; many of the best wits of Achaia made themselves the peoples heads, being grieved to see that the love which they bore to those two who made so unfortunate an end, should be judged a fault deserving death. So as the Duke of Alva's severity wrought the effect, which is usual in new Tyrannies which are crept into Free Countries, by reason of the discord between the Nobility and Commonalty, of reuniting the No∣bles and Plebeians in perfect love and charity, that so they may recover that Liberty by union, which they lost by foolish civil discord. The whole people of Achaia therefore, led on by the Nobility, took up arms upon an appointed day, and falling fowle upon their Prince, drove him easily out of the State. And it is now two daies since Alva reco∣vered Parnassus, and came immediately to do his obeysance to his Ma∣jesty, who did not only receve him very coolly, but was sorry that he had been deceived in the good opinion he had had of him. The Duke would have excused himself, and have alleadged reasons for his discrimi∣nation, but Apollo bad him hold his peace, and told him that such a one as he ought to know, that it was unwisely done by them who intended to make a Free People willingly to accept of slavery, to use cruelty (as he had done) at the very first beginning, and open inhumanity against the chief Personages of the State; whereby the people being made to de∣spair, they would try all means to free themselves from that heavy yoak of servitude, which they were unacquainted with; and that a business of such importance must be purchast by length of time, by little and little, insensibly introducing slavery amongst the people, and bereaving them of their Liberty, whilst they were not aware of it. The Duke reply'd, That he had learnt by Augustus his Proscription, by which ex∣tinguishing all the prime Nobility of Rome, he bereaft the people of
their Chieftains, that new Principalities were to be grounded by such means as he had used which counsel he had likewise learnt of Tacitus, who saies, nihil ausuram Plebem principibus amotis. Tacit. lib. 1. Annal. To this Apollo answered, That he failed alwaies in his resolutions, who governing his own present actions by former examples, had not the same requisite circumstances as they had whom he took for his safe Pre∣sident; and that he ought to have considered, that in new Principalities, he could only safely practise that Taquinian Precept of cutting off the heads of the highest Poppies, and which great Augustus knew so well how to put in execution, who had the like circumstances as that great Emperor had, who being armed, and victorious, could not only with safe∣ty make that so famous Proscription, but might easily quel any popular insurrection in Rome, by the same forces whereby he had annihilated the Roman Nobility: And that the Duke wanting that leaning-stock, in the using of the same severities which Augustus had happily practised, was much deceived; and that the example of the unfortunate Duke of Athens, who was called in by the Florentines to Govern their Countrey, being very like his case, did make it clearly appear to the whole world, That Principalities whereunto others are called by reason of the dissenti∣on of Citizens, are not secured by sudden and severe cruelties used a∣gainst the chief Subjects, but by cunningly keeping up, and heightning those divisions between the Nobility and common people, which ha∣ving occasioned the expulsion of the antient Liberty from out the Com∣monwealth, had introduced new slavery; and that such Princes ought, above all things, to keep themselves from doing any thing which might cause such universal distaste, as through meer dispair, might make the people reunite themselves with the Nobility; and that he saw every day more clearly, that the Spaniards wit was miraculous in the well govern∣ing of those people, which being born, and having perpetually lived un∣der Monarchy, received all servitude willingly; but that in Governing Nations that were either naturally Free, and indowed with ample Privi∣ledges, or which being lately past from Liberty into Slavery, Nec totam Libertatem, nec totam servitutem pati possunt. Lib. 1. Hist. was a business which did not suit well with the wits of those Nations, which having Promptum ad asperiora ingenium. Tacit. lib. 1. Annal. were extrordinary Prompti ferocibus.
The LII. ADVERTISEMENT. An Italian Gentleman, for having lost much bloud in the ser∣vice of a great Prince, is honoured by him with a Noble Order of Knighthood, who being but slightly esteemed of by those of his own Countrey, asks Apollo by what rea∣sons he may satisfie those his deriders, that he was the more richly rewarded, in that he was paid in Honour, and not in Gold or Silver. THe Gentleman of Italy who came to this Court the last week, did not (as many did believe) negotiate the publick affairs of any Prince, but treated of some things concerning his own particular self: For being brought to have Audience of his Majesty, he told him, that having for many years served a great Prince in his important Wars, for the much bloud which he had lost, and monies which he had therein spent, he was rewarded by that liberal Prince with a most Noble Order of Knighthood; and that when he returned to his own Countrey, that rich reward was laught at by those his fellow-Citizens, who love no∣thing but ready money: That therefore he most humbly beseeched his Majesty that he would be pleased to furnish him with such reasons as might serve him to convince those his deriders. To this Apollo answer∣ed, That he might sufficiently satisfie every one by giving an account of the annual Revenue of the Commendum of his Order of Knighthood. The Gentleman said, The Order of his Knighthood had no advantage of Commendum. To which Apollo said, That his affairs being in so sad a condition, it could not by any conclusive reason be proved, that the ho∣nour of Knighthood added more to him who received it, in point of honour and reputation, then what he had formerly merited by his ho∣nourable actions; but that it was the simplicity of mind, and sincerity of heart, which did believe well in the favour of Princes.
The LIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo finding that his having allowed the use of the 80 part of one grain of hypocrisie to his Vertuosi, had wrought very bad effects, does not only recall that his favour by publick Edict, but thunders out exceeding severe punishments a∣gainst hypocrites. YOu heard by our former expresses, That the gallant men of this Court, who follow the noble Rule of Bene Vivere & Laetari, not be∣ing sufficiently informed of the malice and wickedness of those false hy∣pocrites, who by way of loose life, and corrupted customs, have the li∣berty of speaking from their hearts, were by Plato's means perswaded to desire leave of the Censors, that they might make use of a little hy∣pocrisie; which they obtained with very bad consequence; for they soon were aware that hypocrisie is like a contagious disease, never so lit∣tle whereof spreads soon over the whole body: A disorder which those gallant men which have been spoken of, found to be very true: Who though they did strangely abhor so lewd a vice, and consequently bore a mortal hatred to hypocrites, yet that eightieth part of one grain of hy∣pocrisie which they took, was sufficient to infect, in a few daies, all their sincere and plain dealing. For they grew so in love with the credit and reputation which they got by that seeming modesty, and counterfeit de∣votion and charity, as they gave themselves wholly over, both in soul and body, in prey to that horrid vice, which but a little before they did so much detest: And all this with such disorder to the affairs of this State, as in a short time whole Parnassus was nothing but hypocrisie. As soon as Apollo found this inconvenience, he resolved by all means possi∣ble, to extirpate so venemous a plant by the very root from out his State. And knowing that cankers, and fistulated wounds must be cu∣red by fire and razor, he forthwith fell upon an extraordinary piece of ri∣gor; for on Tuesday morning he caused an Edict to be published in the place appointed for such purposes, whereby he strictly commanded eve∣ry one that was subject to his Jurisdiction, That within three daies he should cleanse his soul from that wicked filth of hypocrisie; declaring, That from that time forward, he did annul and make void that permission which a little before was by his Censors granted to gallant men, of the use of the eightieth part of one grain of hypocrisie: And that those three daies being over, which he peremptorily prescribed as the utmost limit of time to all men; all such as should be found guilty of so infamous a fault, should not only be declared open enemies to all vertue, uncapable or any fame or glory, or of ever acquiring any honour, but he declared them to the whole world, to be viperous creatures, shamelesly infamous; and that by all the Plenipotentiary power which he had over his Vertu∣osi, he declared them from that time forward to be grosly ignorant. Moreover, that so hoid a monster should for the time to come, be for ever banished from out his Vertuosi, and be by them detested and abhor∣red;
he commanded that those who should be known to be guilty of so fowle a fault, might without any punishment to the inflicters, be shamed, vituperated, and rendred infamous; as putrified members, fit to be am∣putated from the body of the Literati, by Satyrical Poets with their biting Verses, by Orators with their stinging invectives, and by all the Vertuosi, with all sorts of weapons apt to derogate from the same of any man: And that not only all nds and sorts of testimony, how weak so∣ever, should serve for full proof against any one that was impeached of so wicked a fact, but that it should be lawfull for any man to bastenado, or stone one who was noted for an hypocrite, though it were but by suspi∣tion, or any other remote cause: And that to be much scandalized at matters of small moment; to speak much of charity, without ever giving any alms; to wear a threadbare Cloke, and yet be very rich; to appear poor in publick, and yet live plentifully at home; to be damna∣bly avaricious, and yet boast of Angelical devoutness: to speak slow, and with a weak voice, and under colour of finding fault with publick vices, to speak bitterly against particular men; to bow the head with much humility, and yet to have a proud mind; and to preach that to o∣thers, which it was plainly seen that they themselves did not practice; should be esteemed and reputed sufficient proofs to condemn any one of such a vice. The better sort of the Literati of this State, thought this his Maje∣sties Edict too severe; who to secure their lives and reputations from the ignorance of the meaner sort of people, who are not wise enough to discern between true and counterfeit goodness, presented themselves be∣fore Apollo, whom they desired that wicked hypocrites might be severe∣ly punished, but so as that good and honest men might not incur the danger of being hardly dealt with; and they said that Judicial Astrolo∣gers, and hypocrites, were a certain race of men, who were alwaies ba∣nisht, and yet every place abounded with them; not for that Princes wanted Authority to extirpate them out of their Countries, but for that those very Princes who did prohibit them, did nourish and foment them; and that the only cure for hypocrisie was, That Princes should love, cherish, inrich, and exalt such as being ambitious of glory, thirsting after riches, and desirous of their good will, who affected those things out of meer worth and merit; and that they should suffer great hypo∣crites, who covered their devilish pride with the cloke of humility, an un∣quenchable thirst after gold, with a vail of poverty, and execrable ambi∣tion of dominiering over the whole world, by seeming to despise the world; to live in their condition of appearing humility, of feigned pover∣ty, counterfeit solitariness, and retired life: A Councel whereby Princes would be sure to keep from erring; for if piety, humility, contempt of worldly vanities, which some do so much boast of, were realities, and things done from the heart, they would by this way of proceeding, give men their own delights, when they should be justly punished by their own false weapons, it being very true, that Princes could not better dis∣cover hypocrites, then by suffering them (like Oysters) to stew in their own water.
The LIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Guiccardine having spoken many things prejudicial to the reputation of the Marquiss of Piscara, In an Assembly of divers Vertuosi, that renowned Commander doth suffici∣ently justifie himself before Apollo. DOn Francisco Ferrando d'Avalo, Marquiss of Pisaro, being told some few daies ago, that in an Assembly of the best Historians of this State of Pernassus, Francis Guiccardine had spoken words of him, tending much to his dishonour: Piscara, who was naturally high mind∣ed, and very proud, was so incenst at the injury done him by Guiccar∣dine, as he made his complaint to Apollo; to whom his Majesty, who very well knew Guiccardine's circumspect proceeding, and exact wis∣dom, answered, That it not being likely that Guiccardine should have spoken of him, otherwise then became a true Historian, and free from a∣ny passion of an ill-affected mind, he would, as in justice he ought to do, hear them both speak for themselves, before he would resolve any thing in the Cause: And that if he should find that Guiccardine, in speaking of a man of his quality, had unjustly wounded his reputation, he would take such course as he should think himself sufficiently satisfied. Which being said, he forthwith gave Guiccardine to know by the publick Cen∣sors, that he was to appear before him at ten of the clock the next mor∣ning, to make good the words which the Marquiss of Piscara pretend∣ed he had spoken to the prejudice of his reputation. At the news here∣of, the Literati, who were very curious, and hoped to hear somwhat of ex∣ecellent discourse in that point-blank argumentation, came in great num∣bers thither. Guiccardine failed not to meet at the appointed time, and free∣ly told the Marquiss, who was there likewise present, that he might very well have purchased favour from the Emperor Charls the fifth, by disco∣vering the conspiracy unto him, which many Princes of Europe had plot∣ted against him, but that in the worlds eye he had thereby purchased e∣ternal infamy; not only for that most men did firmly believe, that from the very beginning his intention was to prove false to Cesar, but for that though he had been still faithfull to him, yet that by so many cose∣nages, and such double-dealing, he should have encouraged so great Princes, and inticed them to joyn in conspiracies with himself, that he might have occasion to betray them, and aggrandise himself by sins which he had by fallacies and flatteries drawn on, appeared generally to be an action of infamy. Though all the Vertuosi thought this to be a very hainous impeachment which Guiccardine had made against the Marquiss; yet that Commander, who in most desperate cases was still most undaunted, answered Guiccardine, That it was an usual fault amongst Historians, but infinitely unsufferable, to be mistaken in their penetra∣ting into the hidden sense of their actions, who had done great things both in peace and war, and in rendring the true reasons thereof, to give
so rash judgements, as they were oft times seen to blame worthy actions, and praise such as were to be blamed; and that he was very much scan¦dalized that there was not some severe Laws published by the Colledg of Vertuosi, against men who by their pens do daily occasion great shame, and irrepairable blame to others; which Laws should ordain, that Histo∣rians (as it well became their profession) should only meddle with the bare Narration of things done, and that they should leave the judgement thereof, and the Princes secret meanings therein to be judged of by the Reader, and that with all due reverence & respect to the place wherein he spake, they lyed who durst say, that from the beginning, Ierollimo Marone discovered unto him the conspiracy which was a framing by the greatest Princes of Christendom against Cesar, his intention was to prove false to his Master. For those who understood the true bounds of Po∣licy, knew that whilst a man communicates a conspiracy to any great Of∣ficer, which is in agitation against his Prince, the Officer ought at that very instant to resolve whether he liked the business or no; for to be doubtfull in such a case, was interpreted by Princes to be an ill-taken re∣solution, a mind not only contaminated, but already wholly putrified with the disease of Rebellion, and that he had not encouraged Marone (as Guicciardine had been bold inconsiderately to say) with an intention of double-dealing, nor yet to purchase his Princes favour by the sins of o∣thers; nor had he inticed the Princes who endeavoured to make him rise, to discover unto him all the particulars of the Conspiracy, but by strict tye of honour, and to serve his Master compleatly; as also because the weighty business which he had in hand did force him so to do: For such wounds ought not to be discovered to their Princes by wary Offi∣cers blindly bound up without knowledg of the particulars, but plainly laid open with perfect knowledg of every the least circumstance; and that for one like him, to have shewn the least negligence, or to have been never so little remiss in a business of so great jealousie, would have been thought so shameful an omission, as would have redounded to his appa∣rent damage, and perpetual blame; and that the reason hereof was very evident; for he who heard conspiracies plotted against his Prince, must have his eyes open, and his ears stretcht out, and must be exquisitely di∣ligent in perfectly understanding and discovering every particular; for by doing otherwise, a man might be justly thought by his Prince to be a foolish servant, and an unfaithful Officer; and that in such cases, negli∣gence was rather punished then excused; that therefore before he was to reveal the conspiracie to Cesar, as it became him well to doe, he would inform himself of all the particulars of each person that had a hand in it, and of every other necessary circumstance: and that he did not believe there was any one in that honorable place, who did not very well know, that no greater misfortune, nor moe certain danger could befall a Soul∣dier of reputation, then to be sought unto by great Princes to betray his Master: For to quit a mans self of a business, to the undertaking whereof he is as good as compelled by the intreaties of powerfull per∣sonages, and think to save both his life and reputation, was to act the part of common ignorant people; and that the only way for a wise man to shun splitting against so dangerous a Rock, was to live with such a reputation of honour in all his actions, to be so ambitious of doing his Prince faithful servic, and appear so desirous of purchasing a place n his
affection, as that these good parts, and honorable qualities might deter any one from communicating any such wicked affair unto him. But that though he had very much observed this rule, yet had it no waies a∣vailed him; he knew not by what dishonourable action, by what ap∣pearing avarice, or by what appearance of inclination to commit wicked∣ness, he had encouraged the Princes that conspired against Cesar, to make Marone acquaint him with a business so dissonant from his genius, so con∣trary to his nature. That he did not deny, but that after the noble vi∣ctory at Pavia, wherein his comportments were witnessed to the world by Paulus Iovius, he was not well satisfied with Cesar, as thinking his service not sufficiently acknowledged, nor himself enough rewarded; but that he did not think any such behaviour in a Prince so wise, should be thought sufficient to make one rebel against him; for if his distaste ar ose, from not being so highly favoured by his Prince, as he thought his fide∣lity deserved, they might consider, that by discovering the conspiracy, they had furnisht him with monies, whereby he might purchase so mch of the Emperors favour as he knew he wanted, to obtain the Supreme dignity of General, and the Government which he so much desired of the Dutchy of Millan, and which afterwards he had, that no man who profest himself to be an honourable Souldier, could receive a greater af∣front, then being sought unto, to do an unworthy action; for whosoever treated with any one about such an action, shewed clearly that he thought him he treated with, to be a man inclin'd to wickedness. That he could not (as he knew it became him to have done) revenge this great injury done him by Marone, with his Dagger, because his Princes service, which required other resolutions from him, kept him from so doing. And that if his duty to Cesar had not moved him (as certainly it ought) to pro∣pagate such a machination, certainly he should have been moved there∣unto, more out of rage to revenge himself for that great injury which the Princes did him, when they seemed to esteem one like him, a Trai∣tor, and vainly ambitious, then out of any other reason: And that he should have been very simple, if he should have imbarqued himself in the business, by reason of their promises; who for reward of his treachery, assured him that they would make him King of Naples; for that Spani∣ards, of which he gloried to be one, were better pleased with such a lit∣tle Marquisat as Piscara, gotten by Loyalty, and by fighting valiantly in their Prince his service, then with the Kingdom of Naples, purchast by treachery. That Francisco Davalo was not so shallow-brain'd, nor so little vers'd in worldly affairs, as not to know, that the Princes of the League; who did so much covet his Rebellion, aimed more at keep∣ing Cesar from the total acquisition of the Dukedom of Millan, then at the making him King of Naples. And that it was known to him, as it was to the whole world, by so many sad examples which had happened, that great Princes, after they had imbarqued an ambitious personage, out of their several ends, in vaine hopes, and wrought him into the certain danger of treachery, and after having made good use of him, did so totally abandon their protection, not only because Graviorum Facinorum Ministri, quasi exprobran∣tes aspiciuntur. Tacit. lib. 4. Ann. but to give examples to their Sub∣jects, not to commit the like wickednesse, by proving compleatly famous, as they were likely to be the first who would deliver them up
into the power of their incensed Prince; as (to leave the more hatefull examples of modern times) the world saw it formerly fared with Charls Duke of Burgundy, towards the unfortunate and ill advised Count Saint Paul, unluckily imployed by him; and that though Spani∣ards were thought by all men to be puft up with the wind of Am∣bition, yet was it not that vain-glory, with which some Princes of Europe have of late years swoln many French Ballowns, and not a few Flemmish Pilots. But that those of his Nation being ve∣ry hard to be imbarqued in the getting of great riches by indi∣rect waies, sinned only in their too immense desire of being ho∣noured and respected in the places, which they by their faithfull service had deserved of their Prince; and that they were far from coveting by oblique and shamefull waies, those greatnesses which they saw they could not arrive at, with secure peace and quiet: that to be a Coy-Duck for other mens ambition, so to becom afterward the peoples laughing-stock, or Town-talk, was a thing abhorred by his Spain; and that it would have been too great a folly for one like him, to suffer himself to be perswaded that the Kingdom of Naples, which was alwaies hereditary in the bloud of Spain, and which would never accept of any Baron of the Kingdom, though some of them had been very powerfull and ambitious, and who by the effusion of their bloud, had driven out Princes borne of the Royal bloud of France, who would have con∣quered it, would accept of him, who was inferior to many Barons of that Kingdom, and of a Nation so hatefull to the Neapolitans. That in Hereditary Kingdoms, as was that of Naples, Kings were there borne, not made or chosen: And that those fools who would aspire thereunto by any other means then by lawfull succession of the bloud-Royal, did climbe up a Mountain of misery, to fall down headlong with the greater shame into the valley of infamy: And that if any one should compasse it by fraudulent means, he would be like those ridiculous Kings of Beffana, who that they might afford pastime to the rabble-rout, failed soon after their creation. That he had alwaies kept firm to the resolution which he was born with; rather to die a glo∣rious Commander, then a shamefull King. That he had rather sought to deserve, then that he ever coveted greater Titles then that of a Marquiss; and that having observed by what he had read, and in consideration of the present times, that all con∣spiracies begin merrily, with high thoughts, but end basely with weeping, he was contented to serve the Prince whom God had set over him, with those means which he had beene pleased to bestow upon him; for too immense greatnesse promised by For∣reign Princes to such as he was, were but breaknecks. Apollo was so well pleased with Pescara's Apology, as he answered Guicciardine, who still affirmed, that to intice the prime Princes of Europe, with so much duplicity of heart, to joyne with him in conspiracy, of purpose that he might have the better occasion to discover it afterwards, had rendered the
Marquiss eternally infamous, that Pescara had not inticed any Prince to joyne with him in framing any conspiracy against the Emperor, that afterwards he might make advantage by reveal∣ing it: In which case he would justly have incurred infamy; but that much to his praise he had used requisite double deal∣ing, to discover the Complices of the Conspiracy, and every o∣ther particular, which for his Masters better service, he was to know; and that the Marquiss was the more to be praised, for that by his honourable fraud, he knew how to overcome the Princes so artificial deceits; and that upon that occasion he had so fully done what became him to doe, as he deserved to be imi∣tated by every worthy Commander who might fall upon the like misfortune. In Conspiracies which are communicated to others, both he who accepted thereof, and joyned therein, and he who refused, yet held his peace, incurred the same penalty; in so dangerous affairs, the best counsel was to precipitate into the sudden, but clear revelation of so unfortunate enterprises: And that in the most mortal infirmities of Conspiracies, two of the Politick Hip∣pocrates his Aphorismes were very true: That, Qui deliberant desci∣verunt, and that In ejusmodi conciliis periculosius est deprehendi quàm audere. And that they that were desired to enter into a Conspiracy, were fooles, and self-murderers, if in so miserable a case they pitcht their thoughts onely upon the sweet of revenge, the accumula∣ting wealth, or preferments to Principalities, and Kingdoms, which might be propounded to them in reward of such wicked actions; and those wise and charitable, who held before their eyes the pi∣ctures of Fetters and Gibbets, which are the right rewards, and certain acquirements of desperate and ambitious people, and of such as were giddy-headed.
The LV. ADVERTISEMENT. Giovan Francisco Pico, not being able to reconcile the dif∣ferences between Plato and Aristotle, Apollo commands those two great Philosophers to end the business in a pub∣lique Disputation; and being therein obey'd, they do not notwithstanding part friends. THe task which as you heard of late the Count Giovan Francisco Pico della Mirandola, that Phenix of the Vertuosi undertook by or∣der from Apollo, of reconciling the immortal differences which are discust between the two supreme Luminaries of Philosophy, Plato and Aristotle, hath been to so little purpose, as not having given any satisfa∣ction to his Majesty, nor to his Literati, it hath kindled new, and much more eager argumentations in Pernassus. Wherefore Apollo for the quiet of his State, for the agreement between his Vertuosi, and for the honour of Philosophy, caused Plato and Aristotle to be sent for on the first day of the last month, to appear before him, to whom with an austeer look he said; That there being but one truth of all Sciences, they much injured Philosophy by the diversity of their opinions; that he did love peace and agreement between his Vertuosi; that he like∣wise knew that the multitude of Sects, was that which occasioned great mischief in States; and that he might obtain from them such concord between themselves, which he knew to be altogether necessary for his State, he was pleased to use such respect to them both, as not to pro∣ceed against them with violence, but did let them know that he should be very glad that both of them would so much honour Philosophy, as to agree in opinion, in point of the greatest differences that were between them. Then turning towards Aristotle, he said, That it made not for his honour to dissent from the opinions which so great a Master as Pla∣to had read unto him in the Schools; and then told Plato, that he suf∣fered much in his reputation, that the world should see so great a Rebel as Aristotle should issue out of his School. Both Plato and Aristotle seemed very willing to yield to each others opinion, when by good arguments, and sufficient reasons, they should be made appear to be the better; and joyntly agreed that they would dispute the business in two several chairs, hand to hand, without any Moderator. Apollo did not only accept of so glorious a defiance, but for the consolation of his Vertuosi, made papers be fixt that very hour upon the gate of the greatest Philosophy-School, and in other publique places, wherein all the Vertuosi were invited to come and see so gallant a spectacle; and to the end that those who inhabit in far Countries, might have time to come to Pernassus, and be present at so famous a contest, he allowed the two Philosophers twenty daies to appear in the field. The mean while, for the Vertuosis better commodity, many
Skaffolds were built about the great Court of Urania; and on the day appointed for the Disputation, Adriano, Orlando, Ciprione and many other modern Musitians, sung first in several chorusses, their excellent Compositions, accompanied not only by the Organs, Viols, Harps, and other grave instruments which are used at the meetings of the Vertuosi, but (according to the defect of the modern age) with the interposition of the Lute, Cornet, Theorbo, and of the very Violin, taken but a lit∣tle before out of the ignorant Consort of trivial Fidlers, who play fum fum in the meanest Assemblies. The Musick being ended, the two famous Paladins of Philosphy appeared in the field, and their dispute held for six hours together; but it was not notwithstanding possible to meet with the desired agreement. For in the curious Philosophical wrest∣ling, which is so delightfull to the Vertuosi, the Arms of solid and stout Arguments are only made use of, backs of efficacious reason, strange nimbleness of foot in apparent demonstrations; and yet that last Ef∣fort which is so pleasing to the spectators of seeing the enemy thrown flat upon his bac, overthrown and convinced by undeniable Argu∣ments, doth never ensue: For Philosophical wrestlers, though they fall resolutely to catch where they catch can, yet by means of distinctions which they have at their fingers ends, they still keep themselves on foot. These two great Luminaries of Philosophy gave such content to the standers by, as they did infinitely admire the reach of humane intellect, which having waded through all the Heavens by the excellency of her speculaion, did not only exactly know the quantitas, qualitas, and the motus of them, but is arrived even at the knowledg of God himself, and of the Divine Nature, of which she can discourse very handsomly. With these wonders did the Disputation end, which afforded as much con∣tent to the Literati, as if those two Philosophers had been perfectly re∣conciled and agreed; only Apollo, by the apparent sadness which was seen in his face, disturbed the universal mirth; wherefore great Aver∣roes askt him, whether Aristotle and Plato had not given him such satis∣faction as he desired: To which Apollo answered with a sigh fetcht from the bottom of his heart; that those two Princes of Philosophy had ful∣ly satisfied the opinion which all men had of them; but that he had seen that in this Argumentation, which would keep his mind perpetually af∣flicted: For he was forced to bewail the infinite corrupt condition of this age, wherein sensuallity was grown so great amongst men, as he who saw their hidden passions, had clearly found, that many were come to these disputations even from far Countries, rather to please the itch of the ear, by hearing the Musick, then to feed their souls by those Vertuosissimi, which he said were introduced into the world by those wicked Mounte∣banks, who in their defect of too much mingling pleasure with profit, were gone so far, as having admitted of Jack-puddings, and Pantalouns into their company, many flockt to them rather to laugh at their sports and wantonness, thento buy useful medicines for their maladies.
The LVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Gonsalvo Ferrante Cordua, not having obtained the con∣firmation of his desired Title of Magnus, from the reve∣rend Colledge of Historians, demands an other place in Pernassus of Apollo, from whence he is likewise ex∣cluded. GOnsalvo Cordua was very much grieved at the repulse which he re∣ceived from the History Colledge when he was denyed the Title of Great; and to try whether the favor and recommendation of Prin∣ces were available to effect business in Pernassus, which justice could not do, he addrest himself for help to his King Ferdinando; whom ha∣ving acquained with his business; and received for answer from that wise King, that he should have thought them very simple who should have favoured a subject of his in obtaining the Title of great to be confer∣red upon him, which made him Little: that he was none of those who would commit so great an error, as to desire such glory might be at∣chieved by others, as did greatly lessen his honor, and that his Consci∣ence told him, he must be so charitable to himself, as to endeavour that the whole glory of the purchase of the kingdom of Naples might be attributed more to his wisdom, then to Cordua's valour. Wherefore Gonsalvo being much incens't at so resolute and sharp an answer, went presently to Apollo, and told him, that since it had not pleased the Colledge of Historians to think him worthy to be ranked with Pompey, Alexander, Charles the Emperor, and others, who for their glorious Actions had deserved the Title of Great; that yet he might be favoured with admttance into the squadron of his Majesties Gens d'Armes, wherein was that famous Bellisarius, Bartholomeus Alvianus, Pietro Navarro, Antonio de Leva, Count Petigliano, Lorenzo de Ceri, and many other famous warriours. Apollo graciously granted Gonsalvo what he desired; but it fell out that whilst in his Majesties presence, the ce∣remony of putting on the accustomed upper weed was a performing, whereat all the chief military men of this Court gave their attendance, Bossio the Atturney General accused Gonsalvo of Perjury. Apollo, who doth very much abhor those who are noted for falsifying their words with men, much more those who are perjured before God, al∣lowed the Atturney-General three days to make good his impeach∣ment, and ordered that Gonsalvo's business might be adjourned until then. Gonsalvo being very much troubled at this foul imputation, told the Atturney Bossio, that he had always profestfidelity, and that he did not onely wonder, but was very much scandalized, that so wicked an accusation should be laid upon such a one as he, born and bred up in a kingdom where loyalty to his King, and fidelity to every privat man, did abound as much as in any other place of the world. Bossio answer∣ed
him, desiring that he would be pleased to relate the case of the im∣prisonment of the Duke of Calavria, how it had been carryed, for for what appeared to him, it would be proved, that he was not troubled without reason. Gonsalvo said, that having besieged the young Duke of Calavria in the Castle of Taranto, who was son to Frederick the last King of Naples, he capitulated with that young Duke when he resol∣ved upon rendering, that he should have free leave to go whither he pleased best, and that he plighted his faith to keep this promise, and ther∣upon he received the holy Eucharist; but that afterwards falsifying his oath, he made sure of the Dukes person, whom he sent with a good guard prisoner into Spain. Apollo seemed then to be mightily offended with Gonsalvo, and told him, that so wicked and execrable an action ren∣dred him altogether unworthy of any place in Pernassus, and therefore willed him to get quickly out of his State. Gonsalvo was much con∣fused and astonished at this so severe sentence, and answered in his ex∣cuse, that though he acknowledged it to be a very foul action, yet that he was necessitated to do it for his Kings service; for it being a pra∣ctised rule amongst good Politicians, that no Prince doth securely pos∣sess any conquered State, whilst they live who were driven out of it, the noble acquisition of the kingdom of Naples, could not be esteemed a compleat victory, unless he had secured that Prince his person: Apollo was so far from allowing of Gonsalvo's excuse, as growing much more incenst, he bad him be sure not to be seen any more above two days in Pernassus, which should not be a receptacle for those, who by their acti∣ons shewed they more respected the service of men, then the good will of God. Then did his Majesties Masters of the Ceremonies, drive Gonsalvo out of the house; who whilst he went disconsolately down the stairs, told the Atturney Bossio, that apparent wrong was done unto him; for Caesar, who to purchase the Roman Empire, had not onely violated the laws of God and man, but was the first Author of that wicked saying, That all things were lawful which conduced to govern∣ment, was seen to have a glorious place in Pernassus, from whence he was so unjustly driven out. 'Tis said that Bossiv boldly answered Gon∣salvo, that Caesars example did not square with him; for it was one thing to commit foul actions, thereby to purchase a kingdom to a mans self, and another thing to do the like to purchase one for ones Master. For by the laws both of God and man, a Pander deserved greater pu∣nishment, who meerly out of the malignity of a depraved mind de∣lighted in doing ill, then he who committed Fornication out of the frail∣ty of the flesh.
The LVII. ADVERTISEMENT. A Barque loaded with inventors of new grievances running shipwrack upon the shore of Lepanto, his Majesty treats them well, though he do greatly abominate such like men. THe dreadful storm at Sea occasioned some days ago by the furi∣ous southwest winds, drove a Vessel upon the Strand of Lepanto; to the succor whereof, all the inhabitants along the river side made in, (for they saw it was fraught with passengers) and were so fortunate therein, as though the Barque split, they saved above fourscore persons that were in her; who were by order from Apollo commodiously lodg∣ed, and were then askt, who they were, whence they came, and whither they were bound. They answered they were all of them Italian Arci∣gogalanti, and were lately come from Italy: which when his Majesty understood, though he be naturally very courteous, yet doth he so abo∣minate those cruel enemies of mankind, as he had almost repented the ayd which he had given them, thinking those wicked ones unworthy of commiseration, who spend their lives in nothing else but in inventing ex∣ecrable grievances, by which many modern Princes so cruelly torment their miserable people. Yet some Vertuosi said, that since there were so many of those rascals in that Barque, all of them come from Italy, they must needs believe that they brought the good news to Pernassus, that the Italian Princes had put on the noble resolution of purging their States from that wicked sort of men. Apollo commanded that they should be asked, wherefore they parted from Italy, and whither they were going; they answered, that having happily finished all the most witty inventions, whereby to empty the peoples purses, and fill the Princes coffers therewith, since they had raised the Gabels and Taxes as high as it was possible for them to do, and having nothing more to work upon in Italy, they had ran over France, and Spain, in which noble kingdoms they had so behaved themselves, as they had left eternal me∣mory in both of them of the Florentines, and Geefes. That after∣wards endeavouring to get into England, the Low-Countries, Germany, and Poland, all of them Provincees abounding with gold, and wealthy inhabitants, and where they thought to have done wonders, they were driven out with cudgels by those people who were born to a kind of Li∣berty, and who might be said to be sheep, which giving their shepherds a little milk by way of recognition or Fealty, in a certain little mark'd measure. And vvho vvill not suffer themselves (as it is usual elsevvhere) to be milked at discretion. Wherefore like those famous Trojans led
on by Aeneas, they vvent plowing up the Sea vvith that their little ves∣sel, to finde out nevv people and nevv Countreys, vvhere to the praise and glory and profit of Princes, and to that perpetual desolation of the people, vvhich occasioneth security in reigning they might use their Ta∣lent, and open their shop. When the Literai had heard these things, many of them presently beseeched his Majesty that he would publikely revenge the injuries done to so many Nations, which through the malig∣nity of that race of Vipers had been flead by their avaricious Princes, with the rasor of exorbitant grievances, making them be burnt in the remainders of that their Vessel. But Apollo, whose deep judgement exceeds all humane wisdom, having understood the shameful profession of those rascally people, commanded that their entertainment should be doubled, and that they should be better treated; and causing mony to be given them, and great store of victuals, sent them to Constantinople, willing them to see whether they could reduce the Ottoman Empire, which was so Capital an Enemy to Learning into that desolation, and desperation by their exorbitant damn'd new inventions, into which they boasted themselves to have brought France, Spain, and Italy. The LVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. By letters intercepted, which were sent by an express from some Princes to the Lake of Avernus, People come to know that the enmities which are seen to reign in the Nations of the world, are occasioned by the cun∣ning of their Princes. A Post was robbed on Monday night last between the coasts of Pindus and Libetrum, which some great Princes had dispatcht away in much haste, towards the Lake of Avernus. And because the Post had no injury done to his Person, it was believed that the excess was committed onely to take his Letters from him, as it proved afterwards. For they onely took from him a packet dire∣cted to the three infernal Furies, Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megera, by which it is known for certain, and not without great scandal, that some great Princes did hire those Furies, to sow, and foment perpetual strife and discord, not onely between Nation and Nation, but oft times between the subjects of one and the same Prince. And to aggravate the distastes, there was a letter of exchange found in that packet, of ten thousand Crowns for six months pay.
The subjects to these Princes who writ these letters, have sent them by some of their Deputies to Apollo, heavily complaining that their Princes, who ought to study nothing more then the peace, and unanimous agreement, not onely of their own particular subjects, but that also of all Nations, did by ready mony purchase sedition amongst others, and mischief to themselves; and that they had not till now learnt, that it was meerly the cunning and machinati∣ons of Princes, which caused those several divisions and inhate ha∣treds between Nations, which are the true root of those evils wherewith mankinde is so afflicted; which if they were extirpated out of the world, men would injoy the comfort to see the French love the English; the Spanyard the French: the Germans the I∣talians: and perfect peace would be amongst all men. Whilst these Deputies were reasoning thus, Apollo was seen to weep bitter∣ly out of meer compunction of what he had heard. Insomuch as the standers by believed that his Majesty would have broken out in∣to some great heat against the Princes who were accused of so foul faults, when he spoke thus. My friends, your complaints are as true, as grievous; but you must know, that the excesses which you now complain of, are not occasioned by the ill nature of Princes, but out of the peoples seditious spirits; whose instability is such, as the universal peace of mankinde cannot be better compas∣sed by any other means, then by sowing that discord amongst Na∣tions, and those divisions which you now so much complain of: for long experience hath taught Princes; that the great frame of reigning securely is wholly grounded upon the sound foundation of dividing well. And it is apparant, that were it not for Princes that govern them, people would of themselves fall into greater seditions, then those which are sown amongst them for the publike peace, and universal good of all men. All which, my welbeloved, are neces∣sary evils, though it exceedingly grieve me to see, that the disease of universal discord which reigns amongst men, cannot be sooner cured by any other medicine, then by that bitter Pill, which you complain so much of.
The LIX. ADVERTISEMENT. The Prince of the Laconicks Nephew, being after his Uncles death, to return to a private Fortune, shews no well compo∣sed minde in making so dangerous a passage. THe Prince of the Laconicks Nephew, who during his Uncles life of famous memory, did with extraordinary Authority govern that State; by reason of the choice which was made some few days a∣go, of a new Prince, was two days since to return to a private life. And because the parting from Authority after the sweet thereof hath been a while tasted, is a thing much more fearful then the parting of the soul from the body; and it having formerly hapned in Parnassus, that the too great ambition of Government hath so suffocated the vertue of hu∣mility and those vital spirits of the minds moderation, which keep a well composed heart alive, as so great a passage is not to be made with∣out reluctaney; Apollo compassionating such sad cases, that he might provide for the saving of so great mens honors, in that time of terror, In∣stituted in Parnassus many years ago, the charitable company of commi∣seration, whereof the chief Moral Philosophers of this State are mem∣bers. The night preceding the day, wherein this Prince was to make so sore a change of condition, Reverend petrarch made him a vsi with his book De remedi is utriusque Fortunae, as also learned Giorolimo Car∣dano, with his work De utilitate capienda ex adversis: and Annaeus Se∣neca the worthy President of the Company, with the precious writings of Boetius Severinus de Consolatione Philosophiae: whom after a long preamble of fair words, they acquainted with the sad return he was to make the next morning to a private life. Certainly most unwelcom news; and which he heard with such impatiency and disturbance, as with exclamations which deafened all that heard him, and howl∣ings which reacht Heaven, he began to lament and bewail his perverse fortune, by which he said he was assassinated: crying out that she had hardly suffered him to tast the sweet of Government, the suavity of Command, when she hurryed him down to the miseries of a private life, making him to swallow down the unpleasant potion of changing Com∣mand, for Obedience; oft recommending his honor in this his Agony to these his comforters, and earnestly desiring that they would not aban∣don him in this his urgent necessity. Then both Seneca, Cardano, and Petrarch, did with unspeakable Charity imbrace this Prince, intreat∣ing him couragiously to undergo this his adversity, and the more to comfort him, they alleadged all they could in praise of a privat life, let∣ting him know how great a happiness men found in knowing how to govern themselves and their affairs, and making him often repeat those words of the Master of the Politick sayings; Quam Arduum, quam sub ectum Fortunae, regendi Cuncta Onus. Tacit. lib. 1. Annal. Excellent words, which being chewed by a Palat that knows truly how to taste
them, are of such efficacy, as they had the power to make the great Em∣peror Charles the fift, (who had been more ambitious of government then any other) to withdraw himself into a Monastery, and become an Hermit. But these consolations wrought so little upon this Lord, as he said more then once to those Reverend Comforters, that to prefer a private life before Reigning, was a most odious Paradox; a thing which, was uttered by the mouth, but not believed by the heart: a Doctrine which they did mainly hate, who went about to make others believe it. The next morning this Gentleman was stript of all his jurisdiction, which caused such a passion of the heart in him, as the Comforters not being able to keep alive the spirits of his Patience, he swowned three times in their hands, wherefore the unfortunate Gentleman was carryed half dead out of the Palace; who when he saw his own private House, fell into yet greater Agonies; so as these Comforters laboured very much to make him use in so dangerous a nick of time the vertue of a well-com∣posed minde, which men of strong complexions can shew in cases of Adversity, when they seem to do that cheerfully, of meer choice, which they are forc'd unto by inevitable necessity. But this Gentleman de∣spairing every hour more and more in his misfortune, grew so horn-mad as to call every man ungrateful; and it was cleerly seen that the new Prince his happiness, the Grandetsa of his Nephews, and the prosperi∣ty of his more intimate servants and friends, did vex him more then his own Calamity. When he was come to his Paternal House, he had not heart enough to look upon it, but still kept his eye fixt upon the place where he had been. Wherefore the Comforters to do the very utmost that they could, to save this Gentlemans reputation; which was in so evident danger of being lost, blind-folded him: he was no sooner come into the Hall, (so drunk are men with the thought of rule, when they have once tasted it) but he called for the Agents, and Princes Embassadors, as if he had been under the cloth of State in the Palace, and would negotiate with them, having no business at all, and seemed as if he would still govern the world, though he had no Authority; en∣tertaining himself continually with grave Affairs, not having any thing to do. By which Actions this ill advised Gentleman made every one know, that the being in greatness, with absolute power of Command, makes men seem wise olomons to others; who when they return to their private Fortunes, are found to have no more Brains then a Goose:
The LX. ADVERTISEMENT. Antonio Perez of Aragon, having presented Apollo with his book of Relations, his Majesty does not onely refuse to receive it, but commands it to be presently burnt. ANtonio Perez, formerly Secretary to Philip the second King of pain, knowing the ill opinion which people have of a Secretary who parts distasted from his Prince, as soon as he was got into France, he published in his own discharge, those his unfortunate relations, for which he hath been so much blamed: for whilst he should have endea∣voured by all means possible to conceal them, he had the boldness to present them on Thursday morning to Apollo; who as soon as he saw the book and was informed of the contents thereof, he was so incens'd a∣gainst him, as he made it be immediately burnt in the chief Market∣place, and told Perez, that he had given his Relations such a place in Pernassus, as they deserved: to the end that other his fellow Secreta∣ries might take example, and might learn to prefer secresie and faithful silence before the love of their own lives, or of themselves. For as he deserved the name of a wicked man, who upon any new distast discovers the secrets wherewith he was trusted in time of former friendship; that Secretary was to be held a thousand times more base and infamous, who for whatsoever bad usage he could receive from his Prince, pub∣lished those secrets to the world, which being made acquainted withby his Prince, when he had formerly had confidence in him, should not onely not be willingly divulg'd, but ought not be extorted from him by any whatsoever Fortune.
The LXI. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo to afford past-time to his Literati, makes two useful Sceans be represented upon Melpomenee's Theater. In one of which he shews the lesser Princes with what wari∣ness they ought to preserve themselves from a greater Po∣tentate; and in the other, lets Senators of Republicks know how ill advised they are who thorough partiality side with a subject of their own faction, who notoriously ayms at Tyranny. THe Ancient Romans, Carthagenians, Athenians, and other the fa∣mousest Commonwealths and Monarchies of the world, have with much reason always thought publike shews and entertainments to be the best means to maintain States in that universal peace, and quiet to e∣very particular man, which is easiest received by a people, who live con∣tent and satisfyed in perpetual jollities. Wherefore the ancient Romans built magnificent Theaters, and Amphitheaters, in which to delight their subjects, pleasant spectacles were (not without immense charges) represented: it being a dangerous advice for such as govern, to keep their people discontented, and buryed in sloath and idleness. Hence it is that Apollo doth not imploy himself more willingly in any business, then in what may rejoyce the minds of his Literati, by diversity of shows. It is true, that whereas in Rome, Athens, Carthage, and other places; all the delights which the people found in those shows, were occasioned some∣times by the obscenity of Players, oft times by the cruelty of their gla∣diators, and their hunting of wild-beasts, the delight of the Vertuosi of this State consists wholly by extracting useful Precepts from noble re∣presentations, thereby to inrich their minds. Apollo therefore having finisht the icy way of Winter, when he was to begin his pleasant jour∣ney of the Spring, was pleased, for the better satisfaction of his Lite∣rati, to have extraordinary solemnities used at his entrance into Aries: To which purpose he caused two several shows to be represented on two several days in Melpomene's Theater, which were extraordinary useful, and of great content. The first that entered upon the Theater, were the Associates, Confederates, Friends, and the sort of Militia which the Romans called Auxiliary souldiers. And to the end that his Ver∣tuosi might be the better satisfyed by the sight of so numerous Armies, he commanded that such souldiers should appear upon the Theater, with the same Arms, Ensigns, and with all those warlike Instruments, with which they had served in the Roman Armies; and all this was perfor∣med with so great a number of Foot and Horse, with so Magnificent Pomp of Regal Ensigns, and with the sound of divers Instruments of war, with such rich acoutrements, and other things thereunto apper∣taining,
as all that were present at it freely confest, that they never saw so curious a show in Pernassus. After that this Militia had marched di∣vers times round, both within the Theater and without it, Apollo sent for the chief leaders thereof, and bad them withdraw for a while to within their quarters, and that they should return to the Theater in the very same posture, in which they ended their unfortunate Militia with the Romans. Not long after, those very souldiers who had appeared upon the Theater in the aforesaid Pomp, were seen to come naked with their hands tyed behind them, stript of all their goods, loaded with I∣rons, full of wounds, ill handled by executioners, rob'd by the avarice of rapacious Consuls, Proconsuls, by the Emperors Agents, and other Officers of the Roman Empire. So as the Romans who at their first entry made so stately a show, whom Pernassus had seen so noble an Auxiliary Militia, who had raised their Empire to such an immensity, and who were so glad to hear their civil Government so exagerated by all the Literati, in being able to dilate their Empire by the blood of o∣ther men, were forced to quit the Theater, and to hide themselves in holes, that so they might shun hearing the scorn and injurious speeches which were uttered against them by all the Literati that were present at the show. For the noble Vertuosi, hating from their very souls the Roman cruelty, and ingratitude used towards those Nations, who by their expence of blood had deserved so well at their hands, asked where was the Faith, where the sacred Friendship, where the Gratitude used to those their Friends, to those who had so well deserved of the people of Rome, and by their lives had exalted their Empire to so great a height? And whether these were Actions becoming that Roman Senate, who made so great a show, and boasted so much of Religion, Faith, and un∣violable friendship, insomuch as all did detest that execrable reason of State, which following onely that which brings men apparent advan∣tage can so impiously turn its back upon what is just and honest, and which when her occasions are served, forgets all Obligations, how great so ever. As soon as this miserable sight was ended, Guiccardin by or∣der from Apollo, got up into a very high place, and made a long Politi∣cal discourse upon the little discretion, and upon the want of Charity, of great Monarchs towards petty Princes, that are of less power then they: wherein he said, that when in a State consisting of many Princes, one Prince more great then any of the rest, took up Arms to bear down one of the other, all the rest, to keep from being supprest, should think their Companions loss, their own ruine, a means to bring them in∣to slavery, a preparation for their overthrow; and that therefore, abso∣lutely forgetting all private hatreds, and heart-burnings, they should all of them imbrace the publike Cause, and un by their common forces joyntly to asswage that fire which was likely in a short time to reduce their own homes into ashes: for in former times, Asia and Africa, not at all betaking themselves to Arms, were unfortunate spectators of the servitude of whole Italy, subjugated by the famous Romans: and in more modern times, the whilome powerful Kingdom of Hungary, to its now great sorrow, laught at the overthrow of the Grecian Empire; that therefore in like dangers, every Prince should have the two golden Sentences of that Master of true Policy Tacitus, written in their hearts; Omnibus perire quae singuli amittant. Tacit. in vita Agriculae. It being
very true that in such like cases, Singuli dum pugnant, Universi vincun∣tur. And that they should esteem such honors as were done them by those who were more powerful then they, shameful disgraces; allian∣ces which they might contract with them, preparations to betray them; the advantage which they might get by Pensions, hooks bayted with poyson; tricks to lull them asleep, onely that they may afterwards, with a little mony purchase that their liberty, which cannot be payd by mountains of gold. And that above all things else, they should take example by the slavery which they had seen of the Romans associates, and should think that the ambition which the more powerful have to reign having no Orison, the accomplishment of conquering an Enemy, was the beginning to subjugate a Friend. The second day Apollo commanded, that upon the same Theater, all those great Senators should first appear who had assisted Caesar his Ty∣ranny, and that of Augustus, out of the Interest of private Ambition, or out of meer avarice, which being forthwith done, he gave order that all those should appear who were wickedly slain in the cruel Proscripti∣on made by the Triumviri, and in Augustus his long reign, and those who had been put to death by Tiberius his cruelty, Caligula's bestiality, and by Nero's fierce Nature. This was the most sad and lamentable spectacle that was ever seen represented in the memory of man in any place whatsoever; for then all Pernassus broke forth into deep sighs, and shed tears in abundance, when those that had assisted Caesar in his Tyranny, saw that not onely Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, but even Augustus himself, forgetting the obligations which they ought to their posterity who had ayded them in atchieving their Tyrannical power were by them destroyed and cruelly put to death. For Children not inheriting their fathers humors, as they do their Estates, many of the sons of those Senators, who following Caesars, and Augustus his Co∣lours, had appeared enemies to publike liberty, were afterwards cruelly slain by the insuing Tyrants, onely for that they discovered too much their love to live free; others for proving more vertuous Senators, then would stand with Tyrannical Govenment: and an infinite number by the meer bestiality of those that governed. This so horrid sight, at first occasioned great silence, wherein the Vertuosi considered, that since not any Plebeian appeared amongst the vast number of those that were slain, nor any other principal subject of the Provinces, but onely wor∣thy Senators, and Gentlemen of infinite desert; the cruelties used by the Tyrants who reigned in the Roman Empire, against the Senators, and nobler sort of Gentry, were for the most part occasioned, thorow the defect of the Nobility; who not able to preserve publike liberty by peace, (as they ought to have done) could never submit themselves to receive that total servitude which must of necessity be imbraced under the Government of one onely man: but by their many Conspiracies, by continual misgovernment of their Tongues, and by their pride of speak∣ing like free men, whilst they were in slavery, did so provoke and anger them that reigned, as made them become cruel Butchers of the Roman Nobility. This useful consideration being ended, those unfortunate Sena∣tors, who to make Caesar, and Augustus great, had with their swords in hand, and with so much effusion of blood, banisht liberty from out their Country, ran as if they had been mad, to embrace their children,
grandchildren, and great grand-children who had been so Tyrannously treated; but being by them driven away with reproachful speeches, those Senators more afflicted then ever, said; You have reason to look upon us your Progenitors, with an incensed eye, and to drive us like enemies out of your sight; for you may truly say these your wounds were occasioned by these our hands, the Tyranny which hath made you so miserable by our imprudency, your calamities by our foolish Ambition, all the inhumanities whereinto we have most imprudently hurryed you, by our unfortunate jars, and deplorable discord; and now, when repentance serves onely to make our afflictions the greater, we cleerly see by this your miserable spectacle, that nothing is sweeter, that there is no great∣er consolation, no greater Jubile of content then by forgetting injuries, pardoning offences, and embracing enemies, to live in a free Country, in such peace as eterniseth Commonwealths, so to keep from falling by desire of revenge, into those mischiefs into which we are ran, who out of our capricious humors having lost the Liberty of our Country, have wickedly precipitated our Families, and our blood into those dire miseries which we are bound to behold; and have learnt to know at last, by the blood which you have lost, that great dignities, and supreme Magistracies in a free Country ought to be conferred upon the vertue and merit of honorable Senators, and ought to be sought for by such, not upon those who endeavor the procurement thereof, (as we have wickedly done) by private disorders, sedition, and civil wars; there not being any greater folly, then for a Senator to ad∣here unto a friend that is a Tyrant, out of vain hopes of bettering his condition, and Family in publike slavery. The LXII. ADVERTISEMENT. Lewis de la Tremoglia, a Noble French Baron, re∣nounceth his Nobility, and all the priviedges which he therby injoyed, in presence of the Monarchy of France. VVHen the Illustrious French Monarchy, was (like the King of Bees) invironed the other day by an infinite number of the Barons of his Nation, Monsignior Lewis de la Tremoglia a Noble French Lord came before her Majesty, and boldly said, That though he were born a Noble man of France, yet he freely renounced his Nobility, and all the priviledges thereunto belong∣ing, contenting himself to be numbred in the third rank of the peo∣ple of France, Those who were present at this so great Novelty, say, that the French Monarchy, which never knew what fear meant, shewed manifest tokens of Apprehension at the hearing of this his so resolute deliberation, and some are of opinion that it was occasioned, for that Tremoglia being known by all the Nobility of France to be greatly wie, the French Monarchy doubted lest this example
might make many others take the same resolution; a disorder which might, if not altogether deprive him of the gallant and couragious sword of his warlike Nobles, might at least very much weaken it by the admirable worth whereof she had not onely founded, and augmented so powerful a kingdom, but did maintain it in great tran∣quility. This opinion was increased, for that the French Monar∣chy seemed not onely not to be offended at this scandalous resolution, of Tremoglio's but taking him by the hand, led him into his privat Cabinet, where for a good while he had private discourse with him. The French Barons who stood without, though they were very desi∣rous to  what past between Tremoglia and their Monarchy, yet could  t possibly learn any thing of it; they onely observed by Tremoglia's laying often his hand upon his breast, that he seemed as if he made some Oath to the French Monarchy to keep some certain promise which those arons thought might be, that he would never discover the reason to any one, which had made him put on so strange a reso∣lution. Every one wondered to see that so gallant a personage could resolve to relinquish the honor of the French Nobility, which is held in so great esteem, as those who have purchased it at the prise of much blood, thought they came cheaply by it. But some great men of this Court, whose usual custom it is to indeavour to know, and freely to speak their minds of all mens actions, said, that Trmoglia having found at last vvith vvhat tricks the French Monarchy doth fetch about her Nobility, vvould by renouncing his Nobility, let the vvorld knovv, that the condition of the common people of France, vvho satisfie their impositions by ready mony, vvas much better then that of the Nobility who being bound to serve their King in his vvars, pay it vvith their blood. The LXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Don Ferrante Gonsaga being Governor of Corinthus, is exhorted by Domitio Corbulone severely to resent a great excess, committed by a chief personage of that City: which Counsel Gonsago wisely refutes. DOn Ferrante Gonsaga was sent some weeks ago to be Gover∣nour of Corinthus; an important and difficult charge, that Pro∣vince abounding in a powerful, and wealthy Nobility, given to be proud, and lovers of Arms: who do not onely (according to the usual custom) deal hardly with those that are less powerful, but by reason of their ancient Factions, living still contentiously, it seldom happens that the Governour is of such intellectuals as to give full satisfaction both to Apollo, and to the people. Gonsaga had not past over his first months government, when one of the chief of the Nobility chanced to commit a very inconsiderate insolency. Don Ferrante seemed not onely to be much perplext how to revenge, but appeared to many to be very sad for what had happened. Domitio Corbulone a gallant Roman, and a great friend to Gonsaga, told him that he had now another fair
occasion, which required the same resolution which he took when he was Governor of Cicily, against those Spanish souldiers who mutiny∣ed: that therefore he ought rather to rejoyce, then to be troubled, for what had now happened in his government; for Governors of Pro∣vinces where there was a seditious Nobility, might think themselves Fortunate, when at the entrance into their Government any great per∣sonage should commit some heynous fault, by whose exemplary punish∣ment, the unquiet Nobility might be so terrifyed, as the government of the whole Province might be the better for it a long time after: which he said was so true a Document, as others who had practised it had reaped much honor thereby. For when the charge over t Roman Forces which were afterwards to fight in Armenia, was giv im, he finding that through the meer simplicity of those who had the care thereof the souldiers were grown to be very Licentious, not observing any manner of Military Discipline, by his meer resolution which he put on in the very beginning of his charge, of condemning two souldi∣ers to undergo the severest punishment, the oneor that when he was working in the Trenches, he had not any Arms at all about him; the other, because he wore a dagger without a sword, he reduced that so licencious Army to the exact obedience of the good ancient Military discipline; and he further said, that the world was so well pleased with this his severity, as Tacitus himself having authenticated it in his Annals as an undoubted maxim in Policy, fit to be imitated by all Officers, had transmitted it to Posterity in these words; Intentum{que} & magnis delictis inexoabilem scias, cui tantum asperitatis etiam adversus levia credeba∣tur. Ferrante answered Corbulone, that one sort of government was to be used with souldiers in Armies, and an other sort with Citizens in the Government of Provinces. That Commanders in war judged accor∣ding to their humors and with free authority, but Governors of Cities were bound to observe Laws, and having their hands thereby bound, they must be thereby regulated. That he very well knew that many Officers, to the end that they might humble the insolent, quiet the sedi∣tious, and pacifie the tumultuous, used unheard of severities at their ve∣ry entrance into command upon such Delinquents as fell first into their hands; but that he had likewise observed that those that did so, ran danger at last, by their bruitish way of proceeding. For he strayed ve∣ry far from the right way, who thought to attain good ends by unjust means. For God who did abhor that faults should be punished by great∣er faults, could not any ways tolerate without exemplary punishment upon the Judges, that injustice should be done to any one, though it tended to the universal quiet. That he loved onely such understanding Officers who could conscienciously apply fitting punishments to faults; that he desired rather that men might err on the charitable side, then exceed in rigor; and that he had observed that those who begin their government with too much severity, must either continue it with too barbarous cruelty, or lose their credit by altering their maner of government: that he had rather leave Corinth with the reputation of being a too indulgent, then too severe an Officer, That all times, places, and persons not being alike, that Officer was very unwise who would put himself upon a necessity to proceed always after one & the same maner; & him wise, who being sometimes indulgent, sometimes severe, & some∣times cruel, who knew how to keep himself free in all his ways of pro∣ceeding,
could upon any excess suddainly committed, or by too power∣ful a personage, or in times of trouble, or when to punish insolency with usual severity, would rather aggravate then amend the malady, make men believe that he had past over such a fault meerly out of his own clemency, which he could not possibly punish according to the rigor of the Laws, out of important respects. That he confest he might infuse the same terror into the Nobility of his government, by using extraordinary rigor toward that powerful Delinquent, which Corbulone had infused into his whole Army, by his severe proceeding with those two soldiers; but that then Corbulone must likewise confess, that upon another occasi∣on, at another time, or in another place, that same noble man, or any o∣ther m ommit a greater insolency, which was for the good of the Coun  be winkt at; nay, sometimes praysed and rewarded; that this was a great advantage, which was gotten by the advised Officer, on∣ly by a judicious variety in his proceedings: and that too much rigor in a government to frighten delinquents, was only then good when it was used towards the meaner sort of people, who through their innate time∣rousness do more dread punishment then love reputation. But that the nobly born (who usually erred more in revenging the injuries done unto his honor, then through any malignity of minde) thought himself in∣jured by the too great severity of the Law, and together with his kin∣dred and friends who account that shame, whotever it be, as done to their whole generation, grevv so incenc'd, and inraged, as to affont the too humerous Officer in his reputation, and study revenge. By all vvhich he cleerly savv that the Officer vvas ill advised, vvho vvhilst he might carry himself freely in all his actions, should by his cruel usage of the Nobiliy exceed the terms of that equal Justice which ought to be so a∣dequate to the crime committed. That to proceed otherwise, was foolishly to put fetters upon a mans own feet, by obliging him to be e∣qually severe to all sorts and conditions of men, and make himself slave to shameful & dangerous cruelty. To this Corbulone replyed, that he was not wise enough to weigh businesses with the distinctions of time, place and persons; but that practice being the rule that he went by, he knew that the punishment of those two foot souldiers, had kept him from be∣ing trouled with using many the like severities. But, said Gonsaga, it would have proved otherwise if you had used the same cruelty to any of the chief Officers of the Army: and that the custom used by Gardners was excellently good, and very fit to be imitated by all wise Governors of Provinces, who make scare-crows of the filthiest rags and outs a∣bout the house, to frighten birds from eating their fruit, and not of rich silks and velvets. The LXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. The Prince of Macedon accuseth the Nobility of Athens of Treason before Apollo, who are freed from that imputato∣on, by his Majesties Councel of war. THe Duke of Athens dyed about the last of September, and diffe∣rence arose between the Prince of Macedon, and the Lord of Epire
touching the succession of that State. The Prince of Macedon, being cal∣led in by the people, took possession of Athens, against whom the Lord of Epire came with a numerous Army, and besieged his enemy in the City of Epire, and according to the modern way of warfare, begirt it with Trenches and Forts; and that he might bring the defendants the sooner to yield, he assaulted Macedonia with an other flourishing Army, making great progress there, and doing much harm. The Prince of Ma∣cedon, who knew he could not long maintain himself in the besieged City, and defend his own Patrimony, to keep from loosing both, resol∣ved to yield, and was contented to deliver up possession of whole A∣thens, to the enemy, upon condition he should restore such place unto him as he had taken in Macedon. As soon as the Nobility of th esieged City heard of this resolution, the chief of them came un Prince and told him, that as they had called him in to be their Lord and Ma∣ster, so would they never acknowledge any other Prince but he; and that if he would but be of good courage, he should find them ready to defend that State even to the last drop of their bloods. To this the P∣answered, that the danger of his becoming a private foot souldier, was too great, that therefore for the better security of his fortune, he was re∣solved to deliver up Athens to the Lord of Epire. Those Lords did then again beseech their Prince to confide in his subjects, who did not onely assure him that they would defend Attica, but that they would likewise recover Macedon; and lastly conjured him to remember, that they who with such readiness, and singular affection, had chosen him to be their Prince, did not deserve in this their urgent necessity, to be so ungrateful∣ly abandoned, and given up in prey to the Prince of Epire; who was much inraged against them for being rejected by them in that Election▪ The offers and intercedings of these noble men, did not only not at all incourage this Prince, but at the very self same time he dispatched away a Herald to the enemies Camp to conclude the agreed on Capitulation▪ Then the people of Athens, that they might not be sold as slaves to that their enemy, whom they knew they had so hainously offended, seised on their Prince and made him prisoner, and secured his person in the Palace putting a numerous and faithful guard upon him of the best men of the City. This mean while the deputies of the Prince of Epire came to con∣clude the agreement, to whom the Nobility of Athens answered, that it was they that must be treated with in the point of surrender, who were so far from making any agreement with the Prince of Epire, as they wil∣led him to know, that they were resolved to defend their Country, and sent away the Deputie with this resolute and stout answer. The next day the young men of Athens sallyed forth armed, and in a couragious as∣sault slew many of the enemy; and soon after making many other sallies, put the enemies Camp into such confusion, as the Prince of Epire, who thought himself before to be very sure of the business, began much to doubt the victory, and after many months siedge, in all which time the Citizens of Athens appeared to have no less resolute hearts, then ready hands, came to parley with the enemy, who had already enough of the business; and on the 11 of this present month such advantagious con∣ditions were agreed upon for the people of Athen as became free men, which being done, they sent the Prince of Macedonia home to his own State; who three days since came to Apollo, and did not only complain bitterly of the hard proceedings used to him by the Nobility of A∣thens,
but prest very hard that they should be hung up in effigies as Tray∣tors, in the great Pegasean Tower, for this their execrable rebellion. His Majesty thought this a very weighty business, wherefore he referred it to his Counsel of War: The reasons of both sides were divers times heard, and discust by the Counsel, which at last gave sentence, That the offers of the Atick Nobility being made so chearfully to the Prince of Macedon, and they being by him refused, it being apparent that he was resolved for other particular ends of his own, to give over the defence of the City, it was lawful for those Noble men, when their Prince had abandoned that protection of the people, to which all Princes stand deeply bound, to use that expedient though it were very severe. A thing done by il Signor Lodovico Oriosto, caused much wonder in all those who were present at this so signal sentence; who when he had heard the judgement given, took his hat from off his head, and like a mad man, threw it on the ground; then lifting up his eyes to heaven, and fetching a deep sigh, uttered these words in a sorrowful tone, Dii immortale, ho∣mo homini quid praestat? stulte Intelligens quid interest? The LXV. ADVERTISEMENT. A Shop-Keeper is condemned to the Gallies at the very in∣stant that he was seised on by the Serjeants, not being so much as examined. THe Shop-keeper who dwelt at the signe of the two Crowns in Mercers Street, was four daies since taken prisoner by the Serjeants; and being immediately upon his being taken, carried to the Haven, and put into the Gallies; whole Pernassus wondred very much hereat, to see that the execution of the Judgement should precede process. 'Tis said that this was done at the instance of the chief Monarchs of the world then resident in this State, who held themselves mightily of∣fended with that Shop-keeper, because he sold publiquely meer smoke▪ a commodity which Princes pretend is not to be sold by private men; and therefore it is thought, that by his example they would affright o∣thers from not troubling them in things which concern their Jurisdicti∣on; and although the less solid sort of men thought that the Shop-keeper's fault deserved not so great a resentment, yet those who see fur∣ther into the interest of great Princes, say that they dealt very gently with him; for meer smoke serving Princes upon many occasions in∣stead of ready money, all their richest Treasure would soon be ex∣hausted, when the so current money of meer smoke becoming of no reputation amongst people, Princes should be forced, like to com∣mon people, to pay their debts in ready coyn.
The LXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Bernardino Rota, a famous Neapolitan Poet, being greatly beloved by the Vertuosi of all Professions in Pernassus, is accused before Apollo, for having purchast so general a good liking by some ill means. BErnardino Rota, a Noble Neapolitan Poet, to the great wonder of all the Literati of ths Court, is so strangely beloved by the whole Colledg of the Vertuosi; as he is stiled by every one, the delight of Pernassus. And truely it appears a great miracle to every one, that since there are more then capital jars, divisions, and enmities between the Greeks and Latins, between the Latins and Italians, between Physiti∣ans and Doctors of Law, between the Peripatetick and Platonick Phi∣losophers between the Grammarians, and all other professions of the Ver∣tuosi, only La Rota is rather adored then beloved, by all, and by each of them. And because it appears very strange to every one, that if so amiable a nature proceed only from the vertue of the soul, it be not found to be in any other of the Vertuosi of this State, its being only seen to be in La Rota, hath made every one suspect, that this man who appears to have a candid and liberal soul, is in effect otherwise; and that he hath won this universal good will by the vice of playing Jack of both sides, a vice which his Majesty doth so much detest; and therefore be∣ing questioned by Marioulo in the Tribunal Della Vicaria, he was made prisoner two daies since; and it hapned, that whilst the Tipstafs of the Court, searched him to see whether he had any weapons about him or no, they found a great deal of Storax and Incense bound up in a paper in his pocket. Severe process was made by the Judges against La Ro∣ta. But Apollo, the better to inform himself of what was proved a∣gainst this his Vertuoso, commanded that he should be brought into the Quarantia Criminale; where his Majesty asked him, whether he did inchant mens minds by the Magick of flattery, by the sacriledg of assisting others in their fowl vices, or whether it was only by the chains of vertue, that he did so straitly fasten unto him his Literati, and chief∣ly that he should tell him what use he made of that Storax and Incense which was found about him. To which La Rota answered; that he had purchast the love of all the Vertuosi in Pernassus, only by detesting to imitate others in their contentions, and that he won upon the affecti∣ons of all men, and made them love him, by the sincerity of his soul, and candidness of heart, by not desiring to know, much less to busie himself in other mens affairs, and by practicing the excellent vertue with all men, in all places, and at all times, of seeing, hearing, and conceal∣ing the actions of his loving friends and companions, and by divulging only such as might purchase others glory and reputation, and chiefly by applying himself to every ones humor, and that to the purpose, that he might rather make himself be idolatrized then beloved by all men, he
used to perfume every one with the Storax of praise, and with the In∣cense of commendations, which was found about him. Apollo then spoke alowd, and said, O you that are overswaid with passion, who are so obstinate in your opinions; learn from this my most wise Poet, the Art so necessary for men, of applying your selves to the hu∣mor of those with whom you converse. This is the way to live in the world, this is the true means to make men flock after you, by making your selves slaves to all men, so to arrive afterwards at the happy condi∣tion of commanding all men. The LXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. A Carpenter being cudgeled somewhat severely, for having uttered certain insolent words against the most noble Sca∣liger, to his greater calamity, complains first of him to the Lord chief Iustice, and afterwards appeals to Apollo. Julius Cesar Scaliger, that famous Literato of Verona, caused some cu∣rious shelves to be made some few daies ago in his Library, by a Car∣penter, which being finished, a dispute arose between them, not so much concerning the price, as the ill workmanship; and whilst they were at variance, the Carpenter being more bold then became him (as is the fashion of Plebeians, who negotiating for the most part with the com∣mon sort of people, weigh not their words, when they have to do with people of quality) said, that Scaliger was subject to the fault of other Noble men, to stand upon hard tearms with poor Artificers. Scaliger was so touched to the quick with this injury, as appearing presently to be very well satisfied with the shelves; and with their price, he caused the money to be forthwith paid unto the Carpenter, which he demand∣ed. The Carpenter answering, that he was fully satisfied, Scaliger re∣ply'd, that it now rested that he must likewise have his satisfaction, which lay in teaching such arrogant fellows as he, how to govern their tongues; which being said, he commanded a servant of his, to take a Cudgel, and therewithall conjure out the fowl fiend of insolence that was in him; wherein he was instantly obeyed. The miserable Carpenter being sound∣ly beaten, presented himself all bleeding before the chief Justice, and complained grievously of Scaliger for having treated him so ill. The Ju∣stice, before he would resolve on any thing, would (as it became him) inform himself fully of the fact; and when he heard the insolent words wherewith the Carpenter had provoked Scaliger, he commanded the Goaler forthwith to give that insolent fellow three sound lashes with a rope; which was done. Whereupon the cudgel'd Carpenter went a∣bout Pernassus crying, and exclaiming more against the Justice, then a∣gainst Scaliger. The Literati of this Court differed in their opinions
touching the chief Justice his Act; some of them blamed him extream∣ly, for that by that action he did too much encourage the Nobility, who were naturally given to deal too injuriously with the common sort of people; and some of these, who bore ill will to the chief Justice, egg'd on the Carpenter to complain to Apollo, both of Scaliger, and of the chief Justice. His Majesty, who had a little before been very par∣ticularly informed of all that had passed in this business, speaking to the Carpenter, & those who were back-friends to the chief Justice, who had egg'd him on to make his appeal, said, That he as much hated the inso∣lent proceedings of his Nobility with the common sort of people, as he was very much distasted that Shop-keepers, and others of the mean∣er sort of men, should by bold speeches injure the reputation of those who live only to purchase honour and renown; and that the common sort of people were much deceived, if they did believe that such Justice was practised in Pernassus, as wrought no other effect then what would make the rabble-rout insolent, and that it was great folly to trouble a Noble man, who having moderately revenged himself for an injury done unto him by a Plebeian, had only deserved punishment if he should have basely put it up, and so much the more, for that it did much misbecome such a personage as Scaliger, to apply himself to Courts of Justice for injuries done unto him by such people, and thereby become the table∣talk of Justices and Notaries. That he much commended the discre∣tion of the Emperor Charls the fifth, who as he was returning with his Emperess from a Turney which was made about Toledo, did not only not resent an action done by the D. of Infantaga, who cut a Provost Marshal soundly over the head, that whipt on his horse, bidding him ride faster, though the action was done against a publique Officer, and in his pre∣sence, but with like Justice as ought to be used to a Noble man injured by a Plebeian, gave the Duke to understand, that if he pleased, he might hang that sawcy fellow; which the Duke would not only not suffer to be done, but with a Castilian magnanimity, beseeched the Emperor to par∣don the Provost Marshal, and accompanied the wound with 500 crowns which he sent the wretch, that he might be the better cured. Then A∣pollo added, that there being three chief felicities which made humane men happy, Peace, Justice, and Plenty, unless Princes who govern the world, were the more circumspect, severe Justice served only to make the rabble-rout proud; universal peace, to make men cowards; and per∣petual plenty, to make people who living formerly by the sweat of their brows, were industrious, idle, of no use, and vagabonds: And that it being very true, that Princes were the Shepherds of mankind, the com∣mon people the Sheep, and the Nobility the Dogs which guard the flocks, and keep them from the Wolves; it was likewise as true, that by all right of good Government, the Nobility ought to be maintain∣ed bold, and to be rather armed with Iron Collars of Generosity, to de∣fend them from the Wolves, then through the fear of equal Justice (so peculiar to ignorant men) be cow'd in such manner, as that the very Sheep with the horns of unsupportable insolence, durst dare to butt at them.
The LXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. The great Emperor Maximilian the first, having said in a great Assembly of the chiefest Princes of this State, that the Mahometan Religion was nothing but Policy, proves by cellent reasons to the very teeth of the Ottoman Mo∣narchy, who complained hainously thereof to Apollo, that he had said nothing but truth. VVHilst some daies ago the Emperor Maximilian the first, Lo∣dovick the eleventh King of France, Matthias Corvino King of Hungary, Stephano Battori King of Poland, and the famous Andrea Gretti, Prince of the Venetian Republick, were reasoning together (as it is the custom of great Princes to do) touching the affairs of the world, they spent much time in considering the greatness of the Ottoman Em∣pire; and whilst every one spake their opinion of that Government, The Emperor Maximilian did freely confess that there were many Military Disciplines practised in the Ottoman Empire, which were worthy of ad∣miration, but that the Mahometan Sect was throughout so impure and foul, as it seemed to be altogether unworthy the practice of men; and that a desire of piety was manifestly seen in many Institutors of Divine Laws, although the Religion which they profest, was notoriously false; their errors being occasioned meerly out of their ignorance of Divine things; but that the infinite impieties which were discovered in the Ot∣toman Sect, were wholly malitious in giving Laws to her followers; Ma∣homet having proved himself to be a better Politician then Divine; it being clearly seen, that to purchase followers who would imbrace that new Sect, he had more respect in the forming of his Alcharon to satisfie the body then the soul, and to aggrandize an earthly Kingdom, then to make others gain Heaven. And that in other Sects, the Institutors there of made use of Divine Precepts, for the bettering of human affairs, very cunningly cloaking over all their impieties, lest people when they should come to the knowledge of their foule hypocrisie, might be scan∣dallized. But that Mahomet alone, out of a meer greediness of Govern∣ment, did affrontedly laugh at sacred things, to raise the value of pro∣phane ones. These words, though they past between Princes of such eminency, were suddenly brought to the Ottoman Monarchy, who took them so ill, as he immediatly gave the Emperor Maximilian to understand by a Bas∣sa of his, that he would, as it became him to do, defend with his Arms, the contrary to all that he had spoken to the prejudice of his Laws; and at the same instant that he sent this Ambassy, he made ready his nume∣rous Army. Maximilian nothing affrighted at this defiance, summon∣ed the Diet at Ratisbon, that he might have such assistance from Germa∣ny against so potent an enemy, as is usually given either first or last.
Apollo, who was soon acquainted with this news to the end that he might appease those two great Monarchs, called an Assembly of all the Princes the next day; who when they appeared, he much complained of the Ottoman Monarchy's barbarous proceedings, since even in Pernassus, where argumentations, and difference in opinion being only decided by the rule of truth, he had dared to use force. He then told them, that he had summoned that honorable Assem∣bly, only that they might hear from the Emperor Maximilian's own mouth, all he reasons which had induced him to accuse the Mahome∣tan Sect, as being composed of nothing but Policy. His Majesty after∣wards commanded the Emperor to begin his Justification. Whereup∣on Maximillian, with such Majesty as became him, began thus. I was moved to say that the Mahometan Sect was nothing but Poli∣cy, meer ambition, and interest of Reigning, and that the first Institu∣tors thereof were more ambitious then pious, out of these clear reasons. For that Mahomet, to the end that his Armies might be free from those incumbrances, and expence of Wine, wherewith the Militia of Christi∣an Princes is so much molested, did forbid the use thereof to those of his Sect; a Precept wholly Political, as that which frees the Turkish Souldier from that expence which doth so abound in the Christian Mi∣litia, particularly where there be Dutchmen, or Northern Souldiers, who consume more in drinking, then in meat, clothes, or even in pro∣viding themselves with Arms. Moreover the great advantage which their Princes receive from their Souldiers sobriety, though it be known to all men, yet are they more particularly known to me, who whilst I made war in the world, was much more troubled with my Dutch Soul∣diers drunkenness, then with my enemies Arms. Add to this, that whereas amongst the Turks, the fields serve either for arable ground, or pasture, our grounds are encumbred with vines. The other more then Political Institution of the Mahometan Law is, That the great∣ness of a Prince consisting in the multitude of his Vassals; the Maho∣metan Law, to the end that her Disciples may have so great a benefit, permits them by a rare example of unbounded lust, to have at one and the same time, but in divers places, plurality of wives, and as many con∣cubines as they please, without any sin unto their soul, or prejudice to their honour: A thing which more resembling the Custom of Beasts, then any Institution of Man, is altogether unfitting to be named, much more to be practised by any Nation: A Law, which by reason of the unexhaustible multitude of children which the Fathers of Families have in the Ottoman Empire, is altogether Political: For the infinite num∣ber of Turks serves not only for abundance of food for powder in the Ottoman Wars, but to reap the same benefit, which we Christian Princes doe out of that trite politick precept, of keeping the people low: For the custom which many of us have of burthening the people with extraordinary Taxes and Impositions, so to keep them low, and by the severity of our penal Laws, which are now become matter of mo∣ney, are things which breeding ill bloud in our Vassals, doth oft-times make them rebel. But wise Mahomet hath only known how to keep the people low perpetually, and yet with their delight and satisfaction, which was never yet known to any other Politick Legislator; for in∣finite number of children being of necessity to be born unto the Turks,
through their plurality of wives, and abundance of concubines, Politick Mahomet, to the end that he may bring the wealthiest Families in a short time to beggery, hath not been ashamed to command in his Alcharon, that Bastards, which are by all Laws so much detested, should share e∣qually in paternal inheritance with children lawfully begotten. And if it be true which I have often read, and heard said, That a Tailor of Con∣stantinople shewed Solyman the Emperor thirty of his sons, and that one Giambelat, a man famous amongst the Turks for his fruitfulness, had eight sons born in one and the same night, and left fourscore sons a∣live when he died, what is the richest inheritance of whatsoever Turk alive, which being equally divided amongst so many children, will not beco r, and their Families be perpetually kept low, and forced to beg th pay of their Prince by following the Wars? And if that be true, which we Princes have daily experience of, That the Souldier that fears not death, overcomes all difficulties which he undertakes, and hap∣pily compasseth his end, whatsoever it be, and that it be impossible to withstand the most inconsiderable man that is, who despiseth his own life; what more politick and devillish precept could be infused into men by any ambitious Legislator, thereby to get the government of the whole world, then that of fate, which wicked Mahomet hath injoyned his followers to believe? Who being shamefully seduced by so false a Doctrine, believe firmly that all men have the prefixt and inevitable day of their deaths written in their forehead in Divine Characters, though not discernable by the eye of man. A Law as wicked before God, as greatly miraculous to aggrandize an Empire, to which infernal institu∣tion, the extent of the Ottoman Empire is solely attributed. To these may be added the other powerful precept, That it is not lawfull for the Ottoman Emperors to restore any Kingdom to any what∣soever Prince, where they have built a Moschey. A Rule, which (as every one may easily discern) is only made to overcome the great difficulty which all Princes meet with, of keeping States newly acquired, and to make the Militia so obstinate in the defence thereof, as those Provinces which were conquered by victorious arms, are only lost by such arms as were conquered. Nor is the Decree given to the Ottoman Emperors, less politick then this, that they shall not be allowed, either for the main∣taining of their memory alive, or for the burial of their bodies, or out of any pious zeal, to build any Moschey, unless they have first acquired some Kingdom; a Law only instituted to excite the basest and most cowardly minded Ottoman Emperors, to the ambition of glory, and pro∣pagating Empire. But of all the Precepts that I have touched upon, or that can be related by any other, there is none, in my opinion more po∣litical, then that of their not admitting of any women into their Mos∣cheys, to pray there; a most wicked Law, and which doth manifest, that the Mahometan Sect doth more affrontedly make use of Religion as a pretence whereby to reigne, then any other Sect that was ever heard of. For what doth such a Law denote, but that Mahomet is content to oblige only the Masculine sex to sacred things, to the end that he might from them receive the advantage of loyalty, obedi∣ence, and meekness of spirit, and of the curb of piety, which modera∣ting mans too great inclination to sensuality, makes him keep the right rode of not offending any one; and receive the other advantages which
by a well-regulated Religion, men partake of from peaceable commerce; which because he cares not to receive from women, who are not apt to raise insurrections, to acquire nor keep States, he is content to say, only to keep them from falling headlong into all kinde of lasciviousness, when they shall see themselves utterly excluded from all heavenly glory; that if they live chastly, they shall, when their lives are ended in this world, pass into a place, where if they do not enjoy the blessings of heaven, they shall not at least suffer any evil; a shameful Doctrine, and such a one as never any Legislator durst dream of, in making a foolish and igno∣rant division, or distinction between the souls of men and women. I shall conclude this my justification with this last and chiefest Politick Law; That Mahomet knowing very well how much it mak  Mo∣narchy, that Monarchs should keep their Vassals in exact obedience, as is due to all that reigne, hath not stuck to say, that those mens souls shall not share of salvation in the world to come, who for any faults committed by them, or for any other misdemerits, die in their Princes displeasure. As if a man how wicked soever he be, may not reconcile himself to God, either by contrition, repentance, or condign penance for offences done unto man. Though the colour which appeared in the Ottoman Monarchies coun∣tenance shewed plainly how much she was confused, yet according to her accustom'd affrontedness, she would have reply'd, when Apollo beck∣ning to her to be silent, asked her, whether it were true or no, that by the Mahometan Law, no man might dispute touching the Articles of her Faith, but that it was to be made good by force of Arms; and the Ottoman Monarchy answering, that it was true, Apollo reply'd, that she her self had confest those things to be true, which the Empe∣ror Maximilian had affirmed. For as wealth honestly come by by good men, was maintained and defended by Justice, and plundered goods, by the same violence by which they were taken; so truth was defended by reason, but falshood by violence and obstinacy.
The LXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Anneus Seneca, after having read Moral Philosophy in the publick Schools of Pernassus, obtains a Writ of ease from Apollo; and being desirous to endow the Philosophy-School with a rich Revenue, is not suffered by his Ma∣jesty to do so. SEneca having for above the space of forty years read Philosophy in the publick Schools of Pernassus, to his infinite praise, and the nn∣speakable good of the Publick; Apollo (as to one who had so wel deserv'd) gave him the last week a Writ of Ease; and the place being sued for by very many, Apollo bestowed it upon Plutarch. And because Seneca, by reason of his rich patrimony, had discharged his place with regal mag∣nificency, to the end that so honorable a place might not fall short of its antient splendor under Plutarch, who was but poor in respect of Sene∣ca, he indowed it with an annual rent of 6000 crowns a year: A piece of magnanimity whereby he hath won immortal fame from all the Vertuosi of this State. But when he came before Apollo to ac∣quaint him with so honourable a donation, instead of being commended for that his so glorious action, he was, contrary to the expectation of all men, much blamed by his Majesty, and in these very words reprehend∣ed: Seneca, to trouble the Fountains head when a man hath quench'd his thirst, is an action full of malice; nor should I ever have imagined that such a one as you would have gone about to vituperate that School, whereby you have been honoured; I must praise your excellent inten∣tion, but greatly blame the deed, and (as pernitious) not suffer it to be done. It is great wisdom to keep such places poor, as must of necessi∣ty be discharged by men of worth: To the end, that answerably to the publick good, they may be provided of men; which should it be other∣wise, to the great prejudice of my Literati, men would be provided of such wealthy imployments. The School which you have given over, will alwaies be sought for by such Literatias your self, whilst it is but of poor means; but were it indowed with the large revenue which you would now give it, even ignorant men, out of avarice would so endea∣vour the having of it, as by means of favour which such men by unwar∣rantable waies know how to win, it would be very hard, if not impossi∣ble, to keep it from them.
The LXX. ADVERTISEMENT. Diego Covaruvia, after having for a short space exerci∣sed the Place of his Majesties Chief Treasurer, betakes himself to the Stoicks Sect. DIego Covarruvia had discharged the honorable place of his Maje∣sties chief Treasurer, just two months, with so general satisfaction to all men, as every one clearly saw how well advised Princes are when they promote subjects to places of highest dignity, from but a little inferior places of Magistracy: This personage of exquisite judgement, after having freely imparted his several resolutions to his domestick friends, he unexpectedly gave up the place of Treasurer into his Maje∣sties hands, and betook himself to be a Stoick. Many Literati of this State who were very great friends to this glorious Vertuoso, when they heard so strange a novelty, went to Covarruvia, and seemed very sorry, that by quitting a place of such dignity, he had forgone the fair occasion which he had of making himself famous, and gratifying his friends. Then they bad him consider his own reputation, which by this unex∣pected resolution he did totally bury; since not only such as did envie and maligne him, but even his very best friends, might blame that acti∣on (and peradventure not without reason) as proceeding rather from a melancholy humour, from fickleness of mind, as a lover of novelties, from weakness of wit, as unfit for such an imployment, and uncapable thereof, then to the lawdable desire of a solitary life, whereby he would cloke his being unfit for such a place. It is well known that Covarru∣via answered these objections very resolutely, thus; My friends, the re∣solution which you see I have taken, is not (as you believe) any new ca∣prichio, but an antient resolution which I have ever had since I learnt by Court-fallacies, by the perfidiousness of Courtiers, and by the insta∣bility of earthly affairs, that this worlds greatness, which is gotten with so much toyle and labour, managed with such cark and care, and possest with so much danger, was nothing else but meer vanity; and I did not that at my first entrance into the Court, which I have done of very late, only that I might enter into this famous Sect, with all the reputa∣tion that becomes one like me; for I did not desire that the world should imagin that I had imbraced the Stoick Sect, out of a meanness of spirit (which is a friend to idleness, and an enemy to labour) for weakness of parts, as not fit to attain the most supreme dignities, for not being a∣ble to bear with the bitter distastes of Court, or for any dislike that my home-affairs had occasioned in me; but only that I might attain to that happiness as is usually enjoy'd in a solitary and vertuous life, by such, who being given to Learning, desire nothing but much knowledg: Now, that I have abandoned the happy condition that you all know I was in, only that I might retreat to a better life, my friends, enemies, and en∣viers will certainly praise my resolution; for then doth a man with
much honour embrace poverty, when he forgoes riches, and when to enjoy a solitary life, he gives over weighty and gainful Negotiations. And such men as I, do with glory spurn at the pomp and vanity of this world, when by their honourable labour and service in Princes Courts, they have known how to compass the prime places, and supreme dig∣nities. The LXXI. ADVERTISEMENT. Cornelius Tacitus being imprisoned at the complaint of some great Princes, for having made some Politick Spe∣ctacles, which were very prejudicious to their Govern∣ment, is freed by Apollo. THe whole Colledg of the Literati were much astonished, when they heard that Cornelius Tacitus, one so famous in Pernassus, one so well beloved by Apollo the first Counseller of State, chief Chro∣nicler, and Master of his Majesties Sentences, was seised upon the last night by express Order from the Lords Censors. It was soon after known, that this had hapned by reason of a complaint made by divers great Princes, that Tacitus by his seditious Annals and Histories, had made certain Spectacles which were very pernitious to Princes; for let the simplest person put them on his nose, they would make him so sharp-sighted, as to see into the very hearts of other men, and discover their most secret thoughts: And that which they said they neither could nor would any waies indure, was, that he shewed unto the people, the very essence and quality of Princes-souls, what they were indeed in∣wardly, and not what through the necessary tricks of Government they were forced to make themselves appear to be outwardly. Yesterday morning the Counsel of the chief Monarchs of this State came before the Censors, amongst which, for Tacitus his greater honour, who was to be tryed, Apollo would make one. This Advocate told them, that all the understanding men of the State knew very well that Princes for the peace and quiet of their Kingdoms, were oft times necessitated to do unwarrantable actions, which, to maintain the peoples opinion of their being good Princes (as is fitting for all to do that will govern) they had wont to palliate with specious pretences of good intentions, and great zeal towards the publick good, those pieces of Policy which they would be no longer able to use, if the true meaning of their minds were known to all men; and that if it were possible for people to be governed without submitting themselves to their Jurisdiction, Princes would willingly renounce their Princely itles, and their power of Command, as having found at last, that Principalities are nothing but unsupportable burthens, affairs so full of difficulty and danger, as they could not taste any one savory bit, at those their plentiful Tables, which
jealous men do so envie, which did not stink of Arsnick; but that if experience had made the world know, that all mankind would soon suf∣fer under sad confusion, were it not for wise Princes who do govern them, it was fitting that they should be permitted to use all those just waies which were requisite for them for the well-governing their Sub∣jects: For, if for cultivating grounds, Husbandmen were not denied Oxen, Ploughs, and Mattocks; if Tailors for the cutting out and making up of clothes, were allowed needle and sheers; and Smiths, hammers and pincers; wherefore should Monarchs be henceforward denied to throw dust in their Subjects eyes, or cast a mist before them, which was the best advantage, and the most necessary Instrument for the right Go∣vernment of States, which any Polititian had ever yet found out in any of the most excellent Reasons of State. All which things Princes, by reason of Tacitus his seditious inventions, should now be no longer able to do; it being clearly seen that the devillish spectacles invented by that alwaies seditious Tacitus, to boot with what hath been said of their ma∣king the people sharp-sighted, had also another pernitious effect, by sticking so close to mens noses, as Princes were now no longer able, as formerly they had with as much ease as advantage done, to throw dust in their Subjects Eyes, though it were most artificial, and super-fine, but that they would be aware of their being abused. The Complaints made by the Monarchs, seemed to be very just, both to Apollo, and all the Censors; and they therefore thought wor∣thy of mature consideration; and after a long discourse had about so weighty a business, their opinion seemed to prevail; who voted that Tacitus with his scandalous Annals, and seditious Histories, should be banished the company of man. But his Majesty, that he might not disgrace the Prince of Political History, and not to distast gallant men, by depriving them of their delights, was content that Tacitus should be told, he might do well to make as few of those spectacles as possi∣ble he could, which were indeed so pernitious to Princes; and that he should chiefly be sure not to part with any but to choice personages, to the Secretaries, and privy Councel of Princes, to the end that they might know the more easily how to Govern the people; and that above all things, as he valued his Majesties favour, he should keep from com∣municating them to such seditious people, who in troublesom times might serve for Lanterns to the simpler sort of people, who suffered themselves easily to be governed, when not being inlightned by Lear∣ning, they might be said to be blind, and want a guide.
The LXXII. ADVERTISEMENT. Many Carriers, who contrary to the Laws, brought great store of Beans into Parnassus, are taken Prisoners by the Scouts. THis morning, being the twentieth of this present moneth, the Field-Scouts met with some Carriers, who brought store of beans into Pernassus, a sort of Pulse which was long since banished out of all Apollo's Dominions; for his Majesty having found in ma∣ny unfortunate former occasions, that many passionate Literati, that they might vent their mad passions which burn'd within their bosoms, whilst they made use of these beans in the Senat, have utterly undone themselves and their whole Families, to the end he might maintain peace and concord amongst his Vertuosi, did many years since forbid the sale of any such Pulse under pain of severe punishment; it having been used by divers instead of musket-bullets, only to blast the re∣putation of honest men. It was learn'd from the same Carriers, that this Inhibited. Merchandize was sent from ignorant and malignant Countries, to such perfidious Courtiers of this State, who study nothing else but how to scatter beans upon other mens stairs, only to make such simple people fall and break their necks, who firmly be∣lieve that no man can walk safely any where, but with the feet of up∣right meaning, and good conscience. Whereupon Apollo did very much wonder to see, that through the malignity of the times, all Princes Courts are so pestered with these malignant spirits, as they study more how to discompose other mens affairs, then how to accommodate their own.
The LXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Seneca having bought great store of Poultrey in a Countrey-house of his, which lies in the Gnides Territories, those people come to the true reason of that his forestalling the Market. SOon after that (as you have heard) the most excellent Annaeus Sene∣ca obtained a Writ of Ease from his Majesty, from further exer∣cising his place of Chairman in the Moral Philosophy-School, he, that he might refresh his eminent wit, which was much harras'd in his perpe∣tual studies, withdrew himself to a pleasant Countrey-house of his, seated in the Territories of Gnido, from whence they write, That this so famous Literato, at his very first coming thither, made so great a provision of Cocks, Hens, and Capons, as they that saw them in the place where they were kept, judged them to amount to the number of above five hundred; a thing which all the Inhabitants of Gnido did much wonder at; and those speculative Wits, who spend more time in vainly prying into other mens actions, then in the well govern∣ing of their own, were of opinion, that Seneca had avarice joyned to the other faults which were imputed to him; and that therefore he had forestalled, and bought up all those Poultrey (which was an action misbecoming a man of his parts) only that he might inhance the price of them. And it was said by the same Letters, that some thought that he had added the detestable vice of gluttony, to his infinite thirst after riches. But it being observed in process of time, that Seneca spent three hours daily after dinner, in looking upon those his Poultrey: it was at last known, that this great Philosopher learn'd from that sort of Poultrey, the art, wherein he did not only exceed all other Writers, but hath been followed therein by an infinite number of others, of crowing well, and scraping ill▪
The LXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. The Grand-child to the Prince of the Laconicks asks coun∣sel of Apollo, what course he should take to live with reputation in Laconia. THat Grand-child of the Prince of Laconia, who (as you heard by the last Post) through the froward stubbornness of his mind, be∣took himself to the general scandal of his Government, to lead a privat life, being much afflicted and troubled in mind, is this morning return∣ed to Pernassus; and presenting himself before his Majesty, told him, that much to his sorrow and trouble, he had at last found that to be true, which had been often told him by his best and dearest friends; That most men were so full of ingratitude, as they loved Fortune only, and not the persons of their beneficent Princes; a fault which occasion∣ed that which good men were sorry to see, that they were as sure to fail their friends when their fortunes failed them, as Tacitus had reason to say, That Intuta erant adversa. Tacit. lib. 12. Annal. for much to his grief, he found the Chain of Munificence whereby he had endea∣voured to fasten unto him the affection of an infinite number of friends, in his Uncles Kingdom, from whom he expected a return of much gra∣titude, to be but very weak: And that if it were true which many E∣lective Princes had together with himself experienced to be true, That a stroke of ingratitude gave the deadliest wound which could be recei∣ved by a Noble mind, and that to sow benefits, and reap neglects, was the saddest and most sorrowful exercise which could be practised by a Prince, he deserved not only to be pittied by his Majesty, and by all good men, but to be assisted by advice: And that in this his horrid change of fortune, to see himself not only little respected by those whom he knew not, but wounded by the speeches of those his dearest friends, whom he had endeavoured to oblige, and scorn'd by the actions of those which had formerly adored him, was an affliction which did so in∣wardly grieve him, as he was not able to support to strange a Metamor∣phosis. That therefore since he was forced to pass from Principality to a privat life, from commanding to obeying; he greatly desired to know from his Majesty, what course he should take to live with reputation in Laconia. To this Apollo briefly answered, That he should first inform himself in the Court of Rome, where all the examples of the most he∣roick vertues did abound, and then imitate the great splendor of Edward Cardinal Fernese, who by a Princely generosity, and profuse liberality used towards all men, had made the Court, and the whole Nobility of Rome so in love with him, as he was now more honoured and observed in anothers Popedom, then the great Alexander Cardinal Fernese was formerly in the Popedom of his Uncle, Paul the third. To this the Prince reply'd, That he knew the counsel which his Ma∣jesty gave him, to be very true, but that the receit being very costly, he
thought it to be too dear; That therefore he humbly beseeched him to teach him a cheaper remedy. Apollo laughed, and freely told this Prince, that to pretend to be beloved and honoured by the people, to be attend∣ed and followed like a great Prince, and yet to keep his purse close ty'd, his Cellar-dore shut, his Granaries lockt up and close bar'd, was a greater vanity than to pretend to open the gates of heaven by impious blasphemy; for the face of a sordid covetous man was much more dreadful to the people, than the face of Lucifer himself; whereas li∣berality used towards friends, to keep men in perpetual protection, and to be continually ready to patronize them, defend, help, and assist them in their oppressions, was the true Magick, and pious inchantment by which men were fascinated, and that they did strangely hate such avari∣tious people, who being unwilling to bait their hooks with little Pilch∣ards, dare not venture at catching a great Sturgeon. The LXXV. ADVERTISEMENT. Isabella of Aragon, Dutchess of Milan, being continu∣ally prosecuted by adverse Fortune, is brought to a very unhappy condition in the City of Ephesus. THat famous Dutchess of Milan, Isabella of Aragon, who by un∣parallel'd example of misfortune, within the space of a few months, lost her Grand-father, Father, Brother, and her Nephew, having all of them been Kings of Naples, as also her Paternal Kingdom of Naples, and the Dukedom of Milan, which was her Husbands and her Sons Patrimony, when she subscribed her name to any Letter that she writ, after her name of Isabella of Aragon, Dutchess of Milan, added (as she had good reason to do) the only Unfortunate. For, Fortune, when she once begins to persecute any one, never leaves her malignity; till she have buried them alive in the grave of most deplorable misery. Her unfortunate condition did daily so impair, as to the woful example of the vicissitude of human greatness, she lives now in Ephesus, where from the st day that she entred into Pernassus, she gets her living by the sad and woful means of selling Tinder and Matches, as she goes along the streets.
The LXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Many of the Literati who do much apprehend the severity of the Reformation, which by Order from Apollo, is now in Treaty in Pernassus, do seditiously rise in Rebelli∣on against the Reformers; and his Majesty appeaseth the tumult by applying a fitting remedy. ALl those that submitted to the Reformation which is at this time treated of in Pernassus with much severity, took up Arms in a se∣ditious manner some eight daies ago, and ran to the Reformers houses, carrying Links and Fire-brands with them to burn those reverend Re∣formers in their own houses. Who, as soon as they were aware of the uprore, fortified themselves within their house, and they from within, and the other from without, let fly at one another, so as a very bloudy and cruel skermish was begun; and those without grew so outragious, as they fastned a Petar to the Gate. Apollo, who was soon advertised of this disorder, that he might prevent any inconvenience which might arise from this tumult, sent forthwith his Guard of Provincial Poets thither, who were commanded in chief by the great French Ronsard, ordering him to let those men in Arms know in his name, that they should immediately lay down those their seditious Arms, upon pain of being from that very instant declared to be ignorant; and that as soon as they should apply themselves to him, he would be ready to hear their grievances. These men immediately obeyed his Majesties commands, before whom when they appeared, Apollo with an angry countenance asked them, whether or no they were those rash, those insolent people, who pretended to live in that disorderly and abusive way of licentiousness, and not be made return to the way of well-living, from which it was e∣vidently known that they had very much gone astray. Sir, said Iovan∣ni Scopa, a Neapolitan, in name of all that were to be reformed, We ingenuously confess that our faults are heynous in condition, in number infinite, and very fitting to be amended; we are so far from hating (as your Majesty may perchance believe) Reformation, and the Reformers, as we do greatly love it and them; but the rage to see that the end of our Reformers is far from the pretence wherewith they palliate their Re∣formation, hath put into our hands these weapons of despair. For if those who pretend our Reformation, as zealously intending our wel∣fare, should let us plainly see that they desire nothing of us but our own good, we should as willingly submit to the pleasing yoke of Reforma∣tion, as any man of honour ought to do; but it is long since, that after our so many sufferings, we have at last clearly found, that this Reformati∣on is not introduced out of any charitable intentions towards us, not out of a desire to remove scandals, but out of a wilely end, to keep
those grand Literati, who do so much hate a privat life, and covet nothing but food for their ambition, in the power which they have of dominiering over their inferiors. Hence it is, Sir, that this our Reforma∣tion meets with so many complaints, and such venim against our Refor∣mers; who foolishly perswading themselves, to be able to correct mens vices, and to purge the world of that ignorance which doth so much deform it, by their only outward appearing good intention to Refor∣mation, are pleased with our complaints, their main ends being, that the world may believe, that our complaint, which is occasioned by their fowl proceedings with us, springs from our being nauseated with our correction; and yet the clean contrary to this is true: For finding our selves griev'd by the evil opinion which men have, more then they ought to have, and daily more and more opprest by those whose power is greatest in Pernassus, there is not any one that doth listen unto us, nor mind what we say, though we cry never so lowd for Justice. For men of power are alwaies honoured and exalted, though they deserve the contrary; and such wretched people as we, are opprest and afflicted, let our deserts be never so good. And hence it is that we who are ill at ease, do continually complain more of the Physick not proportionate to our disease, then of our malady it self; and of our Physitians, whose end in curing us, is not (as it ought to be) our health, but their daily gain in exercising their Authority, and in feeding their ambition by the food of other mens injuries. But that which afflicts us most, Sir, is, That in this our corrupt and depraved age, the important business of Reformation should be begun by the most threadbare and ruin'd people that are in Pernassus. We (as your Majesty may see) are for the most part hunger-starv'd Grammarians, broken Correctors of the Press, woful Ushers of Schools, and poor vulgar Poets, of so miserable a con∣dition, as we live by conceits, which we daily borrow from the fruit∣ful wits of Latin Poets and Orators, so as if our daily necessities were not abundantly supplyed by the bounty of our alwaies most reverend Callepine, if we were not fed by the free defrayment of our Cornucopia, and clothed out of the Wardrobe of Mario Nizzolio, what sort of peo∣ple, how poor so ever, could be compared to us? But to speak unto your Majesty with that freedom which becomes such as are overwhelm∣ed with despair, the thefts of Ausonius Gallo, the execrable avarice and immense ambition of Seneca, Martials unpolished language, Aristo∣tles perfidiousness, Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius their unbridled lusts, the bac bitings of Iuvenal and Perseus, Lucians impiety, Ovids ob∣sceneness, and those libidinous Treaties of Virgil, which it is not fit for me to name in this place, for fear of offending your Majesties chaste ears, are those who through their dissolute vices have brought the State of Pernassus into the miserable condition that now it is in: And yet these whom I may freely say are the true Authors of so many scandals, are all of them great personages, the chief Lords of Learning, and are so powerful in this Court, as their vices are reputed vertues: And that which makes us rage the more in our despair, is, that these our Refor∣mers do rather stand in fear of such men as these, then that they have courage to correct their enormities: and yet your Majesty greatly de∣sires that the Justice which is exercised in this your State, should be like the generosity of the Falcon, whose proper instinct it is to prey
upon that Pigeon, which of many others that fly before her, hath the rankest wing. And certainly it does not only appear to be foolish, but is a very sad thing, that when a body hath received mortal wounds in its most principal parts; these our Reformers, for the cure thereof, do ap∣ply medicines only to the ball of the foot, or wash the heels with rose∣water; by which shameful way of proceeding, they rather seem to mock the world, then to mind the mending of men. And what a hellish piece of charity is this which our Reformers use towards us, in being so curious in discovering our defects, and in making us lose our reputati∣on, and the good opinion which hitherto men have had of us, without induing us with that amendment and vertue, wherein these our Refor∣mers profess themselves to be so great Masters? And, Sir, if these men do so compassionate a straw which they see in our eyes, why take they not the beam away which is in their own? A hellish charity, I must say again, to seem as if they did bewail other mens evils, and indeed make merry with their own miseries. Is it not a great piece of cruelty to put a probe of Iron into a wound which a man minds not to amend, or else knows he cannot cure? Who knows not that mens vices have so long corrupted their manners, as a man may say this world was born lame, or maimed? Which being most true, is it not gross ignorance in our Re∣formers to believe that in three or four daies they will be able to make him walk upright, who was born with a lame leg? Evils, which by rea∣son of long continuation, are incureable, ought rather to be winked at by wise men, then exasperated by corroding medicines; it being of ill example, and of very bad consequence to make him known to be lame, who for ought any man knows, hath no defect in his legs: For men who are in perfect charity with their neighbours, do first secretly cure their defects, before they discover them to the world; for no man ever won renown by robbing another man of his honour. But that which troubles us most, is, to see that for the cure of our poverty, we have Se∣neca proposed unto us, who was Master of so immense riches, which God knows how he came by; to the humble and abject, insolent A∣ristotle, and gluttonous Martial, to those that die for hunger. And if it be true, which any man who is in his right wits cannot deny, that a gluttonous Physitian is not likely to do any good by perswading ano∣ther to keep a strict diet; what good is there to be expected from his Reformation, whilst Martial, who is so obscene in his Verses, wils us to speak modestly? Aristotle (who to revenge injurious words, made use of poyson even to his Prince) to pardon injuries received; when Chastity is recommended unto us by Ovid, the Father of all Lascivi∣ousness; Piety by Lucian, who so openly plaid upon God; Ausonius Gallo, who so shamefully sackt gypt, which was given to him to Go∣vern, admonishing us to abstain from other mens goods: And when chaste love is prescribed unto us by Virgil, who hath made himself so infamous by so highly celebrating his Alexis? Nothing, Sir, hath greater operation or fruit in matter of Reformation, then when those that are to be reformed, think well of their Reformers, and then the good example of great men. For he who cures an a king head, enli∣vens all the rest of the body; but he who to cure the Megrim, anoints the feet only, doth both Oleum & operam perdere. Therefore that such fruit may be gathered from this Reformation, as is wished for by honest
men, we beg that as a special favour from your Majesty, which in all Justice ought not to be denied us, that we may be permitted to put the Reformers in mind of such things as shall be thought fit for the increase of their honour, and for the universal good, and that they may have plenary power to correct our misdemeanors, that so we proceeding with them in tearms of love, and they with us in tearms of charity, the Reformation proving essential, and not only in appearance, may abundantly produce amendment both in life and manners. Although the standers by thought that La Scopa had spoke too free∣ly in Apollo's presence; yet his Majesty commended the Proposition as very just, and calling for a particular of such things as they desired should be reformed, did first dismiss the Auditory, which was very great, and afterwards did by writing commend a business of that im∣portance, to his Regio Collaterale, induing them with ample Autho∣rity to decide it actually as they should in reason, Sola Veritate facti, inspecta, omni, & quacun ue Appellatione remota. The Negative to this was often broacht, and disputed: and though the greatest part of the Collaterale, thought the desire of those that were to be reformed, very just; yet after a long argumentation had thereupon, Giacomo Menocchio, one of the chiefest of those Coun∣sellers being brought into the Collaterale, said, with an incens'd coun∣tenance, and in an angry tone; You through your hair-braind rash∣ness, make your selves appear to be a rabble of insolent people, since you have presumed to go about to reform Poets, Philosophers, and others of the chiefest Literati of this Court, whose names you are not worthy to take within your mouthes, and by your bold∣faced behaviour, have committed high Treason, having so highly offended your superiors; Who time out of mind, find themselves in peacefull possession, and enjoy the Ius Quaesitum of reforming o∣thers, without being ever to be reformed by any one. Nor must you by playing the good Companions, live according to your own humors, but in spight of your hearts submit your jobernols to the sacred precepts of Nature; which not without a great My∣stery, is contented, that greater Fishes devour the lesser; nor is it possible to take from small flies, special priviledge which they have over lean Cattel, without overthrowing the whole body of the Civil Law.
The LXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. Many Princes believing that the disorder of their Courts, which were abandoned by Courtiers, proceeded from the injurious speeches used by Cesar Caparoli, in his Chap∣ter Della Corte, desire Apollo that it may be remedied, and obtain their desire. DIvers Princes complained bitterly to Apollo on Wednesday mor∣ning, that their Courts which were formerly in such high esteem with all men, as every one believed that all consolation, and chearfull passing away time, all sorts of Learning to enrich the mind with noble vertues, all means to come by wealth and honourable preferments, were only to be found in them, were now become so abhorr'd, as be∣ing accounted by all men to be but meer snares, and publick Hospitals for unfortunate people, they were very much troubled to find out men to serve them; and that those few who came to Court, were none but shallow-pated people, driven from their own houses by despair, hunger, and poverty: who if they were not immediately enricht at their very first coming to the Court, and did not suddenly obtain such degrees of honour and supreme dignities, as they had first propounded unto them∣selves in their vast desires, grew forthwith so foolishly impatient, as like unbroken Colts, and tender-mouthed horses, if they were but lightly touched with the spur, or had but never so little a check with the bridle given them in the Court, after having first insolently kickt at their Ma∣sters with their heels, they would discourteously forsake their service. And that whereas formerly the noblest and wealthiest personages thought it a great favour to be received into Court, though they had but lodging, bread and beer, and six pence a day for other expences besides allowed them: they did not only complain now of the scarcity of all these, but even the most inconsiderable people did not stick to demand great sallaries. Which disorder, if it were not the sooner pre∣vented, one of two inconveniences must necessarily follow: either Princes must shortly live desolate in their Courts without attendance; or they must afford matter of murmur to their people, by altering their publick expences to supply the new charge of their Courtiers Sallaries. And that they had at last found that Cesar Caporali was the only occa∣sioner of so many disorders; who not content to have shamed them to all Nations by that his seditious Chapter written in defamation of the Court, but was ever seen to whisper the sad miseries which Courtiers were to undergo, into the ears of such as had a mind to apply themselves to Court service. Apollo thought the complaint of these Princes to be very just; where∣fore he forthwith forbad that famous Poets Chapter of the Court. The chief Literati of Pernassus, when they first heard this so rigorous Edict
published, very much prest his Majesty that he would be pleased to al∣ter that his resolution, which would so much afflict the very souls of his beloved Vertuosi; but all was in vain, for Apollo was resolute in his answer, bidding them be quiet, for he would by no means desert the Courts of Princes; which were the only whetstones to sharpen mens wits, the true Schools wherein men learnt that vertuous dissimu∣lation, which is so necessary for such as sail upon the vast Ocean of this world, that patience, that sagacity which all men wanted who were not trained up there; and that to make Princes imbase that their so currant money of hope, which served Courtiers for rich Sallary, would be to turn the world up-side-down. The LXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Learned Seneca, seeing that his late Reformation of his for∣mer too splendid way of living, was ill taken by the U∣niversality of Pernassus, distributes his immense riches in a work which was greatly commended by all men. IT is certainly a thing worthy much consideration, that the Works of the Learned Anneus Seneca, so full of holy Precepts, and of so excel∣lent instructions for the life of man, as they make their Author to appear a man of singular goodness, yet he daily grows so much less in esteem in Pernassus, as he is not much valued by the greatest part of the Ver∣tuosi of this Court: Which Seneca perceiving, and fearing lest the a∣bundance of his Servants, his rich apparel, store of Plate, and the great∣ness of his Wardrobe might lessen his reputation, not only with those that were his rivals, and did envy him, but even with his loving and learned friends, shut up his dores not long since; sold all his Apparel, Plate, and Wardrobe, and dismist at once three parts of his Family; a resolution which was infinitely commended by all the Literati of this Court, and which renew'd Seneca's reputation which was almost lost; but it soon began to decrease again; for those quick-ey'd Coutiers, who being careless of their own behaviours, busie themselves wholly in prying into other mens carriages, quickly learnt, that Seneca had bet∣tered his Estate by the sale of his personal Estate; so as what he thought should have bettered his reputation in the world, did much impair it. Wherefore it being by this accident clearly made known that the my∣stery of hypocrisie, which is so easily practised amongst shallow-pated people, is impossible to be made use of with safety to reputation in Courts which are full of men, who erring more in knowing too much, then in not knowing how men are naturally given, judge not by mens words, but by their deeds. Which made Seneca perceive at last it was not harder to make an Iron Clock without a File, then to be able to use Hypocrite amongst great Wits, without danger of being discovered to
be a Pillary bird. And perceiving likewise that the profession of affe∣cted goodness won but little credit in a man who was very rich, and ava∣ritious withal; that he might not see the death of those his writings, which had given him so long and so honourable a life, he put on an ho∣norable resolution, which was totally to give over the way of appear∣ance, which he had been long accustomed to, and to betake himself to realities, which only occasion the reputation of true goodness. It is whispered in Court that this alteration was occasioned, for that Apollo being told by Seneca's rivals, that though this Philosopher did no lon∣ger use Plate at his Table, yet he fed more deliciously then ever; his Majesty said, that the true Reformation of good men, consisted not in the not using of Silver Vesse's at their Tables, and in the eating of fat Capons notwithstanding in earthen dishes; wherefore Seneca much moved with this sharp repremand, resolved he would be no longer scorn∣ed for spending so immense a wealth only upon his belly and his back, divided his whole Estate, consisting of three millions and a half, into four equal parts, wherewith he founded as many publick Hospitals, and indowed them with rich Revenues, and ordered that the four sorts of fools wherewith the world did abound, should be therein commodi∣ously cured. The first was to be for those foolish people who throw away their Estates, waste their wits, and lose their reputations in seeking for the Philosophers Stone; fools that are indeed to be pittied, for whom all good people ought to pray: The second for those ignorant hiddy giddy people, who Data opera seek for riches by Exorcisms and Inchantments. The third was for the cure of such idle fools, worthy of punish∣ment: who not caring to know things past, by the reading of Histo∣ry, foolishly imagin they may arrive at the knowledg of foretelling things to come, by Astrology. The fourth was for the advantage of such simple folks, who having wasted all their Estates, and not having one farthing left, do notwith∣standing still proudly boast of their Noble Families. The LXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Some Princes of Pernassus, having spent a great mass of wealth in a stinking sort of Merchandise, and having thereby incurred great debts, are forced to profess them∣selves Bankrupts, and to leave Pernassus. IN the Exchange of Pernassus, the most important Bankruptship is discovered that ever hapned in the memory of man; for it fell not out (as usualy) between private Merchants, but between the most Po∣tent Princes of this State, in so much as no payments of monies are made
any where, and Merchants refuse to pay Letters of Exchange, every one standing at a gaze till they see where this business will end, which hath drawn along with it the breaking of divers other Merchants who were considerable. The rich Indian Fleet, almost wholly fraught with Sugars, which entred some daies ago into the Gulf of Lepanto, was the cause of these so many disorders. Some of the chief Princes of Pernas∣sus bought all the Sugar, which brought in great store of money; and then they provided many Magazines and Ware-houses, and made great provisions of Cauldrons, and other brass Vessels, and were at such an expence with all this, as they took up monies at huge high Interest from Merchants at all Marts by exchange and bartering. The true end of these Princes was to know for certain, whether they could happily compass the difficult business of preserving Turds, a business which had been for∣merly endeavoured by many great men, but still unfortunately: Many rich Lords were so resolved upon the undertaking of this stinking occu∣pation, as they neither spared for cost nor labour to bring this their stinking designto their desired end, for they put all their minnions, Hephe∣stion, idols, flatterers, and bawds into the great Caldrons which they had prepared, to whom they were not ashamed to pay all the most abject and base slavery and obedience. These unfortunate Confectioners co∣ver over this scum of people which are so fatal to men of power, with the sugar of honourable imployments, and highest dignities: and though it was clearly seen, that by reason of their stinking lewd conditions, they did not only not become ever a whit the sweeter in merit and vertue, but the more sugar was heaped upon them by those unfortunate Princes, the more they stunk in the nostrils of men of honour, yet did they dai∣ly persist the more in that their woful occupation, and the obstinacy of those ill advised Princes was so fatal, as the worser they found their busi∣ness to proceed, the more did their diligence and expences increase, to∣gether with the impossibility and shame of the fowle undertaking; those foolish Merchants did still beleeve, that the infinite quantity of Su∣gar and fragrant Musk had power to make the stink of those their shame∣ful favorites sweet and odoriferous. But at last, though late, they found their business impossible to be effected: and having consumed all their Sugar they were aware that those their Idols had not only shamefully in∣fected theirCourts by their insufferable stench, but had infinitely defam∣ed them, who for want of caution had doated upon so unsavory carrion; wherefore they quit the enterprise; and because the moneys which they had taken up at use, were already grown due, for fear of their Creditors, they have all played least in sight; and the more to aggravate so great a disorder, we hear that a great King, who that he might confectionate a base minnion of his was for certain the first who advised to this misera∣ble Merchandize, fell unfortunately off horseback as he fled away, and is since dead. His Majesty was very much troubled at these disorders, and to hinder the like inconveniences for the future, hath commanded, that on the first day of August (a remarkable day, since not only the uni∣versal Banckrupt, but the death of that great King hapned on that day) so sad a misfortune should be publickly commemorated, and if the exam∣ple of so great a Monarch could not deter powerful men from the like undertaking, it must be granted that this calamity was occasion'd through the same weakness of brain, by which privat men are blinded, and for ava∣rice undo themselves in pursuit of the Philosophers Stone.
The LXXX. ADVERTISEMENT. Certain prime Politicians of Pernassus pray the Ottoman Monarchy to tell them the true reason why she makes short war with her enemies, and are by her satis∣fyed. MEnante, who for the better satisfaction of his customers to whom he sends his weekly Gasetta's, is very diligent in prying into the very secretest passages of Pernassus, having discovered the other day that some Politicians of this Court desired Audience of the Ottoman Monarchy, was so watchful, as when they went to that mighty Queen, he went along with them in company; and heard Scipio deCastro, whom those Politicians call their File-leader, beseech her Majesty that she would vouchsafe to acquaint those Politi∣cians, that were with him, with the true reason wherefore she makes but short war with the Princes who are her enemies, even when she was vi∣ctorious, and certain to make greater acquisitions, and did prosecute o∣thers even to their uttermost ruine. I have heard that the Ottoman Monarchy did after no barbarous manner answer them; you must know Gentlemen, that I never use to lay down Arms, when I make war against Nations, which though never so great, are divided into several Principalities, wherein I finde discord and faction to reign, till I have totally conquered them: as I did in the Grecian Empire, whose division into several despoters, and the intestine discord which reigned amongst them, did I confess, throw open the gates unto me, and made way for my acquisition of that famous Empire. Likewise when I go against a Prince who is abandoned by his friends, I never make peace with him till I have fully conquered him; as was cleerly seen in the expedition which I made against the Soldan of Chaire. But when I fall upon aPrince whom either through his own power, or the adherence of his friends, I know I cannot utterly ruine in a short time, I use to make but short war with him, and that out of many important reasons. For knowing that it is a great piece of folly to desert ones own Country, out of hopes to conquer what belongs to another man, and infinitely detesting the opi∣nion, that lesser Armies, provided they be well disciplined, are fitter for war, then huge vast hosts of men, (an opinion which I hold to be wholly erroneous, as that which hath brought many Princes to utter desolati∣on) and loving onely the secure though costly way of overcoming by an unexhaustible multitude of souldiers, if I should make war long in a Province, I must so sack the Cities and people thereof, as I must lay it wholly waste; so as to the end that the subjugated people may in time of Peace recover the losses which they have suffered by war, I use to grant Peace unto them, upon any little acquisition of state that I have made.
Moreover, I make short war with my enemies, to the end that I may enjoy that great benefit which ascertains all enterprises, of assayling weak people with my veteran souldiers, and such as are ignorant in mat∣ter of Militia, I content my self with having made my self Master of some little part of their Country, for that when they shall be by their long training up in wars accustomed to war-faring, and become fit not onely to defend that part of their Country which yet remains unto them, but to recover what they have lost, I endeavour to make peace with them (which is usually desired by those who fight against a more powerful enemy) upon the best conditions that I can. And know, that this my advisedness is of such importance, as I may boldly say, it is from thence that I acknowledge the best part of my greatness; for no purchase, how great soever it be, can justly be compared to the great loss which a Prince undergoes, when by many years obstinate war, he inures his enemy to be a warriour. And in the wars which I have had of late with the Emperors of the house of Austria, I have been content∣ed to gaul them a little, and have not utterly subdued them, not onely out of the aforesaid reason, of not inuring the Germans, and Hungari∣ans to war, who are valiant people, bred up in wars, and naturally given to thirst after the hazard thereof, but for that I have by long experience found at last, that the dilating of Empires lies not, (as many foolishly believe) in over-running many Provinces in one year, but in taking some few, and in making those sure. For as much as eating is not re∣quisite for making a man fat, so the aggrandising of States depends not upon making of infinite acquisitions, but the making of a man fat, and the dilating of Empires consist wholly in little eating, and in good digestion, and this not without good reason. For to main∣tain States whichare newly gotten, by power and Arms, is a very laborious business, and even then very hard when the conquer∣ed Nation is weak. For the change of a natural Prince for a forraigner▪ chiefly when he is of a differing Religion and Nation, is so hateful a burthen to people, as they cannot accustom themselves to bear it without much difficulty. But it is exceeding difficult to keep a State newly won, which is inhabited by stout and warlike mn, nay e∣ven then when being utterly vanquished, and their Prince lost, they know not to vvhat or to vvhom to betake themselves. But vvhen one hath possest himself of a Province belonging to a povverful Prince, who wants not onely forces to defend what he is yet master of, but to regain what he hath lost, all that is gotten is of hard digestion, and al∣most impossible to be kept. But as all sorts of meat, though never so hard of digestion, concoct well when they are moderately eaten; so acquisitions made of warlike people, and whose ancient Prince lives still in power and greatness, ought to be small ones, to the end that they may be easily digested, and that people that are subjugated may of ene∣mies be made friends, and of strangers, natural subjects. Moreover I use to make but short war with a Prince, whose ruine tending to the de∣pression of other powerful Princes, may occasion too much State-jea∣lousie, and for this onely reason I did not continue the war which I made last against the house of Austria in Hungary; for the jealousie of losing Vienna, which is accounted theout-Bulwark of Germany and Ita∣ly, might certainly have drawn upon me the joynt forces of the Empire
of Germany, and of the Princes of Italy: and the great error which I committed in my unfortunate taking of the Island of Cyprus, made me know the danger that I may undergo by the Christian leagues; for for one Island which I may call a Desart, I lost by the Naval rout which was given me at the battel of Lepanto my reputation at Sea, which God knows when I shall recover; a loss which hath done me more harm then seven kingdoms of Cyprus can do me good. These Gentlemen thanked the Ottoman Monarchy, who wisht them upon any occurrency, that they would freely demand of her whatsoever they desired, for she would willingly give them all satisfaction; saying that they under∣stood the Theory of Policy which was learnt by books, and that she, though ignorant of Letters, might boast she was able to read in the schools that good and sound practical Policy, which was learnt by the governing of States, and managing of Arms. The LXXXI. ADVERTISEMENT. The Vertuosi of Pernassus, after having paid in the ac∣customed Donative of a Millin of Conceits to his Ma∣jesties Treasurer, according to their wont, ask a favour of him. THose who exactly understand the affairs of this State, know that the Vertuosi of Pernassus do not onely pay into the Exchequer, the Tythe of all the fruits of their wits, but a Tax which is laid upon every one according to his Talent. Whence it is that Ovid pays in to the publike receivers, yeerly eight Elegies, Virgil fourscore Heroick Verses, Horace five Odes, Martial eleven Epigrams, and others accor∣ding as they are taxed. Moreover the Vertuosi do every year by name of a Donative (yet such a Donative as if it be not willingly given, may without the loss of its modest Title, be levyed out of their goods by the Serjeants, and sold by the Candle) pay in into the Delphick Trea∣sury a Million of Conceits, which are after liberally distributed by the Muses to the meaner sort of the Literati, who wanting invention, deserve assisting for the meer love which they bear to learning; and up∣on this so large a Donative, his Majesty is pleased to grant his Vertuosi some such gracious favors as they are permitted to demand. So as the last week after the Donative was prepared, the Vertuosi resolved in a general Assembly to beg seven boons of Apollo, which were all put in a Scedule which was to be presented unto him. But the polisht Classs of Politicians told them, that upon occasion of demanding Graces from a Prince out of merit, they must shun the error of demanding many things; not onely for that Princes, who do quickly take distaste when they are to acquit themselves of an obligation, era annoyed at
the demand of many favours, but for that it always falls out that he who asks many things, is rewarded with the slightest. That therefore in such a case it were wisely done to beg but one onely boon, provided it were of moment, which upon such an occasion could not be denyed by the Prince without a mark of much ingratitude. The Politicians Advice was much commended by the whole Colledge of Vertuosi, and was followed by them. Wherefore the next day Bernardino Bis∣cia, and Tiberio Cerasi, the Vertuosi's Aadvocates, were sent unto his Majesty, who when they had presented Apollo with the Donative, did humbly beseech him, that in chusing Judges for his Courts of Justice, and other Officers for publike Magistracy, he would be pleased to chuse men of a benign Nature, of a courteous Genius, humble spirit, and patient Minde; and that he would send certain Hyteroclical, Bankrupts, phantastical, proud, insolent men, who were so arrant beasts, as did more vex and grieve those miserable men who had suits at Law, by their discomposed phantastical brains, then the suits themselves did; to be Boatsons and Auditors in the Galleys, where they might ercise their vexatious Talents of wit amongst slaves, which were so un∣supportable to free-born men. The LXXXII. ADVERTISEMENT. The Arcadians being up in Arms against their Prince for certain new Taxes imposed upon them, he wisely ap∣peaseth them by delivering up unto them, him who had perswaded him thereunto. THe Prince of Arcadia, a Prince who was much beloved and reve∣renced by his people, was perswaded some months ago by a wicked Projecter to impose some new Gabels upon his people, who after having complained bitterly to their Prince against this Projector, and desired that he might be banished the State as a most pernicious person, and that the Gabels imposed by his advice might be taken away, finding that their Petitions were without any fruit, and that whilst they bore re∣spect unto their Prince, their grievances were increased by the greedy Tax-takers, their patience being overcome, turned into such fury (as it always falls out when superiors seem not to value or care for the peoples complaints) as taking up Arms, and all of them publikely rebelling, they resolved to remedy their inconveniencies by disorders. They fell furiously first upon the Collectors of these new Gabels, and then their sedition increasing, they besieged the Prince in his Castle, whither for his greater safety he had withdrawn himself; nor satisfyed with all this insolency, they threatned worser mischief if they did not quickly re∣ceive the satisfaction which they desired. In the midst of these troubles the Prince consulted with those whose judgements he most relyed upon,
whether it were less shameful for him to seek his safety by flight, or to appease the people by anulling the new Gabels. When the news of this insurrection, and the Princes intention of quieting those tumults with so much infamy to himself, was known by some of his neighbor∣ing Princes, who very well knew that their interest were concerned in this Arcadian insurrection, they suddainly with their whole Courts be∣took themselves to Arms, and getting on horseback, entred the Castle, where they found the Prince of Arcadia, who just then made the Edict for revocation of these Gabels be published. These Princes earnestly desired him that he would neither injure nor shame himself nor his neigh∣bours so much as to be discouraged at this the peoples insurrection, for it would be too scandalous an example to the subjects of his other neighbour Princes, when it should be known that the people of Arcadia having rebelled against their Prince by reason of Taxes, they had through fear and force of Arms caused him to revoke them. That therefore to the loss of his last drop of blood he should defend that his Authority which other Princes had kept unviolated among a much greater and more dreadful people; and amidst a thousand dangers had so long continued their subjects grievances, Taxes, and Gabels, as there not being any man alive that can truly say he ever knew any of them taken off, even those which were at first sessed but for a limited time, were by all Nations thought to be immortal. They told him likewise, that he was to consider that the common people which are en∣satiable in all their desires, by the bad example of taking away these new Gabels might grow so bold as to demand the abolishment of the old ones. All which things did upon this urgent occasion admonish him to appease the incensed people by the usual remedy which had been with good success practised by great Princes, of dlivering up the first in∣venter of those Gabels into the peoples power, to the end that by his ruine who had advised the mischief, the tumult might be quieted; a re∣medy which they said was so much the more certain, for that the com∣mon people who take up Arms upon like occasions resemble dogs, which when they bark violently at any one, were appeased by the satis∣faction of biting a stone which had been thrown at them, and had hurt them. The Prince of Arcadia answered these Princes, that he very well knew the Counsel which they gave him was good, but that he thought it too unjust. To which one of them replyed, that in extre∣mities a man must have courage enough to know how to use corrosives for Cankers. The Prince of Arcadia did then imbrace the propoun∣ded proposition, and immediately caused publike Proclamation to be made throughout all his Country, that he being seduced by this wicked Projector, was pleased that his beloved people who thought themselves so highly injured by him, should take what revenge they pleased of that sedicious fellow. And soon after the inventer of those grievan∣ces was delivered into the power of those inraged people, who first with their teeth, then with their hands, and lastly with all sort of Arms did so deal with him, as having made more pieces then one of him, they dragged him in triumphant manner through all the streets of the City. The which being done, the Prince opened the Castle gates, and was thanked by all the people, who ran joyfully to kiss his hands for the sa∣tisfaction, which he had given them; and he taking them all into his
favor, continued in the peaceful receiving of those his new Taxes, which were willingly payed by the people, they being satisfyed with that revenge: so proper is it to the common people inragedly to bite the dart which hath wounded them, and affectionately to kiss the hand that threw it. The LXXXIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Marcus Portius Cato whilst he reprehends Salustius Crispus for flattering the Emperour Tiberius, is severely taxt by him for being too obstinate. ALL that come to this Court do infinitely wonder, why Marcus Portius Cato, a personage so famous as he is celebrated and exalted even to the skyes by all writers for his austere manners, integrity of life, wisdom, and for his excessive love, which he hath always shewed to his Country, is not held in so high esteem by his Majesty, as so cryed up a subject seems to deserve: for though from the first day that he entred Pernassus he hath ever aymed at honorable imployments, yet could he never obtain any: nay the best Literati of this Court, who do ex∣ceedingly favor him, have cleerly found a resolution in his Majesty, by no means to make use of such a man. The reason of this Apollo's a∣version, forasmuch as is said by them who are quickest sighted, is, for that Apollo having well examined Cato's minde and Genius, his Majesty holds him to be but an impetuous, proud, impertinent fellow, a ca∣pricious wit of the first head, one that means well, but judges ill, and one who is all zeal, crusted up in imprudency; which qualities are very hateful to Apollo, who thinks it very ill done to bestow publike im∣ployments upon such companions, as ought onely to be conferred up∣on men civilly behaved, and upon such as are so far from giving distaste to any who have business, as they know it chiefly becomes them to give at least satisfactory words to all men. This Cato hapned to be present two days ago, when Salustius Crispus, one of Tiberius his inti∣mate servants, did not onely openly flatter his master, but to the end that he might obtain some very chief place, had humbled himself to some of the most abject Courtiers, but such as were well esteemed by the Emperor: at which base action Cato seemed to be so scandallized, as mightily reprehending Salust; he told him, that men ought to obtain places from their Princes by deserts; and that preferments obtained by the means of unworthy people, did not become men of worth; and that his praising of Tiberius, a man who was known to all the world to be so vitious, had purchast him as much blame, as he might have won praise by putting him in minde of his faults. To this reprehension Salust without any the least alteration of minde, answered; To be free spoken
doth not always help, nor do men always win reputation thereby, as you believe; and as it is folly to sow good seed in the sands, so all counsel is cast away when it is given to obstinate people, and where there is no hope of doing any good thereby. For Suadere principi quod oporteat, multi Laboris. Assentatio ergo Principem quemcumque sine affectu &c. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist. But upon such occasions as these, goodness, or honesty must be ac∣companyed with wisdom; and who hath not wit enough to fit the Sayles of his interest to every favourable wind that blows, is a fool if he sayle in the tempestuous Sea of the Court, wherein those obstinate men who cannot accommodate their wits to place, time, and persons, do either perish in their first voyage, or run hazard of danger∣ous tempests all their life time, without ever gaining the Haven of their coveted desires. Know Cato, that they are pointed at by all men as great fools, who standing in need of other mens assistance, mar their bu∣siness, onely because they will stand upon the punctilio of what is meet, and on the scruples of reputation. The greatest wisdom of a perfect Courtier, consists in knowing how to fit himself to all humors; without which it is impossible to come to any good in Court: and he who attains to his desired greatness of obtaining a principal digni∣ty or a great Office, is much more admired by every one for the digni∣ty whih he possesseth, then undervalued for the means he used to come by it. Every stain of honor which is committed for the bettering of a mans condition, is excellently well washt away, if he can make vertu∣ous use of his new obtained Honor. And to preach chastity (as you do) in Bawdy-houses, or fasting in time of Carnevale, is no better then to make musick to them that are deafe, or to light the blinde with Torches. And of this which I say, I will crave no other Testi∣mony then your own, when in the Roman Commonwealth where you made publike profession of being chief Corrector of the Press, you did but badly govern your own private condition, without ever being able to better the publike affairs.
The LXXXIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having by a new Edict inhibited Poets to make use of any fabulous Creature in their verses, at the fer∣vent intreaties of the Poets, his Majesty revokes the said Edict. FOur days since, the Urban Pretor of Pernassus, publisht an Edict in the usual places by sound of Trumpet, and by order from Apollo, that his Majesty being resolved by no means to tolerate that men who should speak nothing but Truths, should invent falshoods, and having heard that Poets in their writings had mentioned Tritons, Basilisks, U∣nicorns, Sirens, Hypogriffiks, Phenixes, Sphinxces, Centaurs, and o∣ther Animals, as realities, being creatures which mother Nature did never create, and that many mischiefs arose from the publishing of such things; understanding particularly that many notorious cheaters sold the Unicorns horn at great rates to simple people, and the other afore∣said things, did by that his Decree declare the aforesaid creatures and other things to be express lyes, meer fables, and Poetical fictions. That therefore his pleasure was that Poets should for the future forbear com∣mitting any such disorders, and that they should make use of nothing in their verses, save what was really produced by nature, upon pain of being banisht Pernassus. The capricious Poets were scandalized at this news, wherefore they assembled themselves suddainly together in their Academy, where by common consent they chose San∣nezzarro for their spokesman to request the revocation of that Edict which was so prejudicial to their Poetry. Sanezzarro presented himself forthwith before the Pretor, complaining bitterly, that in an Age which did so abound in lyes the vertuous inventions of Poets should onely be forbidden, a thing the more worthy consideration, for that by exempting the invention of all fabulous things from their Poems, the very soul thereof was taken away. And that the Poets, who had always been obedient to all his Majesties commands, would wil∣lingly submit to the rigor of this Edict, if it were made universal. That it was very well known that infinite things, yea which much commen∣deed Encomiums, were named for truths by both the meanest, and best Literati of Pernassus, which were no where to be found; and that it would be as acceptable as useful to declare them to be false. The Pre∣tor wisht Sanezzarro freely to name those things, which were with ad∣miration named for truths in Pernassus, and yet were false; for Apollo who was no respecter of persons, would assuredly make them be put in∣to the same Edict. Then said Sanezzarro, uninteressed men, people who love the publike good better then their own private affairs, Offi∣cers who are not slaves to their passions, Princes who are not ambitious of coveting what belongs to other men, are publikely said to live by thousands and thousands in the world, and yet it is better known to A∣pollo
then to any other, whether any such Phenixes be to be found in Egypt, Arabia, or in any other part of the Earth; that therefore if his Majesty would insert these Chimera's into his Edict, and make the Law general, Poets would have no just cause of complaint. This being said, the Pretor went presently to Apollo, and acquainted him with Sanezzarro's desire; who did so much wonder at the request made by Sanezzarro, as he said these very words to the Pretor. Now I per∣ceive the Poets have reason for their complaint, and that my Edict is not universal, therefore revoke it without more ado: for I will rather take the shame upon my self, to let my Literati know, that I was inconsi∣derate in the publication of this Edict, then shame all mankind by ma∣king it know that men absolutely uninteressed are meerly fa∣bulous. The LXXXV. ADVERTISEMENT. Giovangirolimo Aquaviva, haveng overcome a very great difficulty, is with much Honor admitted into Per∣nassus. IN the Assembly of the Vertuosi which was held for that purpose on Thursday last, the credential Letters brought by a Gentleman who was sent to this Court from Signior Givangirolimo Aquaviva Duke of Atri, were read; who afterwards delivering his Embassie, did in very handsome language desire that the Duke his Master might be admitted into Pernassus; and in the same assembly the good deserts of the said Duke were diligently examined, and maturely discust, and this noble Duke being found to be very well verst in all the Liberal Sci∣ences and arrived at the height of excellency in the Mathematicks; by his Majesties express order who was ever very partial to this noble Fa∣mily, wherein learning seems rather to be hereditary, then purchas'd by long study, was created superintendent of the Triangles and lineato∣re Maggiore di euclide: after this the wonted Cavalcata was decreed unto him, and being accompanyed by the Lord Poets, and the other learned Princes of fruitful Parthenope, with many of their servants in rich liveries, the shew was very noble, and worthy so deserving a Prince; but the greatest wonder was, to see the Duke discourse a long time with Homer, and Pindarus not making use of Valla, or any other interpreter, certainly a very glorious action in these Times, and which purchas'd the Duke the more glory, for that the Vertuosi of Pernassus did consi∣sider that this Princes learning was of the very finest sort which makes them so much respected who are therewith indued. Nor did he this out of necessity to eat bread, nor to make use of it (as many do) for a Patrimony, but onely that, though he was born of noble blood, and very rich, he might not be thought an ignorant Plebeian, and an un∣learned
begger: for this Prince always held that perfect Nobility, and true riches did onely consist in vertue. The Duke was already come with his noble Cavalcata into the Via Sacra, when it was made known unto him in his Majesties name, by a publike messenger, that he must return back, for there was so great an impediment found in him, as by vertue of the Pegasean Pragmatical Law he could not be admitted into Pernassus. Upon this unfortunate news il Rota, il Tansillo, and many other Neapolitan Poets of the first Classis, hasted to Apollo, and un∣derstood that the impediment arose, for that the illustrious Octavius Car∣dinal Aquaviva, when he was Prelate in the Court of Rome, had exer∣cised the place of Maistre d'Hostelle under Pope Gregory the fourteenth, and that since it was known in Pernassus, that the formerly stately Courts of Princes, through the tricks and inventions of beggerly Mastre d'Hostels were infected with the sordid contagion of foul avarice, it was enacted by a very severe Edict, that for the future, not onely such as had exercised the hateful Office of Maistre d'Hostelle in Princes Courts should never be admitted into Pernassus, but that all that de∣scended from them, or were any ways allyed unto them, even to the for∣tieth degree, should be for ever excluded. The Duke was very much troubled at this unfortunate rub; but having known that Edict long before, he had foreseen the difficulties, which he might meet withal in Pernassus, so as to remove away all obstacles, he took a letter out of his bosom written with his own hand unto his son, wherein he did expresly forbid him to accept of that place; but the business of Maistre d'Ho∣stel is so odious in this Court, as the Letter in justification of the Duke, was not read, nor any ways taken into consideration; and now the bu∣siness grew desperate, and the Cavalcata began to return backwards, when Cesare Caporale a Poet, who having been greatly obliged to the house of Aquaviva, hasted to Apollo, to whom he largely attested, that Signior Octavio, as he was nobly minded, so had he always lived in a liberal manner, and that he was not made Maistre d'Hostelle by that free handed Pope for having a narrow soul, and given to getting, but onely that by the dignity of that so honorable a degree, he might shew him to be a person fit to be made a Cardinal, as it soon after fell out; and that whilst he did discharge that place, he studyed nothing more then how to feed the Vertuosi plentifully, to protect the Literati, and to reward those that deserved well; a piece of generosity, wherin he did always shew such liberality and greatness, as finding that certain roguish But∣lers, mingled water with wine in the Popes Cellar, he commanded by a severe and noble Edict, which even to this day is punctually observed, that it should not be lawful for any one for the future to have any water in those Cellars. Apollo was so well pleased with this decree, as he commanded that it should be written in large letters of gold by Croes∣sis that famous Millanese Scribe and chief writer of Text-hand, in the Delphick Library, and that for the honor and glory of the famous Family of the Aquavive, and for the Dukes reputation who had in∣riched the present age with so deserving a son, it should be carryed be∣fore him in the Cavalcata, which was the noblest and most admired thing that was seen therein: and to compleat the Dukes contentment, and the splendor of his house, his Majesty decreed the Title of Mecenas to Signior Octavio Cardinal Aquaviva, and sent it him by an express Messenger yesterday in forma dignum.
The LXXXVI. ADVERTISEMENT. The Duke of Laconia to revenge himself by way of Law upon a chief Senator of State for some private distastes that he had taken at him, commanded Fle∣minio Cartaro, his Iudge of Assize, to proceed se∣verely against him upon some heads which he would give him, and he denyes to obey him. THe Duke of Laconia to take revenge for some distastes which he pretended to have received from a chief Senator of his State, be∣gan under other pretences to trouble him at Law; and having made him be imprisoned, he commanded Flaminio Cartaro one of his Judges of Assize, to make severe process against him, and gave him some heads in writing, whereupon to examine him. Cartaro when he had considered the quality of the person against whom he was to proceed, and the faults which were pretended to be laid to his charge, easily perceived that the Duke would vent his private rage of hatred against that so signal personage, by colour of justice. And thinking it mis∣became a man of his place to serve as a Minister to other mens passions, and knowing that the purchase of unjust Princes favors by the shedding of innocent blood would soon be severely vindicated both by God and man; rather then to stain his reputation by so foul an action, put on that generous resolution, which ought to be imitated by all Judges in the like case; he escaped by night out of Laconia, and some six days ago came to this Court. The Duke of Laconia as soon as he heard Car∣taro was fled, and knew what way he took, sent forthwith two Embas∣sadours to Apollo, who earnestly desired his Majesty that for weigh∣ty state-Interest Cartaro might be kept forthcoming, and sent back to their Prince. Apollo who before he would take any resolution, would know the truth of the business from Cartaro's self, caused him to be im∣mediately sent for, and before the Embassadors asked him the reason of his so sudden and secret flight from Laconia. Who plainly and ve∣ry particularly acquainted Apollo with the truth of what had hapned between him and the Duke of Laconia, and then added, that had it been in an hereditary state, he would in giving judgement have obeyed his Princes will; but that in an elective Principality, as was that of La∣conia, where Brevi Momento summa verti possunt, Tacit. lib. 5. Annal. and where in the twinkling of an eye, he might command in chief, who did formerly obey, and where new Princes are usually either of a differing Genius, or contrary factions to the former, when a Prince, say it be not out of private hatred, but justly doth vex any great Officer, he should not finde either Judges, Advocates, or Serjeants ready to serve him. For new Princes, who commonly do not approve of their
Predecessors Actions, when they cannot cudgel the Ass (the dead Prince) vent all their rage and fury upon the pack-saddle (the Judge whom they have in their power) and that in faults committed by great men, and executed by those that are meaner, the known proverb was very true, that the weakest went to the wall; for it was not onely the cu∣stom of angry dogs, but even of judicious men, to revenge them∣selves upon the stone, when they cannot come by the Arm that threw it: and that this his doctrine was so true, as he could give them the exam∣ple of a famous Doctor of Castel Bolognese, who was forced to feel the Tempest of that Rage, which was not possible to shower down up∣on those great dogs, which had good teeth to bite withal. The LXXXVII. ADVERTISEMENT. Some Princes of this State having presented Apollo with a Book of the Reason of State, the Vertuosi of Per∣nassus not approving of the definition of State therein given, publish a new one, which was very much displeasing to those Princes. THe greatest Princes of this Court, did with general applause pre∣sent Apollo two days ago with a book which treated of the Reason of State: and press'd very much, that as being a very meritorious work it might be put into the Delphick Library. Apollo who knew very well how much Princes abhor those writings, which treating of State∣affairs, discover their souls, fashions, and inward intentions to the meaner sort of men, wondered very much when he saw it was greatly desired by them that the book might be published to the world; and as it com∣monly falls out in such like cases, he sorely suspected, lest these Princes might in such a business hide some private ends of their own; where∣upon according to the practice of this Court, the book was assigned o∣ver to the Library Censors, who did the more diligently consider it, for that they likewise did apprehend some cheat, which they soon found out. They therefore told his Majesty the next day, that those Princes did so highly celebrate the book of the Reason of State which they had presented unto him out of self-interest; for nothing being treated of therein but the Politicks In genere, there was no mention made therin of that reason of State which the Title promised; and that Reason of State being of the Politicks, the Author of the book had craftily, (and peradventure bribed so to do by the Princes) given it the specious defi∣nition which belongs to the whole body of the Politicks; saying, That the reason of State was the knowledge of fitting means to ground, maintain, and inlarge a State; by which gilded definition they endeavoured to make the Reason of state appear to be a good thing,
which Learned men, and such as did more fear God, then flatter Princes, freely termed the Devils Law. Apollo did infinitely dislike the falshood used by that Author, and immediatly gave order, That the Title of Reason of State should be taken from that Book (which otherwise was very elegantly written,) and that of the Politicks, put in the place of it: At which, the Princes were infinitly displeased; when not long after, one mightily cried up for his skill in the Politicks, did with excellent Reasons refute the former Erroneous definition of the Rea∣son of State, and gave it publickly another definition; which was, That the Reason of State was a Law useful for Commonwealths, but absolutely contrary to the Laws, both of God and Man. A Definition which being written in Letters of Gold, and afterwards affixed upon the Columns of the Peripatetick Porch, was approved of by all the Literati for as absolutely true, as the other was in extremity false. The Princes, who thought that this new Definition was published onely to put a scorn upon them, were so highly incensed, as some of them moved to take up Arms against the Literati, and to end that im∣portant business with Sword in hand; but the wiser sort did mollifie the rage of the more capricious, and did joyntly present themselves before Apollo, where Lewis the Twelfth, that famous King of France, speaking to His Majesty in the name of all the other Princes, com∣plained, That a Definition was given to the Reason of State, by the Literati, which was very wicked; which if His Majesty should not soon recal, their States should be put into confusion. Apollo answered King Lewis, That he did from that time forward de∣clare the Definition given lately by his Vertuosi to the Reason of State, to be utterly scandalous, and wicked; but that to pro∣vide against the evil which so free a Definition might occasion amongst their Subjects, it was not a good remedy to cloake it over with fair words, as the Author of the Book had done; for mischiefs were not cured by concealing; and that he and all the rest of the Princes would confess the Definition to be true, which they seemed so much to dread, if they would call to mind, that when they did any thing, which for the impiety thereof, did neither a∣gree with the Laws of God, nor man, if they were afterwards asked by any one why they had done so impious a thing; they were ready to alleadge the Reason of State for the occasion thereof. Then turning to Lewis the twelfth, Apollo said; The better to manifest the truth of what I say, to your self, and to all these Princes which are here present, I will make use of one of your Actions, which will make it appear clearly, that the Definition of State, published by my Literati, and which you do now so much op∣pugn, is very true. You know, your first Wife was Sister to Charles the eighth, your Predecessor in the Kingdome of France; and I know, you likewise remember that you did adhere to the Conspiracy made by Francis Duke of Burgundy, by Charles Duke of Burgundy, and by many other great Lords, against the Kingdome of France,
and that you were taken prisoner by King Charles your Sisters hus∣band; and that whilst the putting of you to death as a Rebel was in a∣gitation, your Wives efficacious Prayers was that which saved your life. You know likewise, that Charles being dead a little while af∣ter, you succeeded him in his Kingdom, and that you might mar∣ry the Queen Dowager, Wife to the late Charles, you got to be Divorc'd from your former Wife, which you excused by pretending that your Marriage with so great a Princess was done by compulsion; as if there needed violence to marry the Sister of so great a Prince to any one; you your self know Lewis, that this Divorce was nei∣ther answerable to the Laws of God nor Man: tell me then what was the reason that moved you to banish that wife your bed, to whom you confess you owe your life. King Lewis freely answered Apollo, that doubtless it was the Reason of State that had compelled him so to do; for the Queen Dowager of France having in her, the noble Dowry of the Duke∣dome of Britany, he had marryed her, to the end that that Pro∣vince which was of so great importance, and from which France had formerly received so much mischief, should not again be dis∣united from his Kingdom. See then said Apollo, how you made that marriage which you knew did neither agree with the Laws of God nor man, being forced to do so by Reason of State; by which example, you and all these Princes may cleerly see that the Definition made by my Literati of the Reason of State is most true; now then since you are convinced of the foul impiety thereof, know that the best means that you can and ought to use to keep your self and your State from being damnifyed thereby, is, not to use it, for it is too bare∣faced Hypocrisie to seem more to abhor fould words, then foul deeds.
The LXXXVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Marcantonio Moreto desires Apollo that he may have leave to make an Oration in the publike Schooles of Pernassus in the praise of the Clemency of the most glorious King of France, Henry the Fourth, but is denyed it. MErcantonio Moreto a famous French Orator, told Apollo some few days since, that having exactly examined all the vertues of all the French Kings, and compared them with the valor and glory of King Henry the Fourth, he found that there was not any of them that might be compared to him; and that to make the French adore so gal∣lant a King, and to incite all Christian Princes to heroick vertue, he desired his Majesty to give him leave to declame in the praise of so glo∣rious a King publikely in the Rhetorick school: and because to speak of all the vertues which did abound in so great a King, would require more then a months space to do it; to the end that his Oration might not exceed the usual time of one hour, he would onely celebrate that admirable vertue of Clemency, which was so peculiar to his Henry, as that he cleerly found, by the use thereof he had so far exceeded all hu∣mane mansuetude, as that he bordered upon heavenly mercy: for he had pardoned such injuries in his most implacable enemies, as would ne∣ver have been forgotten by any one save by a King of France; a vertue which appeared to be so much the more eminent in that great Monarch, for that in these so corrupt present times, to pardon injuries vvas not thought to be an heroick and vertuous action, but base and abject covvardise. The same Moreto told every one, that contrary to vvhat he could ever have believed, Apollo vvas highly incensed at that his re∣quest, and that with an angry countenance he said, he was grosly igno∣rant in going about to celebrate the most revengeful and implacable K. that did ever live for his mercifulness: and that if he would praise the infinite valor of Henry the fourth his invincible constancy in adverse fortune, moderation in prosperity, his excellent knowledge in military affairs (wherin he had far exceeded all Kings and Commanders who had ever purchased the glorious name of warlike) the more then humane vi∣vacity of his spirit, the vigilancy of his indefatigable minde, or his dexterous government of that great Kingdom, he nor his Literati, who were partially addicted to so puissant a King, could not hear any more melodious Harmony: but that since that noble acquisition which he made of France, he had revenged himself much more cruelly upon his enemies, then merciless Augustus had done by his execrable Proscription; & that Pernassus was no place to exaggerate falshoods in: Notwithstand∣ing this so resolute answer, Moreto was not discouraged, but with great observancy replyed; that having exactly considered all the vertues of
his King, he did again affirm unto his Majesty that he found not that any one of them did shine more brightly in him then his clemency. Then Apollo looking with a very pleasant countenance upon Moreto, said, tis plainly seen thou honest French man, that thou art onely a meer Grammarian, for thou seemest not to know that that King onely ought not to be vindicative, who (as did Augustus) kills his enemies when he hath conquered them; for to take an evil wishers life away, to the end that he may not see his enemies Triumphs and prosperity; to the end that he may not suffer a thousand torments and deaths hourly, is a kind of pitty. He is to be accounted revengeful, and infinitely cruel, who suffers him to live, who confounds him with pardon, and who doth continually martyrise and torment him by his worthy actions and per∣petual prosperity, as yours and my beloved Henry hath been observed to do more then all the Kings that ever were on earth; who still grow∣ing more and more cruel, by his perpetual felicity, by shewing to the world his Justice, liberality, advisedness, and great piety; did still the more afflict those his enemies, who that they might render him odious to his people of France, did openly affirm, that if ever he should come to be King of that powerful Monarchy, he would surely prove the ut∣ter and final ruine thereof. And how much did it grieve the enemies of so great a King thinkest thou Moreto, when they saw his victory com∣pleated, and his fortune confirmed by his own worth, and valor? and with what an eye thinkest thou they did behold him conqueror, trium∣phing, and not onely adored, but reverenced by his people, according to the ancient custom of France? so glorious, as the very first day that he mounted the Throne, he became the absolute Arbitrator of the world. Dost not thou believe it did much more grieve these mens hearts to see the King of Navar, whose suppression they had so much indeavoured, become the most glorious King of France, then when they thought themselves surest of his down-fall? and then confirmed in his Kingdom by so plentiful an issue, as they are forced to confess they were sent him by Heaven? Dost not thou believe Moreto, that these his malevolents esteem so great happiness, such prosperity given by God to this our King, to be their shame and misery? They are perpetually tortured, who for their greater confusion are suffered to live, being forced to see the Halcyon days of this powerful Kingdom of France.
The LXXXIX. ADVERTISEMENT. A Literato presents Apollo with an Oration made by him in praise of the present Age: Which is laid aside byish Majesty, as not grounded upon any truth. SOme few daies since a famous Literato presented Apollo with an eloquent Oration composed by him in praise of the present age, wherein he clearly shewed how much of latter times goodness, godli∣ness, and all sorts of vertue are increased in the world, and concluded, that from such excellent beginnings, mankind might securely hope, that that happy. Golden Age so cry'd up by the Poets, was now very nigh at hand. This Literato and his Oration found but cold acceptance at Apollo's hands; and being asked whether he had so well considered the Age which he had so highly praised, as he ought to have done, and with what spectacles he had viewed and contemplated it, he answered, that he had not only viewed the Courts of a great many famous Princes, the most accurately that he could, but had travailed over the greatest part of Europe, in all which Courts and Countries he had diligently obser∣ved the lives of those who commanded in chief, and their fashions who obeyed, and that he had observed nothing in them which was not highly to be praised; and that then in passing his judgement upon all the particulars of the present Age, which appeared to him to deserve praise, he, not aiding himself by any spectacles, made only use of the eyes of his judgement, which he thought were not dim sighted. Apollo reply'd, That surely he had written that his Oration in the dark, for that the true state of the present age, the true intimate intentions of those that govern in it, and the real meanings of those that live in it, could not be seen, no not by Linceus's eyes, unless a man did put the purest Politick Spectacles upon his nose, whereby he might see the truth of passions, which lay deeply hid in the breasts of modern men; who were so mysterious in all their proceedings, as their inward mea∣nings appeared least outwardly. Which being said, Apollo caused a pair of excellent spectacles to be given to that Literato, which were lately made in Tacitus his Forge, and bad him view the present age through them, and then tell him whether it appeared to be the same which he had so exalted in his Oration. The other obey'd, and after having well contemplated and considered the Age through those specta∣cles; Sir, said he, That which I now see wih these spectacles, is not the age wherein we now live, but a world full of ostentation, and outward appearance, with very little substance of true vertue, where an infinite number of men are lined with feigned simplicity, clad with the false Alchumy of appearing goodness; but full fraught with cosenage, tricks, and plots, where nothing is more studied, then how to over-reach ones companion, and to hurl his neighbour into the hell of wicked en∣terprises, by false pretence of sanctified meanings. I see a world full of
Interest, in which I cannot discern charity, and candid love between the Father and the Son; and by these miraculous spectacles I plainly see, that the World is nothing but a large Shop, where all things un∣der the Moon are bought and sold; so as the true meaning of men that live therein, is meer gain, and how to heap up monies; and in fine, the world is so ugly, as it is hateful to me to keep these spectacles on my nose; for certainly mankind might be truely termed miserable, if our present age, which I have deservedly praised in my Oration, were in any the least degree like this which I behold. Truely, said Apollo, the world which you now have seen with these politickspectacles, is the ve∣ry same which you glory so much in having praised, where those who will pass their judgement without making use of these penetrating spe∣ctacles, are like those unfortunate wretches, who putting their hands in∣to a hole to find a Creafish, pluck out a Toad. The XC. ADVERTISEMENT. Christopher Columbus, and other famous discoverers of the new world, desire Apollo that Immortality may be decreed them for their noble daring, but are denied it. CHristophano Colombo, Ferrante Cortese, Magelin Pizzaro, Gama, Americo Vespuchi, and many other famous discoverers of the new World, appeared two daies since in this Court: Never was there seen a more signal pleasing spectacle in Pernassus, nor fuller of curiosity, then the entrata made by these Gentlemen, who were met, accompani∣ed, visited, welcomed, and lodg'd by the Princely Poets, with as much affection and honour as men deserve, who by their incessant labour, and numberless hazards, have inriched the Universe with a new World. Nor is it to be believed what consolation the Vertuosi received, for having at last come to the clear and distinct knowledg of the quantity and quality of that great Machine of the earth, which immortal God hath created to be an habitation for men: In so much as Ptolomy, Varro, and other Cosmographers did very often visit these Gentlemens houses; not be∣ing able to satisfie their curiosity of seeing those parts of Asia, Africa, and whole America together with the Cape of good Hope, and the Straits of Magelen, which for so many thousand years were unknown to Anti∣quity. Astrologers have hardly satisfied their desires by the purchast knowledg which they had of the Stars of the other Pole. Aristotle was greatly amazed when these Gentlemen told him, that the Torrid Zone did not only not burn through the heat of the Sun, as all Philoso∣phy-Schools did hold affirmatively, but that it is rather too humid, and that it is inhabited by an infinite number of people: and it was a novel∣ty which appeared to surpass all human miracles, to hear that the Win∣ters were there too cold and rainy, when the Sun was perpendicular o∣ver
the peoples heads: By which he clearly found how many falshoods he and other Philosophers had published of the Torrid Zone, and how fallacious it was to give positive judgement, out of meer conjectures upon the wonders of the all powerful God miraculously fabricated; and he was very much pleased to arrive at last at the knowledge of the true cause of the flowing of the River Nile, whereof, together with many other Philosophers, he remembred he had said many foolish things. Se∣neca the Tragedian made use of so great a novelty, arrived in Pernassus to his immortal glory, boasting every where, that being inspired by Divine Poetical fury, he had by his famous Verses foretold for above 1400 years ago so great a discovery: And some Literati, who laugh∣ing at him, said that Seneca in that his Tragedy spoke but by guess, tast∣ed of his Majesties displeasure; who thinking that the honour of the Muses was much concern'd by that incredulity, made them inhabit for many daies amongst the ignorant. Dantz Aligieri won more glory, who had affirmatively held in his Verses, that the Antartick Pole, which had never been seen by any in his daies, was un Grand Crosiero. These famous Hero's had audience on Tuesday last in the Royal Hall, where Apollo was assisted by the Muses, who were come thither out of a curiosity to see the faces of those men who had courage enough not to dread the incensed Seas, and to plough them up (though they were unknown unto them, and full of shelves and rocks) even in the darkest and most tempestuous night. Columbus, after having kist the last step of the Royal Throne, and the nethermost hem of the Muses garment, and made low reverence to the Colledg of Literati, said in a stately O∣ration for him and his Companions, that the two glorious Princes, Fer∣dinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile having extirp'd the wicked Mahometan Sect from out the Catholick Kingdoms of Spain, at the expence of much gold and bloud, God was resolved to gratifie them with a gift worthy of so great piety: And that therefore his Divine Majesty having debarred the courage and curiosity of men in former times from discovery of the new world, had reserved it to remune∣rate the zeal which he had discovered in those two famous and powerful Princes, to his service; who being born to propagate the holy Christi∣an Religion amongst Infidels, had piously caused it to be planted a∣mongst those Idolaters; and that the ever living God having at last per∣mitted men to make discovery of the new world, he himself first, and then those other famous Pilats that were there with him, had so succes∣fully sailed over all the vast Ocean, as after having discovered new and large Provinces, and very rich Kingdoms, they following the same source which his Majesty had laboured so much in, from the East to the West, had compassed the whole world about. By which their fortunate fate, not only Cosmography, Astronomy, and the Meteors, but even Physick, and the other praise-worthy Sciences had received singular ad∣vantage; and that to boot with the curiosity of infinite diversity of Customs and Rites, newly discovered by them amongst incredible num∣bers of people: they had also inriched the old world with spices, and medicines excellently good for the life of man, and with such riches, as they had caused Rivers of Gold and Silver to run throughout Europe, and great store of pretious stones; and that in reward for so great labours, they only desired that that eternal fame might be grant∣ed
to them and to their memory, for the purchase whereof they had freely undertaken, and happily finished that which appeared so dread∣ful to men of former times. Columbus's Speech was attentively list∣ned unto; and it was immediately decreed by his Majesty, that these so famous Heroes should be preferred before the Argonauts, and that the glorious Ship-Victory, with which Mageline had first compassed the world, should be placed in heaven amongst the fixt stars, and that the names of so illustrious men should be ingraven with indilable Chara∣cters in the Tables of Eternity, in the Foro Massimo. And whilst Ni∣cholas Perinotto the Delphick chief Chancellor, held forth the Decree that it might be the more binding, Mario Molza appeared in the Royal Hall, a cry'd up Poet, but very deformed, as not having any hair ei∣ther on his head or face, who was yet rendred more monstrous by his having no nose, his face full of gum and scabs, who pointing with his finger to his wounds, said with a lowd voice, These which you see, Sir, in my face, are the new Worlds, the new Customs and rites of the Indians; these are the Jewels, Pearls, Drugs, Astrology, Meteors, Cosmography, these are the Rivers of Gold wherewith these new and unfortunate Argonauts of the French Pox, who are come into Pernas∣sus only to add scorn and derision to our mischiefs, have enriched and filled the world; these are the new receits which they have brought with them to infect mankind with a disease so contagious, so cruel and shameful, as it is greatly disputed amongst the Learned, whether it do more pollute the body, or shame reputation: These hair-braind men have enrich'd and beautified the world with these Jewels wherewith you see my face blistered, and my body wounded; these implacable ene∣mies of mankind have corrupted the very generation of man. Then turning towards Colombo, Molza began to unty his briches, but the Muses, to keep their eyes from being contaminated with the sight of a∣ny obscenity, commanded the under Officers to hinder him from so do∣ing; which Molza perceiving; I, said he, most Divine Dieties; will shew no dishonesty in this august place, but the woful calamities, and miserable wounds brought by these men from their stately new worlds, which are unknown to all former Physick and Chyrurgery. And how, Signor Christophano, would you have men taste the odoriferousness of those Aromaticks which you so much glory to have brought from the Indies, if the French Pox, wherewith you have so perfumed the world, be a capital enemy to the nose? I know not with what face you can say, that God, to reward the merits of your Potent Princes, hath bestowed upon them the world which you have discovered, when it is much more true, that his divine Majesty hath made use of you to trans∣plant the pestiferous French Pox, which is so sore a scourge to the li∣bidinous, into Europe. And how dare you say that you have enrich'd the world with Drugs, if Pepper, Cynamon, and Cloves cost thrice as much now as they did, before you did imbitter those Dolci Fichi, which I have so highly praised in my Verses, with the Arsnick, and Nax Vomica of those tortering plasters, and shameful incissions which I dare not name in this place? And do you think that your having brought such quantity of Gold and Silver as you speak of, from the new world, into the old, can be termed our felicity, when our greatest happiness would have been, never to have been acquainted with any of those
damn'd mettals which are the chief cause of all our evils? But you and your companions may doubly glory, first for having put the old world into such confusion, with the great store of Gold which you say you have brought with you, and then for having brought the new world to a final ruine, by introducing the sword. But what need hath Eu∣rope of so much Gold, since all things necessary for human life grow daily dearer, and the peoples poverty increaseth every day? And not to conceal that which ought to make you odious to his Majesty, and to all his Vertuosi, it is not any thist after honour, nor (as you have false∣ly affirmed) the desire of that glory which eternizeth mens memories, which hath eg'd you on to so dangerous and damnable an enterprise, but incited by avarice, spur'd on by ambition, and driven on by the thirsting after that gold which your Country doth value so lightly, is that which made you rashly pass those Hercules his Pillars, which wise Antiquity set for bounds to the insatiable curiosity of man; and for proof of what I say, did not you, Signor Christophano, compel your Kings of Spain to pay your good deserts, by making you be brought prisoner from your Judges, and fettered as a publick thief of the Regal Trea∣sure? And you, Marquiss Pizzaro, Did not you play the trick of a special Gentleman to Antabalipa King of Peru, in robbing him of the great store of Gold which you found he had? And fully to compleat your infamy, Did not you rebel against the Emperor your Master? An action so much the more shameful, for that such bruitishness is seldom seen to fall out amongst the Spanish Nobility. For these reasons, Sir, and for the evil behaviour which these famous Argonauts of Torters have used to the Indians, wrought off their legs in the Forges of Gold, are so far from receiving any favour from your Majesty, as they ought to be cudgeled out of Pernassus, as pernitious people, and fatal to mankind. Molza's discourse appeared to Apollo, and to the reverend Colledg of Literati, to deserve better consideration then did appear at the first; wherefore Colombo was answered in his Majesties name, that he should take back the French Pox, the Gold and Silver which he found in his Judges, and that he and his companions should with all speed quit Pernassus; for that he had gained enough; and because mans happiness consisted in living in a little world well inhabited by men, and not in being Master of many great worlds, for the most part uninhabited by men, and only fraught with wild beasts.
The XCI. ADVERTISEMENT. Sigismond King of Polonia, prefers a Paladine to the prime dignities of his Kingdom, who proving perfidi∣ous, the Polack Nobility, thinking the publick reputa∣tion was concerned in this privat Palatines Misdemea∣nour, revenge themselves severely upon him. SIgismund Augustus, that famous King of Poland, being strangely affectionate to one of the chief of his Nobility, raised him to be the greatest, richest, and most powerful Paladine of his Kingdom; but with bad success to his Family: For this great Personage, were it either through his particular vice of ingratitude, or for that the fatal de∣stiny of Princes will have it so, and that human mischief requires it, that benefits which for their immensity cannot be rewarded, should be paid with the wicked coyn of ingratitude; or else that it be the parti∣cular defect of great men, to love (like generous animals) Liberty a∣bove all things, and to hate being fettered by the Chain of obligation; when this Paladine found that he could expect nothing more from the King, nor that the King could confer no more upon him; he did not only not stick to shew himself manifestly ingrateful, but had the audaci∣ty to discover himself upon some important occasions, his deadly ene∣my. This man being stained with so enormous a fault, was found the night preceding, the 14 of this present month, dead in his bed, stab'd through with many daggers: and a Note was left upon his head, which advised the Judge not to trouble any body concerning that fault, which the Paladines of Warsavia, of Uratislavia, and of Posna, confessed to have committed with their own hands, out of justifiable reasons. This accident, very hainous, as well in consideration of him that was slain, as of those that slew him, was of so much greater wonder in Pernassus, in that the Authors of so great a Riot, were held to be the dearest and most intimate friends that the slain Paladine had; wherefore the aforesaid Note was held to be fictitious; but it was afterwards believed to be true by those Paladines being retired into their own Palatinates, who were that very day seen in Pernassus. Apollo, who much loves the peace of Polonia, fearing lest it might be disturbed by so sad an accident, which had made the chief Lords of that Kingdom take up Arms, caused peace immediately to be treated of between the murtherers, and the sons of him that was slain; who out of such reverence as became them, signified unto his Majesty, that to give him satisfaction, they would readily forget the injury which they had received by their fathers death; but that to wipe the tears from off their eyes, and to cure their wounded hearts, they desired on∣ly so much satisfaction, as that their enemies might declare whether their miserable father had so much distasted those his friends, as did de∣serve
so cruel a resentment; this request seemed very reasonable to A∣pollo, who immediately gave order that the Delinquents should have notice given them thereof. They returned answer, That having long before observed the great ingratitude of that Paladine towards the King his Benefactor, they had often severely admonished him to forbear those actions, which did so much misbecome such a one as he was, but that all being in vain, the interest of the publick reputation of the Po∣lack Nobility, had forced them with their daggers to revenge the inju∣ry which was thereunto done by this ungrateful person. When Apollo had read this Justification, 'tis said he confest, that since many riotous excesses were committed out of good intentions, and meer punctilio's of honour; Judges and Princes must some times not only bear with Delinquents, but punish the offended, and afterwards sent the Note of Justification to the sons of the slain Paladine; who be∣ing more vertuously minded then was their father, came to Apollo, and told him, that having considerately reflected upon their fathers de∣meanors towards his so well deserving King, and upon the occasion which had forced those Paladines to bereave him of his life, they saw they were compelled to pardon the publick revenge which they had taken, for the so great offence done to the Polack Nobility; and that they very well knew, that a Noble man who had received great advan∣tages by his Princes munificence, if he should afterwards prove un∣grateful, did so cut up even by the very roots, all hopes of greatness and honour, which the Nobility of a great Kingdom might deserve, as that any whatsoever cruel revenge was taken in that behalf deserved to be excused, if not justified: For that Princes terrified by the shameful ex∣ample of the ingratitude of Noble Personages, ought not to be blamed, when in the bestowing of their most eminent dignities, they sought for that gratitude amongst the meaner sort of people, which they feared they should not find in the haughty Nobility. The XCII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having a notorious hypocrite in his hands, punisheth him severely. SO implacable is the hatred which Apollo bears to hypocrisie, as till he published that severe Edict against them, of which you were fully informed by our late dispatches, he promised great rewards to those who would discover such devils to his Judges. And having had certain notice of one of them some six daies ago, his Majesty made him sud∣denly be laid hands on; and causing him to be brought before him▪ at the very first sight he knew him to be a compleat hypocrite; wherefore having stript him of all appearances, fictions, and a number of falshoods, and lastly pluckt from off his back his glittering cloke of feigned ho∣nesty, wherewith he was wholly covered, and shewed him to his Ver∣tuosi
who were there about him in his naked tearms of devillish hypo∣crisie, and then to the terror of others who trade in such wickedness, gave order that he should be close tied to the Gate of the Delphick Temple, which was suddenly done. Never was there any monster seen, any wild beast, or any infernal hag, more horrid and dreadful then he, who made use of counterfeit goodness to cover real vice. For then in this lewd companions eyes, who had formerly a commiserating countenance, an incredible intense malignity was discovered, a tyran∣nous pride in his speech, which was formerly all humility; and in all his actions, wherein he first seemed to be content with a little, and to be scandallized with having much, such a voracity of possessing the whole world, as he publickly affected that all humane kinde should be reduced to beg bread of him. Besides, so envious a genius was discovered in him, as he desired nothing more, then that the Sun should shine upon none but himself and his affairs; which was so apparent a truth, as that his monstrous leanness was seen to proceed more from other mens pro∣sperity, then from his own misery. In fine, he was so horrid and fright∣ful a spectacle, as the people durst not come into the Temple for fear of coming near him. The chief Literati of this State did then much wonder how it was possible that these fraudulent hypocrites, with one only grain of musk of appearing sanctity, could make the noisom jakes of their stinking and most abominable wickedness appear so odoriferous to blockish men, as with a little Orpine of affected goodness, they can cover over such wicked vices. And the wonder was greater, to consi∣der where the eyes and judgement of lasie men were, when bewitch'd with the cunning of such raskals, they flock like fools after them, whom they should fly from, as from the Plague. The XCIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Apuleius his Ass having given his Master two kicks in the breast, is severely punished by him. IT is sufficiently known to all the professors of Learning, that next to the famous Pegasean Horse, Apuleius his Golden Ass is the beast of highest esteem in all Pernasus. Beroaldo the Bolognian, who by Apollo's own self is chosen to have care of this highly prized Steed, for which he hath three crowns a month Sallary allotted him, was currying him the other day before the stable-dore, whilst Apuleius himself, to make his Ass the more sleek, was stroaking down his hair with his hand; and it hapned that the Ass, without any bad intention to his Master, flung out with his heels, and hit his Master on the breast, throwing him backward on the ground half dead: And certainly Apuleius was sorely hurt, for the Apothecaries had much adoe to recall him to life, by ma∣ny comfortable applications. But as soon as he was come to himself, he laid hold on the Pitchfork which he found in the Stable, and reveng∣ing
himself upon his unwary steed, laid load upon him therewith, and having well basted him, went his waies. Then Beroaldo much afflicted for the misfortune which had befalne his beloved beast, taking him a∣bout the neck and kissing him, said, my golden Ass, what dire destiny of thine and mine was it that hath drawn upon thee this misfortune of being so sorely beaten, to the great affliction of thy dear Beloardo? The brotherly love which I bear thee, forceth me to tell thee that thou hast dearly paid for the misfortune which hath hapned unto thee, for having foolishly, and with no advantage to thy self, dealt so hardly with thy Master. The Ass, as if the so many blows which he had received from hs Master, had been so many special favours, chearfully answered Beloardo thus; Know my Beloardo, that it was neither unadvertency, nor besti∣ality which made me do that to my Master Apuleins, which you saw, and which doth so much displease you, but tis a thing which I have long premeditated, and resolved to do; and know that the bastenadoes which I but now received▪ though I feel them to be very sore, were notwith∣standing very pleasing to me; for these fifty blows which I have now at once received, will save me, I am assured, above a hundred every month, and a thousand every year. And you shall see, Beloardo, that Apuleius will deal more circumspectively with me hereafter for my late resentment: I know that it is necessary and useful, suddenly to obey whatsoever is commanded, and with patience to undergo whatsoever hard usage we receive from our Masters; such Masters I mean as suffer themselves to be overcome by the humility of those that serve them, and who will return gratitude and better usage, for the good service that is done them; but to put on the resolution which I have done, and doth like me, with such indiscreet beasts, such as you know our Master A∣puleius is, who delights to dominier over such as I am, is the way to make them wiser. And wo unto him who living in all submissness with an humorous Master, hath not heart enough so to resent himself once a year, as may turn injuries into better observances: Nor are we burthen-bearing beasts more beaten then Mules are, for any other rea∣son but that they are excellently well skil'd in kicking, whilst we pati∣ently undergo the lash; and you know much better then I, Beroaldo, that in these times with Masters, Nihil profeci patientia, nisi ut gravi∣ora, tanquam ex facili toler antibus imperentur. Tacit. vita Agric.
The XCIV. ADVERTISEMENT. Paulus Iovius presents Apollo with his most elegant Histo∣ries, which give full satisfaction to his Majesty and the College of Vertuosi, and not withstanding some oppositi∣on that is made, he is admitted with great applause into Pernassus. PAulus Iovius, Bishop of di Nocera, that Noble and famous Histo∣rian, after having been long expected by all the Literati of this Court, came some daies since to the Confines of Pernassus, where he was soon visited by an infinite number of Poets, and of the greatest Historians, and welcomed with many learned refreshments and enter∣tainments. Moreover, all those men who were famous for Arms or Learning, and of whom he had made honourable mention in his Elo∣gies, and other Writings, after having past their complements with him, accompanied him with a numerous and noble attendance unto the Palace Royal, where the Senat of the Vertuosi were met: He there presented Apollo with all his excellent Compositions, which were ac∣ceptably received by his Majesty, who assigned them over to the Cen∣sori Bibliothecarii. These caused Edicts to be posted up the next day in all the publike places of Pernassus, wherein notice was given to every one, that the Histories, and other Writings of the reverend Paulus Iovius, being to be consecrated to Immortality, they had prefixt five daies for the first, five for the second, and five more for the last peremptory tearm, for every one to come in that had any thing to alleadg against him. The day being thus appointed, all the Literati met together in the great Council-Hall, where Iovius appeared before Apollo, where the Censori Bibliothecarii made an honorable Relation of the Writings of that famous Prelat, and did infinitely praise the purity of the Latin Tongue, the loftiness of his stile, his perspicuous method, the infinite variety of things treated of therein, the exquisite diligence used in the texture of those his eternal labours, which they said were such, as that there was not any Latin Historian, who since the declination of the Roman Tongue and Empire, had advanced further in the Latin Histo∣ry. Only some over-curious Literati said, they could have wished for some of the Policy, and some of those Sentences, taken from the very bowels of the Reason of State, in that Prelats Writings, which the Latin and Italian Tacitus are censured to be too full of. Then he was bitterly reprehended for the vast Voragini which were in his Histories; and the Censors, not without discovery of some passion, told him, that if the Vertuosi could not with patience see the defaults of such worthy Writers as Livy▪ Tacitus, Dion, and other famous Historians, whose la∣bours through the injury of time, were lost; it was altogether intolera∣ble in his. Nor was his excuse taken for good which he alleadged, that
the Books which were wanting, were lost in the sacking of Rome, for the Censors freely told him, that if he had spent those pretious hours in filling up what was wanting in his History, which he had thrown a∣way in entertaining the Cardinals, Fernese and Carpi, wth his pleasant genius in the winter evenings, he would have pleased his friends the Li∣terati better. The Censors having made their Relation, the Hall-dores were thrown open, and every one had leave to make what objections they pleased against Iovius, for any thing that they found amiss in his Writings. Wherefore he was accused by Natalis Comes, for having too much praised Cosmo de Medici, the great Duke of Tuscany; and that being bribed, he had published such prowesse in the Marquisses of Pescara and Vasto, as a maker of Romances could have said but little more of the antient Paladines of France. The Censors reply'd to this accusation of Natalis Comes, that they had observed that Iovius had used diversity of ink in his praises of the great Duke Cosmo, and the two Marquisses, but that they found that by Edict from his Majesty, the like License was given to Historians, as was permitted unto Poets, to im∣broider their Mecenas's Garments with Gold and pretious Stones, in hatred to certain greedy curmuggions, who value not the leaving of a good name behind them to posterity. That therefore it was not only lawfull, but very praise-worthy in Bishop Iovius to exaggerate the prai∣ses of the Princes his Benefactors, and to barter his purest quill with their liberalities: And though it be his bounden duty to hold his peace, who is censured, as the Masters of the Pegasean Ceremonies had signi∣fied unto Iovius at his first entrance into the Hall; yet overcome with anger, he was not able to contain himself, but turning to Natalis Co∣mes, said, What humane praise may, I will not say a man, but a Demi-God deserve, which ought not fully to be given to my great Cosmo, the second Italian Augustus? Soon after Francisco Berni objected, That he had pursued the memory of Lorenzo de Medici too bitterly. To which the Censors answered, That Iovius was so far from deserving blame for that his action, as those seditious Historians were rather to be punished, who invited ignorant people to rebellion by their Encomium upon Bru∣tus and Cassius, and such like, and who provoked fierce spirits, beastial wits, and desperate persons to plot conspiracies against good Princes. Lastly Giorolimo Mutio Iustinopolitano, said, that that Iovius his Hi∣stories being full of falshoods, deserved better o be burn'd, than to have Eternity decreed unto them. The Censors wisht Mutio to in∣stance in the places wherein Iovius had lied: Who answered, That he knew not any thing himself, but that he had heard it commonly said so; whence they all found Mutius to be one of those ignorant fellows, who accuse Iovius for a lier without having read him.
The XCV. ADVERTISEMENT. A very famous Literato, who was imprisoned by the Iudges of Assise for being a pratler, is freed by Apollo, as not guilty of such a crime. THe Vertuosi of this State are bound to speak with as much preme∣ditation and weighing of their words, as other men write in other parts; for pollo's pleasure is, for the general good, that to hear his Lierati discourse upon any whatsoever business, be as profitable as to study books; wherefore the speeches of every one be so narrowly watcht, as every least error is sure to receive exemplary punishment. It hapned some three daies ago, that a very learned Vertuoso discoursing upon some Poetical matter, fell into an incidental digression, wherein he so far expatiated himself, as when he had finished it, he could not re∣assume the thread of his former discourse, which was not only noted for a great error, but the Censors being forthwith acquainted with it, he was imprisoned. And the fault appearing to be true, not only by the testimony of divers, but by his own confession, the Judges proceeded with much rigour against him, and inhibited him the use of writing or reading. This miserable Literato, to the end that this severe sentence might either be totally taken off, or at least much mitigated, had recourse to Apollo, who, though he much abhor'd that one of his Vertuosi should be esteemed a prater, yet that he might upon better grounds judge this Literato, he would know from the accused partie's own mouth, what the matter was; which is certainly an excellent way of proceeding, and which if it were imitated by Princes who govern the world, they would not be so much troubled with other mens faults. The Vertuoso acquainted Apollo with all that had been laid to his charge; who having heard his confession, did immediately revoke the sentence (so far doth the Justice differ which God infuseth into the hearts of Princes, from what Judges learn in their Decrees) for finding that the digression into which that Literato had falne, and wherein he had so in∣larged himself, was much more delicate than his first discourse, his Ma∣jsty thought he had no waies misdemerited by that his forgetfulness, since the error committed was not occasioned through his desire to prate, but out of ambition to purchase honour to himself, by making that digression. And therefore he commanded the Judges to set him at li∣berty, for he was not to be blamed for much discourse, who discoursed well.
The XCVI. ADVERTISEMENT. Philip the second, King of Spain, being offended at what the Duke of Alva had told Apollo, concerning his Go∣vernment of Flanders, whilst he seeks to revenge him∣self upon that his Minister of State, is sent for by Apol∣lo, who was acquainted with what had past, and is by him pacified. THere was never any Court wherein there were not of those mali∣tiously minded men, who reporting what ought to be concealed, are very desirous to raise scandals, and to kindle enmity amongst their neighbours. This is said, for that Duke Alva, formerly Prince of the Achaians, had no sooner told Apollo, that (though he foresaw it would be occasion of great scandal) he had caused the heads of Prince Eg∣mont and Count Horn to be publickly shewed upon the Skaffolds in Brussels, only because men are of another opinion when they govern another mans State, than when their own peculiar Estate is concerned: But the news thereof was forthwith brought to the wise King of Spain, Philip the second, who being highly offended with that his Minister of State, resolved to revenge so great an injury by Arms; and therefore he commanded some of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, to arm themselves suddenly, and evil intreat the Duke of Alva, wheresoever they should meet him. This resolution of the Kings was discovered, and being forthwith made known to Apollo, his Majesty sent for the King of Spain and the Duke of Alva to come to him; who when they appeared, the King being highly incensed, complained bitterly upon the Duke, that meerly out of ambition of perpetuating himself in the Government of Flanders, he had put his patrimony into the present inextricable trou∣bles, a thing the more worthy of punishment, in that he himself had confest his dealing so badly with his King, with the same freedom as o∣thers glory in honorable actions. The Duke answered in his own de∣fence to this complaint made against him by the King, that he had fought for his King, in Africa, in Germany, in France, in Flanders, and in Italy, and still with victory; and that his faithful and honorable actions had been so ill rewarded in peace, that not only men of the Long Robe, who were unfit for War, had been preferred before him in those Pro∣vinces from whence he had driven out the enemy, but even women, whereby he was either en tertained idlely afterwards in the Court, or else in imployments misbecoming such a one as he, only that he might idolatrize the power of Ruy Gomes di Selva, and other Subjects who were mean in comparison of him, and yet were in greater esteem then he, in his Kings Court; a thing which misbecoming him to suffer, and which he could in no waies digest, as being altogether contrary to his genius, and he one that could not suffer indignities, was not only inter∣preted
by his malevolents, but even by his King; to be an intolerable pride in him, in not being willing to tolerate an equal, much less a supe∣rior to himself in Court; that it was true, that to preserve his reputa∣tion, and to keep such a one as he from being numbred amongst the rank of ordinary Courtiers in the Court of Spain, he had endeavoured to e∣ternize himself in the Government of Flanders, which he would inten∣tively have endeavoured to have reduced into a peaceful condition if he had thought he could have governed it in peace. The King of Spain was much incenst at this so resolute answer, and said, that his State-Mi∣nister having confest his fault twice over, nothing remained but con∣demnation. Nay rather (said Apollo to the King of Spain) I must by absolving the Duke from all that you lay to his charge, admonish such great Kings as you, to deal well with those Commanders, who having purchased the glory of true Military valour at the expence of their bloud, deserve their Kings full favour; for it is just and reasonable, that Kingdoms, and great Provinces, should be governed by those in times of peace, who had the courage to acquire them in war, or who by their Arms have defended them against the publick enemy; but be∣cause many of you care not to do what is just, nor what out of grati∣tude ought to be done, since I find you slow in learning by the advan∣tagious reading of History, how you ought to satisfie and content those Commanders, who with their weapons in their hands, have de∣served to be largely rewarded, be not at least ashamed to take exam∣ple in a business of such importance, from the Ottoman Emperors, who in the troublesom times of War, give the charge of Generalissi∣mo of their Armies, and therein all usefull and advised liberty, to none but to their chief Vziiers, aso sublime dignity, as he who pos∣sesseth it, governs the vast Ottoman Empire in Supreme Authority, as sole Arbitrator of Peace and War. Wherefore the chief Viziers, knowing that their places are much more advantagious and honourable in Peace then in War, behave themselves very faithfully in their war∣like expeditions, to the end that through their worth, they may main∣tain the dignity which they possess; moreover they hasten to get the victory, that they may discharge so great an imployment, by the ac∣quisition of new States, and by subduing the enemy. Philip, 'tis nei∣ther in my power, nor yet in the power of any other Prince, to make men love the advantage of other men, more then their own: And the true art of making Commanders eternally loyal, is (as I have said) to shew them honorable and gainful peace at home, amidst the troubles of War.
The XCVII. ADVERTISEMENT. Pompey the great having invited many Noble Lords of Rome to be present at the dedication of the magnificent Theatre which he had built in Pernassus, they refuse to come. POmpey the great having finished his stately Fabrick of a Theatre in Pernassus, which was no whit inferior to that which he erected in Rome, when he was to dedicate it, resolved to celebrate the shew of Gladiators; and amongst many other Princes, invited some modern Roman Lords to the entertainment, who did not only excuse them∣selves, alleadging they had not heart enough to behold so bloudy a spe∣ctacle, but confest that they were much scandallized to think that their fore-fathers did not only not detest that cruel pastime, to see men be∣come so merciless one to another, but that even women delighted in so horrid barbarism; and that they would be bold to say, that such like Spectacles were a shame to those that saw them, and did but little honour to those that caused them to be represented. It is known that Pompey readily reply'd, that he should very much admire and love the civility and humanity of the present Romans, in abhorring the shedding of hu∣mane bloud, if they had not stained this their worthiness with the shame∣ful curiosity of flocking with the basest sort of people, to see men put to death by the Hangman. The XCVIII. ADVERTISEMENT. Peter Aretine being again assaulted, Apollo, in respect of the lewd conditions of that Satyrical vitious Poet, com∣manded that no Process should be made upon that Riot. THis last night past, Peter Aretine, as he returned from visiting his beloved Titian, was assaulted by one who gave him a fowl slash over the face, which may be said to be the twentieth blow that he hath re∣ceived, either by pugniard or cudgel, wherewith people as quick of hand as he was of tongue, have so cut his face, hands, and breast, as they look like a Sea-Card. Apollo was much displeased at this Riot, and com∣manded the Attorney-General to be diligent in finding out the delin∣quent. Aretine was strictly examined, who swore that he neither knew, nor could he imagin who it was that had hurt him. 'Tis said, that
Apollo having heard Aretines examination, his Majesty commanded that no further Process should be made thereupon; for since Aretine could not so much as imagin who it was that had dealt so ill with him, he must of necessity be guilty of one of those two defects which deserve no compassion, either of having offended so many, as he could not num∣ber his enemies, or of forgetting those that had done him injuries wor∣thy resentment. The XCIX. ADVERTISEMENT. Apollo having received news by an express Poet, whereat he was much rejoyced, communicates it to his Literati with great Iubile. SO greatly is Apollo pleased with mens vertuous proceedings, as he doth maintain an infinite number of men, not only in Italy, and the other parts of Europe, but in all parts of the world where Learning flou∣risheth, to whom he gives large Salaries, to give him speedy notice by expresses of all the honorable actions, and worthy works, that either a∣ny Prince, or privat man doth perform in any whatsoever Kingdom. Which being after freely communicated by his Majesty to his beloved Literati, serves them for a learned and useful Lecture. This was the cause why the Royal Hall of Audience was filled betimes the next mor∣ning with an infinite number of the Literati of Pernassus, who had heard, that on Tuesday about eight of the clock at night, a Poet was come unto his Majesty, that they might partake of the news he brought from Italy, which being the Soveraign Queen of all Provinces, the Su∣preme Monarch of all the most famous Kingdoms of the world, and the particular Seat of all the most reputed Sciences, is not only looked upon by Apollo, and all the other favourable Planets, but by all the fixt Stars, with those benigne aspects which beget in men the vivacity of a sprightly genius, born to new inventions of the quaintest and ra∣rest things, and the knowledg how to talk well, and do better, toge∣ther with the delightfull vain of writing learnedly, and the easie appre∣hension of all the Liberal Sciences. Apollo appearing then in the Hall, drew first the Letters from out his bosom, which were brought to him by the Post from Italy, and shewing them to all the lookers on, said, My beloved Literati, the world which never ceased in producing Princes of eminent vertue, and private men of excellent Learning, will likewise for ever hereafter produce great store of the like; for by Gods parti∣cular goodness, Learning, which by the inundation of barbarous people, hath some time been seen to go less, cannot notwithstanding perish. Re∣joyce then all of you together with me, be blithe and chearfull; for so the acceptable and happy news requires you to be, which I have now received from Italy, where my most vertuous Francisco Maria della
Rovere, Duke of Urbin, and the Prince of all the modern Literati, per∣ceiving that that sacred Justice, which eternal God hath pleased should inhabit upon earth, to the end that there should no difference arise a∣mongst men touching Meum and Tuum, and that it be not suddenly lul'd asleep by the unfortunate labours of an infinite number of Law∣yers, who by their writings have buried the wholsom Laws in the ditch∣es of cautions, and confusions, so as it is now become prejuditial to that height, as Suits at Law, may now be added as a fourth plague to the former three, wherewith the living God is wont to scourge mankind; a punishment which afflicting the mind, and consuming the wealth of whatsoever rich Patrimony is more cruel then their War, Plague, or Famin: A disorder which, my beloved, is the more harmful to human kind, for that though it be known, and complained of by every one, yet hath it been given over as an uncureable disease, nor was there ever any Physitian found yet, who durst undertake the amendment thereof; but that God who by his inscrutable Judgements hath suffered such a disorder to reign thus long amongst men, now at last hath out of his in∣nate goodness which suffers not mischiefs nor errors to reign long upon earth, raised up a new Justinian, who hath drawn sacred Justice, out of that obscurity and confusion, wherein the unwary Lawyers by their im∣broiled writing had thrown her: For the Illustrious Francisco Mario della Rovere, hath set forth a holy Edict, which commands that no Ad∣vocate in pleading for his Clyent before any Judge of his State, shall be suffered to alleadg any thing but the very Laws themselves, Accur∣sius his Gloss, the Comment of Bartolo, Baldo, Paolo de Castro, Giasone; and in criminal affairs, Angelo de Maleficii, and some few others: This is so excellent a Decree, my beloved, as I cannot but with tears call to mind, that Law-Suits have been so inhumanely immortal in all Tribu∣nals, as that more disputes have been raised, then have been able to be decided in any one mans life-time. And yet every one knows, that e∣ven amongst the Turks (who are wise in this point, though ignorant and without books they have been known to be resolv'd and decided at one only Audience. Add to this, my beloved, that the most pernitious disease of everlasting pleadings, which ought to have been banish'd out of the Territories of all Princes who fear God, and covet their peoples welfare; is for the final infelicity of man, become a dreadful and mor∣tal Merchandize of unprofitable men, who whilst they suck the vital bloud out of Artificers, husbandmen, Merchants, and others that are of service for Commerce, and waste all their wealth; nothing is so much magnified in the world, as the great incomes left by Advocates, Notaries, Sergeants, Proctors, and Judges. His Majesty having said this, he went accompanied by an infinite company of Vertuosi who had heard him, to the chief Temple of Pernassus; whither being come, he beseeched God that he would grant many years of long life to Fran∣cisco Mario, for the universal good, that he would fill the world with Princes of like conditions, and that he would awake the like honora∣ble and holy thoughts in other earthly Potentates, as so wise a Prince had put in execution in his happy Patrimony; for it was a misery and affliction not to be indured by the best composed minds, to sea the ad∣ministration of Justice reduced to that confusion, as the common, more common, nay most common opinions of privat Doctors being more
alleadged at the bar, then the Authority of the Law it self, Suits were grown so chargeable and so eternal, as it were better for men to part with their patrimonies, then to defend it with much anguish of mind before such cruel Harpyes. The C. ADVERTISEMENT. A more then usual sweet Odor issuing from the Delphick Li∣brary, Apollo goes himself in person thither to discover the Miracle, and soon finds the occasion of so great a no∣velty. SOme six daies since, an extraordinary and miraculous sweet Odor proceeded from the Delphick Library, which increasing every day more and more, did very much astonish the Vertuosi of this State: And not being able to guess at the reason of so strange an accident, they ear∣nestly requested Apollo that he would discover it unto them. His Ma∣jesty being likewise moved at the novelty, went the next morning early to the Library; and though the perfume of that Odor came so general∣ly dispers'd from all parts of the Library, as the Literati could not dis∣cern any particular place from which it proceeded; yet Apollo imme∣diately found out the very Fountains head from whence such Fragrancy did flow. And going directly to the place, where, in an Urn of purest Oriental Christal, beset with Pearls and Rubies, the little less then di∣vine writings of Seneca the Morallist are kept, he first honoured those happy Writings, took up the Urn with both his hands, and then turn∣ing towards his Vertuosi, who thinking themselves unworthy to behold Writing so exquisitely excellent, were on their knees with head bowed towards the ground, My dearest Literati (said he) learn from this strange fragrancy which you find doth proceed from the immortal labours of my beloved Anneus Seneca, that if by your late watchings you will make your sanctified precepts savour well in the world, and will perfume your persons with glorious Fame; you must, as Seneca did at last, live answer∣able to your Writings, and do as you say. The End of the Second Century.
THE Politick Touchstone. CHAP. I. Why the Neapolitans are so strangely opprest, and hardly treated by the Spaniard. EVer since it pleased Almighty God to give the Nea∣politans into the power of Pharaoh, as a severe punish∣ment for their great treachery used to their former Kings; the wary Kings of Spain did ordain by a Law, which hath been ever punctually observed since, that that unbridled horse which the State bears for her Ensign, boasting that he can indure neither saddle nor bridle, should be brought once every six months into the publick Mar∣ket-place, and that exact diligence should be used in chusing a formal Colledg of Politick Farriers, who should order whatsoever was thought necessary to tame so fierce, so inconstant, and so seditious an animal, which hath often chosen rather to be ridden by two Kings at one and the same time, then by one. This unfortunate Steed was yesterday led out of the Stable by the Spaniards who had the looking to him; and because he was so consumed as he could not well stand upon his legs, he was drawn with ropes into the Market-place. It was a sad spe∣ctacle to see that Steed which was formerly so glorious, become now so lean, as you might count his bones; he was cruelly crest-fallen, and broken-winded, by reason of the many blows he had given him, his nose was slit; yet the jealous Spaniards keep shackles day and night upon his feet, a caveson upon his nose, a bit in his mouth, a spectacle on his eyes, as if they were afraid of him, and certain to receive quickly some great damage by him. These wise Farriers did diligently consider this horses condition; and after having advised long about him, not with∣out much dispute, at last they concluded unanimously, that his rack should be raised up a handful higher then ordinary, and that the third
part of his allowance of corn should be taken from him: Some moral Philosophers, and therefore good men, hapned to be present when this severe resolution was taken, who being greatly moved to pitty, to see him so extenuated; they asked the Farriers why they were so cruel, as to diminish the food of that macerated horse, which was reduced to such weakness, as he had nothing left but skin and bone, and a little spirit, which could only keep him alive for some few weeks. The wisest of these Farriers turning towards the Philosophers, told them in a shame∣ful manner, that they might have done much better in attending their disputations about Entitie and Quidditie, then to reason of those politick affairs whereof they were so very ignorant: That if it had fallen to their share to have the government of this capricious beast, they would have found their charity rewarded with kicking and biting, wherewith he had ofttimes very unthankfully rewarded some of his most boun∣tifull Masters; and would have been thrown all broken and bruised in∣to ditches: For it was the custom of that fickle and seditious beast, to vex his Masters with all sorts of unruliness, yea though they were never so good unto him, unless he were hardly used by them, and brought by fasting, to that weak condition which they saw he was in: And that to make right judgement of that horse, and how he ought to be govern∣ed, they must not consider his lean sides, and weak legs, but the lewd∣ness of his genius, which was more phantastical, seditious, and capri∣cious now, and more given to love novelty then ever. And they fur∣ther said, Wo to the Spaniards, if the fierce Neapolitan horse had power and means to do that mischief which he did phancy both night and day in that his paltery pate, which was alwaies naturally an enemy to the present Government. All which things did make it appear clearly unto the world, that the present Neapolitan oppressions proceed not from the cruelty of the Spanish Nations, nor from the avarice of the Kings Officers, nor yet from the King of Spains neglect; but from advised Counsel, it being great charity to bereave him by all severe waies, of the means of doing ill, who could never be taught to do well, by any good usage or cour∣tesie. That they must therefore all confess, that the detestable Cancer of the seditious Neapolitan dispositions could not be cured by any bet∣ter appropriated Medicine, than by the Corrosive Oyntment of the Spanish Severity. Genua excuses her freedom in Pernassus. FOr these many years last past, the Illustrious Liberty of Genua hath not been admitted to visit, nor to have domestical conversation with the renowned Venetian Commonwealth, and other chast Italian and Forreign Liberties: For though she hath formerly lived in Pernassus with a great repute of chastity, yet she hath much lost her reputation of late years by her too domestick conversation with the perfidious Spanish Nation; the which (to the great loss of her honour) she hath not only accommodated with the best Lodgings of her house, but hath
permitted her prime Nobility to serve her. For which disorders, which in such a Lady are held to be very heynous, many have spoken freely of her, That she hath not only contracted too great a familiarity, with people who seek to insnare her chastity; but it is publickly said, that she hath granted things to be the Spaniards, which are exceeding prejudicial to her honour; and her thirsting after the Spanish Gold is much talked of: An avarice which is as proper to a base dishonest Whore, as it is altogether misbecoming a chast Madam. By which disorders it plainly appears, that so noble a Princess, who before she lived so lewdly, was numbred amongst the loveliest and most beautiful Com∣monwealths, is now become deformed in her members: For the Do∣rii's Nose is grown four Inches longer, and the Spinola's right leg half a handful. To this great inequality of members, the infinite shame is added, which is cast upon her by mens publick discourse, That her Citizens serve Spaniards for Bawds; and things are so far proceeded, as there are some who do freely affirm that the Kings of Spain would have been dishonest with this Lady; and that they may know in what terms they stand with her, and what they may hope for from her, they have some few daies since, sent her a Love-Letter in form of a Citati∣on, by an Officer of theirs which they have in Italy, named Enriques Gusman, Count de Fuentes, which they say did contain very exorbitant things and which touched much upon her honour. By which all men perceive that the care and affection which the Spaniards seem to bear to this Noble Lady, hath nothing in it of the Platonick, but is a meer lust to dominier over her. Whereupon the renowned Liberty of Genua, as soon as she got so presumptuous a Letter into her hands, first broke his nose that brought it with a Pantufle which she took from off her foot; and then shewed such resentment to the impudent fellow that sent it, by way of words, and such willingness and resoluteness, if ned should require, to come to action, as she hath fully regained that reputation amongst men, which without any fault of hers, she had formerly lost. Whereupon so hono∣rable a Lady, to give the world a more particular account of her wor∣thy actions, and chast thoughts, hath made it plainly appear to all men, by her Ambassadors which she hath sent to all the Princes of Europe, that the domestick conversation which she holds with the Spaniards, is not only for her own honour, and the advantage of her Citizens, but very usefull for Italy, wherewith her Interest is as nearly joyned, as is that of any other of her Potentates. For in former times, and now more then ever, she hath held, and doth still hold the adverse Nation o Spain so opprest by change, and change upon exchange, and by exorbi∣tant Use, as she doth thereby make more cruel war upon the Spaniards, than do the Hollanders and Zealanders by their Fleets and Forces.
The Spanish Monarchy complains that her falshoods are dis∣covered. IT is not known whether it were occasioned through the malice of a∣ny of the French, or by chance, or as some have very much suspected, through the plotting of that Nation which is so implacable an enemy to the French for these many years, that the Royal Palace of the French Mo∣narchy fell on fire, and so great and fearful were the flames, as the neigh∣bouring Monarchies began to fear lest that fire might end with the ruine of their States. So as every one for their own concern, ran to quench the fire of their neighbours house. The English (though naturally ene∣mies to the French) brought with all speed the water of their Thames; the Germans, those of the Mause and Rhein; the Venetians did almost drain all their Marish grounds; and the most wise Dukes of Tuscany hasted to quench that fire with their Arno, which wise men thought was to end with an universal combustion. And truely it was strange to see, that the very Monarchy of Spain her self, which was held to be so great an enemy to the French, did bestir her self amongst other friends, to quench that fire, at which it was generally believed she did rather de∣sire to warm her self: In so much as every one wondred to see how soli∣citous and charitable she was in bringing thither not only the waters of her Tagus and Heber, but the very Ocean it self, of which she is absolute Mistriss, when the English and Hollanders permit her to be so. For Politicians giving a sinister interpretation to the Spaniards charity, would needs have it pernicious for the French, to admit in their necessities, of aid from the Spaniards, who having been alwaies mortal enemies to the French, were rather to be esteemed the contrivers of the ruine of that Kingdom, then zealous of its good; as being men who measuring the actions of all that Reign, only with the Compass of self-concernment, do often not admit of piety towards God, in what belongs unto the acti∣ons of Princes, much less of charity towards men. And such Politici∣ans became the more abominable, for that it was plainly seen, that the Spaniards in their diligence and charity of bringing water to that fire, did not only equal, but out-doe the best friends that the French had. And that which was yet more miraculous, and which won much honour to the Spanish Nation amongst simple men, was, that when Flanders and Austria, her antient Patrimonies, were cruelly pestered with the fire of War, she had preferred the welfare of the French before charity to her self. But no human help, no water whatsoever was able to quench any sparkle of so terrible a fire, for all the diligence and remedies that could be had, the flames of that bloudy civil War did daily more and more in∣crease. Wherefore the best and most devout of the sillier sort of peo∣ple began to listen to Politick Records, and to suspect that the Spanish Monarchies Charity was wholly Interest; which is indeed the Spaniards proper charity: Wherefore they resolved to believe appearances no longer, but to look into the Barrels which the Spaniards brought; and see what was in them. Wherein, instead of water to quench the fire, they found them filled with Pitch, Oyle, Turpentine, and devillish dis∣sention to increase it.
Some French Barons were found to use the like treachery, who appear∣ing more charitable then the rest, applyed the self-same Barrels and mate∣rials which were lent them by the Spaniards. Wherefore they were im∣mediatly put to death by the justly offended French Monarchy, and were burnt in the same fire which they had with such sedition and treachery fomented in their own Country? And the Spaniards were not only for∣bidden further assistance, but were proclaimed to be hypocrites by sound of Trumpet, and it was made known to all men by a particular Edict of the French Monarchy, that if any one, at any time hereafter should be induced to believe that it were possible for the Spaniards to have any cha∣rity for the French, they should be held to be great Coxcombs: And that if he should persist in his error after the first admonition, he should be tost in a blanket as a seditious malignant. 'Twas a wonder to see, that when the Spaniards and aforesaid French forbore their said assistance the French combustion, which was held by judicious men, to be unquencha∣ble by human means, ceased of it self; so as the famous golden Flowre∣de-Luces, formerly so troden under foot, sprung up more resplendant and glorious then before; and France, which through many mens too much ambition, laboured for above forty years under intestine combusti∣ons, became peaceful and quiet in the twinkling of an eye. Which made it appear clearly to all men, that the Spaniards were the first Au∣thors of that fire in France, which under specious pretences of Religion and charity, they would have made the world believe their intentions were to quench. 'Tis said by all men, that the Spanish Monarchy re∣tired her self into her Royal Palace, and did not suffer her self for many daies to be seen by any one, giving her self over to a deep melancholy, and that not without shedding abundance of tears, she freely confest she would rather have lost two of her best Kingdoms, then to see those her holy pretences, whereby she had often-times, much to her advantage, vented stinking Arsafetida, for Musk, and Ambergrees, so quell'd and derided. She thought she had lost her richest Treasure, and the unex∣haustable veins of gold and silver in Peru and the new World, by being deprived of being ever able to paint white for black to the common sort of people. She thought it very hard for her to be reduced to that pass which she had alwaies seen the French to be, of winning Kingdoms barely by the sword: whereas formerly she knew she had set the whole world on fire, only by her appearing holy pretences, in lieu of a formidable Army. She was very much grieved to have lost so much credit amongst men, as she ran danger of not being believed in the future, though she spake truth, whereas formerly her false pretences, and her hypocrisie, were taken for sacred Truths, and perfect Devotion.
The Spanish Monarchy comes to Pernassus, and desires A∣pollo to be cured of an Issue, but is dismist by the Poli∣tick Physitians. THough Apollo did not only give sudden order for the solemn entry of the Spanish Monarchy, who came four months ago to this Court, but also for a publick Consistory of the Literati in the Royal Hall of Audience, where the Muses were all to be present; yet was not the Ce∣remony performed til some two daies ago; for she spent four months time in agreeing with the Prince-Poets touching the Titles that she should give to, and receive from every man; and in what manner she should receive them, and be received by them in visits. Which made the Ver∣tuosi wonder, and bitterly bewail the condition of the present times, which were infected with so much vanity: But the Vertuosi werè more afflicted when they heard that many learned Princes did openly forbid that great Queen to visit them; affirming that they feared to receive some affront from her; for they had received fresh Letters from Italy, wherein they were advised by their friends, to be aware what they did in that point, for it was the usual custom of Spaniards to visit people more to injure them, then honour them; and that therefore they thought it a great piece of folly, instead of shunning affronts, to wait for them at home, and receive them with cap in hand. And though so potent a Monarchy, to the great wonder of all men, seemed more close-handed in giving sa∣tisfaction to others in Titles, then in giving them gold, she hath notwith∣standing received what greatest contentment she could desire in point of Title from the Prince-Poets; and from all the potent Vertuosi who mind realities more then vain-glory. 'Tis true, that it hath much de∣tracted from the reputation of so great a Queen, in this Court, to see, that though she hath great need of friends, she appears so indifferent in aliena∣ting those who desire nothing of her but good words. Every one noted it for a great singularity, that when the Master of the Ceremo∣nies told her that that nice punctilio which she stood upon was hatefull, fit for a barbarous King, but far unworthy so great a Queen as she, she should in a rage reply, That she wondred at him, and at all Masters of Ce∣remony; since he seemed not to know that a Prince without gravity, was like a Peacock without a tail. It is impossible to write with what curiosity of desire, so great a Prin∣cess was expected and looked upon by these Literati: For people flockt from all the parts of Pernassus, to behold that powerful Queen, who with such strange success, had in so short a time united great Kingdoms under her, and made so formidable an Empire of them, as there is not any one Prince in the world, who hath not for fear of her put on a Coat of Male, and an Iron Brestplate. This Queen attended by a numerous Navy, arrived happily some months ago in the Island of Lesbos, and the Lady Republick of Genua lent her her famous Haven gratis, though by a certain antient prerogative, the Family of the Dorii received a great Rent for it. The Spanish Monarchy is young in respect of that of France, England, and the other antient Monarchies of Europe, but of a much larger body then any of them, and disproportionably great for her years:
whence it is believed, that if she should continue to grow as long as hu∣mane bodies use to do, she would become so great a Gyantess, as she would arrive at that immeasurable height of Universal Monarchy, at which the Roman Monarchy arrived. But the accidents which attend State-affairs, say for certain, that she will grow no greater; and that she is grown in her tenderest years to the utmost height that ever she will be at. Which is clearly proved by this undeniable Argument, That she hath more ado to grow an inch in these present times, then two handfuls heretofore. This powerful Lady is of so ssallow a complexion, as she shadows upon the Moor: And therefore is rather proud in her behavi∣our, then grave; and all her actions relish much more of cruelty, than severity: Wherefore having never been able to learn the so necessary Art for Princes of pardoning; it is that which in the opinion of many, doth most impede her growth: For boasting her self of nothing more then in being called Doctor of the Science of knowing how to cut off the heads of those detested Poppies, which in her State-Gardens overtop the rest, she joyes it should be said, That in this Art she hath exceeded that great Tarquin, who was the first Inventer of such a Secret. Being then so bold and resolute in her severities, she is very costive in confer∣ring favours, which proceed but very seldom from her: And she is so arrogant in those few which she confers, as they are not very acceptable: yet in outward shew she is wholly composed of civility and complement; but who can prie into her heart with Politick Spectacles, will find nothing therein but pride, avarice, and cruelty; in so much as they who have convers'd longest with her, tell us that no Princess gives better words, and worser acts. Whence it is, that taken as a Mistriss, men like her very well, but as a Soveraign very ill. Her hands are extraordinary long, which she turns whither she lists, and where it makes most for her advantage, without distinguishing between friend and foe, kindred or strangers; she hath Harpye's nails, and so hard and tenacious fingers, as they never let go what once they grasp. Her eyes are black, but very sharp-sighted; a squint-ey'd look, wherewith whilst she seems to look fixedly upon one, she is very intent in observing another (a very dangerous thing for Prin∣ces) for having of late years her face turned towards Algiers, she fixt her eyes upon Marselles: And much greediness is seen in her eyes, for she sees nothing with them, which she doth not in her heart desire: So as those who are most speculative say, that this Queen doth thirst immo∣derately after what's another mans, and that she never had friend, whom she did not soon make her slave. All which things witness to the world, that she is fitter to command slaves, than free-men: For she expects more then any other Princess, to be served not only by her Subjects, but even by her friends. She stands so much upon her punctilio, as she will not be civil, even on good occasions which have often times come home unto her. She exceeds all past and present Princes, in knowing how to cover all her diabolical Interests with a cloak of double Brocato: And though she be every day seen to do unhandsom things, yet she boasts of nothing more then of her conscience: Wherefore the French, who have been so often deceived under the co∣lour of holy pretences; have at their own cost learnt at last; then to take up arms and get on horseback, when with her beads in her hand, they see her treat of business full of Religious pretences, and charity towards
her beloved neighbour; she is so skilful in riding, as she hath not only suc∣cessfully tamed the Noble Neapolitan Coureer, but the very untoward Spanish Mules, who are so naturally given to lay about them with their heels. She is of so much more suspicious a genius then all other Queens, as setting her own Nation aside, she hath declared her distrust of all o∣thers that are subject unto her, though she hath found them upon all oc∣casions to be very faithful: Which makes so much for her prejudice, as those who mind the worlds affairs, say, that were it only out of this re∣spect, it is impossible for her to grow greater. And this is occasioned, because no Queen loves less to be loved, and more to be feared by her subjects then she: And therefore Politicians think it a great piece of folly in her, to believe so firmly that she can make people adore her, by ill usage: yet she allures people to serve her by these hateful customs; for her great store of wealth is that Loadstone which violently draws the souls, even of such unto her, whose duty it being to abhor her, ought to seek her lessening. She is very accurate in petty affairs; but in matters of great importance, no Princess suffers her self to be more easily decei∣ved. She shews a great deal of wisdom and understanding in arguing and resolving upon matters of weight; but be it either out of her innate slowness, or by the cunning of her State Officers (who are greedy Mer∣chants of great affairs) or for that she thinks nothing is done with deco∣rum, which is not long looked for, she is so slow in putting her resolves into execution, as the face of affairs altering with the times, resolutions which are at first wisely taken, prove unfortunate. She is therefore held by all men, to be better at ordering of plots and businesse, then in the managing of Arms, wherein she is very hearty, greatly constant, and doth strangely undergo all hardships, but is so little resolute, as her too great circumspection hath many times the face of fear: So as she appears fitter to keep States, then to acquire them; and many singular men laugh at her, for that she will regulate all her actions by certain sound and ma∣ture advice, not leaving any thing to the hands of that Fortune or Fate, which hath so favoured the French, and made them so glorious, when they have shewed much boldness, but little advisedness in their actions. And some think that this happens because she is as sparing of her own bloud, as greedy of that of other people; which makes the most un∣derstanding Warriours laugh at her for aspiring at Universal Monarchy, without fighting: The which she doth, because being used to make great acquisitions by alliances, she abhors the fearful French fashion, of pur∣chasing other peoples Patrimonies at the price of her own bloud. Being therefore more advised then adventurous, she is more prejudicial to her enemies in peace, than in war: Wherefore the French who have hi∣therto lived with her in a supine carelessness, have after their so many ca∣lamities, learnt at last, to double-bolt their dores when they have made peace with the Spaniards. She is very careless of her own riches, but so greedy of what is anothers, as she cares not to desert her own patrimo∣nial estate, so she may come by those of others. She is of so deep thoughts, and of so conceal'd a soul, as it lies not in the skill of men to find out her ends: Nay Linceus himself with his acute eye-sight cannot so much as penetrate the outmost film thereof: Whereas short-sighted men can see even into the bowels of the French, and of the men of other Nations.
But he who will judge of this great Ladies genius and customs, must believe her to be in all her negotiations clean contrary to what she appears to be outwardly. And although amongst the vertues that have been named, she hath many enormous vices, yet she hath the good fortune to have all things in her, held vertues, and admired for such; wherefore many wise Princes think it an honour to them to imitate her even in her vices. She is of a strong constitution, which makes many men think her to be long-liv'd: She suffers only in having her members so far di∣stant, a thing which doth infinitely weaken so great a body: And though by the assistance of the Genoweses, and her alliance with the Duke of Savoy, she endeavours to unite them; yet does she but little good there∣in, by reason of the diversity of Interest of these two Potentates. But so great a Princess is prejudiced by nothing more, then by her own Spa∣nish State-Ministers, which she makes use of in all great imployments, wherein they carry themselves so proudly, and with such hateful haugh∣tiness, as they will not be only honoured as men, but even adored as Gods. An impertinency which hath made the Spanish Government tedious and nauseous, not only to the Italians and Flemmish, but even to the very Spaniards themselves. All that behold so powerful a Queen, wonder to see that she should all her life-time be troubled with Leeches, and those for the most part of Genua; And some of them are so great as good big Eels. And it is not known whether her not shaking them off proceeds from impotency, from negligence, or from the destiny of great Princes, to whom it is alwaies fatal to have these ugly animals suck out their very life-bloud. This potent Princess being come into the Royal Hall before Apollo, made her left arm be untied by some of her servants, and shewing it na∣ked to Apollo, and the whole College of Literati, spake thus: Lord and Father of Learning! this which you see, is that stinking issue of Flan∣ders, which the French, Germans, and some Italian Princes who seem to be my friends, and that unbowel'd beyond-sea Renegado made in me so many years ago, for the jealousies they had of me. I confess that the before named Princes had reason to be jealous of me, when after the death of Henry the second, they saw France falne into the calamity of in∣fant Kings, and that I, in their minority, sought to sow discord in that Kingdom: Now that there is no more cause for these suspitions, and that (I do not blush to say it) I have been sentenced to pay charges in the great contention which I had with the French, and particularly with that mad Prince of Bearne, I desire your Majesty that so troublesom an issue may be closed up, since every one sees that it is become so inraged a canker by reason of the abundance of humors that have confluence thither, as I wish to God it may not prove my ruine. I did not pass into Italy meerly out of mine own ambition, nor had I so immoderate a thirst (as my ene∣mies affirm) to command it all. Every one knows that I was called in, and haled by meer force, by the Italian Princes own selves, to free them from the fear of being Lorded over by the French: And there is none in Europe that does not know, that I lose so much of my principal, every year in the States which I hold in Italy, as they serve but to weaken and oppress me. Happy had it been for my Spanish Palace, which I would have tiled over with Silver and Massie Gold, if I had never medled with the Italians, a double-dealing people, full of fallacies and interests, and
who are only good to Imbarque people in dangerous businesses without bisket, and then to abandon them in their greatest necessities; professing nothing more openly, then to take Crafish out of their holes with other mens hands. And I strangely wonder why Italy, which (as every one knows) hath suffered her self to be overrun by all Forreign Nations, should now make such profession of chastity to me, as she cannot see me move never so little, but she is afraid I should bereave her of the honour of her Liberty: And though the greatness which the Kingdom of France is at present in, does secure Italy, and all the aforesaid Princes from the fear they have of my power; yet, if your Majesty shall be so pleased, I am ready to give security to every one de non offendendo; provided this my so troublesome issue may be closed up. The Issue was forthwith by order from his Majesty, very diligently considered by the Politick Physitians, and having held a careful Council thereupon, they said, That it being clearly seen that the Spanish Mo∣narchy was affected with a continual ardent thirst of Rule, she had need of that issue, by which those gross humors might be purged away, which fell upon her stomack from Peru, and occasioned that unquenchable thirst. And these able Physitians considered, that if the aforesaid Mo∣narchy had not had that issue, it was apparently dangerous that the per∣nitious humors of Peru might mount to the head of Italy, to the ma∣nifest ruine of her so principal Members, which remain as yet unviolated; And that the Monarchy of Spain might fall into a Dropsie of Universal Monarchy: For which inconveniences, they said excellent provision was had by this issue of Flanders; which ought to be kept open, whilst Peru did subminister such pernitious humors to the Kingdom of Spain. She was much displeased with this resolution, wherefore, greatly in∣censt, she said, Sir, If by the malignity of others I must so shamefully consume away by administring oyntment to this Canker, which my ene∣mies term a diversive issue; others who least believe it, may pechance bring clouts to it. The meaning of this was soon understood by the French, English, and Italians, who reply'd, That they feared nothing less: For they sent but the scum of their States to Flanders, whereas the Spani∣ards spent their gold, and very life-bloud therein. For, to secure them∣selves from the formidable power of Spain, and from the Spaniards am∣bition, which they found had no Orison; the English, French, Germans, and Italians, were forced answerable to Tacitus his Aphorism. Consili∣is & Astu res externas moliri, armaprocul habere.
A Secretary of Monsieur de Guise is punisht for having spoken amiss. MOnsieur de Guise his Secretary, speaking yesterday with some French Barons of the late Tumults in France, as he mentioned his Masters party, called it the holy League; which when Apollo heard, he caused him to have the Strappado given him thrice in publick, and made him be told he might learn to put a difference between a Holy League, and a devillish Rebellion. The Spaniards endeavour the getting of Savioveda, but in vain. SInce the ill advised Princes of Italy made use of the Spanish Pickax, to take the French nail out, which was fixt in the Table of Millan, which Ax entred so far into the Table it self, as it was never able to be got out by any whatsoever Pincers; all the Potentates of Europe, and more particularly the Princes of Italy, who were aware, that the Spani∣ards, after having inslaved Millan, did openly aspire to get the absolute Dominion of all Italy; to the end that they might secure the remaining Liberty that was left them; they made an agreement amongst themselves, that once every five and twenty year, the Chain which the Spaniards forged for the Italian slavery, should be exactly measured by people pur∣posely deputed thereunto. And coming not many daies ago to the act of measuring, the Italian Princes found much to their amazement, that the so hateful Chain was increased by five prejudicial Links: The poli∣tick Smiths were immediately sent for, who very diligently took test, or say of the Iron which was added to the Chain, and they found that the first Link was made at Piombine, the second at Finale, the third at Correg∣gio, the fourth at Portolungone, and the last at Monaco. The Princes wondred exceedingly hereat, and many of them were ashamed of them∣selves, to find that by their supine blockheadishns, the Spaniards had in∣creased the Chain of the Italian slavery much more in time of peace, then they would have done with four Armies in time of War. They were therefore so incens'd against the Spaniards for these exorbitant novelties, as they freely told them, that if they would not keep themselves within the bounds of honesty and modesty, in case the Italian Files were not sufficient to reduce that woful Chain to its due measure, they would make use of those of France; and if they could not thereby compass their ends, they would bring enough from Germany and England; and that if put to despair, they would provide themselves of those excellent damask blades which are made in Turkey. Whilst the Italian Princes were in this dispute, a Post came to them dis∣patcht in all hast from Italy, advertising them that the Spaniards were hammering another Link in Savioneda, to add unto the Chain of their slavery. At the news whereof the State of Venice straight waies threw open her Arsenal, and all the Princes of Italy hasted to take up arms: The
Warlike French Nation commanded her Nobility to get on horseback; the Germans put themselves in order to pass over the Mountains; nume∣rous Fleets of English, Hollanders, and Zealanders, hasted towards the Straits of Gebraltar; when just as the whole world was up in arms, a new Post came with the joyful and certain news, that the Spaniards had done their utmost endeavour to make the important Link of Sabioneda; but that they had lost their labour; for as they were sodering it, it knapt in two. Sir Thomas Moore, an Englishman, asks Apollo when He∣rsies will cease. SIr Thomas Moore, that Englishman, who the very first day that he was received into Pernassus, was honoured with the Title of singular and holy Literato, and who lives much afflicted in this Court, being perpe∣tually cruciated by reason of the wicked heresies which proceed from his Countrey, and from elsewhere; and which having chased true Chri∣stian piety from out the hearts of men, hath put both holy and profane things into a horrid confusion; this singular mans affliction grew so real∣ly great, as he was perpetually seen to bemoan the heresies of the seduced people, and the seducers open Atheism. This so famous Personage came yesterday before Apollo, and earnestly desired his Majesty that he would let him know when the present disorders and heresies which were crept into the Christian Religion, and which were invented and sown by wicked men, either out of ambition of getting, fear of loss, or desire of revenge, should have an end. To this Apollo suddenly answered; You shall see (my beloved Moore) the mischiefs of the present heresies cease, when the Spaniards content∣ing themselves with their own Spain, will cause no further jealousies in other Princes: And when the House of Austria resting content with her antient Patrimony of Auspurg in Germany, shall bound her ambition of dominiering over the whole world. For the present Heresies being no∣thing else but a League of Potentates, against the greatness of the House of Austria, the evils will not cease before the true occasion thereof be taken away. The French desire Apollo that he will teach them the true Spanish Perfume for Gloves. GReat and eternal is the emulation between the two Warlike and Po∣tent Nations of France and Spain. There is no singularity in France, which is not ambitiously coveted by the Spaniards; nor are the French ever quiet, till they have made themselves Masters of those rarities, which they see Spain indued with. And because the Perfuming of Gloves with Ambergrees, is a particular invention and gift of the Spaniards, the French have left nothing untried, how to come to the like perfection.
They have been at great cost in providing themselves of Musk, Amber∣grees, Civet, and of all the odoriferous drugs which come from the East; but all in vain: For neither hath their expence, nor their diligence been able to make them obtain their desired end. Yet before they would give over their business as desperat, the Noble French Nation had recourse to Apollo's Majesty, who is the bringer forth of all Aromaticks, whom they earnestly desired, that he would vouchsafe to teach the French the true Spanish perfume, wherewith to dress Amber-gloves. 'Tis very cer∣tain that Apollo was not seen to laugh so heartily at the down-fall of un∣fortunate Icarus, as he did at the request of these Frenchmen. He com∣manded the Priests that were by him, to smell to their hands, and tell him of what they smelt. The Priests obeyed, and told his Majesty they smelt very well. Then said Apollo to the French, Nature alwaies helps mens defects, with somewhat of rare vertue; and that therefore she had given the Monopoly of making sweet Gloves to that Nation whose hand did stink insufferably. The Spanish Monarchy goes to the Oracle of Delphos, to know whether she shall ever obtain the Universal Mo∣narchy of the whole world; and receives a negative answer. THe Spanish Monarchy parted very privatly from Pernassus yesterday morning two hours before day, in a Coach with six horses; carrying along with her only some of her chief Court-confidents, which caused great jealousies. And the French Monarchy was particularly so moved hereat, as she presently took Post, and followed after the Spanish Mo∣narchy, to know the reason of this Voyage; and overtook her just as she arrived at Delphos, at Apollo's Oracle. Before which the Spanish Monar∣chy presenting her self, those who were then present, say, that she made this supplication unto it. O Eternal and resplendent Lamp of the world, Heavens right Eye, which art not only the producer of day, but of all good that befalls man∣kind! Thou knowst that all my thoughts have for this long time been set upon the Universal Monarchy, which only the Romans arrived unto: Thou knowst what effusion of bloud and treasure it hath cost me to com∣pass my intent. The watchings, sweat, and cunning industry which I have used to atchieve so important a designe, are only known to thee; and thou likewise knowst, that by the valour of my Nation, the dexterous∣ness of mine own wit, and my monies efficacy, it is not many years since I sowed sch troubles and civil Wars in France, and whereupon I had chiefly grounded my hopes, as that I was near compassing my desire; no∣thing remained to overcome all difficulties, but to joyn Naples to Millan; which if I shall at any time be able to do, I may safely say I have done the deed. But since, were it either through my fatal misfortune, through the impossibility of the business, or through the power of my cruel ene∣mies who appeared against me, the scandallous revolutions which I have
been so long a plotting, and sowing amongst the French, are in despit of me, turned on the sudden into that peace and tranquillity which it breaks my very heart to think on: That I may not utterly ruine those my people, whom I have almost brought to utter desolation, by this un∣dertaking which I propounded unto my self, and that I may be no lon∣ger the discourse of people, I now present my self before your Majesty, humbly beseeching you to give me a clear answer, whether that Universal Monarchy whih I have so much set my heart upon, and which is the only scope of all my actions, be by the will of heaven destin'd to me and to my Nation. And this I desire to know, to the end that if the business prove impossible, I may appease my self, and set my mind in quiet; or if it be feasible, I may incourage my Spaniards in the possibility thereof; for to tell thee the truth, who seest the hidden thoughts of men, by the so many hardships and sufferings which I have undergon by sea and land, by the so many conspiracies and counter-plots, which have been framed against me by my implacable enemies, and which are framing faster now then ever, I begin to be totally discouraged. After this request the Temple shook, and a great Earthquake followed immediately after; when these words proceeded from the mouth of Apollo's Minister. The Universal Monarchy shall again return to the Noble Italian Nation, when she shall have banished all those intestine discords which have made her a slave to other Nations. This sad answer being given, the Spanish Monarchy went much afflict∣ed out of the Temple, and was very much astonished; and when she saw the French Monarchy present her self before her, she first past usual com∣plements with her, then taking her by the hand, drew her aside; and having acquainted her with what answer she had received from the Oracle, she told her, That since the Universal Monarchy was by the will of heaven to return again to the Italian Nation, France would as soon make trial of new Iulius Cesar's, as Spain should do of second Scipio's: That there∣fore to secure themselves, she thought the bst course would be to divide Italy between them. She offered to teach her the same receit which (as she affirms) she had made happy trial of in the Indies, by which they would so secure themselves from the Italian Nation, as nothing should remain in the world, of that wicked generation of men, but the bare name. Suffer me (reply'd the French Monarchy) to forget that unfortunate division that my King, Lodovick the twelfth, made lately with you; and we will then speak further of this business: For the French are not de∣ceived the second time so easily, as I perceive you fancy they are. Then, for the receit which you propose unto me to secure our selves from the Italians, keep it I beseech you for your self. For, to rout out men from out the world, to enjoy the naked earth without inhabitants (as it hath been your practice to do in the Indies) is a politick precept which is not found in the French Reason of State. I have at my cost, learn'd to con∣tent my self with a little, provided it be good. And therefore I ground my greatness more upon the multitude of my Subjects, then upon the largeness of my Dominion. And provided that my Frenchmen enjoy some satisfaction in this world, I am content that others may do the like. The business of agreement concerning Italy, will require time; and you
know by experience, that purgations taken to preserve ones self from apprehended malladies, do often bring them the faster on. I will be bold to tell you, with that liberty which is proper to my nature, that the business of subjugating whole Italy, is not so easie a thing as I per∣ceive you perswade your self it is. For when I had the same caprichio, it proved pernitious to me; wherefore I believe it will prove little bet∣ter to you: For to my great loss, I have learn'd, that the Italians are a sort of people who watch alwaies how to escape out of our hands, and which are never tamed under forreign slavery▪ And though like craf∣ty Apes, they transform themselves into the customs of those Nati∣ons which rule over them, yet they preserve their antient hatred con∣cealed inwardly in their heart. And they are expert Merchants of their slavery; for they make you believe they are become good Spaniards, by only pung on a pair of Sicilian slops, and us that they are become Frenchmen, by putting on a Cambrick band: But when they come to the point of business, they shew more teeth then a thousand saws. They are very like those greedy dames, who by their alluring smiles, soundly fleece their Sweet-hearts, without ever coming to the conclusive point which they would be at. Believe me therefore, who have paid dearly for my learning of it, that you shall reap nothing but loss and shame in going about to subdue Italy. Philip the second, King of Spain, after some dispute concerning his Title, enters in great State into Per∣nassus. PHilip the second, that potent King of Spain, who came two months ago to this Court, was not permitted to make his publick entry till yesterday: The reason why, was because in some Triumphant Arches which were built for him with great magnificence, by the Spanish Na∣tion, these words were written. Philippo secundo, Hispaniarum, utriusque Siciliae, & Indiarum Regi Ca∣tholico, Italiae Pacis Auctri felicissimo. At which words the greatest part of the Italian Princes being displeas∣ed, they desired they might be cancelled, saying they would by no means acknowledge that peace from the Spaniards, which they bought with ready moneys from the Hollanders and Zealanders. This Aromatick business suffered a long dispute; and though the Italian Princes did sufficiently prove that the present Peace of Italy ought not to be owned from any good intention in the Spaniards, who would have wholly overrun it, had it not been for that great diversion; yet in the greatest heat of this contention, the Queen of Italy with her wonted wisdom quenched the fire. For having summoned all her Prin∣ces together, she bad them leave ostentation and boasting to the Spa∣niards, and that minding realities, they should not stick to feed them with smoak. The Cavalcata was the stateliest that was ever seen in Per∣nassus, both for the number and quality of Princes who came thither to favour and honour that great King; who was placed amongst those
Monarchs who have been held famous in the world, more for their wis∣dom and sagacity in peace, then for their valour shewn in War. And therefore the Impressa which he bore in his chief Standard, which was a writing Pen, afforded much wonder to the Literati; with which Pen, as is fully witnessed by all Historians, he had caused greater ruine and hurleyburleys in France, and wheresoever else he had occasion to use it, then his Father Charls the fifth could have done with all the Cannons of Europe. This Impressa was much commended by all the College of the Vertuosi; Writers having attributed it to great honour, that a Pen in the hand of one that knew how to use it, had done such remark∣able things. So great a King is alwaies treated in Pernassus, alla Grande, for even the chiefest Monarchs of Europe have thought it an honour to serve him: In so much as, as he was under the Barbers hands the next day after his entry, the Queen of England held the basin to his neck, and the warlike King of France, Henry the fourth thought it great glo∣ry that he was able to wash his head; which he did with such dexterity, as if he had been bred up to that exercise; though some Malignants say it was without sope, and with very strong lye. This great Monarch was presented by all the Vertuosi of Pernassus, with many pieces of Poetry, and other elaborat Writings, which he rewarded very liberally. He gave twenty crowns in Gold to a Literato who presented him with a solid Discourse, wherein he shewed how the Noble Parthenope, and the whole flourishing Kingdom of Naples, which is now brought to utter desolation, by the plundering of souldiers, Judges lewdness, by the Ba∣rons pilling and polling, and by the general ransacking of the Vice-Roys, who are sent from Spain to grow rich there, might be brought to its antient glory and splendor, and gave the discourse to his Confessor, and willed him to have a care of it, as of that which was written very highly▪ But he gave twelve thousand crowns a year Rent to an excellent Politi∣cian, who gave him a long Treaty; but clean contrary to the other, wherein was discust what way might be taken to afflict that Kingdom of Naples much more then it is now, and how it might be reduced to such calamity and misery, as that generous Steed without or saddle or bridle, which the City of Naples gives for her Impresse, might be brought to bear a pack-saddle and a heavy burthen patiently, nay even to draw in a Cart; and moreover he made him a Grandee of Spain, affirming that it was discreetly written according to the true terms of good Policy. All Princes, Commonwealths, and States, are justly weigh∣ed in the Scales by Lorenzo de Medici. SInce it is clearly seen, that the Commonwealth of Rome, after the acquisition which she made of whole Italy, could in a short space ar∣rive at that Universal Monarchy, which was, and is so famous, and to which many ambitious Princes have since in vain aspired: The Em∣pire and Kingdoms which were afterwards built out of the ruines of so great a Monarchy, came to a great contest, Whether it were possible to hinder that Potentate who should be suffered to grow to such a great∣ness
of stature and strength, as that he was not to be counterpoised by anyone single other Prince, as the Commonwealth of Rome could ne∣ver be, after she had once got to be Mistriss of Italy, from arriving in a short time at Universal Monarchy. Since it is evidently known by many occasions which have hapned, that peoples aid and succour are but vain hopes, and wofull remedies, by reason of the diversity of Interests, and infinite jealousies, which use to reign amongst Colleagues; and the Empires and Kingdoms which arose in the world after the ruine of the Roman Empire, to the end that they might shun those calamities and dissolutions which those Poten∣tates underwent, who were opprest by the Roman Power, did wisely make an agreement, that all the Princes of Europe should meet toge∣ther every fifteenth year, and that their Forces should be weighed, and a due counterpoise and allay should be given to him who should be found to be grown to such a greatness, as might prove dangerous to his neigh∣bours. Many great wits were propounded for the honourable imployment of this poysing; but for above these hundred last years, it hath alwaies been discharged by the Princely House of Medici, and particularly by the great Lorenzo. At which Prerogative, though many thought the Pope was highly offended, and the Venetian Senat, who have been al∣waies as watchful at least, if not more, to maintain the power of Poten∣tates equal as well in Italy, as elsewhere, as Lorenzo, or any of the Flo∣rentines, yet all Historians do agree that the weight of this business was bequeathed to Lorenzo. The first day of August then, all the Princes and Potentates of Eu∣rope met at Phocides, to be present at the important affair of having per∣fect knowledge of their own actions, and (that which imports more by much in matters of State) of those of others. By antient and just pre∣rogative the Aristocratical Monarchy of the Apostolick Sea, was put first into the Scales; and because the weight thereof did not exceed six millions of pounds the last fifteen years, and now it was found to weigh seven millions and a half, every one knew that the addition of the Duke∣dom of Ferrara was the occasion thereof: And then a vail being taken off, the sacred sharp edged sword appeared, shining as clear as the Sun a∣midst spiritual and temporal Authority. And because a thing of so great esteem cannot be weighted by the Scales of humane judgement; it was honoured, adored, and admired only by the minds of all men. Next to this, the Roman Empire was brought to the Scales by the se∣ven Princes Electors; which was found in the old books to have weighed seventy millions of pounds. But her healthful complexion being spoiled by the irregular living of many of her Emperors, which made her be dreaded by every one; she is fallen into such dangerous sicknesses, as after a long Quartane Ague hath terminated in a Hectick Feaver, which hath so macerated her, as nothing is seen to remain in her in this our age, but skin and bones. Yet though she be so much lessened in Revenue, she makes a fair appearance by the stately motion of her body. Moreover, to the end that her intrinsecal imperfections may not be known, good people haue much imbellished her outwardly, and honested her with the antient Title of August, and the Majestical name of Cesar. But when she came to the Scales, she was found to be altoge∣ther
empty within; no feather being so light as the name of a Prince without authority, is idle. The weight therefore of the Roman Em∣pire did not exceed 480 pound; and this redounded certainly to the infinite shame of the lay Electors, who were thought to be those that by their cunning had brought her to that unfortunate condition: For the common opinion was, that they had wrought it so, as those Cities, and States which they themselves could not enjoy, should by rebelling against the Empire, vindicate their Liberty; to the end that those Em∣perors might not have power to regain those States by force of arms, which they had possessed themselves of with so much perfidiousness: So as to the miserable example of the vicissitude of humane affairs, the formerly dreaded Roman Empire, hath wickedly wasted her antient Dominions, by her Subjects avarice and ambition, and is now reduced into a Lodging, with the miserable salary of seven duckets a month; which is given her rather by way of recognition and alms, than as any due tribute: In so much as the House of Austria, is forced to maintain the Imperial dignity (which is now brought to so low a condition) out of her own Patrimonial Estate. And though this so great misery moved commiseration in many Princes; yet those who did remember the Henrie's insolences, the cru∣elty of the Fredericks, the seditions, impieties, and plunderings used by many other Emperors in Italy, affirmed freely, that it was not the ra∣pacity of the Electors, nor the Germans infidelity; but that it was the great wisdom of all the Princes of Europe, who for the good of the publick peace, cut the talons, and pluckt the chief feathers of the Ea∣gle, which had alwaies made profession to live by rapine; and which made her self believe that all the people of Europe, like so many tame pigeons were her prey. And it was observed by many, that the Princes of Italy did very much rejoyce to see the Roman Empire reduced to so great ruine, as those who remembred what hard usage they had often received from thence in Italy. Then was the flourishing and warlike Nation of France brought to the Scales by her famous Peers; a four-square Edifice, of five hundred and fifty miles extent on every side, full of an infinite well armed No∣bility on horseback, who do not only maintain peace at home, but make so great a King formidable to all Nations; where are seen great abun∣dance of sacred Personages, which render her religious; of Learned men who do beautifie her; of Merchants and Artificers who enrich her; and of Husbandmen who do make her abound in all good things. But nothing makes the beholders wonder more, then to see that the King∣dom of France is a Sea which is sailed upon, and a Land which is sowed by all Wines. The antient weight of this famous Kingdom, was twen∣ty millions of pounds; but when she was weighed the last fifteen years, by reason of the great calamities she was put into by some of her disloy∣al Barons, she reached not to twelve millions. And at this present she doth not only equal, but exceed her weight, in the best of her former times; for she weighs 25 millions, a thing which all men have much wondred at; in so much as the Spaniards put their Spectacles upon their noses, and did observe very punctually, whether the weights were just or no. Since Bressia is added to the antient Kingdom of France, given unto her by the Duke of Savoy; which because it flanks the
City of Lions, hath increased her weight above one million. Next the many Kingdoms of Spain were put into the Scale by the Spanish Grandees. And to the great amazement of those old men that remembred that some sixscore years before those Kingdoms were but meanly esteemed of; the weight came to twenty millions: And they assured themselves, that by the addition of so many other States which were yet to be put into the Scales, she would not only equal, but ex∣ceed the greatest weight of the French Monarchy. They did then forthwith put into the Scales, the flourishing King∣dom of Naples, which was believed would add two millions to the weight; but did take a million and a half from the weight thereof. At which the Spaniards being much astonished, said, that Lorenzo had ei∣ther used some cosenage, or else the scales of necessity must not be just; since it was not to be believed that the weight should grow lesser by ad∣dition. And growing into great choler, the Spaniards said that the Me∣dici should do well to be once quiet, and not add new offences, and things hateful to the Spaniards, to the insufferable distastes of Flanders, Marselles, and Aldighiera. Lorenzo, without any the least alteration, reply'd to these resentful words, That his scales were just; but that the Neapolitans and Millaneses did not add any weight thereunto, being so far distant from the strength of Spain, and full of people who did so un∣willingly undergo the Dominion of Forreigners; and that the Indies were void of Inhabitants; that the love and multitude of subjects, the fertility and conjunction of States, was that which weighed down his scales. Then answering with some more shew of anger to the particu∣lar of Flanders, Marselles, and Aldighiera, Lorenzo said, that as long as the Spaniards would keep themselves within the bounds of honesty, they should alwaies be beloved, honoured, and served by his gre Dukes of Tuscany; but that they were very much deceived, if they thought they should ever be able to draw the Medici out of Florence, as they had done the unfortunate Sforz out of Millan: That States could not be deposited into the hands of Princes, as monies were, with a mind to recall them in a fitting time: And that the merit of any gift, how great soever, was lost when one went about to reassume it. Then the Princes, who heard words begin to multiply, interposed themselves between Lorenzo and the Spaniards; and breaking off that hot discourse, bad them proceed on to the scales. The Spaniards put then thereinto the Dukedom of Millan, which withdrew likewise a million from the weight; whereat the Spaniards were so astonished, as they would not put Flanders into the scales, fear∣ing to receive som further affront. 'Twas said, that if they would have put in the Indies, they might have done some good, but not such miracles as some wide mouthes speak of, who speak of millions of crowns with as much ease as Pigeons eat pease. The English were next called in, who put their Kingdom into the scales, formidable for the strength of its miraculous scituation, for the mountains wherewith she is invironed, serve for walls, made like bul∣warks by Gods own hand; and the sea supplying the place of a deep ditch, makes her a redoubted Kingdom, by reason of the commodity she hath to assail others, and the insufferable difficulties which they mee with, who will assault her. This Kingdom the last fifteen years, weighed
fifteen millions; but at the present it comes short of nine; the occa∣sion of this decrease, to boot with the Apostasie of that Kingdom, was said to be because the King is of a forreign Nation, a stranger to the Kingdom, and therefore must require some time to sit fast in the saddle, and to get his foot into the stirrup of that his new Kingdom: The En∣glish to add to the weight of their Nation, would put the Kingdom of Scotland into the scales; when all the Scots Nobility appeared with their swords drawn, and boldly said, they would never suffer that their Kingdom should be joyned to the Kingdom of England. 'Tis very certain that the King of England seemed not to be any whit offended with these men who had spoken so boldly in his presence, and in the pre∣sence of all the Princes of Christendom who were there present: But told them in very mild words, that this Union of the Scots would be of infinite commodity. To which the Scots answered, that the sad example of the miseries of Flanders was fresh in memory, which when she saw her Counts become Kings of Spain, did foolishly believe that she should master the Spaniards; but it was not long ere Flanders was sackt by the Spaniards, not Spain by the Flemmish. And to fill their miseries up to the brim, the Emperor Charls the fifth, and King Philip his son, who were formerly Flemmish, being become Spaniards, the un∣fortunate Flemmish, for having lost their Prince, from being natural subjects, began to be accounted strangers, and to have their loyalty su∣spected. And therefore Flanders which was the native Countrey of Charls the fifth, and Philip the seconds Patrimony, in terms of modern Policy, was become a conquered State; and was therefore begun to be governed by forreiners, with such jealousies, hard dealings, such grie∣vousness of new gabels, aids, contributions, and donatives, which in∣gendered those ill humors, and gave that bad satisfaction, which was the rise of the civil war that insued; which after an unspeakable profu∣sion of Gold, an infinite effusion of bloud, and an incredible loss of ho∣nour to the Flemmish, is turned by the Spaniards into a Merchandize. That the Scots had learn'd by these deplorable miseries, not to suffer their Kings to leave their Countrey, and Royal abode of their antient Kingdom, and carry it to a greater Kingdom whereunto he was lately called: Which should they do, the Scots were to expect all the cala∣mities from their cruel enemies the English, when Scotland should be u∣nited to England, and the Scottish Kings were become Englishmen, which inferior Nations are forced to suffer by superiors who rule over them. That Scotland for misfortune would be like Flanders; and the English for their pride, cruelty, and avarice, like the Spaniards. Those that were present at this dispute, say, that the Spaniards told the King of England, that those Scots who had spoken with such arro∣gance in his Majesties presence, ought to be punished. To whom the King of England answered, That the Spaniards should not give that ad∣vice to others, which had proved so very pernitious to themselves. But commanding that they should forbear the business of the scales, assured the Scots, that ere long he would give them full satisfaction. The vast Ottoman Empire was next put into the scales, which the last fifteen years arrived at the weight of 32 millions; but was found to weigh less then 16 millions now. A novelty whereat those Princes were much amazed, and particularly the Venetians, who could not be∣lieve
so great an abatement; wherefore they desired that it might be a∣gain weighed, and more exactly: And it was found, that in the little in∣terim of time betwixt the first and second weighing, it weighed less by 822 pounds; a thing which made it appear evidently to all men, that the Ottoman Empire, formerly the terror of the world, hasted towards its ruine; which all the Princes were very glad to see. 'Tis true, that the wiser sort of men observed that the Spaniards jollity was altered, fearing lest the Turks depression might turn to the exaltation of the Ve∣netian Commonwealth. The Senators of Poland brought their Kingdom next unto the scales, which by reason of the seditious heresies which they have suffered to creep in amongst them, by reason of the little authority which their King hath over them, and the over-great power which their Paladines have arrogated to themselves, did not now weigh full out six millions, whereas formerly it weighed above twelve. After this, the wise Grandees of the Terra ferma, and the dreadful Magistracy of the Councel of Ten, brought the flourishing State of Venice, to the scales, miraculous for her greatness, and for her situation: she proved of good weight, for she weighed eight millions; which was said to be, by reason of the mass of Gold gotten in so long a time of peace, into her Treasury by her wise Senators. Then the Swissers, Grisons; and other free people of Germany, brought their Republick to the scales, which the Princes desired might be weighed severally apart; which the Germans were contented with, if the poyser were able to do it. But when Lorenzo had put the Com∣monwealth of Basil into the scales, he found that the greatest part of the other free States of Germany were so link'd together, as it was im∣possible to separate them one from another. Which made sweat ap∣pear upon the brows of many ambitious Princes; wherefore Lorenzo, being necessitated to put them all together into the scales at once, was not able to raise up the heavier scale. The Duke of Savoy was brought next unto the scales by Knights of the Annuntiation, who weighed as much as he had done the last fifteen years: But when Lorenzo put into the scales the noble Prerogative which the same Duke Charls Emanuel enjoyes, of being stiled Il primo guerriero Italiano, it added a million and 420 pounds to his former weight. Then with equal pomp and Majesty to that of Kings, did the Duke of Lorain appear; whose State, though it were but small, equalled the weight of great Kingdoms; which hapned through his good fortune of having his Territories so seated, as he can put great difficulties upon the Low countries, by impeding the passage of succours which the Spaniards bring from Italy; which raised him to such a height of repu∣tation, as he sold that his adhearance at the weight of Gold, to him that would give most for it; in such sort, as after having assisted the Spaniards as much as any of the devoutest French Barons of the ho∣ly League, turning to the French who won the field, he faced about so fairly, as so great a King as was Harry the fourth of France, the great Duke of Tuscany, and the Duke of Mantua were glad to have alliance with him. And to add to the Spaniards jealousie, the very immortal State of Venice did so affectionately take one of those Princes into
pay, as had not that illustrious Lady vowed perpetual chastity, and had not her privy parts been sown upon the very first day of her birth, by Venetian Gentlemen who are very jealous of her chastity, many men thought she would have married him. The Duke of Savo was known to envy this Prince his felicity very much; for he being like∣wise placed as a bar between the French and the Spaniards of Millan, as was the Duke of Lorain between the French and the Spaniards of Flanders, yet had he received hard usage, both from the French when they were his enemies, and from the Spaniards when his friends; in∣stead of so many good turns and advantages which he found in the Dukes of Lorain: so as every one thought the Duke of Savoy did now clearly perceive that the Spaniards had practised pernitiously a∣gainst him. Next, the most flourishing State of the great Dukes of Tuscany was brought to the scales by the Otto di Balia; very admirable for the excellent condtions of her inhabitants, all of them being fructiferous, and who have alwaies taken pains both with their brains and bodies, for the exact government, perpetual plenty, peace and quiet which she en∣joyes. So as she being altogether substance, weighed as much as any whatsoever famous Monarchy. And Lorenzo was observed to rejoice very much, when he saw that his successors, according to the model which the great Cosmo had left them, had known how to build strong Cittadels upon the foundations of Churches and Hospitals, which he and his Ancestors had laid in their Countrey, in the time of the Flo∣rentine Liberty. Wherefore Lorenzo, the more to shew the worth and wisdom of the Princes of his Family, put the sound headpiece of Ferdinand the great into the scales, which weighed so very much, as the scales fell over and over, and broke the great chain which governed them, and all things went topsey turvey. All the Princes were then aware of the Prerogative which the Court of Rom hath in producing men of singular wisdom; for that all knew so great a Scholar came out of that School. The breaking of the scales was the cause why some Italian Princes who were yet to the fore, could not be weighed. Wherefore it was agreed upon, that the Monarchy of Spain being according to antient custom, to be weighed against all the Princes and Potentates of Italy, the particular weight of every Ita∣lian Prince should be calculated by the general weight of them altoge∣ther. A large and just ballance was therefore brought into the midst of the greater Hall, into which on the one side were put all the Kingdoms belonging to the Monarchy of Spain, and on the other all the Italian Princes: and the scales were found to stand in equal ballance. A thing which the Italian Princes were much troubled at; who whilst they were in that agony, it was observed by all that looked on, that the pow∣erfull Monarchy of France, by one only loving smile which she cast up∣on the scale wherein the Italian Princes were placed, made it, to the great joy of all men, suddenly weigh down on their side. It must not be forgotten, that the Spaniaros, when they saw the Duke of Savoy (who refused the last fifteenth year to be put into the same scale with the rest of the Italian forces) put himself into the scale, to counterpoyse the Spanish Forces, in a threatning manner, bit their fingers at him; the which when he saw, he with great generosity
said unto them, You Gentlemen of Spain, it is now no longer time to feed men with hopes, I have at last clearly discovered all your tricks; and do so call to mind your past actions; as for the future, I will score up my accounts with another cole; for yours, which till now I have only made use of, hath stained and scorched my hands too much. Your baits of hope have not brought me yet to be such a fool, as to make me forgo the little bit of bread which I have yet in my mouth, to snatch at the shadow of the great Spanish Inheritance which I see in the bottom of the water. And the Spaniards further complaining that the Dukes of Parma, Modena, and Urbine, the Lord of Mirandola, and the famous Roman Barons, Gazitani, Colonesi, and Orsini, who have all of them the Gol∣den Fleece, and are their Pensioners, were weighed together with the I∣talian Forces; whereas by the Orders of that Knighthood, and by the Pensions which they received, they were bound to adhere to the Spa∣nish Interest, and to contribute unto the Spaniards greatness: They were by them answered, That the Lords and Princes of Italy received the honour of the Golden Fleece, and rich Pensions from the Spanish Monarchy, just as do those honorable Ladies, who receive Presents from their sweet hearts by way of Courtesie; not out of any intention to do the foule thing you wot of. Why the Monarchy of Spain withdrew her self into her Palace. BEcause for many daies past the Monarchy of Spain had not been seen to come abroad, nay that not only she had been all this while retired into her own house, but had continually kept the gates of her Palace shut; the Italian Princes, and especially the Venetians, who are not only the diligent observers of the actions, but the most subtile pry∣ers into the very thoughts of that great Queen, began to grow exceeding jealous of such a novelty: And because it was still impossible for them to know what might be the meaning of so much solitariness, they all concluded that there must needs be some great mystery in it. The Venetians out of a jealousie for their States becoming impatient of any delay, with ladders set against the Palace of the said Monarchy, got in at the windows, and saw her hard at work; and with a State-Minister of hers, called the Conte di Fuentes, and some other sturdy fellows, very busie in stopping up all the holes in her house: Where∣upon the witty Venetians very well foreseeing to what end all this pains was taken, advised their friends to arm themselves; for the Spaniards, as soon as ever they had stopped up the holes of supplies, would be sure to fall a hunting of the Rats, to make a great massacre of them.
The Duke of Alva being arrived at Pernassus, in com∣plementing with Prospero Colonna, he falls to cuffs with him about Titles; whereof he had defrauded the Colonnesi. DOn Fernando di Toledo Duke of Alva, some few daies ago, came to Pernassus, and according to an express Order from Apollo, dili∣gent examination having been made of his actions, was, by the Milita∣ry men, found worthy to be admitted into Pernassus amongst those fa∣mous Captains; who fighting with patience and art, knew rather how to overcome their enemies without bloudshed, then with open force and desperateness, to hazard the fortune of Kingdoms in the doubtfull chance of a set battel. But because Lodovick Guicchiardin, a very ju∣dicious Writer of the Affairs of Flanders gave in a complaint, That for some distastful things which he had written of the Duke, he had been evil intreated by him, he was fain to wait yet a good while to clear himself of that foule imputation: For in Pernassus there is yet in force an Edict very strictly observed by Apollo, wherein that Prince or private man is declared to be fallen into a premunire, and liable to the penalty of reproach, that should dare to affront any Historian, or o∣ther Writer, for things written, though little for his honour, yet (how∣soever) true: But so potent were the Dukes friends, that Guicchiar∣din was content to withdraw the suit; whereupon he was admitted into Pernassus with all the greatest solemnities possible, and had a place a∣mong his Majesties Gens d'armes, commanded by the famous Quintus Fabius Maximus, who for his singular wariness was sirnamed Cunctator. And it hapned, that among other Princes and great Commanders whom this Duke visited, that one was the most excellent Signior Prospero Co∣lonna, of whom he was received with all sorts of honour, and so much the more, because he understood that the Duke made publick professi∣on of being a Disciple, a follower, and imitator of that slow, but sure way of waging war, used by this Signior Prospero. But in this visit, there fell out a strange accident, and in truth a very troublesome chance: for at the first meeting, the Duke having given to Signior Prospero the Title of Vostra Merce, he grew into such a rage, that taking so base a Title for a great affront, he said with an angry voice; Duke, I thought thou hadst come into my house to reverence one that is greater then thy self, not to undervalue him: But because the men of the House of Colonna answer injuries done by words, with deeds, Get thee out of this house, for in the street, with weapons in hand, I will make it good upon thee▪ that they which proceed with such as I am, in base uncivil tearms, deserve not to be admitted into any commerce with men of honour. The Duke was amazed at this so resolute resentment which he observed in that great Commander, and resisting the violence that Signior Prospero used to thrust him out of the Chamber, he fell to fisti∣cuffs with him. And because the Spaniards that were in the Dukes company, seeing him struggle with Colonna, came in to help him, the Italians that waited upon Signior Prospero, did the same too: So that a
great many men being gotten into a very narrow place, there insued a very cruel scuffle; the noise whereof being heard into the street, was the occasion that the news of so dangerous an accident was suddenly car∣ried to Apollo: Who in great hast dispatch'd away thither the Lord Lieutenant of that place, with a guard, which took the Duke out of Signior Prospero's hands; and having quieted the uprore, commanded the Spaniards, who had been already shrewdly handled, to get them home again. Then Signior Prospero, before any body could give in sinister information against him, presented himself before Apollo, to whom it is reported, that with great haughtiness of mind, he spake these words: Sir, It is well known to every one, that those of the house of Colonna, which have been men of my quality, have alwaies enjoy'd the Title of Excellency, antequam Abraham fuerit, and ere the Spani∣ards were in rerum natura. Now, that this Nation should undertake to misuse such a one as I am, as at this very instant the Duke of Alva hath had the audaciousness to do in mine own house, is a thing by no means to be indured. For if the abjectness of him that makes the trespass, doth infinitely aggravate the injury to him against whom it is made, how is it possible that an Italian Baron of my quality, should contain himself within the bounds of mo∣desty, when he sees he is so much undervalued by that Spanish Nation, whose miseries within these four daies, the whole world did so pitty, that the Christians were fain to have gatherings for them in their Churches, to free them from that wretched slavery, wherein they were so unfor∣tunately oppressed by the Moors of Granada. The Spaniards enjoy the Dominion over the greatest part of Italy, where, by such as I am, though every day they threaten us with cruel and universal slavery, they are lov'd, honoured, yes, and serv'd. And they with their portentous avarice have deprived us of our estates; and in the deplorable sack of Rome, with their unexpressible sensuality, have bereft our chastest Ma∣trons of their honours: Yet that now in return of so prostrated a pati∣ence, they would fain take from us this little vapour of honour that we have left, and these poor Titles, the unhappy remainders, and lamenta∣ble Reliques of the Italian Reputation, is a thing so hard to be digested, that by every honorable Baron of Italy it ought to be revenged; not with verbal complaints as I do, but with the daggers point. They that were present at this passage, say, that all the while Signior Prospero was speaking, Apollo look'd something smiling: And still the angrier Colonna grew, the more did the mirth of his Majesties divine and resplendent face appear; insomuch, that when Signior Prospero had broken forth into those over-daring words, that the gross abuses which the Spaniards offer to the Italians, ought to be revenged with the dag∣gers point, he burst out into a downright laughter, and said, Prospero, Thou hast been, and alwaies wilt be, too cholerick. And I must needs tell thee, I am infinitely scandalized, that such a one as thou who hath alwaies made particular profession of a sound judgement, should wonder that slaves, which for twenty years together have been fed in a Galley with black and musty bisket, when they light upon a batch of Manchet, use to fill themselves, till their guts be ready to crack. Yet that their outragious greediness, and every indecent action with which they use to gorge themselves, is so far from being odious to those good honest men
which look on▪ that it rather moves them to pitty. Do you Italians therefore give way too, that the Spaniards (men so newly come into the world, and but lately gotten out of the slavery under the Moors of Granada) may glut themselves with diet so delicious to their taste, and with the honoured Titles they have met with in Italy. For I assure you, that as soon as ever they shall be satiated with these vanities, they too, as well as the French, will be so fair conditioned, that, not only to such as you, but to the very Grooms of their Stables, they will very gladly give the Title of Excellence. And let me tell thee, that if thou hadst that discretion, and that perfect knowledg of worldly things, as I ould with thee, thou would'st very well know, that these exorbitances, and this so odious manner of behaviour which the Spaniards use in Ita∣ly, whereat thou art so extreamly vex'd, is as so much of the best sugar for you Italians, and as so much of the bitterest poyson for the Spanish Nation: Which if to her valour, to her subtilty, and to that inexplicable ambition of hers, she had added amiable conditions, by absolutely cast∣ing out that remainder of Liberty which is not yet quite gone; she would soon have made her self entire Mistress of the Universe. All whose insolencies would be revenged, not with the daggers point by you Italians, but with all manner of cruelty by the Monarchy of Spain her self, upon her own Spanish Officers, who with their vapouring, distast the good servants of so great a Queen, and make her Soveraign∣ty unpleasing to all her subjects. Disorders, against which, some course of necessity must be taken, since they greatly hinder the main subsistence of that universal Monarchy, to which with the publick hae of all Italy, it will not ever be possible for her to attain. And with this answer, Apollo sent home again Signior Prospero, very well satisfied. After which, appeared before Apollo, the Duke of Alva, with all his retinue, so melncholike, that the great store of Unguentum album, then on their faces, made that those Spaniards did not look so black as the Moores come from Granada, ordinarily use to be. Then Apollo, interrupting the Duke in the complaints which he was about to make against Colonna, said, Duke, I like not that disorder which I understand hath lately fallen out; and so much the less, as the cause of such a tumult hath been unjust, and no less dishonourable on your part. And upon this occasion I am pleased to put you Italians in mind, that your not only being covetous (as by every one you are known to be) but your not using to be prodigal in giving others those Titles which are desired, is a manifest signe of a malign nature. Since ingenu∣ous Nobleness is known by shewing little greediness after Titles, in re∣ceiving them; and much liberality in giving them: For, not to speak of such as are due, even by those honours as are superfluous, he acquires more reputation to himself that gives them, then he that receives them. And for you Spaniards, that would so rigorously ingross great Titles to your selves alone, you are so far from increasing your good estimation by it, that you are rather grown so odious and ridiculous to people, that the Italians (born to scoff at every one) when in their Comedies they would represent to the world a perfect braggadochio, instead of a Nea∣politan, do not undeservedly personate it by a Spaniard: A thing where∣of you Spaniards should be much ashamed: And I wonder you per∣ceive
not, that your intent of attaining to universal dominion, by means of affronting all men, is a going the clean contrary way to work. The hearts of men, Duke, are taken with that bait of courtesie, with the whistle of gratitude, of civilities, and of being courteous; for very ignorant doth that Fowler shew himself, that (as I see you Spaniards foolishly do) goes into a Dove house to catch Pigeons with a Drum. And I tell you moreover, that if ever any Nation had reason to bait the Italians with honous and dignities to bring them into their Nets, and take them with their bird-lime, 'tis you Spaniards, because of the ends which you have upon Italy. And besides, you should consider, that with those States of Naples and Milan, you are fastened there but with wax: For so long shall you govern those two members which you have there, as till the Italians shall resolve to drive you out: Who if af∣ter your ruine, they could be sure to keep themselves from falling into the hands of the French, you know very well, that with only a little trouble which they might give you in the Port of Genoua, they could put you into a thousand inextricable distresses. All which are things that admonish you to give satisfaction at least in words, to those, to whom by the dominion which you have in Italy, you will be forced to give so many bitter distastes by your deeds. As for the affront which you say you have received from Signior Prospero; I tell you plainly, that whatsoever mischief may be done you, upon such a titular occasion as this, I shall not only no express any resentment against it, but imagin that you have paid your self for it before-hand. Then the Duke would have excused himself, by saying that he had instructions from his King, how he was to carry himself towards the Barons of Italy in point of Titles; when Apollo told him that the Spanish insolence over the Italians, reached not but to the Neapolitans, and the Milaneses; and his Majesty added, that if much passion had not blinded the Spaniards, they might very well know that their grandees, whom Spain it self cannot contain, and which in Italy, will needs be playing the Gyants▪ when they come to be compared with the Barons of Rome, and those too but of the middle size, prove meer Dwarfs. With that a cloud, white as snow, beginning by little and little to cover the person of Apollo, the Priests that were about him▪ perceived that his Majesty would prophesie. Whereupon all of them being falne prostrate upon the earth, the Duke, and the rest that were with him did the same. Then was his Majesties Divine voice perceiv∣ed to come out of that hollow cloud, and with a most delightful accent, thus it spake. I prognosticate to you, Spaniards, that with your troublesome and odious behaviour, you will enforce the Nobility of Italy, Mistress of the cruel Sicilian Even-song, to plot against you some bloudy Neapo∣litan night-service. It being a custom most proper to the Italians, with greater fury to revenge the insolencies of words, then the injuries of blows: As those who having short patience, and long hands, are not only born with hearts much inclined to great resolutions, but so that they use not to re∣venge their wrongs (which when they do, they do to purpose) till those which have done them, have quite forgotten them. And you, to your infinite ruine shall then find them, with arms in their hands, to be
doughty Orlando's: When you shall be fully perswaded that they are grown to be but so many over-jaded and dry-basted Asses. Boccace is asssinated by Salviati. LEonardo Salviati, a man (as far as the present times, and the condi∣tion of the modern Tuscans allow it, of singular learning, did an acti∣on two daies agoe, which hath been infinitely blamed by all the Vertuo∣si. For about two a clock at night, at the entrance of Forum maximum, having affronted Signior Giovanni Boccacio, Prose-Master Major to his Majesty, he gave him many wounds, with which he so disfigured and maim'd him, that his most intimate acquaintance, which have seen him since this mischance, affirm that it is not possible to know him for that same bonny Boccace which formerly he was. And that which in∣finitely aggravated so foul a fault, was, that Salviati did not thus inhu∣mane trespasses for any particular distast given him by Boccace; but at the request of the Giunti, Printers at Florence, for greediness after five and twenty crowns, which they gave him by way of reward for so im∣pious an act. In so much, that this morning, Cavalier Leonardo Salvi∣ati, a man born of so Noble a Family, was, out of the publick Pulpit, standing in the Rostra, proclaimed a publick and notorious Asassinate. The Sicilian Ambassadors cannot obtain Audience from Apollo; but are disgracefully driven away by his Majesty. IN the Port of Pindus, about two daies agone there arrived a ship, which set on shore some Ambassadors from Sicily, sent by those of that Island to Apollo, about matters of great importance, who having given his Majesty notice of their arrival, demanded Audience. No soo∣ner did Apollo hear Sicilians named, but he shewed open signes of extream indignation against them, and commanded Luigi Pulci, Pro∣vost Marshal of Campania, to tell them he would not so much as see them, much less hear them; and that therefore they should get them aboard again. For because of that insupportable wrong which he had received from the Sicilians, he had of a long time firmly resolved never to have any commerce more with that Nation. The Ambassadors returning to their ships, obeyed his Majesties com∣mands▪ To whom they sent an humble Petition, wherein thy declar∣ed, That they were sent to give his Majesty an account of the new Drudgeries, the unheard of oppressions, the miserable impositions which they suffer from the Spaniards. And that so calamitous were the afflictions wherein the miserable Sicilians found themselves involved, that they not only deserved to be graciously listened to by his Majesty, but were worthy to be pittied and bewailed by the most barbarous Scy∣thians that ever the earth bore.
The Petition was presented to Apollo by the reverend Father Tmaso Fazzello, a very elegant Writer of the Affairs of Sicily, who assured his Majesty, that at this present, the miserable condition of the Sicili∣ans surpassed the utmost of all humane afflictions. Apollo told Fazzel∣lo again, that the Sicilians demerits were such, as they had thereby made themselves most worthy of the hard usages whereof they complained so much. That therefore as soon as may be, he should give the Ambas∣sadors to understand, That if within two hours they did not pack out of the Haven of Pindus, he would have without more ado, their ship sunk with his Cannon: For he was absolutely resolv'd not to see the face of any that was of that most unadvised Nation, which was the first Author of those horrid scandals, that had brought excessive miseries up∣on her self, and other people of Europe: For having attracted that in∣humane and ambitious Spanish Nation, before utterly unknown to Ita∣ly, and the other Provinces of Europe, when with fatal resolution, they made themselves subjects to the Kings of Aragon. They then like∣wise gave the beginning to that fatal and cruel Tragedy, whereof did the Italian Princes know what the conclusion of the last Scene of the fifth Act is likely to be, they would keep a perpetual Fast, and upon their naked knees continually pray for the obtaining of Divine aid, to free themselves from those mischiefs, against which it is apparent that humane remedies are not able to do any more good. Fazzello then reply'd, That his Majesty was not to be offended with the Sicilians; but that Queen Ioane the second, by her ever to be de∣plored adoption of Peter of Aragon, had occasioned the present evils of the Spanish Government in Italy; and that with very good reason, he might vent his discontents against that indiscreet and unchast Lady. To this Apollo answered, That indeed, those who had not an exact in∣sight into Princes secret thoughts (as he for his part had) laid the blame of the present slavery of Italy, upon that Queen; but the truth was o∣therwise: For it was a clear case, that she would never, to defend her self from the French Kings, have fallen into that error, of adopting a Spaniard for her King, had she not first seen him a powerfull one, by his rule over the Kingdom of Sicily: and that the Kings of Aragon were no sooner called to the Government of that Island, but they be∣gan those designs upon Italy, which for the Italians exceeding great tor∣ment, have had but too good success: And that they were all so u∣questionably deserv'd by the Sicilians, that to seek to lessen the calami∣ties in which they did pennance for the sins of their indiscretion, was as heinous a kind of impiety, as it were an act of highest charity, to make them yet more severe, that they may serve for a manifest exam∣ple to all Nations, what bitter fruits the plant of wicked and cruel reso∣lution doth in time bring forth, when out of a desperate rage, people run headlong into that abyss of subjecting themselves to the dominion of a forrein Nation▪ Fazzello reply'd▪ That all this had been very true, had the Sicilians altered the rule of an Italian King, to make themselves slaves to Barba∣rians: But that having by their Vesper changed the indiscreet and hairbrain'd French, into considerate and grave Spaniards, it seemed that the intention of the Sicilians having been good, deserved not such an odium from his Majesty.
At that, Apollo grew extreamly incens'd againk Fazzello too; and full of indignation, he said to him, And dost thou think that was not a very lewd ignorance of the Sicilians to remove from the insolence, the prodigality, the carelessness of the French Government, to the cru∣elty, to the avarice, and to the insupportable strictness of the Spanish? Were the Sicilians only ignorant of that which is known to every man, that the Dominion of the Spanish over Countries, is eternal: And therefore out of all question, deadly? Whereas the Government of the French is just like a violent fever, though it may be very dangerous, yet it yields one some hope of life, and there are many medicines with which it may be cured; as indeed you cured it with your Sicilian Vespers. A glorious Vesper certainly, had you not by that Physick brought your health into an infinitely worse condition. For, Fazzello, those people that are wise, never take up the Arms of Rebellion, but when they are sure to gain very well by it, and to change bondage into liberty: For the fish which perceives he cannot make his passage out of the boyling oyle into cold water, thinks it less hurtfull for him, to stay in the frying∣pan, than to make an escape, and leap into the glowing fire. Sigismondo Battori hath learned the Latine Tongue. YEsterday, late in the evening, arrived at this Court, the ordinary Post of Germany, who made every one joyful with the welcom ti∣dings he brought, that the most Illustrious Sigismondo Battori, late Prince of Transilvania, was grown so much in love with the Latine Tongue, that to his exceeding great glory, he spake and wrote it, with the purity and sincerity of Cesars stile. Whereupon all the Vertuosi earnestly besought Apollo, that for so joyful news, there might be made all those demonstrations of gladness, which when any Prince is become Learned, were usually made to encourage great men to love Learning. But because his Majesty sees into the inside of all things, he denied those Vertuosi their request, and told them, That Per∣nassus then only feasted, when Princes took their Learning, out of the free choice of a noble mind, and meer love to their books, not constrain∣ed by any necessity at all. And that they must all know that Prince Battori had attained to this elegancy of the Latine Tongue, not out of any ambition to shew himself learned, nor out of a vertuous curiosity to know many things, but out of the necessity he was put to, of corre∣cting for his credit's sake, that simple boyish misconstruction which he committed in Gender, Number, and Case, then, when in the Hungarian War, he made that fatal resolution of taking up arms against the Turks, that he might adhere to the Emperor of Germany; of whom, having so strong and lively pretences upon the Principality of Transilvania, he should have stood in more fear, then of threescore and ten Ottoman Emperors.
The French are freed out of the Mad-mens Hospital by the Spaniards. SOme two daies ago, did Apollo now at last cause to be releas'd out of the Mad-mens Hospital, a great number of French, that had lain there many years: During which time, in their raging fits, they had committed both against themselves and their friends, many lamentable trespasses, and had given cause sufficient for tears to all Europe. Now, because by Affidavit formally given in to the Court, of the most illustrious Physicians (or Medici) of Florence, who have alwaies been assisting in the cure of the dangerous malady of that Nation, it was made fully to appear, that they were recovered, they have been dis∣miss'd. But before their departure out of Pernassus, his Majesty sent for them, and told them, That for the future they should understand how to enjoy so flourishing and potent a Kingdom with more discretion then formerly they had; and that above all things, they should remem∣ber, that for the recovery of their healths, they had been wholly ob∣liged to the Spaniards, who with only appearing armed in France, and particularly in Paris, had returned some brains into the beetle-heads of those Frenchmen, that formerly had played such mad pranks in France. Many and hearty thanks did then these Frenchmen return to his Ma∣jesty, and said they should be so far mindful of the wholsom counsel he gave them, that in measuring the distances of places, they would here∣after accustom themselves to make use of the Italian mile, that so they might avoid that woful name of League: But as for the recovery of their brains, they were altogether beholding for that, to their most ge∣nerous, and ever victorious King, Henry the fourth, who with the splen∣dor of his valour, had opened the eyes of the French, that had been foully blinded with Spanish hypocrisie: Besides that the Spaniards, which had been the first authors of that lamentable French Tragedy, had so cunningly gotten a trick to make way for themselves in France, with their glittering and most beloved double Pistolets, that they had made both the foolish and the wise too, to run out of their wits. Some for examples sake are made a spectacle to the people. APollo, to his singular discontent, was informed that the greater part of modern Princes do not for the subduing of their enemies, make use according to the custom of the antient Heroes, of open force, but sometimes of fraud: In the exercise of which they so much pre∣val, that only by the powerful means thereof, they have made shift to bring their most important enterprises to pass. Whence it is; that the first weapon which these draw against their enemies, is that so shamefull one of corrupting the Loyalty of their discontented Subjects, and of stirring up the Nobility to rebellion. Wherefore to remedy such grie∣vous disorders, about thirty years ago his Majesty gave command that
the most unfortunate, the Count St. Paul, the Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Guise, should be brought in a wheele-barrow by Iohn Francesco Lottini, privy Register of moral Precepts in this Court, and set under the Porch of the Delphick Temple. Whereupon these three great Princes, with their hands fingerless, and all pittifully mangled, looking as if the dogs had gnawn them, were shewn by Lottini, to the people that went in and out of the Temple: To whom with a loud voyce thus he spake; Ye faithful Vertuosi, devo∣ted to Learning, and sacred Morality, take example by the so wretch∣ed calamity of these unfortunate Princes, deprived of the use of their hands (which God send you ever to enjoy) and learn to know what comes of it, when men will be perswaded to be so simple, as to draw Crabs out of their holes with their own hands, for the benefit of others. A discovery made, that the Spanish Officers are wholly concern'd in their own profits. THree daies ago, about one a clock at night, forty Carts of Hay were seen to enter the Royal Palace of the Spanish Monarchy: and because the unseasonableness of the time filled with jealousie the French, the Venetians, and other Potentates, that live in perpetual jealousie of so formidable a Princesse's greatness; with exact diligence, inquiry was made, whether the Carts carried any thing prejudicial under the hay? And the Spies brought in word, that under the hay were hidden chests full of mattocks, spades, and pickaxes. And because these are tools that belong to Pioneers, the French were resolved to stand to their arms, and the Venetians would needs lanch out those Gallies that were in their Arsenal; when it was resolved, that before they would discover themselves, they should do well to be informed whether the Spani∣ards had brought any other quantity of those instruments, or whether they expected any from some other place. And they were assured, that neither formerly had they received any, nor for the future did they expect any. And the Spies added, That as soon as those chests were taken down, they were not carried into the Royal Magazine; but all the Grandees of Spain, and the prime Officers of that mighty Mo∣narchy, suddenly divided amongst them, those mattocks, those spades, and those pickaxes, with which the next morning, very early, with all speed, they fell to digging of ditches, to drawing of channels, to making of banks, and to loading the earth with a thousand Aqueducts, every one with so much labour and diligence drawing the water to his own Mill, as they had brought the publick affairs to such a sad condition, that the Mills of the Commonalty of Spain could grind no longer for want of water.
Maximilian the Emperor is advertised of the tumults sprung up amongst his Sons. THis last night there came in three Posts to the Emperor Maximi∣lian the second; and instantly it was divulged, that they brought news, how Matthias the Arch-Duke had taken up arms against his brother Rodulphus the Emperor, with which he seditiously claimed the Kingdoms of Hungary, of Bohemia, of Austria, and the absolute Soveraignty over other Provinces. These unhappy tidings infinitely troubled the Emperors mind; for he very well knew, that the discord arisen amongst his Sons, afforded to the enemies of the House of Austria that contentment, which they so much desired to see. Whereupon yesterday morning very early, he presented himself before Apollo, and with tears trickling down his cheeks, he desired to know when the disasters of the House of Austria, long since begun by a cruel Conspiracy of all Germany against it, would come to an end, and for what demerit such bitter punishments were inflicted upon his Family? To this demand Apollo answered after this manner; Great Emperor, the persecutions, and all the troubles of your Family will then cease, when it shall wholly give over those ambi∣tious thoughts of desiring to dominier over Hungary and Transilvania; which thoughts have put Germany into such jealousies, that to secure her antient Liberty from the power of your House, she studies nothing else but how to keep it down. For the Germans fearing much greater mischiefs from your acquisitions, then from the Turks victories, are ab∣solutely resolved rather to lose Vienna, then to take in Buda: And then will the potent Conspiracy begun against you be dissolved, and all Ger∣many heartily affect your Arch-Dukes, when laying aside their pre∣sent ambition, they shall make it appear to all men, that they desire to be the other German Princes equals, not their Superiors. The Doggs in the Indies are grown Wolves. VPon the twelfth of this moneth, about mid-night, came to Apollo, a Post sent from Lisbon in all hast; and told him that he had brought news of very great concernment from the West Indies. Very early next morning, all the Literati ran to the Palace-Royal, to know what was the news. And the Spaniards were the first, who with much carefulness, demanded if there were discovered in the Indies some second Monte diotossi, or some new Rio della Plata, whither they would fain go, and there sow the Holy Word of God? The French were very inquisitive to know whether there were any new World found, that by making the Spaniards so very potent; might perfect the ruine of the old. But it was taken for a very bad signe, to see Apollo, after he had read the Letters, grow exceeding sad; and that muffled up in a thick cloud, he fell a weeping bitterly. For which novelty, every
one conceived that the Post had brought very unhappy news. Whilst then the place was full of Literati, and every sort of Vertuosi, which much afflicted, were there waiting to know the cause of his Majesties so evident sadness; after many claps of Thunder, and infinite store of Lightning, they heard a dreadful voice, which spake thus; Fast, be mor∣tified, cloath your selves in sack-cloth, sprinkle your selves with ashes, eat your bread mingled with tears, O ye that inhabit the earth, and with prayers appease the wrath of God; with a contrite heart, and a pure spirit, beseech him that of his infinite mercy he would vouchsafe to free that part of mankind as dwels in the old world, from those portentous novelties, which for certain have hapned in the new. At such terrible news, the Vertuosi for very grief fell a swouning; and believing that the West-Indies had either been consumed by fire, or drowned by water, were much afraid of the same disasters. For which all the people of Per∣nassus being in a terrible fright, with abundance of tears, sighs, and howlings, whose like was never heard, cried out, Mercy! mercy! and humbly intreated his Majesty that he would reveal to his devoted Sub∣iects, what those mischiefs were, from which they were to beseech Al∣mighty God that they might be freed. Then from the same Royal Seat was heard a second voice, giving them all to understand, that the Dogs which the Spaniards had transported into the Indies, to preserve the Flocks from Wolves, were grown Wolves themselves; and that so ravenous ones, as in devouring sheep, they surpassed in greediness and cruelty, the very Tigres. After so unhappy tidings, there was heard a publick lamentation of all the Literati, every one bitterly complaining, that the Dogs which had charge of the Sheep, should become such greedy Wolves, that they devoured the Flocks. o what Guardians shall the Shepheard here-af∣ter trust their Flocks, the Guardianship of Dogs, which have been so faithful to their Shepheards, being no longer secure? And why came there into the world the species of Sheep, the most unfortunate of all animals, since they must be a prey, both to Wolves their enemies, and to Dogs their friends? Whilst all the Nations in Pernassus, for the great affright they were in, look'd as if they would sink into the ground, only the Flemings, and the rest of the Low-countrey-men were observed to go up and down Pernassus undaunted, encouraging every one to cheer up, and not to be out of heart, saying there was no calamity threatned to any man, which may not be happily avoided by stout resolutions proceeding from spirits unmoved. Whereupon the Flemmings cry'd aloud to every one, that likewise in their Countrey, the dogs whom the Spanish Shep∣heards had set to keep the Flemmish Flock, were grown to be such ra∣venous wolves, that with savage cruelty they devoured the sheep, and had consumed all the Flemmish flock, if by the resentment of that cou∣ragious resolution, which is known to all the world, they had not taken a course or it. That therefore if those mischiefs which are reported to have en out in the new world, should happen in the old, every one ought to know that the true way for chastig of those dogs which have a scurvy quality of worrying sheep, was to give them some Low-countrey Nux vomica, and make them burst, as they deserved.
The Spanish Monarchy visits the Queen of Italy, and there passe between them Complements full of kinde∣nesse. SO great was the affright which the most illustrious Queen of Italy was in, when she perceived that the most puissant Kings of France, at that time become Lords of the Kingdom of Naples, pretended to the Soveraignty over the Dutchy of Millan: And though they made a shew of continuing in their antient amity, yet did they very cruelly lay snares, both against her life and reputation; and all this with such bitterness of minds enraged, that what with the machinations of money, what with the crafty wiles of the pen, they held up, even in peace, a cruel war for many years. Now whilst the heart-burnings and jealousies betwixt these two Queens were at the fiercest, and their minds were observed to be poysed with the most deadly feud; the Monarchy of Spain, beyond all expe∣ctation, went with a Train worthy her greatness, to give the Queen of Italy a visit; who entertained her with such demonstrations of honour, and of intimate affection, that all the Literati, who in the face both of the one and the other Princess, took more notice of the motions and dispositions of the mind, then of their fine verbal Complements, knew for certain, that there was grown between them a perfect and real recon∣ciliation. Nay, never since the memory of man, did there happen in Pernassus any peace or concord, which did more astonish the Vertuosi there, and make them more curious to know the true cause of so strange a thing. And because the Philosophers, the Poets, and other Literati, of what∣soever Science, are but dim-fighted in the art of discovering the true ends of those wary resolutions which great Princes take, they made their recourse to the University of the Politicians, whose peculiar pro∣fession it is, by the light of that knowledge which they have of all Po∣tentates interests to know how to penetrate into the abditos Principm recessus, & quicquid occultius habent. From whom they received this answer; That the Queen of Italy, to secure her Liberty from the Arms of so potent a Nation, was inforced to joyn with the Spanish Monar∣chy; but that perceiving how she also having gotten into her hands the Kingdom of Naples and the Dutchy of Millan, did with more ear∣nest ambition, with more profound artifices, and with more fraudulent machinations, than the French themselves, put in for the Soveraignty of all Italy, and that to compass this end in the minority of Henry the second's Sons, she endeavoured to embroil France, and how for the base Panders of her vast ambition, and for Agents for the common bondage of Italy, she made use of some principal (but indiscreet) Itali∣an Princes, she began to hate her so extreamly, that by every sort of flight, the one sought the ruine of the other: but that since, by the unfortunate end which at last the business of Savioneda came to, the Monarchy of Spain plainly perceived that the purchase of all Italy was not feasible, and a business utterly to be despaired of, she gave over that ambition of being Mistress of it all, to whh she was before wholly ad∣dicted;
and observing that the greater part of her troubles in Flanders, and elsewhere, had sprung from those ambitious thoughts, she perceiv∣ed there was no better way for the setling of her own affairs, then to let others live in quiet: And because she palpably found, that without the friendship, the favour and aid of the Italian Princes, it was not pos∣sible for her quietly to possess the Kingdom of Naples, and the Dutchy of Millan, she was desirous with that visit, to pacify the troubled mind of that Queen. A Policy, which the oliticians called a very good one: For what manner of men would begin to rouse up themselves, if the Spaniards should but make as if they would fall upon Brescia, Brgamo, Turino, and Genoua, when for offering to take in that poor petty Town of Savioneda, there were contrived against them (and that by those from whom it was least expected) such machinations, that the Quail ad bin caught in the Trammelli, and could not have avoided falling into the Spaniels mouth, had she not couragiously resolved to make a breach in the net, and so to save her life by getting out at a torne mesh. The Monarchy of Spain throws her Physician out of the window. THis morning the Monarchy of Spain having sent for her Physician in ordinary, presently after she her self with her own hands, threw him out of the window of her Royal Palace: So that the poor wretch having all his bones broken to fitters, died immediately. An accident which seemed so much the stranger, in that the Physician was held by all the Court to be a very honest man, and in the exercise of his professi∣on, admirable. Diverse were the discourses made upon so notorious a novelty. But Apollo desiring to know the true cause of this hideous resent∣ment, from the Spanish Monarchy her self, she told him, how about for∣ty years ago, by some fittes that she had, and by other signes which were discovered, she was afraid that in process of time, she should catch some dangerous French disease or other, of the Royal House of Bourbon; and to provide aganst the mischief she foresaw, she ask'd counsel of her Physician▪ who prescribed her a tedious, fulsom, and chargeable Purge, of divers Oyles of holy Leagues, of insurrections of people, of Rebellions of Nobles, of Cauteries, and other very painfull Medicines, in which she had wasted her stomack, weakened her strength, and quite lost her appetite: And that the infinite store of Syrops, and the many Medicines taken with so much anguish, had procured nothing but the acceleration of the malady; which had it not been for that un∣lucky and unseasonable Purge, would perhaps never have come: Be∣sides, that the continual and ravenous leeches which were applyed to many parts of her body, had so suck'd out the best vital bloud of hr Spanish Gold, that by reason of her weakness of constitution, she was not able to evacuate those bad humours of Flanders which have so much oppressed: her For which disorders, all occasioned by the exceeding bad counsel of that indiscreet Doctor, she was so vex'd at him, that she
seriously swore to him, that if to free her from future infirmities, he ever prescribed her a purge again, she would throw him out of the window. And that perceiving the Low-Countrey Ach, which at this present she feels in her shoulders, to be an absolute French Pox, she had asked counsel of the same Doctor, how she might be rid of it: Who unmind∣full of his former errors, very simply prescribed her the other purge, for all the world just like the first: and that hereupon, overcome with pas∣sion, throwing him out of the window, she was desirous to punish him for his first fault in his second. And she conceived that he had deser∣ved the misfortune, because he had not learn'd by that case which had proved so unlucky to her Spaniards, to know, that purges made before the time, for evils that are but feared, work not those good effects which the Physician believes, and the Patient desires. The Cardinal of Toledo's Summa is not admitted into the Library of Pernassus. THe most Illustrious and right reverend Francisco Cordouese Cardi∣nal of Toledo, a Personage of exemplary life, an exquisite Divine; and a prime Philosopher, one, that while he lived, did more honour to Gods word in the Pulpit, than any other Preacher whatsoever, appear∣ed some few daies agone in Pernssus, being met at the borders of this State, by Alexander de Hales, and by Monsignor Cornelio Musso, Bi∣shop of Bitonto, and entertained all the way at his Majesties charge. This honoured Literato presented his Writings to the reverend Col∣lege of the Vertuosi; and those which treated of Philosophy were not only praised, but admired, as likewise the Commentaries which he had made upon the Subjects of Divinity, were received by all the sacred Wrrs with extraordinary applause; and presently they were carried in a sumptuous Urne under a Canopy, into the Delphick Library, and with the name of so great an Author consecrated to Eternity. Only his Summa, though very learned, was not received by those Vertuosi; who plainly said; there was such a multitude of these kinds of Summa∣ries and Collections in his Majesties Library, that some of them seem∣ed superfluous: For an infinite number of the greatest Divines had with such diligence handled matters appertaining to private mens cn∣sciences, that they had put to arbitrement the salvation of mens souls, upon a three farthing business; and that the world did very much de∣sire to see a compleat Collection made of Cases touching the consci∣ences of great Princes: A Subject very necessary for the universal tran∣quillity, and yet wholly omitted by Divines. In which Collection men should exactly discourse upon those actons of Princes, wherewith they so often put the world in confusion; filling it with Pillages, Plunders, and so many Murthers, that many of them blinded with an ambition of reigning upon the earth, have made it flow withrivers of humane bloud. And the most judicious College of the Literati hearing these particu∣lars, desired that they should dispute and resolve upon these present questions, viz. Whether Christian Piety doth admit of that pretence of Right▪ which the violence of the sword hath usurp'd upon other mens
Estates? Wether a Principality taken either by force or fraud, from another Prince, may be held by one that hath the true fear of God in him? Whether the determination of Governing a Kingdom that is con∣quered, with a purpose only to impoverish and waste it, that he may Reign over it without jealousie, may be put in practice by him that hath been bred up in the Christian Faith? And whether to set and cry up meer damn'd Policy, called Ragione di Stato so high, that at this instant she tramples upon all Laws, Humane and Divine, be not a more de∣testable and accursed Idolatry, then to adore Nebuchadnezzars Image and the Golden Calf? Lastly, the College declared, That then their desires should be fully satisfied; when there should be found one Di∣vine so truely fearing God, that with his Writings he had affrighted Princes from doing amiss, as ('tis confess'd) many of them have with a great deal of pains terrified private men. For it seemed to them un∣reasonably strange, that such a multitude of Learned Divines should so trouble themselves to dispute of the strict account which Shop keepers were to give to the Divine Majesty, even for idle words; and yet should forbear to make any mention of those horrid offences which great Prin∣ces commit, when with armed Troops plundering mens States, they bring all things, both sacred and prophane, to utter destruction. And that their Ministers should, with far greater benefit to mankind, and eter∣nal rewards to themselves, have discoursed upon the actions of Lewis the twelfth, and Francis the first, both Kings of France; of Ferdinand King of Aragon, and of the Emperor Charls the fifth, whose souls departed this world charg'd with the heavy load of half a million of Ho∣micides (all of them committed out of an ambition to Reign) for which they were to give a very strict account to God; when to stuff up vo∣lumns with the venial sins of privat persons. All which would be things very necessary, to the end that mankind, so much afflicted by the ambition of Princes, may one day receive that consolation, which with so much anxiety it longeth for, that those which reign may be frighted from evil-doing; and be brought to know, that Hell was made as well for mighty persons as for mean. Almansor, that was King of the Moors, meeting with the Kingdom of Naples, they two fall a weeping, and rehearse their miseries brought upon them by the op∣pression of the Spaniards. THe most famous King of the Moors, Almansor, he that for ma∣ny years governed the Noble Kingdom of Granada in Spain, met yesterday with the Kingdom of Naples, and walking to and again, be∣gan to discourse with him: And after he had for a good while viewed well the chain which this Kingdom of Naples wore about his legg, he told him, that being of Morisco▪ work, he thought he had often seen and handled it: And a little while after, with gestures of much amazement, he assured him that he knew it very well, and that it was the very same,
with which he and the Mauritanian Kings, his predecessors, had for seven hundred years, kept many Kingdoms of Spain in bondage: And that therefore he earnestly intreated him, that he would discover to him, how, by whom, and when he was enchained. A good eye, and a very excellent memory hast thou Almansor (an∣swered then the Kingdom of Naples) for this unhappy chain which thou seest upon my legg, was brought from Spain by Consalvo Cordoua, called il Gran Capitano: And therefore I think it very likely to be the same you speak of: And 'tis now a hundred years that I have been in that miserable slavery which you see me in. From which I know not whether ever I shall be able to free my self: because, by reason of the excessive power to which I see the Spanish forces are risen, having utter∣ly lost all hope of aid that I can expect from men, I know my antient liberty lies all in the powerful hand of God, who must renew upon me the miracles of the Red-sea, if ever I recover. The years (reply'd Almansor) do agree very well; for it was but a little before thy bondage that the Spaniards loosned from off the King∣dom of Granada's legg, this chain, with which they have bound thee: But do me the singular favour, good Neapolitan Kingdom, to tell me how it was possible for the Spaniards to make themselves Masters of such a Kingdom as thou art, so potent, and so far distant from their Forces. By fraud, Almansor (said the Kingdom of Naples) did the Spani∣ards get footing in Italy; for with open force they would never have been able to have made such notable atchievements, and (as you say ve∣ry well) so infinitely surpassing their forces, and those too lying so far off. But listen, and you will be amazed at the exceeding large conscience which in matters of State, a King of Spain had, though he used incom∣parable artifices to be taken amongst fools for a Saint Macarius painted upon a Wall: For you will hear a Tragedy, according to the rules of my Christian Religion, cruel and impious; but according to the tearms of Modern Policy, the most witty, as ever any Nation represented upon the Stage of the World. Alfonso my King, to his final, and my principal ruine, gave his Grand∣child Isabella (or from that unhappy marriage, had my ruine its begin∣ning) for wife to Giovanni Galeazzo Duke of Millan. At first the un∣fortunate Princes childhood, afterwards his unspeakable sottishness, en∣couraged Lodovico Sforza to seise upon his Nephews Estate. Alfonso (as it behooved him) sought to hinder this usurpation. Of which ent Lodovico being aware, and knowing, that without the ruine of my Kings, 'twas impossible for him to compass the end of his unjust desire, he threw himself headlong upon that resolution which since proved so fatal to him, to me, and all the Italian Princes, of calling the French into Italy, for the gaining of me. My Kings, to defend themselves from so puissant enemies, called in to their aid, that good soul, Ferdi∣nand King of Aragon, their Cousin; who shewed himself such a lo∣ving Kinsman, and so faithful a friend, that instead of driving out the French, he shared me out betwixt himself and them; and to perfect the Tragedy in all points, a little after this unhappy dividend, he made War upon the French, whom having overcome, he forced to return into
France, with abundance of shame and loss. Whereupon the good King Ferdinand, without any scruple of conscience, became my abso∣lute Soveraign: And then it was that he clapt on my legg this chain, which you have taken notice of for your Countrey-making and work∣manship. And I make a question, whether in the Chronicles of the Saracens, of the Moors, or of the Turks (which you must needs have read) there be found registred a more treacherous act, committed by a King, who would needs be esteemed a man of a most Saint-like consci∣ence, and one that bare a very good mind, and who but a little before had received from the Apostolike Sea, the glorious Title of the Catho∣lick King. Certainly (reply'd Almansor) in the Chronicles which you have nam∣ed, one may reade of very foul actions done by divers Princes, out of an ambition after Soveraignty; but this which you have related of Fer∣dinand, goes beyond them all. But (said the Kingdom of Naples) if you Almansor, and your Nation have held the Kingdom of Granada enchain'd so many hundreds of years, what course did the Spaniards take to set it at liberty? That fatal Union (reply'd Almansor) of the Kingdoms of Castile, with those of Aragon, which ensued upon the mar∣riage of Ferdinand and Isabella, was it that occasioned the Kingdom of Granada's Liberty, and most unhappy Union! which the greatest Po∣tentates of Europe have bewailed, do bewail, and with true tears ever∣lastingly shall bewail, no less then I have done, and do; as that which hath been the true and onely root from which have sprung all those mighty subversions of States that at this day are seen in many parts of Europe; and more notoriously in Italy. And believe me (Neapolitan Kingdom) I had reigned happily in Spain to this very day, had not that pestilent Union broke the neck of my greatness. For those so fierce jealousies that were between these Castilians and the Aragonians, were my impregnable Citadels, which would have made me Reign in Spain eternally. Yet take it upon my word, the assistances that the Popes gave to Ferdinando and Isabella, did greatly hasten on my suppression. Peace good Almansor (quoth the Kingdom of Naples) no more of that, if you love me: For after you were driven out of Spain, the Popes suffered so great miseries from that ambitious Nation, that it may be ve∣ry truely said, they then purchased with ready money, those infi∣nite calamities which they have met withall. For, although the Sea Apostolike was very well contented to see the Mauritanian Kings driven out of Spain; yet did that great pleasure prove extreamly pain∣ful, by my servitude which followed soon upon it: The Popes having never dreaded any thing more, then that I should fall into the hands of some potent Prince, who might make them live in those perpetual jea∣lousies, wherein finding themselves at this instant plunged up to the very eyes, many of them, and specially those that have most insight in the affairs of the world, take but little rest in their beds. A clear testi∣mony of the truth of what I tell you, was that lamentable and most vilanous sack of Rome, committed by the Spaniards a little fter my bondage; with which ingratitude they paid the Apostolical Sea all they were in her debt, both for the release of the Tribute of Naples, and those succours besides, that they had from her in the War of Gra∣nada. A calamity which passing the bounds of any the do▪ efullest mi∣series,
hath so open'd the eyes of even the most drowsie-witted men, that every one begins to perceive what it is, out of a zeal towards Piety, to unchain Lions. For no sooner did the Spaniards perceive themselves freed from that encombrance, which the Moors of Granada were to them; but by reason of that ambition which they openly declared, of desiring to sway the Universe, there were discovered not only in Italy, but all Europe over, most important jealousies of State, most trouble∣som differences in points of Religion: in so much, as I have heard it maintained by men of very good understanding in the affairs of the world, that perhaps it would have been better for the Princes of Eu∣rope, that you had still Reigned in Granada, then that the Spaniards should have come over into Italy, to get from us such important Estates as now they possess there. Which disorder hath caused such an alteration even in matters of Re∣ligion, that they which know how to discourse of the true causes of the weighty resolution of Princes, stick not to say, that the fear which Germany was in of the monstrous power of the Emperor Charls the fifth, was the occasion that the Moors which were in Granada, are changed into those many Hereticks which our age beholds in Germany, and elsewhere. (A race of men so execrable, that with their hainous impiety they have defiled a great part of Europe.) To this very sad disorder of sacred things, are added the prejudices both publick and pri∣vat, which my ruine hath both brought, and continually doth bring to the Italian Princes; and more particularly to the Popes. For no soo∣ner had the King of Spain clapt this Chain about my legg, but they be∣gan to aspire to the Soveraignty of all Italy: And to come quickly to it, they had a very excellent way of interessing themselves in the differences that were in agitation between the Italian and French Princes, touch∣ing the possession of the Dutchy of Millan; in which, that Man of Men, Charls the fifth, carried his matters so, that he made himself to be known for a Grand-child worthy of his Grand-father by the Mothers side. For having with the Forces of the Italian Princes, driven the French out of Italy, instead of re-investing the Sforzi into the State, as had been agreed upon between him and the other Confederate Princes, by the deceitfulness of a thousand Turkish cavils which he made a shift to invent against those poor Dukes, he made himself absolute Master of that so important Dukedom. Hold! good Neapolitan Kingdom (saith Almansor) and make a stop here. Well; If that disorder hath likewise ensued, that the Noble State of Millan is fallen into the Spaniards hands, what hinders them, that they do not suddenly take in all Italy? And if your slavery hath made it ap∣parent to the world, that the aids and succours of Princes, serve rather for the benefit of him that gives them, then for the profit of him that receives them; why did not the Italian Princes rather suffer the French to rule over Millan, then by receiving aid from the Spaniards, run the hazard that so important a member of Italy, as that Dutchy, should fall, as indeed you say it did fall, into the power of the Kings of Spain. What hinders? (Reply'd the Kingdom of Naples) why the power of the Kings of France, defending from the Spanish ambition, that
remainder of Liberty which is yet left in Italy: For those glorious Kings, for the interest of their own greatness, will not endure it, that the Soveraignty of all Italy should fall into the power of the ambiti∣ous Spaniard, who hath not been able to quench his vehement thirst of Reigning with the Purchase of all the new World which he hath disco∣vered, and so much of the old as he doth possess. Besides that the Italian Princes, who know in how shrewd danger of a mischievous and most wretched slavery, they stand, are so united toge∣ther, that although they be many in number, yet make they up but one body; and the Spaniards which have used, and still do use all possible artifices to disunite them, perceive that they were as good let it alone. But as for the State of Millan, you must know it was judged safer for the publick Liberty of Italy, that the said Dutchy should fall into the power of the Spaniards, then if it had remained in the hands of the French; who bordering upon Italy, if once they had possession of ne∣ver so little a part in it, 'tis a thousand to one but they would make themselves absolute Masters of all. But in the Spaniards the case was clean contrary: For their forces, though very great, yet lie so far off, that with a great deal of difficulty, can any be transported such a long way by Sea, out of Spain into Italy, for the making good of what they have gotten there already; much less such as would be sufficient for subduing of the whole. You say true (quoth Almansor) but go on in your relation to me, of the prejudices which your falling into the Spaniards hands hath brought to the Popes. Know (reply'd the Kingdom of Naples) that whereas formerly the Popes were a terror to my Kings; now the case is clean otherwise; for they live in extream torment, lest one day there should happen to be an union of Naples with Millan; which they perceive to be the scope of all the Spaniards intentions; Whereupon the Spaniards (whose proper nature it is, to reap singular profit from the fear in which they perceive they have put their neighbouring Princes) have arrogated to themselves such high Authority in the Court of Rome, that they boastingly give themselves out for the true Arbitrators of all important matters that are handled therein. Besides what I have told you, there is this more; When the Kings of Naples were not Kings of Spain, the Popes with every slight, threatning to deny the Investiture, got from my Kings Principalities, Dukedoms, Marquissates, and other great Estates, by way of Present; besides, that the Kings bought their friendship with Alli∣ances, and every other sort of Liberality. But that fear being now over, if the Popes will aggrandize their Kins∣men with the Titles of Important States, they must pay for them with ready money. And the subtile Kings of Spain, over and above the precious Gold of Intreaties which they will have howsoever for the first payment, sell afterwards at dear rates. Important Interests, and grievous disorders (quoth Almansor) are these you have told me; but how comes it to pass that you, Kingdom of Naples, who are the Magazine of Silks, the Granary of Italy, go so ragged, and are so lean? As long as the Spaniards (answered the Kingdom of Naples) that come naked out of Spain, will within four
daies after they are arrived at my house, be covered all over with Gold; needs must I strip my self to cloath so many, and such pittifull tatter-de-Mallions. Moreover, did you but behold the greediness of the Vice-Roys, that are sent to my house to repair their fortunes; and did you know the rapines of the Secretaries, of a thousand Officers, and other Courtiers, whom every Viceroy brings with him, all thirsting after my bloud, you would extreamly wonder how it were possible for me to satisfie the ravenous and dog-like unsatiableness of such a com∣pany of starvelings. As for that small store of flesh you see about me, the Spaniards say they find it written in a certain Book of a Florentine, which hath given out rules of the cruel and desperate modern Policy, that being a conquer'd Kingdom, I must (like those Barbary-horses which are employed only in running of Races) be kept low. And how (added then Almansor) are the Millanois handled? Why they too (reply'd the Kingdom of Naples) are bathed in the same water, wherewith you see me so wet. Only this difference there is betwixt us, that at Millan it drops in, and in my house it powres in a∣main. The true causes of this diversity of usage, are the qualities of the Lombards inclinations, very much unlike to those of my Neapo∣litans: For the Nobility of the State of Millan is naturally humorous, free, resolute, and far from those vices that are most proper to my Nea∣politans, of flattery and affectation: But so ready to lay about them, and of that wavering disposition, as I dare say, were there but one head∣piece of Cremona amongst my Barons, it would be sufficient to ob∣struct that on-forced Donative, that hath brought me to live upon bread and onions: Which though it had been often demanded by the Spaniards in Millan, and that in very high tearms, they were told a∣gain, that they should mind their own livelihoods. Besides that the neighbourhood of the Grisons, of the Duke of Savoy, and of the Ve∣netians, are some cause, why the Kings of Spain proceed in Millan with more discretion. When the Popes stood to their arms, I was then, for their sakes, much respected too. But withdraw, good Almansor, for I see my most capital enemy, Don Pietro di Toledo coming this way, and I would not by any means he should perceive that I make my moan to you: And certainly, even for this, may my slavery be tearmed most unhappy, that I am enforced to call this miserable condition which you see hath brought me to the last gasp, a most happy Golden Age. The Conte di Fuentes is admitted into Pernassus. DOn Pietro Enriquez Gusman, Count of Fuentes, was admitted the last Consistory into Pernassus, but with a very severe censure, be∣cause Apollo would be exactly resolved whether in the time that for ma∣ny years he had governed the Dutchy of Millan, he had given any distast to those Italian Vertuosi, who for the admirable fruitfulness of their wits, born to the invention of elegant things, are deservedly called by his Majesty, The first born Sons of Learning. And albeit that a∣mong other Objections made against that truely famous man, that accu∣sation
did him most prejudice, wherein he was axed for giving his mind to that mischievous husbandry of sowing jealousies, and plant∣ing contentions (by which he had made those Italian Potentates whose friendship he should have procured with all the skill he had, to be suspe∣cted by his King) more then to the Government of the people, yet were the difficulties of the heaviest accusations taken off by the conclu∣sive proof of his having been in Italy a prodigy of nature, a monster ne∣ver seen before, a Spanish Officer that hated money. For which things Fntes was declared to be very worthy of a residence in Pernassus. And because Apollo took him for a singular lover of Justice, and a ca∣pital enemy to roaring boyes, of which sort of rascallity he knew that he had purged the State of Millan, and that he had laden with it the Gallies of Spain, he gave him the superintendency over the Satyrick Poets, with full authority to punish some Poets that in Pernassus playing the Libellers with their defamatory Verses, wounded the ho∣nour, and maimed the reputation of persons of quality. And the Lord high Chancellor of the Court sent to the Count the Patent of his admission in a very rich Basin of Gold, together with all the Acts of Grace, Prerogatives, honours, and Pensions accustomed: But with a restraint under Apollo's own hand, wherein his Majesty strictly com∣manded him; that he should not by any means presume to stir out of dores in the month of March. Bitterly did Fuentes make his moan to Apollo of this so strange a re∣straint, not used in the Letters Patents of Bartolomeo Alviano, of Pie∣tro Navarro, of Antonio di Leva, of the Marquiss of Pescara, and of other Commanders that were his Camerades there. And with all subtil∣ty of Rhetorick he besought him that it might be taken off: But all in vain; for Apollo bad him plainly be quiet: Since were not he himself in that Month withheld by the important respect of not leaving the world without light, he would have pretermitted his wonted journey, that he might not afflict mankind with an evil quality he hath, which is, to stir up pernicious humors in men, and not be able to dissolve them. That therefore he would not at that time have a person seen in Pernassus, which had the same defect, more then himself. For all this, the Spanish Nation (liberal in making a great shew of mat∣ters that go on their side, and most skilfull in concealing such as go a∣gainst them) did with artificial fires, with squibs, and vollies of Cannon∣shot, make signes of extraordinary jollity for the admission of the Count into Pernassus. In which it hapned, that an hour within night, while the Court wherein the Royal Palace of the Monarchy of Spain stands, was thronged with Princes, who taking delight in beholding those rarities, went up and down disporting themselves; Fuentes, whe∣ther out of a seditious genius, or the dictate of a mind desirous of no∣velty; or out of some private distast, or to disturb the quiet of Italy, offered to dismount him in War, who commanded in Peace. Forth he came; and as he was going to fasten a long squib of wild-fire upon an Italian Prince, it took fire so suddenly, that it went off in his hand, and the flash did so singe his face, having monstrously besmutted him, that immediately he went out of Pernassus; some say, to get himself cured in some secret place: Others say 'twas for shame, that the dammage and affront which he would have done to another, was returned upon
himself. But the more common opinion is, that he will come no more into this State, lest people should jeer him, for having by such an acti∣on, utterly lost all that honour and reputation, which for so many years he had purchased by his upright Government of Millan, and by his most important enterprises in Flanders. All the States of the World are censured in Pernassus for their errors. APollo having no business which runs more in his mind, then that the Princes of the Universe should by the upright Government of their States, give that satisfaction to the people as they ought, did ma∣ny hundreds of years ago; introduce into Pernassus an admirable cu∣stom: Which was, That every year the names of the chiefest Poten∣tates on earthshould be written in little scedules, and the Princes should be drawn out of an Urne, one by one: Whom, in the presence of all the sacred College of the Literati, the publick Censor of Poli∣tick Affairs should put in mind of the disorders which he had observed in the Government of their States, withall binding the said Princes, either out of hand with important reasons, to make good the things laid to their charge, or within the space of a month to amend them. An Institution certainly most Noble and Religious; seeing that in the progress of so many ages that it hath been put in practice, it hath been an occasion that many Princes have mended an infinite number of their errors. Besides, that knowing they must be called to such a strict ac∣count, they study to live so vertuously, that they may not come to be disgraced in the presence of so many Princes. On the day appointed them, all the Potentates of the Universe ap∣peared before Apollo; and Count Baldassar Castiglione, Politick Cen∣sor, told Giovanni della Casa, Nuntio for the Apostolike Sea in this State, and who was first drawn out of the Urne, that it seemed to him a very scandalous thing, and altogether unworthy the Majesty of Popes, that there should be seen in Rome, some Potent Famlies, to whom it was, instead of a rich Patrimony, to make themselves known to for∣reign Princes, ill-affected to the greatness of the SeaApostolike, for such as upon any occasion are ready by the Forces of their Faction, to put the Popes to a great deal of trouble; and that with much truth he could say, that in all his time, he had not seen a more foul and execrable act, then that which the Emperor Charls the fifth did, when he reward∣ed the cruel seditions, and shameless treacheries which Cardinal om∣peo Colonna used towards Pope Clement the seventh, with the most no∣ble Charge of the Government of Naples. Monsignor Giovanni then ask'd the Count, how long 'twas since he had frequented the Roman Court? And he answering, Threescore and ten years ago: The Nuntio reply'd, he should go thither again, now: For he would find, that the Pompei, the Fabritii, the Prosperi, and the Ascanii of the Family of Colonna, the Virginii, and other principal Barons of the House of the Orsini, had eaten such store of sowre
grapes, as their Grand-childrens, and great-Grand-childrens teeth are so set on edge, that they cannot chew so much as their pottage. For the Popes, who tied those exorbitances about their fingers, knew so singu∣larly well how to put Tarquin's Precept in practice, that they had brought the Poppies formerly as tall as Cypresses, to the low growth of ridicu∣lous shrubs. At this answer, the Count held his peace. Then turning to the Ro∣man Empire, which was the next that was drawn, he told him, hat the present disorders which were seen, not only in the large Patrimony of the House of Austria, but all Germany over, were caused by the negligence of the now Emperor Rodolphus; and earnestly desired that his Majesty would embrace the Government of his so great States, with more care, remembring, that Princes, Rulers of mankind, bear a heavier weight upon their shoulders, and have taken a more laborious work in hand, then any the most toiling earth-delver whatsoever can deal in. The Roman Empire returned the Censor many thanks for this ad∣vice; and then very gravely answered, that it was a mischance com∣mon to all Princes, when scandals arose in their States, to be accused of negligence, although it were notoriously manifest, that since those scandals had been occasioned by the machinations of over-potent ene∣mies, they could not be avoided by never so wary a Prince. That therefore he left it to every one's consideration, whether the prodigious felicities of the most puissant House of Austria, in inheriting by alli∣ances, the States of Flanders, the Kingdoms of Spain, Naples, Sicily, Bohemia, Hungary, Portugal, and the acquisition of the Dukedom of Millan, had not raised up in all the Princes of Germany, Italy, and Eu∣rope, such devillish jealousies, as have caused the past and present deso∣lations which are seen in her antient Patrimony: To which, not all the Emperors that have been since Maximitian the first, though they have been accounted very valiant and wife Princes, ever knew how to apply any salve which did not infinitely inflame the Ulcer of the Ger∣man disorders, to which there flocked so many, and such malignant hu∣mors, that man might truely say, it was incureable: And that besides this, he desired them to remember the little authority that the modern Emperors have in Germany; and that it was not only incivility, but o∣pen injustice, to require that one which had his hands fast bound, should do with them the feats of Orlando. That moreover he left to every ones consideration, the quality of the Empire, which being elective, they that served had more authority in it then they that commanded. Besides, he put them in mind of the House of Austria's present weak∣ness in Germany; which impious men having by the sedition of Here∣sie, rob'd of his subjects hearts, (a robbery of that consequence, that those States may be given for lost, in which so diabolical a seed is sown) the lateEmp. saw himself clean stript of the obedience of the greater part of his vassals. And therefore he intreated every one to reflect upon the quality of those Cousins which the German House of Austria hath in Spain; for they will find that the Germans being a people born to Li∣berty, to secure themselves from the monstrous power of so great a Family, take impious and over-thwart revenge of even those that would not be secure, from suffering slavery under the Spaniards, if they
for mens sins sake, should ever come to get the Government of the Uni∣verse: From which, by the meer goodness and mercy of God, they are still kept the farther off, by how much the nearer, by their subtilties, they endeavour to come to it. And that they should all remember, how, the first that both in Italy, and out of it, did with all manner of irreve∣rence, and disrespect, dishinherit the Empire of his Majesty, were the very same Cousins of his in Spain; which all men plainly perceived, by the usurpation of Finale, and by other Imperial Fee-Farms, which they have seised upon. All which things, stirring up very dangerous humors, without dis∣solving them, have brought it so to pass, that the House of Austria in Germany, is cruelly battered by very powerful enemies; while the Spa∣niards were very busie only with threatnings, in filling the whole world with jealousies and distastes. Lastly, he earnestly pressed, that the whole College of the Literati would well consider how, to the miserable barrenness of Sons, which is seen in the modern Emperor, was added a lamentable fruitfulness of Brothers, one of which hurried on by the violent instigation of ambiti∣on, made no scruple at the last, to give a push to his house that was tumbling down headlong. All which have been accidents so unlucky, that they would have made the world have taken King Solomon himself for a blockhead. With these replies which seemed to every one very weighty, the Censor was pacified. Who turning himself towards the Warlike French Monarchy, told her that all the Vertuosi of Pernassus did ear∣nestly desire her that she would regulate the furious, restless, fantastical, and too-too rash brains of her Frenchmen, reducing them to those terms of discretion, wariness, and calmness of mind, as they see is in the Noble Italian and Spanish Nations: And it took off much from her reputation, that the Kingdom of France, which holds the first place a∣mongst the Principal Monarchies of the world, should be inhabited by infinitely hasty, and hairbrain'd men. To this advice the French Monarchy reply'd, That the Censor not well informed of the Interests of her Kingdom, had censured the prime vertues that she most fancified in her Frenchmen (as madness, le∣vity, heedlesness, and a hasty nature, which had made her so dreadfull and formidable a Queen) for defects: Since her Frenchmen, at any, though never so slight a beck of hers, did with alacrity and readiness of mind, expose themselves to those dangers, in which they saw that other Princes could not force their wary, circumspect people to engage neither by halters, bastenado's, nor all the cruel tortures they could put them to. And that in those many battels which she hath had with di∣vers valiant Nations, she hath learned to know that Armies composed of Soldiers, that have but little wit, and much courage (so they be directed by a General of worth) carried the victory from those that made more profession of being circumspect, and wondrous wise. So much the more highly was the answer of the Monarchy of France extolled by Castiglione, by how much the more apparently he knew by the quality of her most puissant Kingdom, that the French possessed all those endowments and vertues of mind, as were necessary in a Na∣tion, for the founding, enlarging, and maintaining of a huge command.
Then the Censor turning to the High and Mighty Monarchy of Spain, he told her, it was generally observed, that nothing did give greater sa∣tisfaction to all sorts of people, but more particularly to those which wee subjects to forreign Nations, then the humanity and courteous be∣haviour of those that rule over them: And that she sending none to govern Naples, Mill an, and Sicily, but her Spanish Dons, these with their usual Castillian strutting, and with unsufferable Spanish ostentation, in∣comparably much greater then the Kings of Spain themselves, either would or could have used in those States, did so turn the stomacks even of her good and faithful subjects, that they made the Spanish Govern∣ment infinitely odious to men. And that moreover he desired that in all negotiations, whether of more or less weight, she would use more expedition: Seeing that by reason of her over-much tediousness and perplexity in the determining of important affairs, she had lost very fair occasions, which were presented her for the aggrandizing of her Power. Very much did the Spanish Monarchy thank the Censor for the war∣nings he had given her; and to clear her self, she said, That noble Gen∣tleman, which had a young wife extreamly handsom, but naturally in∣clin'd to wantonness, would shew himself circumspect; if he liked it better, that a houshold-servant of his, which was a spruce gallant, should rather be infinitely hated, then much beloved, of his wife: And as for that tediousness of coming to a resolution in her affairs, which she knew to be faulty and full of danger, it was not in her power to remedy it: For od Almighty having, not without important reasons, created her Spaniards in all and every thing, of a genis differing from that of the rench, as long as these were in their determinations, rather hair∣brain'd then good at action, she by being slow and unresolved, obey'd the will of God, who had appointed that it should be so. Presently after was drawn the Monarchy of Poland; to whom Count Baldassare said, That all the Princes of Europe desired that the present King Sigismond should have used against those sediious Nobles which lately rebelled against him, some severity worthy of so grievous an of∣fence, only that he might thereby terrifie other Nobles from commit∣ting the like. To this the Polack Monarchy answered, That in her Elective King∣dom, those punishments inflicted upon the Nobility had alwaies proved dangerous, which in an Hereditary State were beneficial: And that Kingdom, which one hath received as a Donative from a Nobility that had the election of the King in her own power, could not be go∣verned with that rigor which in hereditary States was necessry, without running an evident hazard of umbling down headlong from his great∣ness. or that Senat whose election of love gave one a Kingdom, if it were throughly moved by that most powerful passion of hate, knew as well how to take it away again: For the wary Senators used to re∣serve to themselves those necessary instruments, whereby they might be able, upon every occasion of dissatisfaction, to repent their libe∣rality. Ad that the preent Kig Sigismond being the fist of his stock that Reigned in Poland, was in all his thoughts to aim at nothing more, then wih extraordinary diligence to get the good will of the Nobility of his State, that so by his dearly esteemed memory, he
might perpetuate the succession of so great a Kingdom in his own stock. An advice so much the more necessary for her King Sigismond, in that the Polacks, though they had their King by way of election, yet they never defrauded the bloud-Royal of the succession; if he that reigned, knew but how by his gentleness to gain the universal good-will of the Nobility. For Poland, being a Nation which knew not how to live in an absolute freedom, yet so much abhor'd total servitude, as that King (a thing common to all elective Principalitis) was amongst them the most sharp-fighted and vigilant in the affairs of his State, that most of all made as if he did not see, and made the greatest shew that he desired not to know all things. Not only the Censor, but the whole College of the Vertuosi admit∣ted for excellent, the Justification of the Polack Monarchy. And be∣cause the most famous English Monarchy was drawn out of the Urn, the Censor, with something an angry countenance, yet in gentle words, told her, That if humane wisdom were necessary for any person, it was was most necessary for Princes, because of the important business which they had in hand, of governing mankind: And that the chiefest and truest wisdom of men, being the fear of God, little store of discreet government could be expected from him who had committed the impi∣ous and detestable olly, of falling away from his Divine Majesty. That therefore he required her to let the present Iames the sixth know, that the politick precept which England and Scotland had impudently put in practice, of conforming Religion to Ambition, and making use of her for a Winch▪ to turn and wind the people, was a point of Policy that either was unknown to the Antients, or which they durst not use; for fear of offending God. That therefore she should put him in mind to have alwaies before his eyes, the deplorable calamities of the Greek Empire, which although for ampleness of State, for multitude of Sub∣jects, and wealthiness of Treasure, it did vastly surpass the Kingdom of England; yet, because to avoid being subject to the Divine Supre∣macy of the Pope, it disagreed from the Catholike Religion, it so much deserved the Divine anger, that the world hath beheld it made slave to the basest and most barbarous Nation as ever, since the memo∣ry of men, reigned upon the earth. That therefore she should give no∣tice to the now-King Iames, that he ought so much the more to recon∣cile himself to God, in that he being Soveraign over two Kingdoms, so great enemies to one another, it was not possible for him, without espe∣cial assistance from God, to establish the union of those two great Crowns; That therefore he should know, that every day he did more and more provoke him against himself, when spending the greater part of the day in defending the manifest errors of his Sect, he busied himself in nothing but Disputations of Religion. At this severe and just censure of Castiglione, the English Monarchy was seen to fall a crying. And after this, the Censor turning towards the vast Ottoman Empire, told him, That the cruelty which he used so much, upon slight suspici∣ons, against his most principal Officers, was judged by all the world to be a savage action, every one being of opinion, that men of extraordi∣nary worth and high deserts, should never be questioned, but for grie∣vous delinquencies, and such as had been proved against them: And
that if the Ottoman Princes might be justified in taking away their Offi∣cers lives; yet the custom of seizing upon their goods, and making them to be carried to the Royal Treasury, or Casna, and so utterly to deprive the children of them, had no colour of justice in it; for every one conceived, that by this cruel rigor, mens Estates were rather pro∣ceeded against then their demerits. With admirable gravity answered the Ottoman Empire to this so open reproof, saying, That he was grown up to that greatness, in which all men saw him, only by those two powerful means, of Reward without measure, and of Punishment without limit: And that the only founda∣tion of the tranquillity of every State being laid in the fidelity of the more important Ministers thereof, Princes were to seek after nothing with greater care, then by immense rewards to allure them to Loyalty, and by infinite chastisements to frighten them from treachery. And that it not being possible for those Officers, which had in their power the Forces of Emperors, and Government of States, to trespass but in matters of greatest moment; it were the course of a simple Prince, in suspicions of highest consequence▪ to draw up Processes, to allow A∣pologies, and to hear the Defendants Justifications: Whereas in such cases as these, the Prince that will not endanger all, must strive to take his Officer unawares, and secure his own affairs, by making the executi∣on of the punishment, precede even the accusation it self. And that it hath often-times fallen out, that by a hasty punishment, he hath pre∣vented the consummation of very foul treasons: Which resolution, though he must confess it to be very severe, yet he knew it was one cause, that in his State there were seen no Counts of St. Paul, no Prin∣ces of Orange, no Gaspar Colligni's, no Dukes of Guise, d'Aumale, du Main, de Mercurie, and other odious monsters of disloyalty, as have been seen elsewhere, to the shame of those Princes that with halters, daggers, and axes, have not known how to prevent so dangerous of∣fences: It being in matters of State, a rule as common as 'tis certain▪ that, that Officer which gives his Prince never so little cause to suspect his fidelity, forfeits his life; since those Commanders that have in their power the charge of Armies, are (no less then the Wives of honora∣ble Persons) obliged to live with such purity of mind, that they must be without, not only any fault, but any the least suspicion of an unchast desire. That for his taking away of his Bssa's goods after their deaths, he could very truely tell them, that the Pensions, the Donatives, and Wealth wherewith other Princes reward their servants, were in compa∣rison of those inexhausted riches which he bestows upon his well-de∣serving Officers, poor pittiful things: as the Royal Treasures which Rusten, Mehemet, Ibrahin, and many others left behind them, have ful∣ly and amply testified: And that the greatest fore-cast which a Prince ought to have in rewarding his servants, consisted in taking a course, that it might never be possible for others to employ those immense riches wherewith he had purchased their infinite fidelity, to the detri∣ment of him that had been so liberal. That he had learned by the most lamentable disorders which hapned in the States of other Potentates, how it was a most pernicious thing for Princes, that the extraordinary wealth left by a deserving Officer, should pass to his children, whether by that vertue, by that valour, and by that same Loyalty which was in
their Father, they had first deserved it from the Prince, or not. And that he confiscted the great Inheritances of his Bassa's, not out of a∣varice, as many wrongfully judged; but that he might not make those subjects, who for being descended from fathers of noted worth, put the Prince in certain hope that they would imitate their Progenitors in vertue, by the convenience of living idle, consequently to grow vicious too; and that he kept the gates of his Treasury alwaies open to his Of∣ficers heirs, tht he might restore to them their paternal inheritances doubled, whensoever by Loyalty and Valour they should deserve them: And that how apt great riches possessed by a vicious man, and an am∣bitious subject, were to distrb the peace of any Kingdom, how great soever, was a thing known to every man, by the fresh examples which the world hath seen in France and Flanders. While the Ottoman Empire spake these things, he observed that the French Monarchy by shaking her head, did shew (as it seem'd) that she by no means approved of these discourses. Whereupon something passionately he said; Most renowned Queen, my custom of seizing up∣on my Bassa s inheritances, makes well for my greatness, and the tran∣quillity of my State; and for the friendshp that is betwixt us, I could wish that the like were observed in your France. For you know well to what use Henry Duke of Guise did put that vast deal of wealth, wherewith the liberal King Francis the fist, and King Henry his son, rewarded the deserts of Duke Francis his father. For wo to that Prince, who because he knows not how to be severe to others, is so cruel to himself, as absurdly to breed up Serpents in his bosom. You, I, and all the rest of us that bear rule, know that the sweetest honey that men can tast, is Soveraignty; and there being no man that for never so little of it, would not gladly adventure to lose his life; Princes ought to be still most vigilant in keeping all the avenues to Government block'd up, and by all possible severity to hold every one out of the reach of ambition. Nay they ought to order their mat∣ters so, that every privat mn whatsoever, may despair of ever being a∣ble to tast of so pleasant a liquor. And I tell you plainly, had your Duke of Guise but offered to think in my State, that which with so much scandal he publickly made bold to put in execution in your Kingdom; that very first day would I have shew'd him the same play which your Henry the third (though urged to it by most of the Italian rinces) knew not how to resolve upon, till the last day of his insufferable vexarions; and just then when the sore of the French commotions was grown to be an incureable Canker. For where ambition reigns amongst the Nobles, Princes are enforced to shew themselves totally severe, keeping the gibbets alwaies ina readiness, for punishing of the seditious and rebellious; and their Treasury open to reward the peaceable and loyal; that Prince being unworthy of command, that hath not a genius to make himself obeyed: Neither is there any thing more scandalos n a State, then that the Prince should live in jealousie of that Officer which ought to live in fear of him. But it is proper for you Princes of Europe, that making a profession of Learning, and of living according to rules of great Policy, call me Bar∣barian, and my safe manner of proceeding Tyrannical, to suffer your selves by your heroical vertues, of clemency and mildness, to
be brought to the shamefull condition of suffering▪ most unworthy things. Impossible it is to say, how much the Ottoman Empire did with his dis∣course offend all the Vertuosi of the sacred College, who standing up in very great wrath, told him, That with Reasons in hand they would make it good to him, that all the particulars which he had spoken, were most wicked conceits, unworthy to be uttered by a person that had a soule, and as much to be listened to by men that made profession of ho∣nour. At which the Ottoman Empire smiling said, That in the Politick conceits, by which others governed Kingdoms, respect was had to the commodiousness of Moral Precepts, which by well regulated customs, were serviceable to goodness. And that yet the tranquillity and peace of States were to be preferred before all other humane interests. Then the Censor, to cut off so odious a disputation, turning to the great Dukedom of Muscovy, told him, that among the greatnesses of a Prince, it was called the second Noblest Prerogative, to have com∣mand over people that were lovers of Learning; and that it was not only little for his credit, but a thing for which he incurr'd much reproach, that he should so much give his mind to have his Subjects brought up in gross ignorance; for he was scoffed at by every one, that having ba∣nished the Liberal Arts, he had given his people leave only to learn how to write and read. To this Censure the Dukedom of Muscovy answered, That the hi∣deous fire, which he had observed Learning alwaies kindled in those States where it was admitted, had made him resolve, by no means to give way that so scandalous a Cockle should be sown in his Dukedom: For Men being as much Princes Heards, as Sheep are private persons Flocks, it were the height of madness to arm those humane sheep (sub∣jects) which by reason of the much simplicity that God created in them, are, though many, easily governed by one only Shepheard, the Prince, with that craft and malice, which Learning engrafts into the brains of those that entertain it: And that it was no more the proper quality of fire to give heat, then of books to transform the simple sheep into most corrupted wolves. Lastly, that he held it for a thing unquestionable, That if the Germans, the Hollanders, and the Zealanders, had been kept by their Princes, in the simplicity of their antient ignorance, and they withall had given charge, that the pure minds of those Nations should not have been contaminated with the pestilence of Greek and Latine Literature; they would never with such havock of the old Religion, and the casting out of many Princes which formerly governed them, have had the judge∣ment to know how to settle in their Countries, those perfect Forms of Commonwealths, which the wit of Solon, the wisdom of Plato, and all the Philosophy of Aristotle to boot, could never attain unto: This answer so troubled the minds of the Censor, and of the whole College of the Literati, that with threatning countenances they said, That the arguments alleadged by the great Duke of Muscovy, were most manifest blasphemies: Nay it seemed that the Literati were mind∣ed to doe themselves right by arms; but their courages were cooled when they saw the major part of the more potent Monarchies betake
themselves to their weapons in defence of the Muscovite▪ Who grow∣ing yet bolder by the ready assistance which he perceived he should have from so many Potentates, freely said, That if there were any pre∣sent who would deny that Learning did infinitely hinder the tranquil∣lity and good Government of States, and that the Prince might with more ease command a million of Idiots, then a hundred Learned men, born to command, not to obey; he lied in his throat. At this generous defiance, the Vertuosi were all in a pelting chafe, and couragiously said, That the Muscovite had spoken with insolence worthy of an Idiot; and that they would make it evident to him, that men without Learning were two-legged Beasts. Already was the scuffle begun, when the Censor cryed out, Hold! bear due respect to this place where you are all assembled to amend dis∣orders, and not to commit scandals. And such was the reverence eve∣ry one bare to the Majesty of the Censor, that the minds of the Princes, and the hearts of the Vertuosi, though stark mad for anger, and en∣raged with disdain, were wholly paciied on a sudden. Here it is not to be concealed, that the Duke of Urbin, who before sate in the Classis of Princes, as soon as he saw the fray begun, went on the other side to help the Vertuosi, and placing himself in the first rank, shewed a mind resolved to lose his State, so he might but defend the Liberal Ats. All Tumults then being appeased, the Censor told the most renown∣ed Venetian Liberty, who was drawn out of the Urne, That the hardest bone which Aristocracies could never gnaw (as she well knew) was the bridling of the young Nobility, which when by over-much licentiousness it had distasted the better sort of Citizens, had often oc∣casioned the ruine of the most famous Commonwealths▪ and that to his great grief, he heard that the young Nobility of Venice did by their proud demeanor give offence to many honorable Citizens of that State; who loudly complained, that as the insolence of the Nobilty increased, the punishments abated. That he therefore wished her to remember, it was a dangerous thing in Aristocracies, for those which should glory of being wholly freed from the perils which a State is subject to, that obeys the caprichio of one Prince, to be heard com∣plain of being baffled by many Tyrants. To these things the Venetian Liberty answered, That the disorder recounted by the Censor, was true, and withall dangerous; but that pride and insolence are so annexed to authority of command, that they seemed to be all of a birth; and that the excessive licentious∣ness which the Nobility of all Aristocracies exercised over the Citi∣zens, was reputed by all the famous men that have discoursed of Com∣monwealths, a desperate cure: For though it were necessary that inso∣lences should be restrained by severe punishments; yet on the other side, Aristocracies should forbear openly to chastise Noblemen, though seditious: and this, that they may not by disgracefull, sufferings bring the people to undervalue that very Nobility, which having in their hands the Government of the State, ought for the main Interest of the publick conservation of Liberty, to be maintained in highest reputation. And that if in her Venice, the more stubborn and insolent Nobles were not openly punished in St. Marks Place, between the
two Columns so often, as, it seemed, many desired, that yet by the Gran Consiglio, by the Pregadi, by the Collegio, and other superior Magistrates who dispose of publick Offices, there was, with the tor∣ments of disgraceful repulses, made a terrible massacre of those sedi∣tious Nobles, who in a free Countrey were discovered to bear tyran∣nous minds; and that in Venice there were seen many persons of very Noble Families, whose antient reputation had been shot to fitters, with Harquebuses charged with bullets made of rags, and that being by such odd blows sometimes felled to the ground, they were never a∣ble to rise again to honours and dignities. And that there could not be invented, no not by Perillus himself, a more torturing rack for the tearing of ones body limb from limb, then that which a Noble Vene∣tian hath sometimes undergon, when in the Rival ship about Offices of credit, and much stood for, he hath seen go before him, a person younger then he, only because he was known by the Senate to be more deserving. Castiglione not only admired at the justification of the renowned Ve∣netian Liberty; but infinitely praised both the circumspectness and the severity which she used in punishing and chastising her Nobility, in case either of any demerit, or of any defect. Presently after, the Censor said to the Dukedom of Savoy; that his State being placed between the confines of France and Italy, he was necessitated with all possible diligence to maintain neutrality between those Princes upon whom he did confine. But that in these last tu∣mults of France, having openly discovered himself to be wholly Spa∣nish, he had put not only his own, but the States of all the Italian Princes in great trouble; and that while with the bellows of his Forces he had puffed in the fire of the French commotions, enkindled by Spa∣nish ambition, he ought to believe, that that flame would burn up friends and kindred, before it could come at the other Italian Poten∣tates that were enemies. The Dukedom of Savoy readily answered the Censor, That the ad∣herence of his last Duke to the Spaniard was true. But the fair advan∣tage which he had of three sevens in hand, had enforced him to set his Rest, hoping to have gotten the famousest Prime as ever any Prince whatsoever had at Cardes. Upon which hazard he had so much the more willingly put himself, because it seemed a thing appointed by de∣stiny, that those moneys which had been gotten at play, should at the same Game be lost. That afterwards if by his ill fortune, in the fourth Card that was dealt him, he should happen to be affronted by an ugly Court-Card, with which he should have the worst Game that could be in the Pack, yet he knew that honest good fellows would have con∣fessed, that though the resolution were very full of danger, yet they themselves, not to wrong the Cards, would have plai'd it no other∣wise. The Censor understood the Metaphor, and highly praised that Dukes resolution: Who, because from a little Feaver, he might have received as a Donative, the command of the greater part of the world, when not only without any note of indiscretion, but to his infinite glory, he threw the Dy of all the greatness of his Fortunes, in the Ta∣bles of chance, he might once more say those famous words; Aut Cae∣sar, aut Nullus.
Then the Censor turned to the great Duke of Tuscany, and sharp∣ly reprehending him for rousing up the Wasp with those Gallies of his, he put him in mind of the calamities and troubles which the Knights of St. Iohn suffered in Rhodes, in Tripoly, and the great hazard they ran at last in Malta, only because like fools they would needs be fasten∣ing of squibs upon the Bull: And that every discreet Christian Prince should rather favour the Turks present carelesness, then with injuries that yield but little benefit, nay which may bring much danger and damage to awaken them, and enforce them to set their minds again upon Maritime affairs, which now-a-daies they had given over. He likewise recalled to his memory the many complaints, of infinite mul∣titudes which continually crie out, that by his hindering of the Trade between Italy and the Levant, all the Drugs that came from beyond∣sea, were grown excessive dear. To this reproof the Grand Dukedom of Tuscany answered, That the power of a Prince could not be tearmed perfect, unless with a consi∣derable party of men of War, he had some command upon the sea: And that his Gallies were very necessary, not only for the Tuscan greatness, but for the securing of the Liberty of all Italy; as those which served for a School to Mariners, as a Seminary both for sea-Captains, and sea-souldiers. He confessed that the damage they did to Trading, was true; but that withall he desired every one to remem∣ber, that the mystery of War, both by sea and by land, could not be learned by souldiers, nor practised by Princes, without bringing some damage along with it. And that since Tuscany did breed a numerous rascallity of turbulent mad-caps, and extravagant humors, he had yet farther very great need of those Gallies, which were as the scavengery of his State, by which he kept it cleanly, employing them for slaves, which had done mischiefs already, and for souldiers, those heterocli∣tick dispositions, who by reason of their restless natures, 'twas thought were likely to do worse. With wonderful applause was the great Dukedom of Tuscany's A∣pologie approved of, both by the Censor, and the whole College. Whereupon the Count told the Comomnwealth of Genoua, which was drawn last, That the use of Exchange which she allowed her Nobility, caused the great disorder of enriching the private, and withall, impo∣verishing the publick stock: whose in-comes would have yielded a notable sum of Gold, had the King-like wealth of her Nobles been employed in the just traffick of Merchandize. And that together with the prohibition of Exchange, her Nobles should give over that dangerous conversation with the Spaniards, which so much lessened her reputation. With a readiness that much took all the Literati, the Common∣wealth of Genoua answered, It was true that the Exchanges wrought that effect which the Censor had intimated, and therefore vvere most pernicious in any Monarchy; but that yet, vvithout any prejudice to the publick interests, they might be permitted in a vvell ordered Re∣publick; for the most substantial and sure treasures of a free State, vvere the riches of the nobility or gentry, & of all the body Politick one with another. Athing vvhich happened not in Monarchies, vvhere betvveen the Princes possessions, and privat mens goods, there vvas a partition∣wall
of the largest size, made up of meum & tuum: Because in Monar∣chies the change of State happens ordinarily with no great matter of concernment to the people, only changing the name of Matthew to that of Martine: But in the subversion of Commonwealths, where Liber∣ty was to be changed into Bondage, the publick treasure was made out of the peculiar goods of private men, who then would profusely lay out all their Estates, to defend as long as breath lasted, every mans peculiar Liberty. As for the dangerous Commerce that her Nobility held with the Spaniards, she desired every one throughly to consider whether the en∣tercourse of her Genoueses were hurtfull to the Spaniards, or the fami∣liarity of the Spaniards to the Genoueses: For certainly they would find that the frying-pan stood in no great fear of being smutted by the kettle. The Spanish Monarchy invites the Cardinal of Toledo to be Secretary of State: who refuseth: and why. TIs given out up and down this Court, that the high and mighty Monarchy of Spain hath invited the most illustrious Cardinal of Toledo for her chief Secretary of State, with a large Pension, to assist as her Divine in the Counsel-Royal, that so nothing be determined there, which may be against her conscience. This news hath filled all this Court with great admiration, every one knowing how much this Prelate did work against the interests of her King, in the re-benediction of the most Christian King Henry the fourth: Wherefore no man could imagin the reason why so sharp-witted a Princess should desire to make use of a person so little to be trusted in a business of highest importance. Those that most profess the knowledg of the subtile Spaniards man∣ner of proceeding, did even in this, observe the old cunning of the Spa∣nish Kings; whose peculiar custom it is, never to give over, till with Pensions, with honorable places of Command, and with all courteous demonstrations of affection, they have brought over to their side, all those eminent persons whom they perceive to be estranged from their interests, and from whom they know, that at a pinch, they may receive services. They that are most inward wih this great Cardinal, report that his grace cheerfully accepted of the oble charge propounded to him: But upon this condition, though, which by the Spaniards was im∣mediately rejected. For he said, that when by the authority of holy Scri∣pture, by the Doctrine of the holy Fathers, by the institutions of the Canons, he had made it evident to the Consel-Royal, that the results of it disagreed with the Laws of God and man, he would then desire but power to hinder the execution of them; all to no other end, then to let the world know, that the Kings Divie was in that Counsel only to assist the conscience of his King, with knowledge of the will of his Lord God; not for a Vizard to settle upon him the Rule of Kingdoms over men: for he conceived it would be too shameful an action, that such a one as he should be employed to authenticate the diabolical impi∣ety of modern Policy, and make silly souls believe, that the nastiest
Assa foetida that would outstink a Polecat, is as pure Musk as ever came from the Levant. Apollo detesteth the means that are recommended to him, for getting of Monies. Extraordinary is the want of money which at this time is in Pernas∣sus; for not only his Majesties Exchequer, and Treasures, and the greatest Princes of this Court, but likewise the Gentlemen, the Mer∣chants, and the Artisans are in great distress for it; in so much, that ma∣ny daies since the Commissioners for Apollo's Royal Patrimony, and o∣thers deputed by his Majesty over this business, did a long time consider and consult, what course was to be taken for the remedying of this dis∣order. And it was resolved by all to be very expedient, that likewise into Pernassus should be introduced that admirable custom observed by ma∣ny Princes in Italy, of selling the publick revenues to private men, they which bought them, paying the honest Rent of six in the hundred; and that it should be lawful also for private men to put out their money to such as had need of it, at the return of eight in the hundred, by the name of Consideration. This course which these Gentlemen so highly approved of, as soon as ever it was proposed to Apollo, was immediately rejected, as most per∣nicious to all Estates publick and private: And his Majesty then said, that he would not by any means, by the engaging to another the pub∣lick Revenues of his Estate, give an odious president to other Princes, for encumbring in their life times, those incomes, which as they had re∣ceived free, so they ought to transmit them to their successors. For by such inventions as these, there was not only a doore opened to the ruine of Estates, but the way was levelled for the avarice and malice of those Princes, who either because they Reign in States elective, or because in hereditary, they have no successor of their own race, would dismember those publick Rents, which are the true Store-houses, and the secure Magazines that preserve and aggrandize Kingdoms. A disorder, which being by the excessive malice of some Princes in∣troduced into their States hath extreamly weakened them. And upon the very same subject his Majesty said further, that in many States, the Taxes and Imposts were now-adaies observed to be much increased, be∣cause the new-entring Princes have found the publick Revenues mort∣gaged by their Predecessors; and that they themselves, to provide for the urgent necessities of their States, and the private exigents of their Families, were enforced to invent new Taxes, and even against their wils, with odious Impositions to overload their afflicted and tired sub∣jects. Which errors men should so much the more fear that they would one day ruine their States, by how much the more Princes, not to run the manifest hazard of enkindling great commotions in their ju∣risdictions, and being no longer able to charge the people with new Taxations, should at last be constrained to grow desperate, and to seize
upon the Rents, colouring their rapacity with the pretence, that it was more then their predecessors could doe to empawn them so prodigally and maliciously, to the prejudice of the State, and of their successors. And that States being subject to the sentence of the sword, and the tribunal of violence, if it should happen that a Kingdom, where the dis∣order of engaging the publick Revenues, was practised, should be usurp∣ed and taken on him, by any Potentates; the new Prince by relin∣quishing the ordinary payments, would have, if not a just, at least a co∣lourable reason, to commit that cruel outrage of ruining the Patrimony of infinitely many widows, orphans, and other poor creatures that had had all their estates laid out upon the purchase of the publick Revenues. And that he knew, the abuse of alienating the publick Revenues, was gone so far, that many Princes with unheard of avarice and greediness, had either ransacked their own estates, or suffered them to run to ruine; and this horrid cruelty they would have to be taken for politick wit, so to wea∣ken, in elective States, a hated successor; in hereditary a stranger. And last∣ly Apollo said, That it was most wickedly resolved upon, that private men by the purchase of the publick Revenues, and the mischievous bring∣ing in of Consideration-money, should fetch gain out of meer and bare money, without putting it forth upon any commodities; it being a most abominable thing, that men born to live by the sweat of their brows, to manure the earth, and attend upon the multiplication of cattel, should be maintained by those Usuries which are got out of a dead heap of mo∣ney. A piece of bruitishness that is good for nothing but to make In∣dustrious men lean, and Usurers Fat. FINIS.
