B5468 12328298 59598
ATHOMYOTOMIA OR A DISSECTION of the significative Muscles of the AFFECTIONS of the MINDE. Being an Essay to a new Me∣hod of observing the most Impor∣nt movings of the Muscles of the Head, as they are the neerest and Imme∣diate Organs of the Voluntarie or Impetuous motions of the Mind. With the Proposall of a new No∣menclature of the Muscles. y J. B. Sirnamed the Chirosopher. —Augebitur Scientia. LONDON, nted by W. W. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to sold at his Shop at the Princes Armes in St. Pauls Church∣yard. 1649.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. To his loving Father Mr Thomas Bulwer. Sir, IT hath been a lauda∣ble Custome with Persons of emient degree to descend to honour their Sonnes with directing Books unto them; he reciprocation of which af∣ectionate Complement is a duty well-becomming a Son; moved (therefore) with a certaine Filiall Decency I made choice to dedi∣ate this Book unto you in regard he Argument of it is Provinciall o Physick, wherein your experi∣nce hath crowned your Professi∣on,
having ever been Fortunatus in Praxi. You shall find in it that which I use to call the Clock-work of the Head, or the Springs and inward Contrivance of Instru∣ments of all our outward motions, which give motion and regulate the Dyall of the Affections, which Nature hath placed in the Face of Man; Being a New light, and the first Irradiation which ever appea∣red through the Dissections of a Corporeall Phylosophy. Could the Times have afforded it, it had come to your hands illustrated with the ornamentall Demonstra∣tions of many Figures prepared for it; but indeed the Stationers cautionary prudence met with an indisposition in me; for I thought that in such new and unexpected matters too great a splendor might possibly have dazled. I confesse I have met with little encourage∣ment
in this Designe, for all the Physicians and Anatomists that I have hinted it unto have held it scarce fecible, Doctor Wright Ju∣nior onely excepted, with whom having interchangeably communicated Intellectuall Af∣faires, He shewing me the hint of his grand undertaking, which was Anatomia Comparata, that great Defect in Anatomy noted by my L. Bacon in his Book De Augmentis Scientiarum, in returne whereof I having first told him of an At∣chievement of mine in this Art, which I called Vox Corporis, or the Moral Anatomy of the Body; I ac∣quainted him also with this Essay, whose apprehension I found so well possessed with the gallantry (as he was pleased to speak) and the possibility thereof, that he promised me (to testifie his appro∣bation,) he would commend it in
his first publique Lecture of Ana∣tomy in the College; a day much expected by those who had took notice of the most eminent and Divine Impulsions of his Anato∣mique Genius. But prevented by his much lamented Death, what entertainment this Essay shall meet with among the Sect of Cor∣poreal Philosophers; (having bin so infortunately deprived of the advantage of such a Recommen∣dation,) must be left to the Fate of Books. However, I hope it shall find acceptance with you, and be received as an evidence of the proofe of that Education you be∣stowed on me, and of my Duty. Your obedient Son, Iohn Bulwer.
The Scope and use of the Essay for some praevious satisfaction to the Intel∣ligent Readers. More especially Physicians and Masters in Anatomie, whose Candor and Indulgencie on this Essay is most properly desired. HAving resolved to trace the Discoursing Actions of the Head to their Spring and Principle upon which their outward significa∣tions depend; when I had passed the superficial parts, and digged a little more than skin-deepe into the Mi∣nerall of Cephalicall Motion, I came to the Muscles, the instru∣ments of voluntary motion; or the instruments of those motions that are done by an earnest affection, that
is, from an inward principle. The effects of whose moving significant∣ly appeare in the parts moved, when by an arbitrary motion we free∣ly reject or embrace things under∣stood (not with our minde onely, but with our mind and body both.) Here I made a stand; and began cu∣riously to enquire and hunt after all the Anatomists both Ancient and Moderne that had writ of the Mus∣cles, and the motions of the Head, as well to satisfie my self as to crave in ayde of them: and having had a view of as many as I could heare of and conveniently procure, and ob∣served their severall veines and Methodicall variations no way an∣swering my expectation; An emer∣gent thought suggested to my ima∣gination a notable Defect, hitherto undiscerned in that Art which of late hath attained unto a great per∣fection, which cast me into an exta∣sie
of admiration at so strange a Preterition, that among the Con∣script Fathers of Anatomy, there hath not been any one who, Datâ operâ, had undertaken a generall Survey and Cognomination of the Muscles of the Body, as they are the necessary Instruments of all those motions of the Mind, which are apparently expressed and made ma∣nifest by the effect of their use and moving in all the parts of the Body, although more Emphatical∣ly, by those operations they have in the Head and the most remarkable parts thereof. Galen in that excel∣lent Commentary De motu Muscu∣lorum, wherein he went beyond himselfe, and shewed the greatest miracle of his wit, a Book which all Anatomists kisse with reverence, as conteining the Oracles of Myolo∣gie, doth not so much as glance at it, but under the generall notion of vo∣luntary
and arbitrary motion; and in his Anatomicall Administrations wherein he abundantly prosecutes these motions, and glories to have found out many which were hid and unknown to the Physicians that were before his time, and where he teacheth a Method whereby every single motion may be found out; Nor in his Dissection of Muscles not a word, scarce, pointing to this In∣tention, not naming many, but on∣ly numerically, not three with an imaginable reference to any Em∣phaticall motion of the Mind. And all the Nomenclators since his time, who have undertaken to play with new names, which for memory, bre∣vity of Speech, and perspicuity of the thing, they have imposed upon the Muscles, have omitted the due regard proper to the Spirit and life of their mentall significations: whereas the Denomination had been
better from the Nature and energe∣ticall property of the Muscle, which should by that Rule have been taken from the more extant and patheti∣call representations of those parts they actuate, and by which they ex∣hibite their Organicall significati∣ons. More strange yet, that no Artists should have made this the Subject of their O∣rations, but should have all to this Day, either turned their discourse to the structure onely of the Humane Fabrique, the perfections or Sy∣metry of the Body, or the excellen∣cy and antiquity of the Anatomiqu Art, or the Encomiums of the An∣tient and moderne Anatomists: whereas nothing could have set a greater glosse upon the Art, or have bin more glorious and honou∣rable, than together with their Dis∣sections, to have inriched their dis∣course with a relation of the Essence,
Regiment, and proprieties of the Soule, whose well-strung instru∣ment the Body was; Dr. Floud be∣ing the first that in his peroration (when hee was Praelector of Anato∣my in the College of Physicians in London Anno 1620.) exhibited such a kind of Method, together with an Explanation of his Reason, and an Example thereof; which Forme he did not magisterially pro∣pound unto them, but to declare that the Subject of an Anatomicall prae∣ludium ought to be the Internall & spirituall man, which is rather to be dissected with living words, than any knife how sharpe soever, and so consequently to be discovered and explaned by a style of discourse. The field of which subject as it is more ample and spacious than the rest; So the Studious in Anatomy shall never find it barren, but most fruitfull; So that every one herein
may hit of much variety of invention. If then a Prologue onely of this nature is held so convenient by so great an Artist, how much more advantageous and delightfull would a discourse in∣terwoven throughout the Dissect∣ion? Finding (therefore) that neither the great Parents of Physick, nor their Learned Off-spring had pathologized the Muscles, and thence bestowed significant names upon the most remarkable of them; I resolved to attempt the Designe, so to take away the blemish which hath fallen upon the Art by the slo∣venly and carelesse Denomination of some of them, and the six-footed Barbarismes of those Greeke Conju∣ring names which are fit only for the bombasticall Anatomy of Para∣celsus; wherein I was encouraged by observing that half a dozen of Muscles named according to our
new intended modell, or the Spe∣cies of their most significant mo∣tion; and seeme to have been stum∣bled upon by the way of sport, or a Rhetoricall Chance-medley of wit; appeare so wonderfully plea∣sing to our moderne and most inge∣nious Anatomists, that they are still borrowing from on another those patheticall Apellations, or  Rio∣lanus calls them, Elegantissima nomina, as if they were much affected with the felicity of that Pen from whence they first distiled, quae omne tulit punctum, for Elegancy, Memory, Brevity, and Perspicuity. 'Tis true many have exercized their pens in discourses of the muscles: But an exact Description of the Discour∣sing motions of the Muscles none of the Great Professors of Anatomy have so much as thought on; whereas the facility, utility, and delight∣somenesse of such notions might
have invited many; for, what is more easie than to discerne the parts manifest to Sense, and the fidelity of an Ocular assurance? that are so subject to our touch, that in the semblances of those motions wrought in the parts by the endea∣vour of the Muscles, we may not only see, but as it were feele and touch the very inward motions of the Mind; if you aske what delight will hence acrew to the understand∣ing? What is so delightfull as to know by what kind of mo∣vings those varying motions and expressions of the Head and Face are performed? What Muscle doth accomplish this or that speaking motion? To observe the scheme or outward figure of each Affection in the Countenance? That is the si∣tuation of each in its motion, as it is drawn by the Muscles, and to read their significations couched in
their names? So that observing these accidents of the Head and Face, the Types and representations of the Affections which are acci∣dents of the Mind, according to the nature of Correlatives, we may find out one by the other. And though it be but Negative ignorance not to be skill'd in such matters, and so may be thought a needlesse Nicety or over-curious Inquisition to know every Muscle of our Head and Face: Yet certainly it cannot but be some disparagement to one that pretends to any ingenuous Education or Reading, to be as a meere Puppet or Mathematicall mo∣tion, and not to understand why, or after what manner, the Muscles of his Head move in obedience to the Command of his Will; and so to have no better a Head-piece than that, which counterfeiting the na∣turall motions of Speech, uttered
its mind to Thomas Aquine, and he Learned Frier Bacon. And who  pray you that is well versed in hilosophy, does affect to behold the old effects of common Action ithout a Discourse of their Causes nd intrinsicall Agents the Soule nd the Muscles? Since that is fa∣iliar to Sense, and so by cons∣uence to Beasts, But this is subje∣ted to the Intellect, to wit, the In∣ernall Principle of man, where∣ore we will think it a thing worthy o be corrected with the whip of Ig∣orance, if any rashly plunge him∣self into the Muscular Sea of corpo∣al Anatomy, or of the outward man, without any mention of the Inter∣all man, since the Soule only is the pifex of all the movings of the Mus∣les, whose invisible Acts are made anifest by their operations in those arts into which they are inserted. Not that any perfection or exact
knowledge of this nature can be ac∣quired; since the wisedome of th Creator in the fearefull and won∣derfull structure of the Head is no yet fully found out, although it ha bene sought after by illustriou men with much piety and Diligence and therefore that which is most probable, and has the countenance of Authority must passe for truth To those also that shall hereafter Physically and Ethically handle the Doctrine of humane Affections, this may serve as a Mercurius Ethicus, to give intelligence to all Athenian Pathologists, of the motions of the Muscles which beare the greatest sway in matter of Affection: where∣as heretofore Pathology hath beene confined, as it were, to Aristotle Muscle, to wit that principle of inbred Heate, or ever movable sub∣stance of Spirit and bloud, which seemes to frame the severall images
of all the affections of the Mind; and has had little or no entercourse with the Muscles of the Affections; wher∣by she has been deprived of a great part of this ornament whereof shee is capable. But perchance the modernes have bin frighted with the difficulty of such a Designe, as supposing such a Muscular Philoso∣phie not fecible or reduceable into an Art: or else if it ever came into their Heades, they thought it a kind of impudence after Galen that glorious light of Anatomy, to endevour any thing in this kind. Yet Galen in his Booke de motu Musculorum seemes to have given any one a faire occasion of daring, where he writes, Whereas wee have partly found out many things, and partly also intend diligent∣ly to make a thorow search after other things; and some other may find out what is wanting. With his
leave therefore, I shall endeavour by a light Essay, to take notice of the figure and signatures of those Mus∣cles that belong unto the Head, and are the Authors of the speaking mo∣tions thereof, and of the Superfici∣all parts comprized in it, by the way, raising Allegoricall inferences from them, and adapting and im∣posing new names upon them ac∣cording to their Physiognomicall significations, which shall be as the Keyes of their important ations. Describing the rising and insertion, together with the fibres which mo∣dify the Determinate actions of each Muscle that I find instrumen∣tall, adjutant, or any way concur∣ring to the expedition of any re∣markable gesture of the Head or Face: So ordering the matter, that occasionally, most, if not all the mysteries of voluntary motion shall be brought in, at least in such a man∣ner,
as shall be more than sufficient to lay a firme foundation to our vir∣gin Philosophie of Gesture, and to serve my turne for the present occa∣sion. And because none that hither∣to have treated of the moving of the Muscles, have driven after this Scope of their significations; I shall name the Authors by whose light I walke, and upon whose Bowle I clap the Bias of the Affections, neither my Margin, nor the nature of an Essay admitting any more criticall formalities of quotation. I am not ignorant that such daring attempts and undertakings are very obnoxi∣ous to envy, and apt to fall under the Censure of Arrogancy and osten∣tation, imputations I have no rea∣son to feare, since I arrogate not to my selfe by the conduct of my owne light, to have found any new or great thing to add to the Doctrine of Muscular motion, to which (to
speak the truth) I thinke there can∣not much be added: neither am I so conceited of these animaversi∣ons, as to hope they should be ad∣mitted into the Schoole of Anatomy, & straightwise be made Canonical; for, to sit a Novelty of this nature for such an admission, would require a whole College, or rather a nationall Synod of Anatomists to consult about it; my single Phantsie being not ther∣fore par negotio, I have adventurd far with little strength and lesse en∣couragement to recommend the De∣signe to men of stronger Braines and publique Spirits. I thinke I may with modesty suppose, that I have sprung a new veine, and say that I was enforced to dig my way through, and out of much Oare and Drosse, to refine what was fit for my purpose, before I could come to ransack this Secret and undiscover'd treasury of the Muscles; or to cast the old me∣l
of their matter into a new ld, to make it more il∣trious by conjoyning it with  inward motions of the mind, ich set a representative shape  glosse upon the outward tions of those parts which e moved by the Muscles. If ey are contented to allow me  have bin the first that by  endeavoured to linke the uscles and the Affections to∣ther in a new Pathomyogamia;  at lest to have published the  betweene Myologus and thology, that any Physio∣gicall Handfaster that can  them stronger together, might e it if he pleas'd: I aske no ore: as for the rest, Veniam  laude peto. And if the orbutick wits of this Age, ho preferre an idle Head before n active, should bee loath to
afford me that, I can easily comf my selfe with that of Cremutiu Tacitus, Suum Cuique posterit rependit, nec deerunt, si Damntio ingruit, qui mei meminrint.
PATHOMYOTOMIA, OR A Dissection of the Muscles of the Affections. Sect. I. Of the Honour and Dignitie of Animal Motion. MOtion, saith the Stagerite, is Perfectio perfectibilis, the perfection of that which is perfectible. 'Tis ultima per∣fectio Creaturae, Saith the ergamite; The highest perfection of  Creature: for, a living creature, is a ving Creature by moving, and most mmodious to him is motion, as that hich is also out of his substance, be∣ause so soon as he is Animal, he is able to ove of himself; and where there is Sense there is also Motion: for, the Sensitive lant that hath onely the sense of Tact, ath likewise some motion, to wit of Di∣tation, & constriction; therfore Aristotle
speaking of Mola, or a false Conception: But because it is not a living Creature, it moves not. Hence when the Great Pa∣rent of Nature had come to Animal mo∣tion and its instruments, He ceased from his work, having nothing more honor∣able, as having accomplished the last end in the fabrick of the Body; which most Noble and necessarie and no way to be despised motion, especially its chief∣est and neerest instruments, the Muscles, are in us so far and wide renowned, tha if we could conceive in our mind all th organs of motion to be taken out, w would leave few parts to remain, an you would not acknowledge Man to be a living Creature; and that not on∣ly in regard he is depraved in his stru∣cture, but because he hath sustained  greater loss in being deprived of his mo∣tion: For were the abilities that pro∣ceed from motion and its instruments, separated from the Body, without doub man would almost cease to be man, an would degenerate into a Plant or Stock whereupon you could no more observ those motions of the Muscles which ar necessary to life, for he could neithe
follow that which is wholsome, nor a∣void what is noysome. He would be left destitute of the grace of elocution, and his mind would be enforced to dwel in perpetual silence, as in a wooden exta∣sie or congelation; nay his Soul which is onely known by Action, being otherwise very obscure, would utterly lose the benefit of explaning it self, by the innumerable almost motions of the Affections & passions which outward∣ly appear by the operation of the Muscles. That, as (for Rhetorique) Demosthenes ascrib'd all to Action; So Physicians in Nature, give the preheminence to Ani∣mal motion, which is performed by the action of the Muscles. Because all the parts rejoyce in Motion, whereas they lan∣guish in Rest; and as we know all by Sense, so we do all by Motion. Sect. II. That a Muscle is the proper and adequate A∣gent of the voluntary & pathetical motions of the mind, outwardly expressed in the Body. THe neerest and immediate Instru∣ment to the Motive Faculty for the
exercise of motion, as that which can on∣ly receive the influence thereof, is a Muscle; from whence moving proceeds, as from a Motor, whence among Phy∣sicians it is reciprocal and Convertible, to move and to have Muscles: for, no part without the endeavour of a Muscle, although it be illustrated with the pre∣snce of a Nerve, is stirred up to any vo∣luntary motion: neither shall you find a∣ny member of the Body that is moveable, which hath not some Muscle set over it, as President of its significations: all the outward expressions we have or can make, are perform'd by motion, and therefore signifie the affections of the mind, which are motions; the moving of the instruments and parts, answering in a kind of semblance and representative proportion, to the motions of the mind. And there is no Muscle to be found in the Body, but it can expedite such volun∣tary motion. Since all voluntary actions of the Soul are perform'd by motion, and all motion necessarily implyeth the use of Muscles. Galen sometimes calls these motions, Animal, to distinguish them from the Natural; for we can excite these vo∣luntary
motions when we please, ue them often or seldome, heighten them or a∣bate them, and leave them quite off; which is the Character Galen gives of a voluntary motion. 'Tis true, they who are precise in the definition of a Muscles use, say, it is to be the instrument of free or spontaneous motion, and not vluntarie: because Beasts have Muscles, unto whom Will is denyde, because it presupposth Reason. Will being properly an appe∣tite according unto Reason. Fabricius ab A∣qua Pend. takes them for unskilfull men, who thinke when they reade of Volun∣tarie motion, that it is onely compe∣tent to men; whereas they by the Will meane not the Appetite contracted, but generall and at large, which we call the propertie of the very Phancie it selfe, and animall. This Aristotle every where calls , that is Spontaneus, of ones owne accord, and not done at unawars: whence if any will draw it narrower and call it voluntarie in men, and Spon∣taneous in other creatures, he will not be against it, upon this occasion there oc∣currs another greeke word  which is rendred propositum, studium, in∣stitutum,
voluntas; and this seemes almost to signifie the same thing which , id est, animi appetitus; but differs, that one is common to Beasts, but will and election is onely proper to men, of which impeuous motion a Muscle is the Organ. Picholhomenes likes the generall definiti∣on, and allowes not of the vulgar re∣striction of voluntarie motion: the word Spontaneous according to Nancelius, be∣ing chosen to shew the final cause, & that the definition of a Muscle may bee ade∣quate and competent also to the Mus∣cles of Beasts, in whom they are not mo∣ved according to voluntarie election; in∣deede, as Archangelus observes, Volunta∣rie motion in man, is both Spontaneus and voluntarie; by Spontaneous wee must understand the intrinsique Principle of the parts to be moved, which is Cog∣nition, and such appetition with Brutes is the sensitive Cognition and appetite; for these in man there is the intelective cogni∣tion and appetite, which is called the will. Yet as Riolanus well observes, all volun∣tarie motion is Spontaneous, but they are not termini convertibiles; for, all Spon∣taneous motion is not voluntarie. Indeede
Galen sayes it boots not, whether you say such motions are done by advice, or freely, or voluntarily. And although as to its principle, voluntarie motion is distin∣guished from animall, as it depends upon the command of Reason: yet wee had no neede of that distinction, but that wee search not onely by what instruments these motions are performed, but whence, and after what manner they are made. That therefore Physicians call an animall or voluntarie motion which is made by preceding knowledge, ei∣ther of the Intellect or imagination, whereby the motive facultie is excited, that it may move the members after a di∣vers manner, according to the diversitie of the appetite. By all which and divers other places of Galen it appeares, that vo∣luntarie motion appertains only to Muscles as their office, and that for good reason Muscles are appointed for the proper in∣strument, as being their common and proper action, motion proceeding from a Muscle, as from both a Principall and adequate Agent; although Averrhoes (in this point crossing Galen) by divers in∣stances, which Laurentius hath suffi∣ciently
answered, labours in vaine to prove that a Muscle is not the Organ of voluntary motion. Sect. III. Of the nature and Constitution of a Muscle. AS he that is ignorant of motion, must necessarily be unacquainted with Nature, as the enius of Nature inferrs: so if you know not the moving of a Muscle, you shall bee altogether ignorant of its nature, which doth wholy consis in moving; for, moving is a certaine action whereby the first ha∣bit of the Muscle is changed: which mo∣ving, the operation of a Muscle, is so proper to Muscles, that Fabricius hence convinceth Aristotle of ignorance in Muscles, that he is silent of them in his Historie of living creatures, where hee speakes of their moving; which hee would never have beene, had hee beene skill'd in them. A Muscle beeing not or∣dained to any use, but for the cause of certaine Action, from whence perchance of the Latines called Musculus a movendo
he movings of many Muscles in leane nd muculous bodyes doe evidently ppeare before the skin is taken off. And this moving disposition of the Muscle s much advanced by its proper tempe∣ament, being remarkably hot, for as motion begets heate, so heate is much requir'd to motion, which is performed with greater strength and intension of he mind, than the acts of sense. But the distinction of Spigelius is worth the oting, That, motion cannot scarce  way properly be said the action of  Muscle; but rather a certaine effect, and e use of its action: for, the motion is of he part into which the Muscle is inser∣ed. And the Muscles are chiefely named rom the motion of members which are erformed by them, not that they are laced in those parts, but that they are he Authors of the motions (and conse∣uently of the significations) that ap∣eare in those parts. He must therefore e well read and exerciz'd in the nature f Muscles, who would know of what Actions and Significations every one is he Instrument: He should diligently in very member, out of the Muscles raise
a consideration of the motion of the members: and againe out of the motion of the Muscles, the differences of Muscles, for they are Relatives. Motions are the motions of certaine Muscles, and Mu∣cles are the Muscles of certaine motions. Whence so many voluntary motions a there are in the Body distinct in place and time, there are so many Muscles at least, defin'd by their termes and cir∣cumscriptions; but although for the most part one Muscle is assign'd to one motion, yet there is sometimes two, where a stronger force is required, some∣times one onely Muscle to more motions▪ And that we might not alwaies stand in neede of so many Muscles as motions, not few of them performe oblique motions, and with the opposite Muscle of the same stock, straight motions. So that a Muscle is destinated to all motions. Hence as the word motion is generally tooke for th Genus, so action which is a doing motion, or a factive motion of the parts, is th Species, and the signification which action signifies is speciall, when wee say with Aristotle, That action is an impressio in the parts moved, or with Galen, Actione
n fieri constituuntur, which Factive moti∣n is best understood with Avicens re∣riction to animall actions performed by he abilitie of the Muscles; which motive ctions when they appeare in the parts oved, for the most part are volutary, hough they may be also constrained, as ne may by violence make me bow my Head to the seeming signification of as∣ent. And as the moveable parts vary, so he actions vary: Some parts are moved y themselves, others by the interve∣ing of some other; and againe they ei∣her change their place, or are stirred up n the same place. The Muscles which ave their principle of moving from the oule, and actuate those parts, are moved n the same place, and on their movings epend the motion of the parts, which is ot so much distinguished by the diffe∣ence of place, forward, backward, up∣ard, downeward, to the right hand, to he left, or in orb, but also in the figure of he part, wch is called Scheme. For, figure s the scituation of a part in motion. Now ince every instrument should be so dis∣os'd that it may most aptly attaine the nd unto which it was appointed, and
that a Muscle is the instrument of so many voluntary expressions of the minde. Let us see what neate & elegant composure it hath, to give an apt satisfaction to so noble & important motions. The similar parts which concurre to the construction of a Muscle, are seven in number, to wit, a Veine, Arterie, Nerve, Flesh, Tendon, Mem∣bran, & Fat; among which there is a part, without wch the action cannot be done, being that part from which action doth first arise, the root or mansion of the facul∣tie, all the others subministring to this, concurre and conspire to the end of that one action: Therefore it is not suffici∣ent to know that a Muscle is the Organ of voluntarie motion, but there is need of the acutest edge of wit, to finde out that part which exists as Prince and chiefe in it, and which is upon commandment▪ of the Soule, effective of motion. This prerogative of moving a Muscle, is most justly given to the Nerve, as having the greater aptness for motion▪ for all men very well know▪ that the part moves not, but the soule, for the instruments move, because they are moved by it▪ besides, the instrument that serve any facultie, must derive their
orginall from that part from whence such a facultie proceeds; Now the Nerves have their beginning from the Braine, and are afterwards dispersed here and there and derived to other parts greater or lesser, according to the diversitie of the Action. But there ariseth no small doubt, because Galen in many places calls the Nerves the way of the vertue that depends upon the Braine: whereupon ma∣ny assuredly take the Nerves to be onely the Posts & Conveyors & not Motors, & had rather call them Illatores, tha Motores, which is farre from truth; for although they do bring the intelligence from the Braine to the Muscles, yet withal they do move and worke; and they are the In∣telligencers and way of conveyance untill they come unto the moveable parts: but when they are once entred into the com∣position of the Muscle they become Agent and Motors. Which Marinelius by most cleare and pregnant instances out of Galen, maintaines and manifestly de∣monstrates to be true. Now the Braine is the Vniversall organ of voluntarie moti∣on, the great mysterie whereof is thus or∣dered. The Braine commandeth as soone
as it hath judged whether the thing is be to be avoided or prosecuted, the Nerves commonly called Illatores or the Posts, for the Intelligence they give, bring the commandment, and Facultie; the Muscle illustrated with the Animall Spirits o∣beyes, and moves the part according to the command of the ill: and as a Rider by the moving of his Raines, guides his Horse; so the force of the Soule residing in the Braine, moves the Muscles by the Nerves, as with Raines; for the will is like the Rider, the Nerves to Raines, and the Muscles to the Horse. So it is no motion untill it come to the Muscle, for that is truly motion, which is done by the intension and remission of the Muscles. Sect. IIII. That the Appetite or Will is the first efficient cause, but not the chiefe cause of motion, the Spirit and Faculty being the more propinque and conjunct cause, and that besides the com∣mandment of the Will, the endeavor and intention of the mind is neces∣sary thereunto. SInce there are divers motions and Actions performed by the members,
through mediation of the Muscles who have their virtue, from a faculty, by which Physicians understand that which has a power of Doing or Work∣ing, who sometimes call them Powers sometimes Virtues; a Faculty by the de∣finition of Galen being the cause of an Action, for every effecting cause is a Fa∣culty. Now since every worke proceedes from some action, and it is necessary some cause▪ should also go before every action, it followes with reason, that as Action is the cause of every worke, so some faculty should be the cause of that Action, for nothing is done without a cause, which is an Axiome in Physique; therefore it is altogether necessary to consider the efficient Faculty of Action, and the Cause of work, for how can any thing be done without an Agent Cause? and that which has the power of work∣ing? Now this is the animall faculty which gives sense and motion, which suggests cogitation, intellection & memory, and which transmits sense and motion from the Braine, by the conduct of the Nerves, with the Greekes usually cal'd  that is Rationatrix, presiding o∣ver
all the actions and motions that flow from our will, that is from Electi∣on and Councell, and that by the aide of the Nerves and operation of the Muscles; of the Animall faculty the motive is a species. Albertus where he speakes of the Exterour motive virtue which followes upon the affective, that is upon that which workes the inward motion of the mind, very appositly to our purpose, distinguisheth the motive faculty into the appetitive, the affective, and the mo∣tive, the first commands the part to be moved, the affective and motive perform the motion of the members, but the af∣fective makes the inward spirituall mo∣tion, the motive makes the exteriour corporall motion of the members which represents the inward motion. But the actions that are done by the most mani∣fest tone of the Muscles, are those which are produced by that species of motion which they call Pathetique; for, that causeth more violent, extant, and re∣markable actions in all the parts of the body; the internall motion of this Fa∣culty or Perturbation Averrhoes calles motum electivum; and there is no creature
that at some time or other is not dro∣ven to some impetuous action by this inward agitation or perturbation of his mind; which actions in respect of their effect are morall, of their supposed Spring, vitall, yet the actions of these vitall Ethi∣ques serve the Animall by divers motions of perturbations, which spring from he Pathetique Energetique or Ethique fa∣ulty, which although of it selfe it be oyde of reason, yet being apt to obey, ence there ariseth some conflicts be∣weene the Rationall and Irrationall part s the Practique Intellect hath these af∣ections in Subjection, called pathecall when they are mov'd by the arbitri∣ent of another, which though they be eckon'd among passions, yet in their ffects they are actions, and appeare so o be in their types and externall repre∣entations in the face and countenance, nd other parts of the body. The prin∣iple of all motion is the Appeite: whence the sense offering what is desi∣ed, the motions are done no other∣wise then as you see in Machins, the ullyes loos'd, one thrusting foreward he other, but in Machins without
the mutation of qualityes, but in us the formall cause of motive heate and spi∣rits is transmitted withall to the parts, hence in anger we wax hot, in feare and sadnesse cold, for, all these perturbati∣ons are done with heate and cold, to wit, the hing seen excites the Appetite and this the Affection, which prepare the instrument of the Action. So tha the Appetive power or will commandeth but moveth not, but after his nod th Motive faculty ariseth, which flowing b the Nerves produceth Motion. Yet Frnelius his distinction is to be considere in this businesse, who will have the Ap∣petite or will to be the first Efficient cau of motion, but not the Chiefe caus which belongs rather to the Spirit an Faculty than to the Appetite, and must b returned thither, & besides the Appeti or will we must find out some more pro∣pinque and conjuct cause of motion; among others the chiefe reason is, tha when the Palsie hath seased on any par because then the Nerves are destitute  the Spirits and Faculty, the most efficacious or strongest Appetite or Will cannot procure a motion, and if you bin
Nerve hard with a cord you may ommand what you will, but there fol∣owes no obedience of the Muscle whose Nerve is so stopt, since all notice or in∣elligence of our will is thereby inter∣cepted from arriveing at the Muscle. Be∣sides, this commandment of the Will seemes of little efficacy at all, unlesse a ertaine endeavour and intention of the ind be added unto it as a Coadjutor or ompanion; for if a man would either wrest his eyes divers wayes, or set all  parts together into speaking moti∣ns, shal he forthwith effect it, although he instruments be sound and fit for act∣on; of which this in sooth is the only ause, that the mind must hoc agere, and annot take notice of all things at one nstant, nor be intent to every single motion. Therefore the Will is not only sufficient, but a certaine intention also of the Mind is necessary, to rowze up he Motive faculty, otherwise a sleepe nd languishing in particulars. Where∣fore this Animall Faculty which by the ectorship of the spirit flowes from the Braines into every particle, while it is driven foreward by the command of
the will and the endeavour and intenti∣on of the mind, effects the actions whic so significantly appeare in the Head an other parts of the Body. Sect. V. That it is strange, but not so wonderful that Animall motion should be per∣formed on such a sudden. DIverse things are required that th parts should be moved by an Animall or voluntary motion. For wee mu know, how all that is moved, is compa of a Mover and a Moveable; Since what soever is moved, is moved of some thing when therefore we are moved, it is necessary there should be a compound of  moving and a moveable; the Soule is th Movens metaphoricum, the moved o moveable the Body, or some part of it; fo it is the Soule whereby we live and hav motion. And because the Soule moves no by a naturall propension, but by knowledge and for an end; it would be considered with the sharpenesse of wit, o whom it is moved, and with what instruments and medium's it moves the Hea
nd parts of it, and which are the in∣ruments moved, and the moving Mediums etween the Soule, and the last thing mo∣ed. The Principall of locall motion (espe∣ially which must be immoveable) is the oule, Appetition is the Medium that moves he Moveable, the Instrument is the Spirit. o that there are sixe things concurring o these Actions. Immoveable as the Soule, moveable partly, and partly moveable, as he Braine, quatenus a Principle; which ove, and are moved, as the Head, which  moved by the Braine, and moves the arts of the Face with it; which are mo∣ed alone, as the parts of the Face; the edium of the motion, as the Appetition, nd Affection, and the Instrument, which  the Spirit; To this effect Cardan, or  you will have it as Fabricius ab Aqua end. has dawn it out of Galen, and Ari∣tle: All that appertains and concurs  locall motion is thus universally or∣ered. As soon as the imagination is for∣ed of the object known by the intellect r sense, whether it be to be prosecuted r avoided, straightwaies the Appetite is oved, which forthwith excites and moves withall the passions of the Body,
either by heating or refrigerating, eith to attain or avoid: The passions, that i heat, cold, do aptly prepare the motor Instruments, as Aristotle speakes ingeniously; Which are according to Galen, th Braine, the Nerves, the Muscles, an Joints. The Braine besides its propose worke done by it self, and as it were, red up by ploughing, and brought fort out of its proper substance, as the Imagination, Appetite, and Passions,  moreover transmit the Animal Spiri begotten in and of it self, by the nerve his branches, as it were by channels  the muscles, the peculiar allyed and proper organ of motion; with which for the Muscles wholly affected and illustrated attempt the performance of appare motion. Now, although the Muscles  the instruments of voluntary motion,  many other things being required to th act of their motion; whence that by  mediation (so many causes interceding so suddenly a commotion should  wrought and introduced into the Mebers, is a thing full of miracle!  hath a pretty Simile to illustrate this bsiness: As (saith he) in the striking of
ring of an Instrument, an eight an∣wers unto an eight: So the Motive Fa∣ulty by a wonderfull providence of Nature moves the mobile Spirits, and hese moved, flie forth with a stupendi∣us obedience to their destinated Or∣gans. As in a Monochord, a Diapason, a Diapente, and a Diatesseron sound only t certaine intervals, and in the other tops sound not: So certaine parts, as soone as may be, obey the soule, sending particular Mandates unto them; for, all he parts wait upon the soule, and were framed by Nature to such an aptitude, that being commanded, they presently obey, and are moved as long as the mo∣ving faculty flowing from a principle, is not by some impediment debarred from them. But without doubt, saith Mari∣nellus, this is not very perspicuous to rea∣son, how we do move at the Nod of the Will, what part soever we desire, al∣though the most remotest from the head, the foundation of the moving faculty, and that without any interposition of time; But all admiration and astonishment will vanish away, if we suppose that which is most certaine, to wit, that the
motive faculty while man is awake, or no oppressed with heavy sleep, doth perpe∣tually flow and travell to the Nerve which are derived from the Braine, and dispersed through the Laberinth of th Body; which virtue since it is, as w may so say, in the first act in the Toe o the Foot, the Appetite commanding, i breaks out into the last act which is moti∣on. Caen gives us an example: no time saith he, it found to pass between, whe you would move your Head, and be∣tween the Action it self: As it also hap∣pens in the Sense; for in this we expect no time of wounding to feele, but th Knife at once cuts, and we feele it. And this calls in question that opinion o the whole Schoole of Barbarians, whic affirms the Spirits to be transmitted to al the Members, and by them the virtue carried & conveyed, they being the pro∣per instrument of the Soule: But if th virtue is communicated by transmissi of the Spirits they would no way com∣municate on a sudden, but in manifes time; for the Spirit is Corporeall: Bu we so suddenly as we will move ou Head or the parts of it, expecting no∣thing
at all the virtue to have an influ∣ence upon the motion. For, Nature, as Vallesius well observes, never orders any thing to have a power, only to move once: but she once gives that which shall have a power to move many times. And therefore when we attempt any second motion, we have the benefit of that in∣fluence which had first inabled the moto∣ry parts. Sect. VI. That in all outward Actions the Soule com∣mandeth either manifestly, or obscurely, and that we are not stirred up to any such motion by Nature, or Custome. IT is very hard and difficult to assign a Cause of so different motions. Galen who was very curious and inquisitive in searching out the cause of the moving of Muscles, at last ingeniously confesseth, hat he knew not how the Muscles were moved: the cause of his doubt was, that since the offices of Muscles were un∣known to Infants, they seemed not apt to demand their endeavour of them, be∣cause it is a voluntary motion; Will is from
Knowledge; the end therefore for which we are moved, and the peculiar Instrument of the motion is to be known: therefore since none of these are known to In∣fants, for good reason we aske why they rather move their lips than their feet, or how they move them? In all motions that are voluntarily performed, there is nothing more obscure or doubtfull than this; because I see, saith he, in children, much more in others, that when they would make any outward expression with any Member of their body, thi they do voluntarily, and this they do by a Muscle destinated and appropriated to that motion, although indeed they know not that Muscle, and not only are they ignorant of this, but even many Physicians; and the consideration of this mystery drives him to  som extraordinary hand of Providence to be active in it; for his words are; Because I find the Members of the body to b moved by a Muscle on which the Crea∣tor, who created and fashioned us, and is alwaies present with us, hath pru∣dently bestowed a power of moving when therefore we would make use o
any motion, He moves the Muscle which he hath formed and created for that pur∣pose. Scaliger, who takes this confession of Galen for a qualme of Philosophicall modesty, tells Cardan, verily Galen knew not many things, which yet he would not have others to know that he knew them not, and with a subtile facili∣ty he attempts to resolve this knotty doubt. Will, saies he, is twofold, one of Election, as in wise men: another from Instinct, as in an Infant new-born, to suck milke, for when he is grown of age, he will do the same (if need be) with Ele∣ction, and the force is the same which serves the Soule for the commodity of the Body, and hath a connative Species of its conservation: The Soule therefore moves the Muscles, and therefore moves them.  thinks the Oeconomy of our  to be as 'twere a City go∣ern'd by good Laws, wherein when nce the order is established, there is no eed of a secret Guide which must epresent at every thing that is done: o all parts of the Body to what uses hey were appointed performe their du∣es without any Teacher, and as Homer
feigned that the Instruments of Vulcan moved of their own accord, and those golden Shields to be of such cunning workmanship that they moved of them∣selves: So the Muscles endued with a con∣venient structure, performe their worke by a certaine ingenit virtue. But Mari∣nellus, a Physician of an excellent judge∣ment, conceives not Scaligers distinction of the Will to be consonant to reason; for Will alwaies as it is a Will, supposeth some Election, and Election, Cogition, which least of all exists in Infants: And therefore to feigne a Will, to Will some∣thing unknown, seemes to him a vain for∣gery. Nor is he satisfied in the example of Aristotle, which is not well accom∣modated to the business of voluntary mo∣tion. For, a Monarch imposeth Laws upon his Citizens who are renowned with a knowing soule, and keep their Princes commandement in memory▪ But the Muscles the moving and the mo∣vable Corporeall parts are, not endue with any Cognoscent powers; fo so every animated part were to have  proper Soule, which were most absur and repuguant to his own saying, wher
he infers, that it behoves not there should be a Soule in every part, but that it ex∣sist in some Principle or chief part of the Body. Besides, the parts for the perform∣ing of motion stand in need of a Spirit or influent heat that makes the motion, according to its nature, impetuous, or some moving Faculty that flows from a principle, but this or that is not moved but by Imagination, or Appetite, the Ima∣gination or Appetite not without the Soule; whence it is to be concluded, that the Soule alwaies commands the motion, and the parts moveable do not performe their worke from Nature. The Philo∣sopher makes it plaine, that motion is done by the Imagination and Appetite; for, the passions aptly obey the instrumen∣tarian parts, the Appetite the Passions, and the Imagination the Appetite; and if in that place he useth the word Nature for the Sole, as some Commentators affirme, (for the Soule is a certaine Nature) yet that similitude were incongruous enough and unlike, for, the Soule should be alwaies present and command the parts, and should not move by some instrument, which the Philosopher
denies. Perchance some may object, that sometimes we know not nor are a∣war of some actions we doe, and ther∣fore they can not be voluntary nor have any such emphaticall signification; this indeede is a thing somewhat doubtfull and full of ambiguity in some mens o∣pinions, and has bin the cause to make some to imagine that there are many kind of motions that depend not upon our will. But they who have taken this doubt into consideration, have decreed the will to be double, one is  the other is , the first is, vigi∣lantium, proper to them that are awake and heed what they doe; the last is Dor∣mientium, or theirs who doe a thing in their sleep, or with lesse intention of the mind. So that in every motion the wil cō∣mandeth either manifestly or obscurely. Hence it is that we doe not alwayes mind the motion of every particle in our head or face, yet all the gestures of the parts which we exercise, even when wee know not whether we use them or not, are motions of the soule, since per∣formed by the worke of the Muscles. And I thinke, saith Marinellus, there is
no man when he moves after any man∣ner his whole head, distorts his Face, Eye∣brow, lip, or nose, or winkes with one eye, which somtimes we do not being aware of them, and so against our knowledge and will, yet none are so simple to thinke they are not the actions of the soule, and done by voluntary motion, and that they proceed not from the soule, because knowledge and command doe not so formally precede as in other actions it is wont before appetite; for the Phan∣sie may doe its worke and move when we perceive it not; and it appeares by Aristotle, that motion may be com∣manded the members although the out∣ward Senses are notably hindred; and whatsoever motion is done by the com∣mandement of a Faculty, is voluntary, it being without all controversy, that all motions the soule exerciseth by the Muscles are arbitrary and so to bee called, they being voluntary which Reason and the Will command, called Animall, be∣cause common to us with Beasts; For, all motion that the Rationall or Irra∣tionall Faculty commands the Muscles, is animall, or arbitrary; for since all
motion is either naturall or voluntary, and that which is done by the Muscles is not naturall: it followes then it must be ac∣counted for animal, arbitrary, or voluntary, names which imply all one thing. But all motion which is done by the contracti∣on of the Muscles to their heads is com∣manded the Muscles by the Soul or Appe∣tite, al such motion therfore is and ought to be called voluntary or animall, for, that contraction of the Muscles which without the helpe of any extraneous thing are driven to their Heads, & move the mem∣bers into which they are inserted, is the operation of an animated body quatenus animated, wherefore such motions of the Muscles cannot bee done by any other thing, the Soul not cooperating with it: For, al actions equally proceed from the Soul, but receive their Specifique difference from the instruments; Wherefore these are both animall and voluntary motions if the name be put for them both, but if you would call that onely voluntary, which is done with our will and assent, and not against our wills, you will be compelled to exclude many other moti∣ons performed by the Muscles from the
number of voluntary motions. Galen en∣deavours to salve this doubt; why wee doe these voluntary actions as 'twere not wittingly or willingly, or as being a∣ware of them, not presuming to have found the cause, but to speake a little more probably: Because, saith he, wee are not intent with our whole mind up∣on them, as many have done actions which they forget to have done in fits of anger and passion, having made but a slight and superficiall impression in their mindes, as madmen performe ma∣ny voluntary actions which yet they remember not when they come to themselves; whereas to some actions we adhibit a more indulgent heed, when no way disturbed nor distracted with cares, we are not drawn away to desist from the motion begun; for, Care, the Contemplation of some thing, Custome, or some affection of the mind, may prove impediments to the knowledge of the Command of the will; for if our Cogitation be very intent upon a thing, so that it slights other things which had intended it, it errs from its proper end, which often happens to men when they
intend a journey to a certaine place, and many times being engaged in other thoughts, doe passe it: Notwithstand∣ing it is a thing hard enough to believe, that any one should command and not know that he doth command, and ther∣fore some have dared to affirme, that the beginning of a motion depends up∣on the command of the will; but the progresse of a journey to bee done by Custome and Aptitude of parts, since many at that time are turmoyl'd with divers cares: but it is better to affirme the Cause of such errour to be by rea∣son of the mind detained by some cogi∣tation. And with Marinellus wee may wonder as much, how such motions are many times done in our sleep, which we forget to have done in our sleep, the soule then working obscurely; for when we awake, wee cannot tell whe∣ther wee had moved any part of our face or no, and so by oblivion are soone induced to say, they were done without our will or privity, which is the case of your Noctambuli (or as Sennerus had rather call them, Somnambuli,) who in their sleepes rise out of their Beds, walke
and performe many actions and gestures whereof there is mention every where among Physicians, which gestures and actions are done unwittingly, and when they awake in the morning they remember no such matter, animall mo∣tion being stirred up in them by force of a stronger imagination, which are per∣formed by the benefit of the motions of the Hand feete and the other organs ser∣ving to animall motion, commanded by the Locomotive prickt forward by the Appetite, stirred up by the Phansie, which taking notice of some object of∣fered unto it in sleepe, tenders it to the Appetite either to bee avoyed or embra∣ced. To which the command of Reason and the will doe concurre with the locomotive power, although more obscurely and darkely, the action of imagination being stronger in sleepe, but that of rationation, which should direct and moderate the hansie is more obtenebrated, the acti∣ons of those who sleepe, and those who dreame seeming not to differ, but that these rise, the others lying in their beds doing the same things. Another ob∣ection may bee, that many of these
speaking motions of our Head, Face, & o∣ther parts of our body are many times done by custome & a habit, rather than by a voluntary motion. Indeede, Zinguer reckons custome among the accidents of the In∣strumentall cause of the motive faculty, and that it is as 'twere the Vicar of the will and sometimes the Arbiter. But the Master of the subtilties laughs at Cardan for his definition of the double Cause of motion, one the Soule & the Muscles, the o∣ther custome. You in vaine saith he, mul∣tiply things, you in vaine bring a name for a thing: For, what is custome? if I should aske, you would spend above two dayes in deliberation what you were to say, & it would fall out well if you could then come off with credit. Custome is nothing else but a habit, but a habit is not the cause of motion, but a quality added to the motion: because it so adheres to the members, that as Aquilio without C. o his owne accord doth presently answer, brings forth its actions as they are to be done without any inquisition. Custome, indeed, and the aptitude of parts doe ad∣vance & helpe forward the doing or per∣fecting of some motions; and it is wort our admiration, to see in a Chironomer,
who has his soule in his Fingers, the Mus∣cles of his Hand should bee directed so swiftly to the Nerves of his instrument, while it may bee he is afflicted in mind, his hand being droven by the com∣mand of his will to such motions, all the ready variations of his cunning fingers being done by the Nods of the Soule, though unknown unto him; unknown, by reason of long custome, by which such actions become most easy. The modesty of Galn will conclude this matter very well. Rashly to judge these motions is ignorance, promptly to pronounce them not voluntary is rashnesse, and there is no just cause why wee should recede from what is evident, and there are evident judgements to be made of voluntary mo∣tion; the causes we find not, because we follow not particular actions. He that denyes his beliefe is voyd of sense. He is rash that pronounceth of uncertainties. He that for the obscurity that is in these, ha's those in suspicion which are cleere, is a Sceptique & of them that delight in Doubts. He that not only suspects but stu¦dyes to evert those which are cleere, for the obscurity that is in them, is an ar∣rant foole.
PATHOMYOTOMIA OR A Dissection of the Mus∣cles of the Affections. Beeing an Essay to a new way of describing the operative and significative Muscles of those Affections, which are more Conspicu∣ously emphaticall in the Demon∣strative Actions of the Head and Face.
THE PROEM. The Prerogative of the Head in point of Animal and signi∣ficant motion. MAn who in respect of the va∣riety and excellency of his Actions is a most perfect Crea∣ture, has a Body withall com∣posed of divers parts, answerable to the variety of his Actions; and every way fitted to signifie and explane the affecti∣ons of his Mind; among which, the most eminent and obvious part, the Head, wherein the whole man seemes to dwell, hath a prerogative in point of signifi∣cant motion, and being the Forum of the Affections, hath many advantages for declarative Action of the subordinate and more private parts of the Body. And all this by a good right, as being the Root of the Affections, and the prin∣ciple of motion. Hence the instruments of voluntary motion, the Muscles, dispo∣sed
in the Head and Face, are so hono∣rable and remarkable, that if man were deprived of them, he would look like a Socraticall Statue; for, his Face would be alwais in one fix'd posture, there might be Facies but no Vultus, or volun∣tary explanation of his mind: But it would be like a Cabinet lokct up, whose key was lost. No certaine way of en∣trance into his mind to be found, and so Momus his Cavill would be just; all the inward motions and affections of his mind would be obscur'd in silence, and become altogether invisible, the counte∣nance, without the moving virtue of the Muscles, ordained in time to measure out the passions and affections of the mind, remaining like a watch, whose spring or Principle, and the wheeles that served for motion, were taken out.
Memb. I. Of the Muscles, the instruments of voluntary motion whereby the generall significations of the Head are performed. ALthough the Braine it self is not moved by a proper Animal moti∣on, and so needs no Muscle: Yet the rest of the Head requires divers motions, both n respect of the whole, as in respect of certaine parts, or Members, which as well as their chief are so called, for that hey have no proper circumscription on very side, nor are every way conjoyned o others; more especially, that the whole ead with its comprised parts, by the be∣efit of certain Muscles might be enabled o move, and by motion, to expresse the ffections of the mind. Now the Head eing (as all Bodies are) in a place, its otions with other corporall motions must be locall; therefore the Head, y the Ishmos of the Neck, as it were icking to the continent of the Body, as  a Base or Centre, is apparently moved y many affections and energeticall mo∣ons of the mind; being oftentimes
moved in a place, from a place, to a place, & by a place; but observing still the same centre, to wit the rest of the Body, which persists unmoved, as likewise doe all the parts of the Head and Face, when their potentiall abilityes of signification are reduced into act, by any affection or pa∣thetical motion of the mind. But as mem∣bers, so some actions are compounded, and some simple; the compound soone appeare; the simple do last occur; for first we per∣ceive Nods the compound motion of the Head, then the more simple motions, to wit the contractions and extensions of the Muscles where of those Nods consist, and which are the singular parts that effect, or assist the declarative motions of the head: Some of which instruments & their mo∣tions, in leane & musculous men do evi∣dently appeare without any dissection even through the veile of the skin. These Muscles the instruments of voluntary mo∣tion, by which the generall discourses o the Head are performed, are usually reckon'd seaven paire; whereof every one hath its Action, some being placed before, and some Diametrically opposite behind, and of the Muscles of every pair
one takes up the right side, another the left. Those Muscles are primary and serve the proper motions of the Head, which are done, the Head mov'd, the Neck unmov'd. Archangelus calls these that attend upon the private motions of the Head, Musculos Cephalicos, capitall or mo∣ving the head. And, the Cylinder of the Neck although a medium betweene the Head and brest yet most properly re∣fer'd to the head in respect of the com∣mon motions. The Muscles that are set over the conduct of the Neck accomplish he common motions of the Head, which re those which follow the motion of the Neck, which motions are secundary and y accident, for, the Neck being moved, he Head necessarily followes, and ther∣ore with as many proper motions as the Neck is moved with, with so many se∣undary motions is the Head; these Arch∣ngelus calls Musculos Cervicales, from moving the Neck; they are foure paire; Which as a kind of Chorus encircling it n a Ring, embrace the Head and Neck, eing ready prest to obey the Becks and odding Commandements of the will. The oure first paire also of the Muscles of the
Back are subservient to the motions and significations of the Head and Necke, & are Musculi adjutorij, reckond by Vesalius & others, among the Muscles of the Head and Neck, although not seated in those parts. The chief commodity of the Neck was to sustaine the various motiōs of the head, wherin there is a new thing & tru∣ly admirable, that in the joynt of the head the greatest bone is coupled and put upon the least almost, whose nature is so ob∣scure, that it is controverted by many, And Galen, the Miracle of nature, and the most exquisite Interpretor of motion, in weighing the construction of any part, requires not so learned and witty an Auditor as in the motions of the Head, and with the difficultie of the matter affrighteth his Reader, as Vesalius, in thi point of Articulation (unworthily scof∣fing) observes of him. Notwithstanding this is agreed on by both sides, that eve∣ry motion is performed upon the first or second vertebra of the Neck, whereof in leane and consumed men, we may make an experiment, if we put the index of our Hand about the pit of the hinder part of the head, or nape of the neck; for wee
shall then perceive the first and second vertebra to be more moved than any of the rest; the motions of the other joynts are neither so valid nor manifest, and very difficult to observe, so that they cannot be discerned in the very act, by every man; So obscure are their moti∣ons, that unlesse you bend your whole mind, there is no comprehending of them: but the motions of the Head up∣on the Neck, which expresse divers af∣fections of the mind, are so manifest and evident, that they are hid from no man. The structure of the joynt being very remarkable? for, sage Nature modera∣trix of all opportunities, when she fore∣saw that many motions were necessary for the Head, and that it could not under∣goe them unlesse the bones were round and committed to a simple Article loos∣ly bound, knowing that the security of construction would be repugnant to the variety and agility of motion, and sollici∣ous for the noblest part, though she al∣wayes in the first place casts for the dig∣nity of the Action, and in the second for the security, consulting for both in this oynt, chose rather security, than the va∣riety
and agility of motion; for, seeing they were incompatible and could not stand together if it were tide loosely and free to turne every where; she gave it a few motions and those safe, rather than many with the perill of the Head: and because the scope of variety was not to be contemned, therfore provident Na∣ture what she could not with the magni∣tude and laxity of one Article perform, she recompensed with two smaller, and a multitude of Muscles. For which cause no motion seemes to be wanting to the Head. But although the construction or the articulation and composition of the Neck is provided for locall and vo∣luntary motion, yet there is no Action of Articles but onely a Passion; for so much as the Article or joynt acts no∣thing but onely is moved, but to be moved, is to suffer, when not by its proper motion, but by some∣thing placed without it is moved, not by it selfe, but by the Muscle; where∣fore if the Action of this joynt is a motion, it is not done by acting, but by suffering, and the motions and signifi∣cations are to be attributed to the Mus∣cles
which are the instrumentall cause. Lastly, that the Head in violent moti∣ons and agitations might not goe be∣yond its bounds and suffer a Luxation, which is deadly, there are foure strong ligaments to establish and better secure their motions, which are of great mo∣ment to be known exactly by those who would rightly perceive the motion of the Head, or dispute of their significati∣ons: Provided and furnished with these accommodations, the Head can with what equipage is requisite, at an instant, attend the motion of the mind, and at∣empt and dispatch all the important negociations and patheticall affaires of he will or Appetite. Dissect. I. WHen wee assent, affirme, yield, grant, vote, confirme, confesse, ad∣mit, allow, or approve of a thing, &c. wee re wont to Nod or bend our head forward. Galen ascribes this motion to the Head, where he saith, Flexio fit annuendo: which Vesalius expounding sayes, He meanes of hat motion whereby wee bend or incline our Head forward in assent or approbati∣on.
The naturall reason of which moti∣on in these senses is, an approving which is made by the Imagination seeing o hearing somewhat done or said which accordeth very well, and this power re∣maineth in the Braine or forepart of the Head wherein the Cell and Seate of the Imagination is, when any of these thing give it contentment, suddenly it moveth the same, and after it all the Muscles o the Body, especially of the Head the chiefe Sphere of its activity, and so ma∣ny times we allow of witty sayings  actions, by bowing downe, or Nod∣ding of the Head. The Muscles appoint∣ed in a Right motion of the Head to exhi∣bit the yielding flexibility of the will, an the upper portion onely of the pain of Muscles, commonly called masteidean or the mamillary paire, because in∣serted into the Dug-like processe of th Temples, arising with a double origi∣nall, distinguished with a certaine cavi∣ty, whereof one begins at the top of th Sternon, the other proceedes from th higher part of the Clavicula where it i joyned to the Sternon; Seated in th forepart of the Necke under the squa
Muscle of the Cheekes: For when this part of the aforesaid Muscle enjoyes the action alone, the Head it selfe onely by the first fibres which are infixed into the first and second vertbre, is moved to assent. Which portion, insooth, hath sometimes a peculiar and cleere circum∣scription or delineation which answers in proportion to those small Muscles which are behind: for since the signifi∣cations that are performed by the Head alone, are very short and light, and the Head being heavy, by reason of its weight is easily depressed or let downe o the anterior parts, two such small Muscles were sufficient for this action. If ny man would make triall to find after what manner this significant motion of he Head is done, having got a fresh hu∣ane carkasse, the other parts besides he ligaments of the vertebres being aken away, driving the Head foreward nd backward with his hands, He shall asily perceive it to move first by it selfe, nd shall thence conjecture the small Muscles inserted straight into the Head,  be the chiefe authos of the motion. Note that wheras this just flexion of as∣sent
is caused by the Heads urging and impelling the second vertebre by the benefit of the ligament of the Tooth, the Muscles on each side working together: So if the Right Muscle only be contract∣ed, the Head drawne by oblique fibres, obliquely assents Leftward: the Left Muscle onely working, the Head assents for∣ward, but to the Right Hand; which you may see represented in the raines of a Horse. But nothing can better shew you how to conceive of the office and functi∣on of these Muscles, than if you should put a garter athwart about the hinder part of the Head, bringing it from above the ears on each side-down to the breast; for if you afterwards draw both the end of the garter together, the Head wil give a just Nod of assent: but if you pull the ends by turns one after another, you wil cause Collaterall Nods, such as wee us when the partyes to whom we make th signe are on one side of us. Now fin these Small Muscles, commonly account∣ed the upper portion of the mastoidean  Mammillary paire (though their prope circumscription seeme to give them th Delineations of a Distinct paire) affor
the Dug-like process of indulgency, expressed by assenting Nods, giving them a proper name from the affection and significati∣on of the mind they help to exhibit, they may be called Parannuens, the assent∣ing, or yeelding paire, or the muscles of Approbation. When the Head in assent∣ing is more manifestly bent forward, and compell'd to Nod, then the whole Ma∣stoidean paires work together, the lower portion of those Muscles being most active in the fuller Declaration of the mind which appeare under the Oesopha∣gus, a paire seen before the carcasse is excoriated in leane, and old men, and men living, being those which in an∣tique Coines were observed with so great diligence by the Ancients; the profoundnesse of this paire yielding a signature of a deeper assent, and might for Distinction be called par affirmans, the affirming paire, or the Muscles of Concession. Dissect. II. WHen we would bow low, as in assenting with reverence, or
to adore, worship, or profess a submissive respect, the whole Neck with the Head is inclined and lowly bent forward, in which large expression of the Head and Neck, after the second vertbre the third is moved, then the fourth and all the rest, the lower the vertebre is so much the obscurer motion it obtaines, and the last the shortest. This motion is per∣formed by the Benders of the Neck, which are two paire, the first paire com∣monly called Longus, lying under the Oesophagus, is long, arising with a sharp and fleshie beginning from the Body of the fift vertebre of the Thorax, on the fore part where it is joyned to the Rib; this ascending upwards, is annexed col∣laterally to all the Bodies of the Vert∣bres, even to the first of the Neck where both the Muscles touch one another, and with an acute and nervous tendon it ends in the processe of the first vertebre, which is the standart or proportion to the body of the other Vertebres, that the Neck might be bent. The second paire of Benders commonly called Tri∣angulate hath a fleshy and large original from the first and upper Rib of the Tho∣rax,
afterwards maintaining its course towards the Face, it grows narrow, and is terminated with oblique fibres, in the transverse processes of all the vertebres of the Neck where they look inward; for, these muscles working together, bow the Neck right forward, and so consequent∣ly the Head. The first long Muscles which so appeare active in these Decla∣rations of the Mind might by our scope of Denomination be called Par reveren∣tiale, the Reverentiall paire; The other commonly called Triangulare, for di∣stinction, Par adorans, the Muscle of Worship or Adoration, or the Muscles of the yoke of submissive obedience; and that well grounded upon the naturall Philosophy of Gesture; The bowing down of the Neck with the Head, natu∣rally implying a professed submission, even to the taking up of the yoke of obedience. This motion may be also collaterall, when either of the paires work alone, for then they incline the Neck and Head forward towards the side of the contracted Muscle.
Dissect. III. WHen we lightly dislike, refuse, denie, or resent a thing, we use a cast-up backward Nod of our Head, a motion diametrically opposite to the forward motion of assent; and this sig∣nification of the mind is performed by the extension of the Head according to Galn, Extensio fit abnuendo. Vesalius ta∣king upon him to expound Galens meaning in these words, saies, they are meant of that motion of Deniall wherein we reflect or recline our Head after that manner as the Thracians and most of your Cretans even at this day seeme Ab∣nuere, that is, to refuse, and denie; for when they refuse or denie, they move their Heads straight backward, and lift and cast it up, not as we refuse and denie, who drive the head about in a circum∣duction. Here Divine Vesalius (as Fallo∣pius his superstitious Admirer often cals him) the Anatomique Argus, who never took a nap in Dissection, appeares guil∣ty of a drowzie Nod of Cavillation, in making so blind a Comment upon so
cleare a Text. But indeed, the luck of his divine wit hereabouts fail'd him and proved mortall, which hath caused such great Digladiations among Anatomists, as to divide them into Sects, one part endeavouring to maintaine his Cavill against Galen in point of articulate mo∣tion, according to his provinciall garbe of refusing and deniall: The other strongly repulsing the Calumny. But as to the signification of the affection of the mind exhibited by this gesture, none have minded it so far as to under∣take a vindication; which since it is not only a mistake of the mind of the noble Pergamite, but comes overthwart to endanger the principles of our uni∣versall and naturall Language of the Head, I am engaged (saving the reve∣rence due to so great an Anatomist) to make head against him, and to say, Ve∣salius non vidit omnia. To which pur∣pose, an inference from his own words in that place will serve; For, Vesalius speaking of those anterior Muscles that officiate in the motion of Assent, saies, they are altogether contrary to the first foure paire of Muscles placed in the hin∣der
seat of the Neck; neither can any thing so exactly shew the function of the posterior Muscles, as those Muscles of Assent, for they have the same motion forward, as the other have backward. Being their motions, then, are Diame∣trically opposite, so are their significa∣tions: for if we use, as we do, the flexi∣on of the Head to shew our assent, and that properly according to the univer∣sall intenon of Nature; the contra∣ry motion to that, must as naturally imply dislike, or dissent, or resentment. And if we Nod from us when we bid one go, Nodding to us is a gesture of in∣vitation, and calls and bids them come unto us; the first significations being made by the co-operation of the same Muscles of assent, as likewise the Nod of Command, Direction, and Demonstra∣tion are; the second, by them he grants to have an Analogicall contrariety of situaion and motion unto the other; which from thence might be called Musculi imperantes, Dirigentes, Demon∣strantes, and Repellentes, the inviting or repelling Muscles. And if Galen had said, Flexio fit repellendo, extensio fit advo∣cando,
or invitando, this would have pleas'd Vesaliu, who seemes to me in this matter guilty of that fault, which Fallopius grown wiser, and leaving off Jurare in verba magistri, is bold to ac∣cuse him of, that is, He rather carps at Galens words than his meaning; and here he seemes to quarrell at the signifi∣cation of the word Abnuendo, as if Galen had improperly used that word with restriction to a Nationall garb of speak∣ing by the Head; whereas extensio fit abuend, according to Galens true mean∣ing hath an undoubted reference to the universall and naturall way of deniall or dislike, which all Nations of the world agree in, being as common to other Nations, and so to Vesalius his Coun∣trymen, as to the Thracian and Cretans: And he might have as well expounded Flexio fit Annuendo, to have been a Thra∣cian or Cretane property. So that Galens extensio fit Abnuendo (even in the natu∣rall universality of its signification) may be rationally maintained. Now the instruments of this extension ac∣cording to Spigelius, whose description (to avoid the confusion and contra∣diction
I find among other Anatomists) I here follow, are foure paire, common∣ly called the extenders of the Head, whereof the first paire, known by the name of Par triangulare, Scalenum, and so called from their figure, and by some Splenium for the resemblance it hath to the Spleene, affording thence a signa∣ture for a Splenetique motion of dislike, ari∣sing with a twofold beginning, one pro∣ceeds from the tops of the fift, fourth, third, second, and first vertebre of the Breast: The other from the five Snigs of the lower vertebres of the Neck, and with somewhat oblique fibres are inserted into the midst of the occipitium which is between the eares. The second paire of these Extenders, subject to the other, is known by the name of Trigeminum, or Compositum, because endued with a three∣fold origination, that it seemes to b compounded of three Muscles; the first has an acue beginning, proceeding from the tranverse processe of the fourth and fifth vertebre of the Breast, and is inserted into the midst of the hinder part of the Head, therein seeming to have a signature to accommodate a
sharpe crossenesse of dislike, which ri∣sing from under the Spleene, and ascend∣ing to the Breast, and from thence to the Head, hath therein made an impres∣sion of resentment; the other ariseth from the Snig of the seventh Vertebre of the Neck, and grows into one with the other before its insertion; the third coming out from the transverse proces∣ses of the first and second vertebres of the Breast, is strongly fastened into the hinder part of the Head. The third paire commonly called Recti majores, The right Majors, doth presently occur un∣der these; and proceed from the top of the second vertebre of the Neck, and are inserted into the hinder part of the Head. The fourth paire called Recti minores, seated under the greater, arising from the knob of the first vertebre of the Neck, which holds Analogy with the Snigs of the other vertebres of the Back, and end in the middle occiput under the ends of the Recti majores. By the help of all these Muscles (whose Dualities, mul∣tiplicities of principles, and divisions inserted into the Head are not without some signature of disagreement, and dis∣like)
if one paire of them work together in Consort, the Head is extended straight backward, to disallow, or deny; I one of them work alone, we refuse and dny somewhat obliquely, which oblique aversenesse answers in the proportion of contraries, the forward collaterall Nod of assent, and indulgency. And it is ob∣servable, that the long and great Muscles are alwaies first moved in this motion of Refusing, and Deniall, but where the Head is extended after a manner to an acute angle, the Right relieve the other, for, the long Muscles cannot performe that action, but it is ever done by the smaller Muscles; which we will there∣fore call Musculos Abnuentes, the Refu∣sing, and Denying Muscles. But before I end this Section, I must crave leave to smile by way of observation at a great Anatomist, whom I find running away with an errour instead of a conceited verity, and one of the sworn Vassals to his judgment, strongly following the Heu and Cry after him; Who having absurdly robbed Galens universall Abnu of a Muscle, or part of a Muscle, under pretence of a Thracian, or Cretan
Recusant, to enrich his Country Abnuo, hath by his envious robbery committed a contempt against the Sanction of Na∣ture, who intending the Head to be the Ballance of the Soule, wherein the Cell of Judgment, seated in the midst, as the Tongue of the Beame, to keep the Head in aequilibrio, untill the Judgment mo∣ved it to incline, or rise, hath to that end (for Counter-ballance▪) planted many Muscles behind to counterpoise the inclination the Head hath, by reason of its weight, to propend or weigh down in too easie assents; by reason wherof man is equally disposed in respect of the Organ, according as he sees good, either to approve, or dislike. To speak plainer, Vesalius taking the fourth part of the Muscles Trigemini, which Fallo∣pius makes an exact and distinct Muscle, which the Will useth lightly to dissent or refuse by Nodding backward, Vesa∣lius joines this in commission with the Muscle commonly called Superior ob∣lique, and makes it serve to Denie by a circumduction of the Head, from whom Fallopius justly dissents, with Argu∣ments well grounded upon the Philo∣sophy
of voluntary or arbitrary moti∣on, and its important significations; discovering wihall the occasion of this Vesaliar▪ Dcptin. Against which ab∣horred Solecisme of Vesalius, Fallopius argues after this manner. If, saith he, the Head cannot be moved round, unlesse after the moving of the first Vertebre, which is obvolved about the Tooth of the second, it will be necessary that it should be first moved by this Muscle, and upon its moving, the Head also should be turned: but this cannot be done; Therefore it doth follow, that it is not the Instrument of moving the Head round. For let us look to its rising and insertion [which indeed is the rule to discover the course of a Muscles Moti∣on] if the Vertebre is to be turned round, the rising or originall of it will be in the occipitium, and the insertion in the transverse processe of the said Ver∣tebre. Now let this Muscle act, if in the meane season the Head may be moved, it cannot act, because there is need of the rest of that very part from whence it ariseth if it must draw: If therefore it be granted that the Head may rest, the
Muscle working, the Vertebre will be led about, but upon that motion the Head also is wheeled round; therefore it will happen that the Head together and at the same time may be moved and rest. But let us grant the Head to be moved when this Muscle acts [Deniall.] Now the quaere is, whether it must be moved with a contrary, or the same mo∣tion? If it may be moved with a contrary, a concourse without doubt will nsue, and so the Head will not be moved upon the motion of the Vertebre; because the Vertebre would be agitated to the Right Hand, and the Head to the Left, by con∣trary motion, whereby they would con∣cur and meet together. But let it be the same motion, that both are carried to the Right Hand; I aske again (saith he) which shall have the precedency in mo∣tion, the Head, or the Vertebre? 'Tis likely it will be answered, the Vertebre should precede, because that is moved per se, but the Head by accident upon its moving: But the principle or begin∣ing of moving comes from the Head, because the Muscle ariseth from thence, which draws it, therefore it will follow,
that the vertebre is moved by the Head; and not the Head by the vertebre, which is against his owne opinion. Yet some may answer, that the Head is driven round by this Muscle, begining at the vertebre and ending in the Occiput: but if this were granted, it would follow, that this Muscle should move the Head per se, and not by the motion of the vertebre, and in its pro∣per Article, which Article according to Vesalius is unfit for circular motion. Wherfore if we should grant this Muscle to serve for the circular motion of Denial, [and not the extensive] some of these discommodityes will necessaily follow; which are destructive to that true, nay most true opinion of the Head in orbe by accident. Dissect. IIII. WHen we would mock, deride, con∣temne, disdaine, threaten or re∣buke, we use an ironicall motitati∣on or wagging Nod by the flexion and reflection of our Head in turnes in a quick succession, both which motions,
peculiar to the Head, are done in se∣quence by the Muscles of Assent and De∣niall making as 'twere a mixt motion, and that emphatical and proper enough, for an ironie, where the first action im∣ports approbation, and the second com∣ing in the interim and immediately up∣on the nick of it before it is fully done, by a contradictory motion compounds it into an ironie. Like unto this, is that motion of assent in old men, from whence the Adage came, Omnia omnibus annuit, touching the paraliticall indul∣gency of old men, who are not by the complection of Age so free, but they instantly recall their graunts, for in them this Nuus and Renutus signify no∣thing, while that which is by transfer∣ring downwards, alwayes succeedes that which is done upwards, and the down∣ward motion againe received of the up∣ward, the motion is made double and compounded, while the Head inter∣changeably changeth place, which trem∣bling is a voluntary motion depraved by eason of an equall fight between the moving faculty, and the gravity of the moveable part, arising from the imbecil∣lity
of the moving Function, which Galen approves. Now of voluntary motion which is undergone, not according to Nature, there is one forme which is called Tremor, which he proves againe, saying, motion in those who will not move a member, we call involuntary, but in them affected with trembling, the mo∣tion comes not but from the command of the will; but is said depraved and not according to Nature, although it depend upon the empire of the will, for it wants that convenient motion in∣tended by the institution of the will: for although it be altogether excited ab im∣petu, yet the motion perisheth, by reason of the imbecillity of the faculty. There are some found who deny the Impetus can possibly be separated from the Tre∣mor, because they somtimes see the whole Head to tremble and to be shaken, no will or disposition to move concurring therewith: But they seeme not to know, that to keep any part erect, the cōmand∣ment of the Will is required; because muscles in this, scarce otherwise then in o∣ther functions, are strained; & therefore  you rest a trembling Head upon a cushi∣on,
you shall soon stay the trembling, nd free it from that motitation. And ence it is that we know this motion of he Head is voluntary. Dissect. V. WWen we reject, refuse, or shew an extraordinary dislike, we use to urne away our Head. This is the acti∣n Vesalius would have so proper and eculiar to his Countrymen in point of efusall and deniall; Which indeed is like naturall and common to all Nati∣ns, that of Extension, which Galen peaks of, and this of Circumaction being oth significant to shew averseness of the Mind, unlesse you, as Vesalius seemes to o, will imagine this way of rejection nd deniall by the Circumduction or turn∣ng away of the Head to be the more mphaticall of the two, by reason of the obliquity of the Gesture. Yet in the other Naturall way of Rfusall or Deniall by the Extension of the Head, lthough it is done so straight back∣wards, the same Muscles when one of  paire work alone have a power to
effect some obliquity, which they of∣ten put in practice upon this occasion. The Instruments of this oblique moti∣on of Refusall and Deniall are the two paire of circumagent Muscles, common∣ly called the Oblique Superior and In∣ferior, from their situation, both of them lying under the Right Extenders, to which they are correspondent in substance and forme, exhibiting there∣by a signature of some vicinity and likenesse in the substance of their signi∣fications. The upper paire from the middle of the Occipitium arising neer the outer side of the Recti majores ob∣liquely descending, is transversly inser∣ted into the top of the transverse pro∣cesse of the first Vertebre of the Neck. The inferior paire derived from the Spine of the second Vertebre of the Neck ascends obliquely, and is inserted with the former into the transverse pro∣cesse of the first Vertebre. These when they are contracted drive round circu∣larly towards the Spine backward the first Vertebre upon the second, whence it comes to passe that the Head consist∣ing thereupon, is together circularly
moved. But because these are some∣what small, the two first extending aire, when one of them acts, doth ssist the motion; and it seemes there is reat community and reciprocall enter∣ourses of relation between the Right xtenders and the Oblique Superior, for ccording to some, when the Oblique uperior, that is the whole paire, doth ork together, their Office is to help he Head straight backward to act a ght Refusall or Deniall. Well, since the bliquity of these Muscles, their ob∣que descension and assnsion, trans∣rie insertion into transverse processes o all speak allegorically by their cor∣spondency of signature a serviceable  for the oblique expression of a ejecting mind, turning away by a Refu∣ng gesture, they might be called usculi Rejectionis, the Muscles of Re∣ction, Improbation, or Disallowance, or  Recusants: But most properly, Mus∣li Renuentes; for whereas Abnuo, and enuo, are both words significant to port a Refusing or Denying by Nod∣ng of the Head; Whereas Galen saies, ciensio fit abnuendo, I would say Cir∣cumactio,
or rather, Semi-circumactio  Renuendo, which would not only serve for a Distinction, but if Critiques woul give me leave to expresse my antsie in this matter, which is a little out of thei reach, it would prove as proper to ex∣presse this Refusall or Dislike perform by a backward semicircumduction, as  does to signifie that Refusall or Dislike i exhibited by a straight backward extensi of the Head. Wherefore to adapt  new Nomenclature to the ancie modell; whereas in that, these Muscle are called Obliquus superior, and Obliquus inferior; according to our Doctrin and scope of Denomination, they  passe by the name of Reuens superior, an Renuens inferior, the superior and inferior Muscles of Dislike, or the upper an the lower Recusants. ¶ That this Actio of the Recusant Muscles should not  undertaken without understanding  judgment, we have a hint, in that  motion is so proper to the Head, that  Neck is destitute thereof; for, this motion, wherein the Head is driven  rolls as a wheele upon an Axeltree,  a circular motion (though the
is no exact circular motion in the Head but semi-circular only, for we cannot urne our Head in orbe, that is quite round) may be done the Neck quiescent, if you strive to look by turnes to the Right Hand and to the Left by a cir∣cumversion of your Head; for after what manner soever you order the po∣sture of your Neck, this semi-circum∣action of the Head is commodiously performed. For when men bend their Neck and the Head inclined therewith, as Shepe-biters in their shamefull feare, and rustck bashfulnesse are wont to do; Or if the Neck be extended, as in Refu∣sall and Dislike it usually is, and in feare, and jealousie, and dread, which makes a man circumspect, and to weare his Beard (as the Spanish Proverb saies) upon one shoulder; Or if the Neck be Loftily ex∣tended, as in proud men, who look aside upon men, as they say, over one shoul∣der; Or whether the Neck be bent down laterally to one shoulder, as in anguishing of the Mind; in all these we may easily maintaine the gyre or cir∣cumaction of the Head: which ability of motion was ordered to the Head out
of an obsequious regard to the eye, for that which is behind cannot otherwise bee seene by the eye, un∣lesse the conversion of the Head relieved the Defect, and when we need more then this Capitall Semi-circumvolution, the thighes helpe to turne the Body round. So that the mind is every way fitted with Muscles for circumspection and wary heede. So that the same Mus∣cles which before were called the Recu∣sants, might in reference to these affecti∣ons of the mind, be called Musculi Ti∣moris, Pudoris Rusticani, Contemptus. The Muscles of Feare, Rustique Bashfulnesse, and Contempt, or amici circumspectionis, the Friends of Circumpection. Dissect. VI. LIght Displeasure makes us shake our Head, and casts it into a short Ague of Distaste; which gesture we also use when we Dissallow, chide, forbid, rebuke, condemne, doubt, lament, condole, repent, &c. which action is nothing els but a sloe and definite trembling, and an effect a∣rising from the same cause that trem∣bling and horror doe, namely from the retyring of the Spirits but in a lesse de∣gree.
The muscles by whose operation this important motion is produced are the oblique Muscles of Dislike, moving re∣procally by short turnes, and so dupli∣fying the single motion of oblique Dis∣allowance, into a redoubled and more ample circle of Distaste. ¶The quick suc∣cession of the same oblique Muscles of one side working alone, and their fel∣lowes on the other side taking it by turnes to maintaine the rotation, ac∣complisheth (also) that motion of th enraged and frantick fury of the mind which wheeles and swings about the Head in the voluntary and giddy vertigo of Phrensie or Bacchanalian fury. And be∣cause some latter Anatomists have gone about to take away this act of circumver∣sion from the Head, if you desire to see his motion, having gotten a Humane Carkasse, endeavour to remove all the arts which are laid over the Head and Neck (the ligaments onely left) then ut that part of the skull which is cove∣ed with haire with a saw in orbe, and raw out the Braine with a portion of he Spinall marrow, afterwards bid a∣other to comprehend the skull on both
sides with his Hands, and to hold firme the first and second vertebre, that while you shake the Head you may try whe∣ther it may be moved after this manner to the sides and in orbe; insooth this motion although in it selfe somewhat obscure, and is tryed in a dead Body, which is not onely destitute of naturall heate, but hath also by reason of cold the ligaments almost contracted, yet it is not so smal, that it may not answer these small Muscles which cause it, and which have no other office than to accommo∣date the significations of this motion. Dissect. VII. IN Supplication, tendernesse of love and humility; servile respect, flattery, reve∣rence, and obsequious regard, &c.  moderate bowing the head to one side is ofte used, the better to move others to co∣passion, by that languishing posture  the Head. This oblique motion is of  second kind of motions, and of the  differences wherein an oblique motio may be done, this may be truely call oblique; which motion is peculiar  private to the Neck, according to Vsalius
who challengeth this as a peculiar: for, the Head obtaines no peculiar mo∣tion of laterall inclination, but is carri∣ed to the side by the benefit of the Neck onely, and by a secondary motion: for, the Neck unmov'd, and rigid, we have no power granted us to bring the Head ny way towards this or that Scapula, ntill the Necke be turned thither. The ntimations of the mind that are exhi∣ited by this laterall motion of the Neck, have no peculiar Muscles assign'd nto their action, there being not par∣cular and private Muscles allow'd to very motion of the mind energetically orking out its signification by the mo∣on of the Head: for, this oblique mo∣on is perform'd when one of the Flex∣s and Extensors of the Neck work to∣ther. Eustachius sees nothing to hinder yet he will not affirme it rashly) that  significations of the mind may be  exhibited, when two Muscles of  same side, yet of diyers yoakes or njugations, to wit the forward and  hindermost from the Head inserted o the transverse processe of the first  work together, for, the Detri∣ment
of moving which necessary fol∣lowed the security of the Article of the Head, is sufficiently recompensed by Na∣ture with the multitude, magnitude, & various situation of Muscles. So that  the Flexors and Extensors of one side  contracted together, the Head following the motion of the Neck, is driven to the Right or left Hand, wherein they ob∣teine their situation, and according  these worke more or lesse by reason  their fibres, this straight obliquity  more emphaticall. And although the being no proper Muscles assign'd to  action, the Muscles that cause it  no peculiar Denomination; yet we ma call that Flexor and Extensor when the appeare working together, (especial upon the same Right side)  Supplicationis or Adulationis, the  of Supplication or adulation, or the  flatterers: ¶ In extraordina languishment of the Spirits, and in  or wantonnesse of the mind,  Head usually is seen to fall to the Rig Shoulder. But why this Caput  or mollitiei, this head of languishment effeminacy, should alwayes sinke to
Right shoulder, is a subtilty worth the Scanning. Baldus thinkes that in these maladyes of the mind, the Neck and Head may incline more to the Right hand than to the Left, because the Mus∣cles on the Left side are more easily re∣solv'd than those of the Right, as being esse nourished; for that it is more cold nd weaker than the Right: which hap∣pens because it is lesse moved and exer∣cized. Now sine they who are drenched n these maladyes of the mind, cannot ncline their Heads backward nor for∣ard in regard of the vertebras, and those rong Muscles implanted in the processe f the Iugall-bone and Breast, it remains erefore, since their Muscles are laxe, edounding with overmuch moysture, ey should, as men drowzie, let their ead fall to the Right or Left shoulder;  withall, their Heades abounding ith exerementitious humours, cannot  susteined, but are so inclined, and rchance rather to the Right Hand  the Left for the aforesaid reason. nd indeed they may well be suppo∣d  to have the Ligaments of the Left  more slacke and remisse, which
notes out much softnesse and superflu∣ous moysture predominant in the Left-side, by which, when the Muscles and Ligaments of that side are loosened, the Head by its weight is bent to the oppo∣site side, as it happens sometimes the Cheeks to be drawn awry to one side, when there is a resolution of the Nerves and Ligaments of the other side. Dissect. VIII. PRide, Arrogance, Ambition, Insolency, Insultation, Confidence, Disdaine, Mag∣nificency, Magnamity, and the odious vani∣ty of Bragging and boasting, beare up the Head aloft, by reason of which garbe, such who use it are properly called Cer∣vicosi, that is, Elate▪ and arrogant; which action is performed when all th hinder Muscles of the Neck and Head and that confused Chaos and heape o Muscles in the Back, which are like Labyrinth of many waies, work together; for then by drawing the  straight backward, they extend it an keep it erect as a Mast of a Ship is  Cords, which posture is Tonique, an
hath these significations when it is mo∣derately so held without any vehemen∣cy; and we might call this action of the Muscles, the Combination, or Conspiracy of Pride and Arrogance: or the Bragga∣dochios plot. ¶ But in fierce audacity, when we would affront, defie, upbraid, and with an execration expresse cruell anger, we augment the tension of the Muscles, and confirme our Head to a Chamelion-like inflexibility, setting withall our face (with the veines retched out) against others. Anatomists call this, a∣mong the five figures of the motion of Muscles, according to Galen, Extreme figure; where there is an immoderate contention, wherein the parts are vehe∣mently stretched out, and wherein the Muscles of both kinds work together, and sometimes beyond their strength; but chiefly when we compell a Member to persist longer in that tension, for we cannot long endure the great stresse of the Nervous fibres. But this Tonicall fi∣gure may be more or lesse intense ac∣cording to the pleasure of the mover. This rigid forme of fierce audacity, looks like a Crampe or Crick in the Neck,
and makes the Muscles to remaine so stretched out, that the Head and Neck seeme indeed immoveable, but yet in truth the Muscles are moved in conser∣vation of the contracted Muscles, such being the nature of successive motions (as Laurentius speaks) that they are no lesse done while they are so kept, than when they were first begun: We may call this generall concurrence of the Muscles, when they are thus perceived to act with perseverance, Tetanum oppo∣sitionis, the Rack of opposition, or the voluntary Crick of stiffenecked Cruelty. But this case of Tonique motion, being absolutely the greatest mystery that re∣lates to Voluntary motion, deserves a better enquirie. First, This Action is of the same kind with Contraction, that is, they agree in the Genus of the Acti∣on, but specifically differ: Yet Galen doth not expresse what Species of motion it is of. So that this Action is not a change of place, but only an Action with im∣mobility. Galen calls that Action of the Muscle without locall motion, motum Tonicum, which perchance with him was all one as to reteine the part in that
place from whence it would recede, unlesse it were deteyned by the Action of the Muscle: for, all immobility (as He proves) is not caused by the priva∣tion of Action: for, a part that is su∣steyned and held firme in one posture that it stirs not, could not be done, un∣lesse they did Act; for else it would be altered, or fall by the weight of the Bo∣dy. Whence it doth follow, that all immobility doth not depend upon the privation of Action, but upon some Action of the Muscle: But the Action of a Muscle is motion, for, the Action of a part is defined by Galen an Active motion, but rest is contrary to moti∣on. Galen takes this for a hard and di∣fficult question; yet he hath many kinds of this motion from experience and sence; as that of a bird hanging in the Ayre, and of one swimming against a streame with equall strength, the mo∣ving faculty raising it up equall to the weight of its body depressing, and the strength of the swimmer equally con∣tending and striving against the force of the streame. Serpillon imagines this to be an action mixed of tension, and
contraction, which Fontanus his Antago∣nist will not endure to heare of. Galen in a most smooth and admirable mode∣sty of stile goes over the Rocks and depths of this mystery: It is possible (saith he) to find some motion, all the Muscles that are ordered for it ceasing from their Action; and to find a quies∣cency many Muscles working: For, all motion is not caused by the operation of Muscles, nor all immobility by their rest. Now, whether or no shall we say that they do act and are stretched, but are not moved? And if we feare to say so, we must likewise say that they do not act; for 'tis absurd to confesse they do work according to their innate and most proper Action, and to deny them to be moved; But they appeare not to be moved; yet because the Mus∣cles act, therefore we say they are mo∣ved: but because the whole Member whereof they are a part, nor they them∣selves apart, do appeare to move; there∣fore for this cause again, we do: not con∣fesse they move; where therefore shall a man find a Solution for this doubt. From the name Tonique, as some have
done? which comes of  id est fir∣mo. Fontanus has a good mind to help Galen out in this difficultie, but endea∣vours it with little successe: This only he gathers from the Doctrine of Galen, that Action without motion of the Mus∣cle, is called a Tonique motion; Action with motion, Contraction; motion without Action born of the Contracted part, Extension; the Decidency of the Muscle, a motion from the weight of the part and Muscle. But seeing of the causes of Tonique motion Galen hath written little, Fontanus is at a stand, per∣chance thinking it would be an impu∣dent Design to attempt any thing in that kind after so great a light of Phy∣sick, yet he puts the Quaere, whence this Tonique motion should come▪ and he ventures to conclude, from the motrice faculty commanded, as all other voluntary actions; for, the nearest cause of this motion (as he conceives) is the Animal faculty which moves the Mus∣cles, and it is the part of that to susteine the Members whose part it is to move them; wherein, after his great flourish, he hath made no more progresse than
the very words of Galen led him to; whom we find concluding, that this Species of Action, whether you call it Tonique, or by another name it matters not much, this is true: That in this Tonique motion, the Muscles are not idle, but act by the Commandement of the Will. From this Tonique motion Tau∣rellus took his Lepid Paradox (as he was wont to call it,) In omni motu est quies, & in ipsa quiete motus. The Muscles most active in this expression of the mind are the two paire of the Extenders of the Neck, the first whereof commonly cal∣led Transversarium, ariseth from the transverse processes of the six upper Vertebres of the Breast, are fastened on the outside into all the transverse pro∣cesses of the Vertebres of the Neck. The second paire commonly called Spi∣natum, occupies the whole hinder part of the Neck: This takes many Beginnings out of the roots of the Spines of the seven upper Vertebres of the Breast, and is strongly implanted into the whole lo∣wer part of the Spine of the second Vertebre. These two, when they work together, first extend the Neck, and
afterward the Head. The first paire might from those workings of the Mind they help to exhibit be called par arro∣gans, the Arrogant paire or the Muscles of Disdainfull Confidence. The other paire of Extenders commonly called Spinatum, for Distinction might assume the name of par insultans, the Insulting or Bragging paire or the Muscles of In∣solent Pride, and fierce Audacity. Dissect. IX. THey who like not a thing that has happened for which there is no remedy but patience, or they who are taken tardy and in the fact, and can no otherwise defend themselves but by a tacite confession; they who flatter, admire, are bashfull, feare, doubt, deny, or are illeberall, or would frame an excuse, are wont to shrink the Head and contracted Neck between the Shulders. There are divers Muscles that concur to the expediting this shrugging, and Chamelion-like expres∣sion. The most active (for indeed the action outwardly performed seemes to suggest so much) is that Muscle of the
shoulder-blade, from its office com∣monly called Levator, or the Lifter; the Muscles of this Conjugation even before Dissection being obvious and easie to be perceived in all men, especially in Wrastlers; arising from the first, third, fourth, and fift transverse processe of the Vertebre of the Neck, as 'twere in foure separated beginnings, is inserted into the higher angle of the Scapula, moving the Scapula forward and to the sides of the Neck; and because the shoulder is joyned to the Scapula, by accident it lifts that up also. Lycas a∣mong the Ancients was of opinion, that the Head was drawn down to the shoul∣der by this Muscle. But Galen (who thinks it is better to say this Muscle was formed for the Shoulders sake, ra∣ther than the Heads,) saies, this alone was design'd to draw back the whole Shoulders to the Head; Wherefore if we should take away this also from the Shoulders, they would be altogether destitute of such a motion: But it has such a motion, as is evident to all men; therefore it is the Muscle that causeth this motion; if there be any other (as
no other there is) this is necessary, and this doth witnesse its operation in the Shoulders, that a Nerve coming unto it from the Braine, if it be Cut, the same motion of the Shoulders and not of the Head is resolved, of which Nerve Lycas was ignorant as He objects; and in his Anatomicall Administrations he teach∣eth a way to discerne the motion of this Muscle, which is a generall rule, to draw the Muscle to its Head according to the Na∣ture and positure of its fibres Oribasius also will have this Muscle to draw the Shoulders to the Head, and takes the course to prove it, in placing its origi∣nall in the Bone of the occiput, and the insertion in the angle of the Scapula. But after what manner soever the moti∣on be done, whether by the Heads draw∣ing up the Shoulders, or the Shoulders drawing down the Head, or both; this Muscle Levator is most active and evi∣dent in the motion, when it appeares to move the Shoulders upward to re∣ceive in the shrinking Head, and makes this Dive-dopper, or Dobchick of the Mind most significantly Emphaticall. This motion and signification of the
Mind may be thought to be a little furthered by the aid of a portion of that Muscle called by Galen Trapezius, from a Geometricall figure; to wit, that por∣tion, which contracted, works the Sca∣pula upwards, which is according as it may chance to be moved; for, this action of the Head may not be so ex∣actly punctuall, as to the Garbe, in all men, by reason of the personall propri∣eties of men. This Muscle is more com∣monly known by the name of Cucullaris; which Laurentius compares to a Maids Coife or Kercher, Columbus likens it to a Clout the Women of Cremona weare up∣on their shoulders; and Vesalius thinks that Franciscans, and the rest of the Or∣ders of Monks borrowed the shape of their Hoods from this Muscle; which being fashioned round like a Hood, that is a little Cell for the Head, it seemes to have a signature of absconsion, which it seemes to offer the Head, which seemes then ashamed to shew it selfe, by helping the Shoulders to rise, which then are most properly Scapul a scandendo palum, from climbing up the prop of the Neck. The originall also of this Muscle being neere
under the Cell of the Braine wherein the Memory resides (which is now afflicted) & going transversly towards the Eares, which do now male audire; may in an allegoricall supposition be thought im∣mediately affected, and to present it self in part as a Monke and Tacite Con∣fessor of the living Monastery of Mount Cephalon, and of the Order of Nature. And indeed such impressions has a me∣lancholly apprehension of such matters made sometimes in the Head of a Hy∣pocondriacall Nichodemus, that they have caused him to shrowd his Head in a Hood, and turne Monke and a Recluse from the conversation of men. Another Muscle that assists in this Action, is that which is commonly called Serratus mi∣nor, from the fashion of a Saw which it resembles, for, this with its upper Fibres alone, when they are contracted, may seeme to cooperate to the signi∣fications of this gesture; and the sig∣nature of that Muscle seemes, either to insinuate the doubtfull conflict of those thoughts which draw a man in this case by a various vicissitude, now into one frame of excuse, and then into another,
before they can resolve what is best for their turne (so that their thoughts seem, as Festus saith, Serra pugnare, that is, successively to move forward and to re∣cede; and indeed this outward gesture if it chance to be repeated, doth not very much differ from the posture of those who work in a pit with a two-handed Saw:) Or else as Placiades observed, this signature of a Saw may signify Male∣diction, or as he calls it evill speaking, by reason of the row of Teeth which seeme to intimate some Mordacity, of which the Party labouring being very sensible by reason of that hated stridor that is so offensive to the Eares of those who are hit in the teeth with things wch it is too late to remedy; that it may be the Mind thereby now put into a sowre horror, such as a Saw causeth in the Body when it falleth into knots, bethinks it selfe what instrument it hath in readinesse in the Body (which indeed hath the Signatures of all things,) to fit its pur∣pose in such an intricate nick of irreso∣lution; and not being able soone enough to resolve the Doubt she is in, the Mind seemes by using this two-handed-saw
Muscle at last resolved, that there is no way but to saw the knot a∣sunder, and to breake through with Head and Shoulders. This Muscle ly∣ing wholy under the pectorall Muscle (as it is commonly called from its situa∣tion) drawes the other into consort, and it may be thought to assist when the Fibres of the first of its three Heads worke alone; for then they raise the Shoulders a little upwards. The Muscle also Deloides so called from the figure of the Greeke letter Δ and the Humerall Triangle, (in the midst whereof the Ancients made their Fontanellos which are now better made between this and the Muscle Biceps) concurres a little to the Significations of this Gesture. For there is a neere relation betweene the Muscles of the Scapula, the Shoulder, and the Arme or Cubit; and their motions are Cozen-germans, for as the Scapula is moved per se, and the arme together by accident, and the Scapula by accident of the Brachiall Muscles, which while they draw the Arme by a certaine kind of Consequution they lead the Scapula which is annexed unto it together with
it. This Muscle having divers Beginings of different situations, one whereof a∣riseth from the Anchor formed Processe by reason thereof they have divers Fi∣bres. Now when all these Heads of the Muscles worke together, the Shoulder is lifted Straight upwards to advance these significations of the mind, and the co-heaving of this Muscle may seeme as if it strove to bring this active consultati∣on of the Muscles to an issue, as to cast anchor upon this resolution, That there is no other Defence or Evasion but to bend their power to subhumerate and beare the burden imposed upon them through the errours of the Head. At last the broadest Muscle which with the fellow of its Conjugation co∣ver the whole Backe, having in a man∣ner remain'd as a Neuter in this Action, unle the highest of its Fibres had faint∣ly assented to the propositions of the Attollents, begins to declare by a con∣trary motion; for, this Muscle, from a homely use which it somtimes is put to, being called Aniscalpr or Anitersor, an office we could not perform without it, perceiving it was likely to prove but a
soule Businesse, by the action of it more humble Fibres begins to work down∣wards and draw the Shoulders backe which were advanced forward to joyne n suffrage with the Pectorall Adductor. And but that we know there is no part or Muscle that thinkes its worst em∣ployment dishonourable, we might (fol∣lowing the unhappy hint of these Alle∣gories) imagine that this Muscle by some instinct was moved to joyne in the appeale to the Heart, so to prevent the worst of that imployment it might pos∣sibly be put unto, having perchance when mens hearts have fail'd them and sunke lower, bin formerly commanded to make good its Nickname, given it by some Barbar Dissector, no Chirurgion, but a Groome of the stoole to Anato∣my. Thus have we now upon the best hints we could meet with raised, with much liberty of conceit, unexpected Allegories from the instruments of this Action. But the Name which refers to the significations of the Mind exhibited by that Action, must be given to the Muscle most predominant and demon∣stratively acting therein; which is the
Muscle commonly call'd the Levator of the Scapula. This Action being one of the first I set upon to unridle, being thought by some that nothing of cer∣tainely or probability could be said un∣to it, and objected to mee as an Action not possibly to be made tractable to the scope of my Designe; At my first en∣trance into this Enquiry I found this Muscle in Dr. Rheades Anatomy of the Muscles styled the Muscle of patience, which I confesse at first sight I tooke but to intimate the Corporall virtue of a Porter, and not much better than that Patience which the Spaniards call Asini∣num onus; and seeing it expos'd naked without any glosse of interpretation out of his owne conceite nor any other authority, it passed with me for a Dull notion and little to my purpose; when considering the Action wherein this Muscle sirnam'd the Lifter was usually seen in those that like not a thing that has happend, for which there is no re∣medy but Patience, I saw it might pro∣perly stand with the intention of the mind, if it were named Musculus Patien∣tiae the Muscle of Sufferance, or Patience
per force; and having thus imposed a name upon it answerable to the signifi∣cation it often helps to exhibite, Behold I soon saw I was imprudently fallen into the error of the Anabaptisticall Nomen∣clators, for, perusing Spigelius, and turn∣ing to that place where he describes the Levator of the Scapula, I plainly saw I was forestalled, and that Spigelius wa before in the Conceit, which prevention by so ingenious an Anatomist pleased me better than if I had so named it first, thinking ever after a little the better of my Fansie, because as they say, good wits jumpe. For thus Spigelius to the purpose: This Muscle I am wont by way of sport to call Musculum Patientiae, the Muscle of Patience, and he adds his Reason, which is grounded upon the same signification of the Mind exhibited by the gesture caused by the operation of the Muscle. Because when we beare a thing ill, which has happened by chance crosse to our Will, we are wont by the help of this Muscle to raise the Scapula with the Shoudlers, ingeminating the bitter name of Patience. So that it may be Doctor Rhead might meane as much as
Spigelius, from whom (or some other) he perchance borrowed this name of the Levator, although his silence in the Rea∣son scarce signified what he meant ther∣by. But this Muscle serves to work the Shoulders to many other significations of the Mind; for, they who would shew that they have pitty and compassion of ones misery, or are ignorant of the matter they are asked of, make use of the same Muscle. Niggards also in the acti∣on of their illiberality and Deniall use the same Muscle; the gesture resulting from thence being made by Aristotle a Cha∣racter of their cold property; which expression is seen in its pure naturality in Boyes, for when they are loth to part with any thing, they use to contract their Shoulders, and reduce them to their Neck and Head, as if they were carried into themselves, as doubting to be dissipated and offended in their sub∣stance, if they should be compelled to give any thing away which was in their possession; from which most Emphati∣call operation of this Muscle to th signification of the Mind, the Musc might be properly called Muscul
illiberalis, the Illiberall, Negative, or the Niggard Muscle. So much shal suffice as to the Denominations of this Muscle which is principall in the Action▪ which th Mind enters visibly in the Head and Shoulders; as for the other Muscles which are but Accessories, they are like to retaine their old names, unlesse some charitable Myotomist be pleased to take pitty of their private Condition, and think good to bestow the other signifi∣cations of this Action as nominall fa∣vors severally upon them. Memb. II. Of the Muscles serving to the gene∣rall expressions, or most important moti∣ons of the Face or Countenance. MAny are the affections of the Mind that appeare in the signifi∣ant motions of the Face, even when he Bones are at rest; for whereas some arts of our skin are altogether immo∣able and pertinacious in their circum∣uction over the subjacent parts; other arts thereof versatile indeed, but they
are not actuated with any voluntary motion: the skin of the whole Face participates of motion, which being voluntary, does necessarily imply the use of Muscles, by whose benefit those motions should be orderly and signifi∣cantly performed. Galen was the first who observed that Broad Muscle which he calls , The broad Mouse-Muscle, and was unknown to the ancient Anatomists, arising from the top of the Sternon and the whole Channell Bone, the upper Spine of the Shoulder-blade, the Spine of the Ver∣tebres of the Neck, and inserted into all the parts of the Head which  without haire, and the lower jaw, beyond which it goes not, according  whose variety of originals and the productions of divers fibres it proves  Author of so many voluntary motio as appeare in the Face; for it so ends  the Face, that it covers it within as  a Visard. Sylvius makes it a Horsema Cap or a Riding-Hood, if you take  so much of it as is covered with the  Theophilus compares it to a womans , which the Greekes vulgarly
, and is nothing else but a no∣table fleshie Membrane, a medium be∣tween a skin and a Muscle, which en∣closeth the Head and Face no lesse than the Skin, therefore called fleshie, be∣cause besides the nature of other Mem∣branes, in some places it is thicker and degenerates as it were into a Muscle, as appeares in most parts of the Face, where the skin conveyed along with the Mem∣brane, is the cause why the skin is there moveable; hence Creatures who have all their skin moveable, for the greatest part have this Membrane growing to heir skin. But although the Ancients hought the whole Face was moved in ll its significations by the operation of his broad Muscle, yet latter Anatomists ave found out the Muscles that lye un∣er it, whose opportune subjection oncurs to the advancement of the eaking motions and voluntary dis∣urses of the Countenance; there  for these purposes of the Mind, as  reckon, forty sixe, to wit, to the otion of the Eyes and Eye-brows enty foure, to the motion of the  twelve, and to the rest of the
parts ten. These Muscles by the effect of their action are beheld in the motion of the Face, while they move the skin together with them, the parts wherein they are inserted varying according to the variety of the parts. This difference being, as Galen speaks, between the skin, and the eyes, and lips, that under the skin there is a Musculous thin Nature, the Eyes are moved by Muscles, and the Lips by a Nature mixt of a skin and a Muscle: So that the parts of the Face have their significant motions either from the administration of their prope Muscles, as the Forehead, Eye-lids, and Lips, or by reason of the vicinity o the skin, as the Balls of the Cheeke▪ which being destitute of Muscles  moved together with the next skin;  that indeed one motion often times follows upon another, by reason of  common broad Muscle out of whic the Muscles that move the parts of  Face are made, there being some  are common to two Members, as  of the Nose and upper Lip, and the  and Cheeks, whose Muscles are  to each other. Indeed, the Professe
of Dissection assigne not any action to the skin in generall, because it is a sim∣ple and similar part, not organicall and instrumentall; which must be under∣stood of common and visible actions, for private it hath, as nourishing it selfe by attraction of aliment, though in∣deed in regard of Tact it hath a common action. But in the Face, it hath a pub∣lique and locall motion that is most Emphatically significant, wherein the perturbations of the Mind discover themselves, being moved in the Face by the streight annexion to Muscles, which are the organs of voluntary motion; for, Nature would have it so ordered, hat by the benefit of certaine Muscles working under the skin, and affecting he parts of the Face, (being all of them furnished in their originals with Nerves from the third Conjugation of Nerves hat come from the Braine) Man with is very Countenance alone, should xpresse all his Will, Mind, and Desire, when at any time it happened o be inconvenient or unlawfull to open  in words at length. The reason why he Face doth so naturally follow the
motions of the Mind, and is an Index of the Affections, is, as Baldus thinks, That Affections being Passions in mat∣ter, and in the Body, they are the forms of a certaine Body, to wit, of the Mass of Bloud; and insooth, a certaine pas∣sion requireth a certaine matter, as An∣ger Choller, Joy pure Bloud, Sadnesse Melancholly, Astonishment Phlegme; which humors conteyned in their Na∣turall Vessels and mixt together, fur∣nish the Affections with matter; which while it remaineth about the Heart and the first sensitory, from the image per∣ceived and adjudged to have the cause or matter of molestation or placencie, excited by Heat and Spirits, it is drawn into Act, and is made such in act; from thence the altered Spirits, or vapours with the Spirits are elevated, which by the Arteries coming to the Braine, the Principle of the Nerves, which bring the Commands for motion to the Muscles into which they are inserted, so making them the Instruments of Voluntary mo∣tion, pluck and pull it after diver manners, according to their quality Affecting, Contracting, Dilating, Heat∣ing,
Refrigerating, more or lesse dry∣ing or moystening: And any the least mutation made in a Principle, there followes a change in those things that depend upon that Principle; Wherefore the Arteries and Nerves that follow the Heart and Braine are changed, and be∣cause the Face is nigher the Braine, the chiefe organ of the Sense, made remark∣able by the Cognizanze of the greatest Arteries, and endued with Nerves, & such varietie of proper and common Muscles which entertaine them: Hence it comes to passe that all changes and passions in or with matter, o not existing without it, which happen to be done about the Heart, are participated to the Braine, so that the Soule may take notice of them and judge them. All these working upon the Muscles of the Face, after some man∣ner more or lesse, alter and vary the Face, and move it from its former state, introducing some of their signs therein. Yet we allow not the Heart to be the chiefe originall and seat of the Affecti∣ons, which are (indeed) originally from the Head; for although in asmuch as they concerne the Body, their chiefe seat
is in the Heart, because that is chiefly al∣terd by them, yet forasmuch as they af∣fect the mind also, it is onely in the Braine, because the mind can immediat∣ly suffer from this onely. And hence it followes that the Head and Face doe so manifestly by signes (exhibited by the operation of certaine Muscles) expresse the affections of the mind. Dissect. X. IN profuse Laughter the motions that appeare in the Face are very remark∣able, there being not any particle of the Face that is moveable, but it is moved by common or its particular Muscles which lye under the skin of the Face, whose actions introduce so notable a change and alteration in the Counte∣nance, whence it is, that man onely laughes; because he hath a Countenance furnished with Muscles to declare what is signified thereby. In other Creatures the Face, or Muzzell rather, is dull and heavy, and seemes to sleepe in an unmoveable habit: Not but that other Creatures are stirred up after their man∣ner
to expresse some signes of exultati∣on and Delight, which supply the place of laughter: but because they doe not, as we doe, change the Countenance, they are not said to laugh. Erronious there∣fore is their Conceit to whom it seemes that Laughter is a certaine common re∣traction of the parts towards the princi∣ple of the Soule, wherein that conceiv∣ed joy doth flourish: for they will have them to be contracted and coadunited in that part, wherefore the Muscles of the Face, Throat & the midriffe is drawn back to the heart. which is absur'd, be∣cause the same Species almost of motion is effected in griefe, which verily ought not to be done, for griefe rather repells, and withall we see that the impeus is rather done ab inrinseco foras, from the Center to the Circumference: For ma∣ny times laughter being begun in those inward parts, it is restrained, and as it were cut off in the midst, nor is unfold∣ed or revealed in the Face. So that the motion of laughter begun within in the middle venter, the terminus ad quem is the extreme part of the Face, where it terminates, because that part is the
emunctuary of the senses, by which our mind doth both receive in and utter the affections, since by that part it doth perceive, and in that part the Sensories are instructed; wherefore to it the whole sense, and more over our whole mind doth conspire. Hence therefore pro∣ceedes the Equable Emission and inten∣sion of Sense in the Face, as it were ex∣tant and coming forth. Hence the Aire is breath'd out thick and short. Hence the Midriffe is contracted and the Mus∣cles of the face, because the equable Emis∣sion with the alacrity of Sense reaching up to the Sence of the Face, cannot be done without the retraction of those Muscles. In this Dance of the Muscles performed by excessive Laughter upon the Theater of mirth, the Countenance, the Mouth seemes to lead the Chorus; For, Laughter is a motion arising chief∣ly out of the Contraction of the Mus∣cles of the Lips, in which motion of the Mouth, called Laughter, the parts a∣bout the Mouth seem bounded out with certaine lines called Rictus, whence Ri∣sus. And this contraction of the Muscles of the Lips, is occasion'd by reason of
the consent they have with the Nerves of the Braine drawn back to their origi∣nall; and with the Diphragma, the grand Muscle of this and all other passions which is altogether almost nervous and musculous. And because the Lips are Muscles of themselves in respect of their instrumentall relation to speech, their engagement in this passion renders them unserviceable for the framing of words; for, the formes & matter of words both are then intercepted; the first by the streighning of the Gorge & Lips, wch will not admit of any articulation especially labiall: & the latter by the Interjections breaking off the voyce at the Larinx. Hence it is we heare men say they could not speake for laughing; nor indeede can we eate in the violence of this passion, the impediment proceeding from this Diduction of the Lips which were gi∣ven us to eate and drinke withall; yet the Mouth is more shut than open, that is it is Dehiscent, yet scarce Dehiscent in∣to a Casme, yet the Lips are so distend∣ed and contracted that they discover the Teeth. The Lower-Iaw after a manner inclines inward. And as about the
Nostrills and the Region of the Chin, or forepart of the Jawes, a Certaine con∣cave of a circular line encompasseth the contracted and wrinkled Cheekes: So the convexity thereof boundeth out the hinder part of both the Jawes on both sides, where a certaine hillock lifts up it selfe; which figure of the mouth and cheekes, together with the wrinkles which appeare in the Face of him that laughes, is called Gelasinus. The Nostrils are opener, crooked, hooked, wrinkled and crisped, especially in Derision. The Eyelids in a mediocrity shut. The Eye is somewhat recondit betweene its Or∣bite, which a certaine corrugation about its outward angle. The Eares indeed are generally conceived to be immoveble in man alone, which yet are moved in some, and appeare to shake and to bee moved; but this motion is not of the Auricles alone per se, but because they somewhat adhere and are conjoyn'd to the Jaw or lower Mandible, which is chiefly by its appointed Muscles mo∣ved in laughter: yet in such as have a faculty as some have in their Eares, as having the auricular muscles bigger than ordinary, this motion may be more e∣vident.
The forehead seemes exporrect and unfolded, And all these Muscles on the right side are more active, whence the motions on that side are most nota∣ble and apparent; insomuch as the Mouth and the Face it selfe is depraved and distorted, especially in Derision. But this genuine figure of true laughter is somewhat various, according to the various Constitution of the substance of particular persons, in the parts of their face; that as to the individualls, it is almost unutterable, for you shall see in some, in the Chin and in the Cheekes certaine concavities then caused like those in the Hands and other mem∣bers; in some a pleasant p or Dimple which is called the Navell of Venus, and the Muscle commonly called Buccinator in which it appeares, might be thence called Musculus Gelsini, or umbilici Ve∣neris, the pleasant Muscle of Loves pret∣ty Dimple; this in some is a rifi, in others a wrinkle; which are occasioned in these parts of the face of those that laugh, be∣cause in some perchance the parts of their Face by reason of their unequall contexture or constitution, are not e∣qually
contracted, nor swell, for in laughter the Face swells: for, the whole Countenance is powred out and spread with the Spirits that then swell the Muscles, there being a great concourse of Spirits and bloud unto the Face, which bear a reatgstroke in the Action: So that the Muscles of the Face are fill∣ed with Spirits after the same manner as a certaine member directy opposite unto it which importunately sometimes lookes us in the Face, which being fill∣ed with Spirits growes stiff and is exten∣ded, yet although the analogy be very faire, there is no contraction in that part, but onely a great extension and that according to all its Dimensions; which happens by reason of the Spungy and very loose flesh which is not so much in the Face; and withall that Part is very free and at liberty: whereas the Muscles of the Face on both sides and e∣very where adhere most firmely to the bone and skin, that when they cannot be extended every way according to all their Dimensions, there are contracted. Now this figure that compriseth the al∣terations of every part in the face follows
as an effect and consequence of the mov∣ings of the Muscles that are proper to the parts, or which being Common have by their conformation a Sympa∣theticall dependency one upon another. But this is not all: for, that which is most remarkable and worthy observati∣on is, that this moving of the parts of the Face although very great, is done & undone on a sudden, and almost in a moment; that is, a mans Face forthwith falls into the posture of laughing, and while in that posture he laughes, he in∣continently leaves off the motion; which as it suddenly comes, so it goes; when a man ceaseth from laughter although it be at the highest pitch and scrued up to the very Eela of mirth, it vanisheth a∣way, and needes no time of interpositi∣on to abate by degrees, to take out the tracts of the operations of so many and divers engaged Muscles, which inconti∣nently cease from their labour, for as soone as the Conceite and jest is at an end, the laughter being naturall, the mouth and parts of the face returne to their former situation, the motion be∣ing now over; of which sudden begin∣ing
and ending of so many concurring motions the Cause may be supposed, the subtiltie of the Spirits in their mo∣tion, when they ascend to the face: But what kind of moving of the Muscles this should be is somewhat difficult to conjecture, although it is so manifest and evident in appearance. 'Tis true, we can conjecture a Muscle to move or to be moved, for we know a Muscle hath moved its appointed moveable, when contracted, it appeares shorter and harder; especially if it have a bon under it, as all the Muscles of the Face have. But here all the parts of the Face, except that perchance of the Forehead, seeme to be contracted together; and the whole face, according to the con∣stitution of its substance, to grow stiff and hard; wherefore it seemes most probable, that all the Muscles of the face are moved together at once, yet the controversie is somewhat intricate, & they that are for the Negative allege, that the same thing cannot be moved by contrary motions at the same time, as for example; Some Muscles move the Lower-Iaw downwards, and so open
the mouth; others by moving the Iaw upwards close it; others move it out∣wards, others inward; others draw it to one side and drive it round; where∣fore all of them seeme not to Move at once. To which is answer'd, that things moving in Contraria, in the same move∣able, if they be of equall virtue, they either doe nothing, or if they doe, the moveable is distracted: but if they be of unequall power and strength, the weaker gives way to the motion of the stronger; yet the prevailing Mover in the conflict or contention obtaines not the same vigour, or as much as if it had not contended at all and had moved without opposition; for if all Mate∣riall Agents (as the learned know) in Doing Suffer also, and after some man∣ner abate of the Degree of their virtue; ow much more will it happen when one hath an adversary, although weak∣er, yet openly, endeavouring against him? Wherfore it may be suppos'd it doth not move so perfectly as it would, f it were not hinder'd by its Adversa∣ry. The way to discover the manner of moving in this Conglobation of Muscles
in laughter is, to consider what Muscles of parts of the Face are effectivè more or fewer, thicker or smaller; for, ma∣ny moving together are not stronger than fewer if they be all equally quali∣fied, and the great and thick are stron∣ger than the small and slender, as may be made manifest by speciall example. As first, the Muscles that move the lower-Jaw drawing it upwards to close the Mouth, are more and thick, and therefore stronger than those that lead it downwards to open the Mouth; as is well known out of the Anatomy of those Muscles. Now, because in Laugh∣ter the Mouth is neither too much closed, nor yet gapes; the Muscles that serve to shut and open the Mouth are mo∣ved together; the Mouth not being ex∣actly shut, although the Muscles are more intense which are appointed to shut it; but withall is somewhat open∣ed, by reason of the repugnancy of the opening Muscles. Hence it is that in over Laughter our Iawes ake, so that they seeme to suffer a luxation, by rea∣son of the contrariety of moving and violent Conflict; for, the Ligaments,
Nerves and Fibres are after a manner di∣stracted and drawn into factions. And we may observe that the Masticatory Muscles, (which are better called Late∣rall from their use) whose fibres by reason of their Divers Heads, which re∣specting one another after a divers man∣ner are inserted acrosse in manner of the Letter X, do manifest their opera∣tion in this motion, for by reason of their Fibres, although they move to the Right hand and to the Left, not∣withstanding they can withall not a little move the lower-Iaw either outward and inward. The Muscle called Ad∣ducens Perigoideum, which puts the Chin out forward, with the other Man∣sorie also which leads the Chin inwards, and when it is produced recalls it back, these by reason of the contrarietie of their movings which are done at the same time in Laughter, are very re∣markable: Of whose Contraction we may make an experiment, because the Mansorie Muscles being chiefly seated about the Cheekes, do then appeare Contracted and somewhat hard, the Chin being perchance somewhat drawn
in, because the Muscles are more valid which move the Iawes inward; which perchance may not so exactly appeare alike in all men, but may differ accord∣ing to the divers Condition, Composi∣tion, or Commension of their parts. The Contraction of the Temporall Muscle which is but small in Men, is lit∣tle observed; nor that of the double-belli∣ed Depriment which works contrary to the other, for they are small and thin, their employment being easie, because the Iaw with its own weight tends downward and hath no need of any strong Retractor, but as a heavy thing, it is drawn down with a little adoe, to open the Mouth. In the motions of the Lips the con∣trariety is not very much perspicuous, for they are exercised in two moveable Lips; wherefore their Muscles contract∣ed together, they are Contracted, to wit, the upper Lip upward, the lower Lip downwards; whereupon the Teeth are discovered; whence some derive Rideo a Radio. But that we see the up∣per Lip more contracted than the lower, it hath that property from the more
valid Muscles which it hath obteined; or although the Muscles of the lower Lip are broader than those of the upper, yet being shorter they gaine no advan∣tage by their Breadth; for, the Length of a Cord gives more advantage in Drawing than the Breadth. And that the Lips also in Laughter are moved nei∣ther inward nor outward, (which mo∣tions, and those indeed contrary every one of them hath, happening by the advantage of certaine fibres belonging to their Muscles) the cause is, that they being weaker than the Muscles them∣selves, moving the upper Lip upwards, and the lower downwards, by good right give way to their motions, neither are they able according to their usuall operation to move the Lips inward or outward, especially since they are strongly drawn in on both sides, and extended by the Contraction of the Cheekes, to which on both Hands they are annexed. The Muscles which draw out and open the Nostrils, excell so in strength the constringent paie, which are some∣what small; that the adverse mov∣ing
in the Nose is not so percep∣tible to sense; therefore in Laughter they are strongly Contracted, inso∣much as the Nostrills are opened, and especially in Derision are wrinkled; and these Muscles so raise up and Con∣tract the Nostrils, that the Nose seemes crooked and hooked, and by that means also the Nostrils become acute. We may observe concerning the Eye∣lids which are two over each Eye, an upper, and a lower Lid, that the upper Lid only, according to Galen, is moved upward and downward by the office of divers Muscles having contrary moti∣ons; So that by this Rule and Mthod, that teacheth all the Muscles in the Face to be moved together at once in Laugh∣ter, We should not affirme the Eye-ids to be then moved, if the aforesaid Mus∣cles of the Eye-lids were of equall strength: But since (as it appreares by the effect) the Muscle that draws it down is stronger, to which the weight also of the Lid it selfe doth adde some advantage, it comes to passe that the Eye-lid is a little then moved down∣ward, and the Eye a little closed. And
although Aristotle who was not advised of Muscles (much lesse of the Muscle which late Anatomists have found for that motion) truely affirmes the lower-lid to be also moved in man: yet that motion is but small and little better then nothing; and that which is as it were nothing, is to be thought in a man∣ner to be absent. Whatsoever is to bee observ'd of this matter from late Anato∣mists, this is enough for this purpose, that the upper-Eylid hath obteined two contrary motions, and therefore can neither shut nor open the Eye overmuch in laughter, although it shuts it more; and it is observable that by reason of this contrariety of moving of the upper-Eyelid, that in laughter there is made, by reason of the Contranixion, a cer∣taine corrugation or wrinkle about the angle of the Eye, especially the outward angle, which in those that laugh often, are supposed to grow habituall: which some Ladyes fearing, will not laugh, lest they should contract wrinkles and looke old by breaking in that part which is neere the Temples, whose Latine Ei∣mologie they much abhor. Hence of some
who have but a kind of pinke eye we us to say, they laughed that they had ne∣ver an eye to see. And because the Ey is more shut than open'd in laughter,  comes to passe that both the Eye-brow are drawn a litle downward, and the somewhat, yet lightly incline; bo the Eye-browes together, especially  excessive laughter, being necessarily mo∣ved: whereas otherwise at pleasure  can move one of them alone, as  nictation. The Eyes in profuse laughter seem to be retracted or drawn back, and no a little to be hid within their Orbit But to conclude this to be done by th Muscles, is to speake to more than th causes appearing to Sense. It is though the Optique Nerves may be retracted  well as other Nerves, and why not Which may be by the seventh Muscl placed about it, which with it fibres  hath obtein'd, being straight, may,  is likely, draw the eye back also.  whether the other Muscles of the eye  contracted or no thats a question. Why not? but there is no confident pro∣nouncing this for a certainty, becaus
they appeare not to Sense; but if they be contracted, it is most probable that they are all contracted together in this laughter, as the other Muscles of the Face are; and by reason of that contra∣riety of movings that they have, and perchance equality of strength, the eyes seeme rather to rest than to be moved, as any man may make experiment in himselfe, and may apprehend that while he laughes, his eyes can difficultly be moved to looke round with a dis∣tinct vision, which is done at the per∣pendicular Ray, unlesse he endeavour it by the inordinate motion of his whole Head and Body; which circum∣pection the Head, nor whole Body an Scarse then obteine. But the Au∣hor of this experiment will not endure o be asked whether the Muscles may e then moved, abhorring to be put to o difficult a point of Divination. Sure∣y the question may be resolv'd accord∣ng to the received Philosophy of Arbi∣rary motion; for if he will admit the Muscles of the Eye to be all moved at  & together, the motion is Tonique; herein although the Muscles seeme to
be at rest, yet as Galen sayes, they doe, quiete agere, act in rest; Tonique motion being an action with immobility. In this excessive laughter, the Fore∣head (by which we must understand the Musculous skin thereof) hath a pe∣culiar property of it selfe, and a privi∣lege from the universall contraction of the other parts: for, the Front (which is a thing has bin but little observ'd) is neither moved upwards nor down∣wards nor knit, although it be very propense and proportionall to signify many passions by those motions; but it remaines as it were in its naturall state, yet smoothly expanded and stretched out insensibly; which motion of expansion is to be refer'd to the Mus∣cles it hath received, or to its fibres; which (as we may believe) are equiva∣lent; whereby when in laughter by the same reason as other Muscles they are moved together, it comes to passe that the Forehead then doth rather remaine immoveable, and the motion proves Tonique or streined out; unlesse per∣chance it may be moved a little down∣ward for explication, by reason of the
somewhat more prevalent fibres. The whole Countenance is poured out and spread with the Spirits that swell the Muscles; there being a great con∣course of Spirits and bloud unto the Face, which beare a great stroake in this action. Now this broad and high laughter is the measure and rule of the essence of other, and by its defect, the others may be measured and pondered; for, in low laughter, although the motions of the Face are even then very remarkable and great, yet they are more remisse, in moderat laughter they are more intense; for, these motions of the Muscles have ndicible and distinct degrees, or an utterable latitude of consideration, here being no Muscle or part in the whole Body, that is out of action if a an laugh but a little: for, although aughter be more especially a motion f all the Muscles of the Face at one time nd together; yet it is withall a motion ommon to most of the parts of the ody. This Dance of the Muscles be∣g like that which is called the Cushion  or Joane Sanderson, which brings in
all that have ability of motion; for, the whole Head is moved, now cast backward, and by and by inclined to the Right or Left Shoulder; because the Muscles that move the Head and Neck arise partly out of the Breast-bone and the Channell Bones, and partly also out of the joynts of the Breast; wherefore it necessarily followes that in violent laughter, and the agitation of the Diaphragma and pectorall Muscles, the Head should also together be mov∣ed. The whole Neck is contracted and made a little shorter; this you may ei∣ther call the motion of the Head drawn down by its contracted Mucles: or the working of the Levator of the Scapula which causes that shugging of the Shoul∣ders so emphaticall in fat-folkes; but what it is, is not very apparent or wor∣thy of so great observation, and seemes to accompany the inordinate motions of the whole Head. The Throate seemes not a little to tremble, by reason of the Breast being much, suddenly, and often moved: for, the Rough Artery being placed in the internall Region thereof, the great and often respiration shakes
the Throate. For since the Midriff is therefore contracted taking this moti∣on from the dilatation of the Heart, and to beare up against the moving of the Sense and Spirit, lest it should to the great endangering of life be emptied and vanish away: or because it behov'd these parts so to endeavour for the strength of the motion to bee made which is at hand. Hence also the Mus∣cls of the whole Throat and Face en∣deavour together with them, for they so consent with the Muscles of the La∣rynx, that unlesse they bee together drawn in, the other can no way be con∣tracted. But what manner of motions these and the rest which follow downe to the feete should be, is hard to say, or from what denomination to define them: for, we cannot according to A∣ristotle, a termino ad quem; for, these mo∣tions of the whole Head & Body seeme, Carere termino certo, and cannot be de∣scrib'd but after that manner as men are shooke together, are gestient, tremble, or cannot abide in a place, but leap, start out, ly downe, and seeme wholy dissolv'd and impotent. And because
there are so many movings of Muscles, and those indeed contrary, those tensi∣ons and contractions, if they continue and are daily used, are very hurtfull: for, the Muscles of the Face being fill'd with subtile vapours causing them to streine for the avoidance (as in Skreak∣ing the Muscles are contracted to avoid a vapourous excrement,) the Spirits are thereby much evapourated and spent. As for the rest of the motions let De∣mocritus looke to it. Upon this mani∣fst sight of the motion of the Breast (wherein the Midriffe is moved, and the Lungs, even up to the Muscle which move the Cheeks, the variou movings (from whence some infer as manifold differences of laughter) and because Respiration, which is a mo∣ving of the breathing parts is as it were the matter of laughter out of which it is produced, whence comes that suc∣cussation of the Lungs and agitation of the Midriff) no man e're doubted that laughter was a motion, and to be re∣fer'd to the motive virtue. But upon what principle this motion should de∣pend, since it is done before we are
well aware of it, and besides our will, whereas a motion that depends upon Appetite, is Spontaneous, as laughter is concluded to be, and that Faculty being Animall is no way proper to man; That hath bin somewhat doubted of; upon which occasion some have unne∣cessarily multiplyed many Entities. But They state the cae best who say, that laughter is an operation proceeding from an effect of the Intellective virtue which in the first place is the cause of it, and the chiefe roote, for in all laughter the Intellect is as the first Radix after a manner susteining the perturbation and dilation of the sense; but the motive power is that by whose commendation it is last of all perfected. We may not therefore when we see men Laughing to be affected with a certaine moving of  Lungs the Midriff and the Muscles moving the Cheekes, thinke men laugh, when according to their arbitriment or any otherwise they accommodate themselves to the motions of these parts: Or when we see a more remisse laughter out of the moving alone of those Muscles, and a little retraction of the
Midriffe without the manifest act of Gurgulation, we should therefore be∣leeve either that Laughter of it self is such a motion, or that this, at least for the greatest part, is its Nature, since all these may be counterfeited, and may be rather an Image of Laughter; there∣fore there must somewhat precede in the Soule, and the first Sensitive, that Laugh∣ter may be absolute and accomplished in all its numbers. And indeed, that manifest motion dth presuppose a cer∣taine affection of the first Sensitive and Rationall part of the Soule, so that per∣fect Laughter is not only that manifest motion, nor that inchoat motion as they speake in the first Sensitive and its Spirits; for, this is often done, and yet Laughter is suppressed, that it truly seemes to be done by halves, and inter∣cepted as it were in the midst. But true Laughter hath both the effects of the intellectuall part as the Principle upon which the dilation of the Heart and contraction of the Countenance ensue, it being not only an affection of the Body, but totius conjuncti, of the whole Man.
So that it is manifest that Laughter is a certaine vibration of the Midriffe, and of the Muscles of the Mouth, and the whole Face, &c. And that when we laugh the motion of our Face aimes at some end, that is, to signifie some mo∣tion of the Mind, and followeth upon the Connexion of those Muscles that draw the Face in such a sort to some in∣ward parts that are moved by the passi∣on out of which Laughter proceedeth; the Genus whereof occupying the place of the Forme is Motus; the matter or Subject are all the parts of the Face, especially the Muscles together; the fi∣nall Cause is to bring forth Laughter, (which by a kind of magneticall virtue it doth even in another.) But Laughter being no affection, but an outward act proceeding from some inward motion of the Mind; the question is what af∣fection of the Mind this Jubilee and vi∣brations of so many Muscles should sig∣nifie? Fracostorius judgeth Laughter to be a sign of two Passions, Joy, and Ad∣miration. Valeriola and Laurentinus take away Admiration, supposing that profuse Laughter is the issue only of
Joy. Vallesius states the Controversie. The opinion of Fracostoreus (whatever Bartholinus and others object to the contrary) seemes to me most probable, that it is a compounded motion, be∣cause in Laughter there are certaine contranitencies; for, Admiration makes a kind of suspension in the Head, and Joy a kind of expansion in the Heart▪ (Yet both motions are so sudden that they are done together,) whereby  comes to passe that when Laughter  produced, it is not done without som molestation. And that which seeme to confirme this opinion is, that the are most apt to Laughter who are easily drawn to admire, as Children, Wo∣men, and the Common-people: where as Grave men, and Philosophers are lef prone to Laughter. Another thin that seemes to confirme this opinio is, a new thought of my own, that  suspension of the Eye, and expansio of the Forehead seeme to be Symbolic effects of this mixt Passion. But here the grand Quaere, how Joy that is motion and passion of the Heart, shoul move the Muscles? for how so ma
Muscles that are the Instruments of th Animal Faculty should be moved by a passion of the Heart is worth the scan∣ning. For, you would verily think that the Heart were a Muscle, and the grand Principle that set all the other Muscles in Motion; whereas it is known well enough that the Heart is neither a Muscle, nor of it self can move the Muscles, for, that moves only the Arte∣ries: yet though Joy be a passion of the Heart, Laughter indeed, which pro∣ceeds not only from Joy but Admirati∣on, is a passion of the Rationable part▪ (for otherwise Beasts might laugh;) no wonder therefore that the Instru∣ments of the Animal Faculty are moved to discover and bring forth the Admira∣tion conjoyned with Ioy; nor is it a marvell that Ioy should be expressed by an Animal motion, the Heart not moving the Muscles, but the Animal Faculty consenting with the Vitall. So that hereby it is made manifest, that na∣turall Laughter is a free motion, because it is Animal; yet it can hardly be held in sometimes, because although it be Animal, yet it is in the number of them
that serve the Naturall. And this is the reason why Laughter is originally from the Head and not from the Heart, that notion, intelligence, or imagination, which are functions of the Mind, and accounted among those faculties that reside in the Braine, are brought forth by the Soule; for, who ever (unlesse a Parasite) laughed before he knew wherefore he laughed? So that Hippo∣crates Lib. de morbo Sacro, with very good reason deduceth Laughter from the Head, as having its originall from thence; for that the first motions begi there, and from thence are communica∣ted to all the subject parts, drawing th whole Body into Consort, and wit its universall moving and agitation declares the Sympathy it has with th Mind and the Braine: as if the Min sitting enthroned in a high Tower, de∣nounceth so to her Subjects to prepar themselves for Laughter, for there wa something, which they knew not  which yet she only saw and knew to  worthy of Laughter: upon this admonition presently the inferiour principa parts Contiguous and Connatives t
their High Prince bestirring themselves, do sollicite the other lower parts al∣so subject unto them. And first the Braine commands the Nerves, these stir up the Muscles, and they agitate the parts annexed unto them; untill the whole Body, as it were to gratifie the Mind as a King, signifies its conceived Joy in all the waies and officious de∣monstration of triumphant gesture it possibly can; and as every part is nigher to its Principle, so much the sooner and vehemently it is moved. And although, to speak according to the modesty of Caesars Speech in Tully, we are ignorant how Laughter exists, where it is, and from what place it so suddenly breaks out into the Countenance: yet the man∣ner and order of the generation of Laughter may be supposed to be after this manner. When some pleasant queint novel and conceited object offers it self to the Senses, there is an impression thereof made in the Braine, the Object thus come into the Braine, the Mind is filled with Ioy, this by the first branch of those Nerves of the sixt Conjugati∣on which goeth into the Heart is carry∣ed
unto the Heart, with which the Heart affected, impatient of delay, dilates it self: the Heart impetuously moved, the Cawle thereof by consequence is carried from one part unto the other and con∣tracted; and because the Cawle is fa∣stened to the Mediastenum and Dia∣phragma, there is a necessity also that the very Diaphragma should be violent∣ly moved, agitated, and heated by the diffusion of Bloud and Spirits that are then encreased about that part. Th passion or motion by the object thus raised in the Heart (such is the consent between the Heart and Braine) is by the other branches of the Nerves of the sixt Conjugation called Nervi prenici, which bring the motive Spirits from the Braine into the Diaphragma, and by virtue whereof it is very sensible, carried back to the Braine: So that the change of motion in the Heart caused by this Passion, and imprinted, ecchoed, and expressed in the Diaphragma, and thence conveyed unto the Braine, is as the Ground; and the motion command∣ed the Muscles by the Braine, is as the voluntary Descant upon it. Concerning
the chiefe corporall Principle, and mate∣riall Instrument wherewith Laughter is performed, the Learned differ in their Judgments. Democritus thought that that first part and chiefe Principle was the Spleene, and that the other parts were but as Instruments arwards subservi∣ent to the perfect finishing of the work. Which opinion to others hath justly seemed absurd, because Laughter is performed by the ministeriall assistance of certaine motion, but the Spleene is beheld neither to be moved, nor to be the Principle of any kind of moving, yet we see those parts to be moved which are in the Breast and middle venter; besides, it is not accounted the prime seat of any faculty of the Soule, much lesse of the Cognoscent or Animal; therefore it cannot be the prime Prin∣ciple of Laughter. Others have belee∣ved the prime Part by which Laughter is begotten, to be the Diaphragma, for that is a certaine Muscle somewhat broad, placed neere the Mind, excel∣ling in alacrity of Sense, agile to mo∣tions, of it self, in the first place sub∣ordinate to Respiration, being of such
and of so great importance to the fun∣ctions of the Soule, that the Antients by one common consent named it , quasi mentem vel mentis sedem, and they thought that Phrensies and Delirations arose from thence: Therefore it is no marvell if Laughter also should be first wrought by this part, since it is swift and expedite to swift motions, being a broad Muscle and most plentifully abounding with Sense and Spirit, which is equally dilated through it: (for, Laughter is accounted to be as a certaine Dilation,) and is withall the prime In∣strument of Spiration, which appeares to be in a manner the substance of Laugh∣ter, which Aristotle affirmes, where he saith, that for this cause the tickling one under the Armes causeth this af∣fection, because the Midriffe is fastened in that part, whereby it easily opens and moves the Sense of this Muscle besides our Will; which (indeed) is somewhat apparent to Sense; for, in any the least Laughter the Midriffe is manifestly re∣moved and retracted, and the beginning of motion being made there, the other parts, as the Lungs, and Muscles of the
Face are forthwith stirred and moved. But because the Midriffe is in no manner a principall part of the body, nor the chiefe seat of the Soule, or of any fa∣culty; therefore neither doth it seeme Consentaneous it should be accounted the prime Principle of Laughing; wherefore for some reasons the Body of the Heart hath been by some adjudged the prime seat and original of Laughter. But Physicians who upon the best ground make the Braine to be primum Sensitivum, affirme the Braine to be the Prime Principle of Laughing; but this af∣fection to be made common by consent to the Diaphragma, and that it there∣fore is the prime Instrument, because it begins to be formed, and to appeare by this part, the other parts thereupon ad∣ministring to the operation, wherein it is necessary to use a Distinction for the better clearing of the Point, for it is one thing to be the prime and neerest Principle, and another thing to be the rime manifestative Instrument, and per∣ective of the Forme; the Braine is ac∣knowledged the prime and nearest Prin∣ciple, but the Midriffe is the prime ma∣nifestative
Instrument, and perfective  the Forme. Now the Diapragma  operation is so evidently seen in  Face, its motion in this passion bein attended with so many motions of  Face and Body, is a Muscle the most  nowned and famous as the spring of  the orall motions; whose honourab names sufficiently prove its Excellency having obteined a figure peculiar an common to no other Muscle; bein broad, thin, and orbicular, and having  beginning in its midst, from when thick fibres run out as from the  to the Circumference: for it hath a  of nervous Circle in the middle, whic is its originall, about which anoth wholy fleshie consists, by which the  that go out of it are dispersed  spread out to the Piripheria. The  proper and Emphaticall name it  obteyned with the Greekes is , fro the word , that in Latine signi sapere, which with us is to savour or  like, for with this part we have a liki of any object, on a motion of inclintion unto it, to which we are beholing (as Plinie saies) for all our men
conceits and fine flashes. This muscu∣lous Membrane being as it were the Timbrell of the Fantsie and the Heart, which beaten upon by them, the Muscles of the Face and Body are put into mo∣tion, and dance unto the Dorian melo∣dy thereof a kind of Morisko expressed in the exultant action of the parts into which they are inserted, deserves to be called Musculus hilaritatis seu facetiarum, the Muscle of Ioy, Mirth, and Laughter, or of witty conceit, or the Muscle of the motion of inclination. Anger, Indignation, and Envy affect the Muscles of the Face, with a kind of Laughter, improperly enough called Sardonian; which being according to Nature, is conteined in the other Laugh∣er, yet there is some difference, neither do all things▪ which accompany the other naturall Laughter appeare exactly is this, there may be perchance the same motion of the parts, and almost the same Figure of the Face, but no Sign of Joy or Mirth, but almost alwaies sad∣nesse; for the front is cloudy and con∣tracted, and indeed, the Lips only and Teeth are affected, in which adulterate
Laughter men doe Labijs tantum, &  enis malis ridere, or ringere rather  ridere, Feare also, and a Sudden fright  Spectrum, especially if it bee horrib ridiculous, hath the same effect somtimes upon the Muscles of the Fa there being certaine effects that doe nturally breake out into contraries, isinuating not themselves into the Bod corporally, as they say and subjectiv but immaterially and objectivè inva our senses, for, the Spirits or Radica moisture by which we know on a suden, perceiving some sad object  spectre and evill, doth perchance fear and flying back betakes it selfe in manner wholly to its intimate Tow or Fort, therefore it contracts the mebers, and especially the Muscles of t Face, as the part by which the Spectru breakes in most upon our minds an Spirits. Weeping is a motion contrary i signification to laughter, representin also some motion of the mind, that  by Laughter the heart is Dilated  with it the Breast and the Muscles o
Face: So by this they are . But in the Face by Laughter the parts out the mouth are more emphatically fected: but in weeping the parts about e Eye; which compression expresseth ares, else there is little difference in eir lines, as Painters observe, which onsequently requires the action of the me Muscles in both, which is not by ny influence of the lively Spirit which  Laughter replenisheth the counte∣nce, causing the eyes to sparkle, and  the Muscles of the Cheekes with a btle vapour: But the contraction of he Cheekes in weeping, seemeth to  from an excrementitious vapour hich passeth with the humiditie of ares from the Braine into the Cheeks; nd forceth Nature to make contracti∣n to dischardge it selfe of that vapour, oyned with the consent, which is be∣ixt the Muscles of the Jawes and lips ith the Midriffe, whose remission and ontraction being hastned by the con∣raction of the Heart in griefe, con∣acteth also the aforesaid Lips and eekes, which it causeth by the fourth nd sixt paire of Nerves derived into
both parts from the marrow of the Chine-bone, in the Neck. These are al∣so the cause of the whole deformity of the Face in griefe, which chiefly contra∣cteth the visage in expiration, in which the heart hath more power over the Midriffe being slacken'd, than in inspi∣ration, wherin by dilating of the Chest for use of breath, it is extended. Memb. III. Of the Muscles appertaining to the Fore∣Head, or the Browes and Eye-browes, and employed by the mind in the significant motions thereof. THE skin of the Forehead is signi∣ficantly moved according to the pleasure of our will and that in the opi∣nion of the Ancients from a Musculous and thin substance united to the skin of the Forehead; for, because it could not be that any part should be moved vo∣luntarily in any important motion with out a muscle, our wise Creator foreseeing that, he spread under it a certaine thin Musculous substance; for, the Bulke
nd proportion of Muscles is ordered ccording as the greatnesse of the part  be moved did require. And in this lace the skin onely is united to a Mus∣ulous substance, which although so ited, yet it is so free from the sub∣cted bones, that it may be moved, the  being the superficiall part of the bject substance which is Musculous  adhering together and growne to, at their motion is both one. This in of the Forehead, which moved by e Musculous flesh that covers the bone hereof, and by its tension and corru∣tion demonstrates divers affections f the mind, is not onely moved by the enefit of a fleshy membrane (which ing under the connate flesh goes into Musculous substance, endowed with raight fibres:) But with two Muscles, hich the course of the fibres, and mov∣g which appeares in this as in other uscles, (which are not found in a eshy membrane) doe make manifest. rentius sayes they meete in the . Columbus sayes there is no Muscle in  middest of the Forhead; yet he will ve them two, one on each side, and
their motions different, and proves it by the example of a Cardinall who having the left Muscle cramped with a wound, could not move the one halfe of hi Forehead; and indeed at the Top of the Nose where they are also more fleshy, they are so joyned, that they may seeme one. But that they are two, Anatomy doth not onely teach, but reason and experience, for, all the members are double, that the Body might by kep in aequilibrio; and experience shewe that if one of them be struck with th Palsie, or cut acrosse, the motion o that part is lost, but not of the other; whose motion could not remaine en∣tire, if it were one Muscle. Spigeli calls them (to note their use) the Mus∣cles of the skin of the Forehead. Bu Platerus elegantly, an the first I think that ever let fall a word to this purpose▪ Musculos affectuum animi significativos, th significant Muscles of the affections.  besides these Frontall Muscules, ther are sometimes two ocipitiall, which re∣ceive into them the Muscles of the fore∣head, and are reckon'd to have an in∣fluence upon the skin and Muscles o
the Forehead and Eye-browes, So that such men who have these additionall Muscles, have larger expressions of their minds and affections appearing in their moved Foreheards. Baubinus sayes these Muscles of the hinder part of the Head are not found: But Gabriel Fallopius and Platerus shew by the example of Antonius Platus, who could move the whole skin of his Head, that there is such a speaking motion in the Coape or outer Cover of the Head. Rhealdus Columbus saith he had a thousand times contemplated this motion (not without pleasure) in the Head of that excellent man Antonius Platus whom they now call Lonigum; for he moveth the whole skin of his Head strongly. Hieronymus Mercurialis hath observed as much in many; Nay Columbus proves this motion by his owne example, the skin of whose whole Head was qualified with such a motion y virtue of those Muscles. He therefore ecalls these Muscles into play, which were passed over by the negligence of thers, the utility of this motion being ot to be despised. St. Augustine af∣firmes
that he saw a man in his time, who could, without stirring his Head, or touching it with his Hands, raise or lift up all the haires of his Head, and make them fall flat upon his face; af∣terward he could raise them againe and returne them orderly to their due pla∣ces. Which could not be done without the advantage of such extraordinary implements of voluntary motion. Whatsoever inward Cogitation or af∣fection of the mind is attributed by Plinie, or observed by Metoposcopers and others to appeare in the Forehead, they are all exhibited by the operation and instrumentall assistance of these Muscles and since the Muscles, the instrumen of voluntary motion, are found  the Head, and so neere to receive  the races and convoy of the Nerves bility of motion from the Braine,  stands to Reason that the Forehead dclare the wil and the disposition and afections of the mind. Yet to speake  truth, these Muscles are rather to  ascribed unto the Browes; and Spigel shewing his warrant from Galen, attbutes them to the Eye-browes; for
Eye-brows have such a command over the Front which appeares so obsequious unto the acts of their authority, that the actions may justly be counted theirs. Columbus indeed adds two more proper which the Eye-brows do use, which he affirmes that neither Galen, nor Vesalius, nor any other before him did know. And Aquapendens attributes an orbicular Muscle to the Eyebrows. Dissect. XI. IN Sadnesse, Griefe, and Severity, Dis∣like, Anger, Threatning, Revenge, and Earnest study, we use to wrinkle or to bend the Brows from the Sinciput to the Eye-brows, which are then knit about the Nose; the reason is, for that Sadnesse is a certaine Contraction of the heat and Spirits towards their Principle, in re∣gard of the apprehension of some in∣gratefull object, and this effect follows although there be no reall cause; the Forehead being deprived of the Heat and Spirits, is wrinkled. The materiall caus being a melancholly humour affected and kindled with much heat, which
sends up a salt vapour to the Face, which pluckes the Muscles of the Forehead. This motion is performed not only by assistance of the fleshie Membrane, which under the Connative flesh endued with many straight fibres goes into a muscu∣lous substance: but by the two Muscles on each side of the Forehead; which motion Laurentius from Columbus brings to prove, that the Muscles of the Fore∣head are two, and not one as some will have it; for, if the Forehead had but one Muscle, this expression of the Mind ex∣hibited by the touching Brows could not be done, of which opinion also Ri∣olanus is. These Pyramidall Muscles uni∣ted together by oblique fibres from this employment of the Will might be cal∣led Musculi severi & minaces, The Severe and Threatning Muscles. Dissect. XII. PRide, Arrogance, Contempt, and Wonderment, advance and lift up th eye-brows; so doth affected gravity when  is full of disdaine; the like action of th Eye-brows arch-like bent they use wh
are angry, and proudly threaten Revenge; Griefe and Sorrow also cause a man to use the same action of his Brows. This motion that exhibits so many signifi∣cations of the Mind, is performed by the benefit of those Muscles, which arising from the upper parts where the haire ends, descend into the Inferior parts, lifting up the Eye-brows; for, those Muscles of the Forehead are ra∣ther to be called (as Spigelius notes) the Muscles of the ye-brows, into which they are implanted, and to whose mo∣tion they serve; since they were not de∣signed for the corrugation of the Fore∣head, but the elevation of the Eye-brows: for, if they are reckoned among the Muscles of the Head that are seated in another part, only because they ad∣minister unto the actions of the Head; why should not then these also for the same reason, although seated in the Forehead, be called the Muscles of the Eye-brows? This motion of the Eye-brows Riolanus brings together with Dissection to prove, that the fibres of the Forehead are not oblique stretched out from the top of the Nose towards
the Temples, as Columbus will have them; nor that the wrinkles of the skin might obteine a transverse situa∣tion; but are carried right downwards as pleaseth Galen, to whom Vesalius and Fallopius yield their suffrage. These Mus∣cles if they remaine in the middle fi∣gure, as Anatomists speake, (wherein they do perpetually persist unlesse when at pleasure and our arbitriment they are removed) they deteine the Eye-brows in their native posture and situation; whose use of what decency and impor∣tance it is, appeares in those who by the unskilfulnesse of Chirurgions, and a transverse Dissection of the fibres of these Muscles, have been deprived of the use of these significations of the Mind, and have had their Eye-brows too much humbled, that they have fallen about their eyes. These Muscles from this action might be called Musculi Ad∣mirationis, the Muscles of Wonder or Admi∣ration. And because the Occipitiall Mus∣cles (in them that have them) assist▪ as the paire of the Forehead, to draw the skin and Eye-brows upward in these signi∣fications of the Mind, they may be cal∣led
for distinction sake, Musculi, sublimes, Arrogantiae, , Contemptuosae gra∣vitatis▪ The Lofty Muscles, or the Muscles of Arogance, the Threatners, and the Muscles of disdainefull gravity. Memb. IV. Of the Muscle appointed to the Eye-lids for the expediting certaine signifi∣cant motions of the Mind. THe Eye-lids which are light, most  and soft, are fitted for a most agile and prompt motion, and to ex∣hibit many significations of the Mind; yet some have thought the lower Lid immoveable, and so by consequence not capable of expressing a voluntary motion of the Mind; of which opinion was Galen, who expostulates with Na∣ture, why the lower Eye-lid should not participate with the upper in points of voluntary motion? Since it was ordain∣ed for the same end, and hath a place no lesse accommodated for the receiving of Muscles. Nature seemes here, as he confesseth, unjust; when she might
have divided it equally between them, yet she would gratifie the upper with the whole priviledge of motion: and not only unjust in that, but in making the lower Eye-lid lesse than the upper, which as other parts should have been equall, yet for that, he applauds the artifice: but his inference from thence, which he saies is perspicuous, that it needed no motion, there he failes; the Reason of his Doubt he there shews upon an experiment of observation: and it seemes to him to need animad∣version, and if he had hit on the right, he promiseth to declare his mind in that Book of Doubtfull motions he intended to write. Here, saith he, it is sufficient to say that the subtlety of Na∣ture is such, that many Great men ha∣ving sought to find it out, yet have not attained unto the full knowledge of it. Vesalius in this follows Galen. Archan∣gelus saies the lower Eye-lids stand im∣movable, or immovable of themselves, unlesse they are stirred up by the motion of the Genae. Weker sayes they seeme to partake of no motion, there being no Muscle allowed unto them to endue
them with any instinct of action. Lau∣rentius conceives all the motion, and so consequently the signification, to be performed by the upper Eye-lid. Some say that it is after a manner moveable. Indeed the motion of the lower Lid, it being lesse, is very small and obscure; yet not so saith Riolanus, but every man may deprehend it in himself: the other being greater, hath a more evident mo∣tion. Bauhinus saies both the Eye-lids move, as is evident to sense. Parae∣us saies there is no difference between the lower and the upper Eye-lid, than that the upper brings forth a more open and manifest motion: the lower a more obscurer, otherwise Nature had in vain compassed it about with the substance of a Muscle, which late Anatomists have found out. And indeed the Cause of their motion is very admirable; for, it altogether imported them to be endu∣ed with a voluntary motion, else there were no use for them. But to all volun∣tary motions Nature hath provided certaine Instruments, which we call Muscles, which move the particles into which they are inserted; for, since we
can move them quicker or slower, oft∣ner or seldomer, or altogether refraine their motion, and againe excite them to motion, is not he deceived who saies their actions are naturall and besides our Will? And in vaine were they gi∣ven us unlesse we could use them at plea∣sure, and to some signification of the Mind. The Muscles that are designed for the significant motions of the Eye-lids are three, one right, and two semi-circular. Dissect. XIII. IMpudence, Contempt, and simple Ad∣miration, cause the Eyes to stare, and require an open Eye; which action proceeding from these intensions of the Mind, is intense and Tonique, or strain∣ed into an extreme figure. Paraeus will allow no peculiar Muscle for any such signification of the Mind; But the Broad Muscle performes all, and by its porrection it may serve to open the Eye; who having by an exact Anato∣micall administration of that Muscle, shewn how it mingles it self with the
skin, and the Muscles of the Lips; when you come, saith He, to the Eyes, you shall teach how by this one Muscle, the Eye is both opened and shut; because it is compounded of a threefold kind of fibres. Although by the opi∣nion of all men that have hitherto written of Anatomie, these actions are said to be done by the force of two Muscles appointed for that purpose, and although in their publique Demon∣strations these two Muscles are wont to be solemnly shewn, yet I think, saith He, the very Demonstrators are no more assured of them than my selfe. And the ground upon which he tooke this opinion up is, because to those that separate the fleshy Pannicle or broad Muscle, no other Musculous flesh ap∣peares in those places, than what is of that Pannicle, whether you guide your Knife from the front downward, or from the Ball of the Cheeke upward: besides, in incisions in the Eye-brows upon urgent occasion, we are prohibited to work them transverse, lest this broad Muscle falling upon the Eye, should make the upper Eye-lid or upper cilium
immoveable: and if any such incision happen by chance, we are bid presently to sew it up; which thing is a very strong argument that the motion of the upper Cilium or the Superior Eye-lid is not performed by its own proper Muscles, but wholy depends upon the broad Muscle for performance. But his next Argument is somewhat Philoso∣phicall to the Doctrine of voluntary motion. Now (saith he) if there should be such proper Muscles in the upper Eye-lid as are described, because when one Muscle acts, his opposite or An∣tagonist doth cease, and ought to give way and be obsequious: that which is said to open the Eye working, his Op∣posite obsequiously yielding, it neces∣sarily follows the Muscle of the upper Eye-lid will be drawn towards it Prin∣ciple or beginning, as we see to happen in Convulsions; because the operation of a Muscle is a Collection of that part which it moves, towards its Head; since therefore such a kind of Collection no where appeares, therfore he thinks it ap∣parent, that all the motion of the upper Eye-lid depends upon this broad Muscle,
and that it is the sole Author of this mo∣tion, and consequently of these signifi∣cations of the Mind exhibited thereby. Nor is it to be omitted what Galen affirmes, that the skin was endued with a voluntary motion even for this very action, for it was necessary the Eye-lids should be much opened when we endeavor to see many Externall things at one time, which is their intention who in this posture simply admire, or impudently Gaze; for which (a little) the circumfused skin, as well that above in the Forehead, as that beneath at the Ball of the Cheeke, hath a voluntary motion, that by extension thereof it might open wide the Eyes. Vesalius speakes of a broad and fleshy Glandule, which seemes to him to be a certaine vice-Muscle to lift up the Eye-lid. But we will conclude with the gene∣rall opinion of the best Anatomists, that these motions of the Mind are signified by the operation of that Muscle of the Eye-lid, which is commonly called Rectus, or the straight Muscle, and from this office Apertor oculi, and Artollens palpebram, the Eye-opener, or the Gazer,
placed in the upper region of the Or∣bit of the Eye, neare the Musculus Artollens or Lifter of the Eye, being like also in figure to it, proceeding from the same Principle as the rest which move the Eye, and inserted into the Car∣tilage of the upper Eye-lid, and by its fibres contracted inwards, draws the su∣perior Eye-lid upwards, the lower of its own accord subsiding into its place, assisted, according to the intensnes of the Act, in these significations, by the Mus∣cle of the Forehead. So that this Muscle commonly called Attollens palbebram, might be named from the declaration of these affections of the Mind effected by their moving, Musculus Impudicus, vel simplicis Admirationis, the Muscle of staring Impudence, or simple Admiration. ¶ Another expression of the Mind is sometime performed by this Muscle, to wit, Pride, and Loftinesse; for Solomon in a Physiognomicall Proverb, observed a Generation of men, whose Eye-lids were lifted up; and therefore whereas the At∣tollent Muscle of the Eye is called by Physiognomers Musculus superbus, be∣cause it is a sign of Pride to have lofty
Eyes: Casserius the expert Anatomist, would rather have the declarations of pride and humility to be drawn from the Eye-lids, and especially from the upper Eye-lid, for who have this elate, are proud and fierce; they who have it depressed, and shutting as it were halfe of the Eye, so that they seeme to re∣spect the ground, are humble and mild. So that it might be called Musculus Sub∣limis the Sublime or haughty Muscle of the Eye-lids. Dissect. XIIII. FEare and pusillanimitie, cause the af∣frighted Eyes to twinkle, that is to open and incontinently to shut more than is convenient. Some have thought this motion of the Eye-lids to be done by the instinct of Nature, and not up∣on deliberation or set purpose; for so Aristotle would have them twinkle a∣gainst things whose occurrence threat∣ens danger, So that the Muscle were unprofitable. But in regard of the pre∣servation of the Eye, against which some dangerous thing is presented it is
meerely arbitrary: and naturall one∣ly when it proceedeth from some affection of the Body, unto which it is obsequious, as in the Cynique Spasme, wherein the upper Eye-lid is seene to be naturally mo∣ved. Casper Hofman. very well contends that this motion of the Eye-lids is meerely voluntary by the example of those two Gla∣diators of whom Plinie makes men∣tion in his Naturall History, also by the example of Socra es of whom Aulus Gellius speakes, but that frequent interpellation happens from things that occur from without, especially the aire light, &c. Indeed usually it s done with no great bent or intention of the mind, as those motions of Election are: but with a kind of remission or slacking of that contention, as they performe acti∣ons, who doe a thing, as 'twere Drow∣zily and with lesse heede; and such ne∣ver performe a perfect motion, especial∣ly Tonique. Now because it is so soone done (as the Proverb speakes) that for the most part we are not aware of its motion, therefore it may be Aristtole
rather call'd it naturall than voluntary. 'Tis true, Galen puts this among doubt∣full motions and those which are not yet found out. The Voluntary and Na∣turall motions (saith he) are mingled in the Eye-lids motion, which is done in many men without the assent of the will, and you shall scarce see any one who can so order his Eye-lids, as not to move them, and to remaine with o∣pen eyes untill he would close them; and who shuts them but seldome. But this motion is meerely Animal, as Ma∣inellus and others by many instances affirme, and Galen afterwards confes∣sed his former ignorance in this matter, where he declares the manner how this is done, and reprehends those who were of his former opinion. Some Sophisters (saith he) when they had neither found the moving Muscles, nor he reason of the motion, arrived to hat point of impudence to denie that motion to have any dependance upon ur will, but to bee naturall, as those nvoluntary and necessary motions of he Heart, Arteries and other instru∣ments: thinking it better to lye, than to
confesse their ignorance. araeus will have no peculiar Muscle ordained for this action, but to be the worke onely of the Broad Muscle. But with Spigeli∣us and others we shall declare that this motion of pusillanimity is perform'd by two semicircular Muscles called Clauden∣tes, the Eye-shutters; one superior, seated in the superior Eye-lid, the other infe∣rior; that being greater, this lesser; yet there are not wanting some who would have these to be one single Muscle, which yet are two; and observ'd ever to be double in men that are somewhat Musculous, and their principles and in∣sertion are distinct, although it be true that their circular fibres doe touch each other; to these add, that both of them re∣ceive distinct Nerves from distinct places▪ But these Muscles are seated between the fleshy membrane and that which is brought out of the pericranium, of which the superior or greater, ariseth with a acute begining out of the inner angle  the Eye and part of the Eye-brow tha is next the Nose, and so goes transvers∣ly toward the outer angle, and at last is inserted into the outer angle. The les∣ser
being arisen from the top of the Nose neere the foreward angle of the lower Eye-lid, with a sharpe begining likewise, when, being carried transvers∣ly, it comes to the midle part of the Eye-lid, becomes more fleshy, circuites the externall angle, and ascending to the superior Eye-lid, it is inserted into it with a broad end. These two Muscles when contracted into themselves, the greater drawes downe the upper Eye-lid, and the lesser attracts and raiseth up the lower Eye-lid, so that the lower Eye-lid is onely lifted up, and that with the second Shutter. Baubinus who would have these two to be but one Muscle by reason of their fibres which are continu∣ed sayes, that this Drawn towards its begining, at one time moves the upper Eye-lid downwards and the lower up∣ward, and so conjoynes and shuts both the lids together; which the continui∣ty in circuite and angle, and the mov∣ing in the same angle, especially more constrict which is perceived by sight and touch doe prove: for, nothing can be constringed and come to a mutu∣all contact, unlesse some parts be led
upward and other parts downward; But in respect of the Eye-lids these are two Semicircular Muscles, and separa∣ted, each makes a Semicircle, but both joyn'd together they make a perfect cir∣cle; but there is a Semicircular Muscle found in each Eye-lid as well in the lower as the upper, whose motions are manifest, neither could so quick and frequent a motion be performed by the upper Eye-lid alone, since the motion downward requires a longer space than is convenient for so great celerity, wher∣fore they easier come to a mutuall con∣tact, if one be assisted by the other; the lower Eye-lid although it have two Right motions, yet it hath not two Right Muscles as other parts usually have for the same occasion; but this Cir∣cular Muscle performes both actions. Now these two Semicircular Muscles or one circular which thus shut the Eye in feare and pusilanimity might be called from their manifestation of the mind, Musculi or Musculus Pusillanimitatis, the Muscles or Sphincter of Pusillanimity. But true Cowards who are of the worse Sect of winkers are wont to shut their
Eyes very hard, not daring to behold at all what they apprehend so dange∣rous; to this extreme figure that of Galen is to be applied, who observes that one reason why the circumjacent skin was endued with a voluntary mo∣tion was, the reliefe of this action: for, the eyes that were then to be exactly closed and constring'd by all the cir∣cumjacent parts, when they feare the incursion of any danger upon them, for that end the bordering skin (both that above in the Forehead, and that which lyes below about the balls of the Cheeke) being replicated upon it selfe by a voluntary motion, shuts the Eye according to the timorous endeavour of the mind; and upon this occasion, the Orbicular Muscle of the Eye-brows is not onely assistant, but chiefe Operator, which may thereupon be called Muscu∣lus vecordiae, the Dastard Muscle, or the Ranke cowards Sphincter.
Memb. V. Of the Muscles that serve to the significati∣ons of the Mind exhibited by the moti∣ons of the Eye. THe Eyes of man are the most cleere Interpretors of the affections o the mind; wherefore since they were or that purpose to be endued with a voluntary motion, and all motions ar performed by Muscles, therefore th great Architect gave Muscles to th Eyes, whereby they are most swiftly moved according to the inward moti∣ons of the mind, whence the Eye by th Philosopher is said to be the mos moveable part of our Body, by which advantage it hath more opportunitie to expresse the motions of our mind▪ Which Muscles are usually accounte six, because as they say there are bu six motions in mans Eye, allowing no Muscle for the Tonique motion of th Eye, which yet many ocular Anato∣mists doe; which Muscle may be divide into more. If you would observ
the proper motion of these Muscles (when they remaine in their seat) bind a thread to every one of them not far from the Tendon, and then draw it, and you shall see how each Muscle works the Eye to that motion which exhibits the signification of the Mind which it was ordained to promote. Dissect. XV. PRide, Contempt, and Disdaine, lift the Eyes upward toward the Eye∣brows. The Muscle, the Organ that causeth this lofty motion or exaltation of the Eye is, the great Muscle, the first in order; for, Pride will have the first place, and loves precedencie. It is com∣monly called Attollens or the Lifter, ari∣sing from the upper part of the orbite of the Eye, neere where the Optique Nerve comes forth, and is inserted into the Coat (called Cornea) of the Eye, where it is cleare and neare the Iris, by a thin and membranous Tendon, which when it is drawn to its Head, it helps to declare the Pride of such men who are lifted up in their own conceit. There∣fore
more elegantly and apposite to th signification of the Mind, named Musculus superbus, the proud Muscle; becau it lifteth up the Eye with a kind of Didain, or the Elate and proud Muscle, becau in such men it doth seeme to be rounde and more prompt to its office, as Spgelius well observes. And although the is a naturall reason for the greatness an situation of this exalted Muscle, becau there is greater strength required to  up than to pull down: yet it is very remarkable, that it hath a signature for th signification of Greatness, in that proportion it hath to the other Muscles and of loftiness and exaltation of Mind in being placed above in the superio part of the Eye. This Muscle might  more fitly called Musculus Sanctus,  Devout or holy Muscle, this being the Mucle by whose operation in the pious afection of the Soule we lift up our Ey to Heaven in Prayer. Dissect. XVI. IN Bashfulnesse, and Shame-faced modsty, and in exhibiting an humble revrence, with a sweet demisseness we dra
our dejected Eyes downward toward the lower Lid. The Muscle that causeth this motion is, the Second of the Eye commonly called Musculus Deprimens, the Depressor or puller-down of the Eye; by some Anatomists (as I find it fitted to my Design) it is called Mus∣culus Humilis, the Humble Muscle; for ariation we call it the Muscle of Mo∣desty, or the Bashfull Muscle, Not with∣out an Allegoricall signature of pro∣portion lesser than the other, although he Eye also which with its own weight ends downward needed no greater . And as Humility is opposite to Pride,  justly seated opposite to the First, and  the inferior and lower part of the Eye, by that signature of situation shew∣g, that it is fitted to expresse the low∣nesse of Mind, which it most sweetly  when it is drawn to its Head. It iseth in the inferior part opposite un∣ the former Muscle of Pride, and hath  insertion as the former. Dissect. XVII. TO turn the apple of the eye towards the Nose, is their peculiar action
who are Sowre and Severe; for, such are of a Contuitive, Grave, and Cogiabund aspect, such as is seen in those who with some Tragicall and Goblin-like look would affright and scare others. The Muscle which when it is drawn to its Head performes this motion and signi∣fication of the Mind is, the third Muscle seated in the great Angle, and ariseth from the Orbite of the Eye, neere the Origination of the Proud Muscle, and is inserted as the former. It is common∣ly called Adducens, the To-leader; be∣cause it leads the eye inward towards the Nose; & by the Barbarous Bibitorius, the Tosse-pot; because they make use of this Muscle who look into the Cup they drink out. Dr Crooke calls it the Gleejng Muscle; for that the Eye is usually turnd that way in gleejng; we may call it the Squinting Muscle; I say the Tragick or Hobgoblin Muscle, but most oppo∣site and pathetically it may be called Musculus acerbus & severus, the Sowre an severe Muscle.
Dissect. XVIII. WAywardnesse, Indignation, Contempt, and Disdaine, sometimes draw the Eye to the lesser angle, or to the Tem∣ples; which motion and signification of the Mind is performed by the fourth Muscle opposite to the third, arising and reposed in the outer side, or externall Angle of the Eye, and inserted as the former, and commonly called Abducens, or the Fro-leader; for, when this Mus∣cle is drawn to its Head, the Eye becomes the Interpreter of such affections of the Mind. This Muscle I find more signifi∣cantly called Musculus indignatorius, the Muscle of Indignation, or the wayward Muscle. We call it saith Dr. Crooke the Sue-Muscle, or the Muscle of Disdaine. And the obliquity of the situation affords  signature for the signification of the motion: for, when the Eye assisted by his Muscle looks askaunce or askew up∣on any, it most properly exhibits an overthwart regard, or slighting Dispo∣ition of the Mind.
Dissect. XIX. WAntonnesse, and Amatorious petu∣lancy make use of a rolling Eye to expresse their procacity in. Archangelus conceives that this Circular motion of the Eye, and expression of the Mind is done, when all the foure first Muscles at divers times without stay successively work. Which is also the opinion of Co∣lumbus. Which Fallopius reprehends and saies, that they erre who think the ob∣lique motions of the Eyes are done by the straight Muscles loosed and stretched by turns, and acting in sequence, deny∣ing that out of two or more refracted right motions, a Circular should result; since there is no proportion between a crooked and a straight; we may adde with Galen, one motion is not made of many, as figures are made of lines; yet Platerus is of opinion, that if two right Muscles of both sides work together, oblique motions may be also accompli∣shed by their cooperations. But Baui∣nus, Vesalius, Spigelius (which is the most true and authenticall opinion)
attribute this obscure circumversion and rolling expression of the Mind to the fift and sixt Muscle, which as Vesalius well observes, as they chiefly conduce to Circumversion of the Eye, yet they drive it after a manner upward & down∣ward: So that the whites obliquely cast up & down, cause a leering look, which is called the Seepes Eye. The fift Muscle which is the first oblique, and the rol∣ling or circumvolving exterior or infe∣rior from its situation, and Minor be∣cause lesse than the sixt, this is seated in the exterior and internall seat of the Orbite, between the Eye, and the Ten∣dons of the Humble and Severe Mus∣cles, having its originall from the rist which is in the lower part of the Orbite, and joynes the first bone of the Jaw to the fourth, and is implanted neare the Iris with an oblique Line, between the Tendons of the proud and wayward Muscles; whose very situation and inser∣tion shew, that love which they serve to expresse, is a passion compounded of all the other▪ the office of this Muscle is to roll the Eye obliquely downward to the externall Angle with a circular
moion, and so to turne the sight of the Eye towards the Nose. Yet about the rising and insertion of this Muscle there is great difference of opinion among Anatomists, the most erroneous Arch∣angelus hath well confuted, that is theirs, who would have it to rise and end in the Eye, which is contrary to the Prin∣ciple of voluntary motion: for, if eve∣ry thing that moves, is moved upon some Qicent, and in the moving of the Muscles, the originall of the Muscle moving is ever quiescent, it would fol∣low that the Eye in the very selfe same article of time should be moved and rest, which is impossible. The sixt Mus∣cle, and the second of the Oblique com∣monly called the interior or superior circumagent, and the Major because the longest of all the Muscles of the Eye (which although it exceed them all in length, yet on the contrary in regard o its tenuity it is the smallest of all, this not exactly oblique as the other, but partly straight and partly oblique, i ariseth out of the same place from whence the Adducens or To-leade doth, and having passed by the Pully▪
and going over the Proud Muscle, as amorousnesse many times surmounts mens pride, and brings them to a wan∣ton humility) it is inserted in the up∣per region of the Eye, between the Tendons of the Proud and Wayward Muscl; the use of this Muscle is to roll the Eye with a kind of circular motion towards the inner Angle, and so to draw the apple of the Eye from the No∣strills. These Muscles I find according to my Design, called Musculi amatorij, the Rollers, or Muscles of Love, and Circu∣lares, the Muscles of the amorous Circuit; the superior Circulator being also cal∣led Musculus Trocleae, or the Muscle of the Pully, which is a little Cartilage re∣sembling a Pully, hung by a Ligament in the concave or upper and lower part of the inner Angle of the Eye, made for the Eyes sake, found out first by Fallopi∣us, and by Laurentius and Aquapendent called his Pully, serving this Muscle for a promptnesse of motion, which from thence obteined its name; for, it hath a Canale through which the Chord of this Muscle passeth, and when the Mus∣cle is drawn inward towards its Prin∣ciple
or Head, his Chords or Strings with a kind of circular motion ob∣volve or roll the Eye to the greater An∣gle. This is the Muscle most active in this amorous rolling of the Eye, and hath a signature for the facilitating of an easie and amorous insinuation, expedi∣ting and facilitating the motion of the other; both of them being not so fleshy as the others and small, have a signature for a swift and nimble moving, to which the round figure of the Eye doth much confer; for, a Sphericall figure is most convenient for a swift motion, which precedes all other movings in a wonder∣full velocitie, a circular motion having two advantages of speed beyond any other. Fallopius saies he cannot some∣times refraine from Laughing, when he sees in mans eyes Muscles the Authors of Circular motion, and yet that they were not found by the most exercised Anato∣mists. Dissect. XX. IN Cogitation, Admiration, attentive D∣liberation, and in voluntary Extasies of the mind the Eyes are fixed, and the Eye-lids remaine unmoved, and the
Head let downe, we contemplat the earth with a set, wist, or museing look; which motion is Tonique, and is done as Buhirus, Laurentius, Spigelius and others suppose, when the foure first Muscles of the Eyes, the Lifter the De∣pressor the To-leader and the Fro-leader, worke together, for then the Eye is drawn inward, fixed, established and contein'd; which is then according to Nature, when the fibres of all the Mus∣cles are equally intended and stretched out; So that the Muscles seeme then to be at rest, though indeed (as we have often said) they doe as Galen speakes, quiete agere, act in rest, for every action of the Muscle is a moving. The man∣ner how this is done (as they say) is very remarkable, the foure Muscles arise from the Conus of the Orbit of the eye or the roote of the Optique Nerves, thence stretched to the Optique Nerve and to the eye in a straight line they end to the horny Coate, but before they come thither they end in a broad Ten∣don whereby they are joyned to the Tendons of the other Muscles & seeme to constitute a proper membrane, en∣compassing
the whole eye, this tendo∣nous membrane is inserted into the hornie Coate in that part where it is pellucid before the Iris or Rainbow of the Eye, Whence it comes to passe that al the Muscles working together the Eye is staid and established. But Columbus who challengeth the fift Muscle as dis∣covered first by his invention, affirmes that Muscle to come into the aid of the other foure, which stayes the Eye, as its situation shewes, when it is contracted towards its Head, holding the Eye that it fall not out of its Seate. And Lauren∣tius will have all the six Muscles of the Eye to concurre and to stretch their fi∣bres to this Ballancing or equall fixing of the Eye. This makes Lavellus, Fon∣tanus and others contradict Galen, Vesa∣lius, Fuchius and others that follow him, as if there were no need of a sea∣venth Muscle. But although Spigelius and others will allow no Muscle to be purposely assign'd to this Tonique mo∣tion of the Eye: yet Avicen, Fernelius and some late expert Anatomists are for the seaventh Muscle, affirming that the Muscle which is most active and provi∣dently
design'd to this action is, that bulbous and orbicular Muscle which they leave to Beasts, who have need of such a Muscle by reason of their prone aspect, whereas mans os sublime makes it un∣necessary. As for them who cannot see this Muscle (if there were any doubt of it) the expression of Fontanus which he useth about Folius his affirming to have sometimes seene the venae lacteae, may be applyed. It is easier to believe one that writes affirming he hath seen it, than him who denies he hath seene it: for, because one hath not seen a thing, it doth not straightwise follow that that thing is not, but that which one truely sees, that is, because sense is of things existent. This Muscle therefore that encompasseth the Optique Nerve and the Basis of the Eye, hath a signa∣ture of Situation for this purpose, and therefore being the Chiefe operator it might be called the Tonique Muscule. And because Admiration, Cogitation and at∣tentive Deliberation are a kind of suspen∣sion or fixing of the mind, and an in∣tent application (for, the whole force of the mind is fixed upon the thing and
therefore it is called an intention) And because Extasie is a certaine excesse of the mind and phantsie in Admiration, from whence the Nerves are stretched and the Eyes made immoveable in re∣semblance of the posture of the mind, this Muscle might be called Musculus intentae Cogitationis, voluntariae Estasis, intentae Deliberationis, the Muscle of ear∣nest Cogitation and Deliberation, or the Muscle of the Ecstaticall intention of the mind, or the Musing Muscle. ¶ A∣mazement, Astonishment, and Stupidity, (passions of the mind working in an extraordinary manner upon the same Muscles being then passive) cause such an immoveable fixing and staring of the Eye. This is of things formidable and is an affection above an Extasie, which has then no name but is called Horror from its effect; for, the Spirits that move the Muscles being made im∣moveable, the Eyes become stiff as horne; for, admiration causeth a tension, feare frigiditie, whence the Nerves be∣come distended and as it were congea∣led. Generally this set motion is the o∣ther kind of that aspect which they call
Tonique, and is besides nature, when the Eyes remaine fixed whether we will or no: which happens (as they usually say) when the faculty that moves the Muscles is resolved, weaken'd or wholy extinguished; or because those Muscles are all equally gather'd and contracted into their Heads. Memb. VI. Of the Muscles assign'd the Eares for cer∣taine significations of the mind. Dissect. XXI. CLaramontius and indeede all Semei∣oticall Philosophers are here lost, concluding that there is scarce any re∣fluction of the affections into the Eares, and that of themselves they have no or∣der at all to action. Caelius saith they are immoveable, or if they bee moved that motion of theirs is duller and lesse preceptible. Galen takes not away all motion from our Auricles, whose sub∣stance is (as his words are) but fere immobilis. Athenaeus describing Hercules greedily eating saith he mov'd his Eares
no lesse than Qudrpedes doe; where Causabon besides which he brings out of Eustathius speakes of one Muretus who could manifestly move his Eares. And Hosman sayes hee hath eene them that could doe as much. Justinian the Em∣perour had such Eares, and therefore the people among other opprobious indig∣nities offer'd him in the Theater, as you shall find in Proopius, called him Asse. S. Augustin writes of certaine who could at their pleasure move their Eares either one alone or both together. Vesalius also sayes he saw in Padua a Lawyer one Claudius Symnius a Forojuliensian a fa∣cetious man, and one Petrus Ravisce∣rius of Geneva a valiant and stout man, who could at their pleasure move their Eares. All the Family of the Flacci o Rome had this moving of the Eares, and Scipio Du Plesis the Resolver a great ob∣server of the curiosities of Nature sayes that hee himselfe had seene in Gascoig two men who had this moving. And when I was a boy I remember a School-fellow of mine in whom I was wont to observe that by way of sport he would often wagg his Eares. So that the Eares
although in man for the most part they are immoveable, so that their motion is sensibly perceived in very few; yet if it happen that we move them at our pleasure as has bin observ'd in many, that is performed by Muscles; Caelius imagines that these Muscles which are perceived to be so wonderfully moved in some men, is not by reason of the inward motion of the Eare, but by ex∣trusion or excussion of the Muscle that moves the Jaw, which sometimes is drawne so neere the Eare that it touch∣eth it. But indeede the Muscles whose action is motion and the Nerves which are commonly observed about the Eares doe declare it to be true that the motive virtue doth flow into the Eares. And Vesalius the great Anatomist affirmes that they are moved by reason of their Muscles. Indeede as Casserius wel argues, Although the energeticall force of moving be only deprehended by the senses as apparent now & then in a few certaine men, yet the influence of moti∣on is generall into the Eares of al men, which makes them partakers of volunta∣ry motion; for, unlesse it were so, wee
must protest against the Doctrine of all Anatomists now from many ages con∣firmed by most certaine, infallible and frequent observations; That motion is not the essentiall action of a Muscle, see∣ing there is no auricle but hath its pro∣per Muscles: Neither doth the Sensu∣all immobility of all auricles almost perswade this very thing; for, it is an Elenchus Consequentiae, The motion of the auricles appeares not to sence, Ergo they have none: For, although we are to yield to reasons, when the effect ap∣peares to the senses; yet where the sense proves defective and reasons may pre∣vaile, the effect is not to bee denied; for, if as Galen witnesseth, there concurre to an Agent a fit situation, a due space of time, a valid force of the Agent and a disposition of matter to receive, what should hinder the effect? these for the most part to be present in the accom∣plishing the motion of the Eares, even Sense doth teach; wherefore although the motions of the Eares are not made manifest, yet it is not to be denyed, but some motion at least and lesse per∣spicuous to sense is performed by them.
The cause why men doe not ordinarily and evidently move the exterior Carti∣lages of their Eares as other Animalls doe which have them is, as Baubinus and others conjecture, because those princi∣palls of motion are very small, So that Galen ealls them certaine Delineaments of Muscles, and they have little threads of Nerves, So that the motive Spirits cannot in sufficient quantity flow into them: and the Eares are too little and Cartilagineous, whereby the little Bran∣ches of the Muscles and Nerves cannot be expanded; whence their motions are so rare, and so little perspicuous and obvious to sense, which are greater in such men whose Eares are perspicu∣ously moved. And where the occipitiall Muscles are found, these of the Eares are manifestly discover'd. Hence it may be Columbus had this knack of moving his Eares, and he St. Augustine speakes of, both which could move the whole skin of their Heads by virtue of those Mus∣cles, and having them (if Fallopius and Riolanus his affirmation hold) had these Muscles of the Eares manifestly obedi∣ent to their wills.
Another reason why the Eares in men are not ordinarily at least not evi∣dently seene to move is, lest the Sense o Discipline should be depraved, especially since the eares of man are small where∣fore they are moved every way to re∣ceive sounds by the most swift motion of the Head, and therefore in Brutes who want that expeditious mobility of the Head, they are greater, to be more capable of sounds from all parts, and to drive away flyes, which man can doe with his hands. So that to prevent a greater inconveniency and undecen∣cy than their ordinary employment could recompence, they are usually sus∣pended from preceptible actions in most men, yet, this is not without a Tacite elogie of the Pleropheria of motion which the face enjoyes by its Muscles, to which the surplusage of auricular motion might seeme unnecessarily re∣dundant; for, the Face of man is so suf∣ficiently provided of Muscles, the Or∣gans of voluntary motion, which are ever ready to expresse any motion his will is pleased to concurre unto, and make a significant declaration by, that
he needes no such additaments as the Muscles of the Eares would make, if they were ordinarily reduced to mani∣fest action, yet such who have these Muscles large enough for apparent acti∣on, seeme to have a Patent for excel∣lent Pantomimicall utterance, such addi∣tionall helpes, in all probability, giving advantage of supernumerary gestures. Now although to men that can expresse their affections not onely in wordes, but also by speaking motions, especially in their Faces which are open and discove∣red, Nature hath seem'd to have thought it undecent and unprofitable, to have any great volubility or flexibility (for so we must speake for want of better wordes) in the motion of their Eares as other Animalls, the flexibility of his Head and Neck serving the Eares to all such intents and purposes; yet since these Auricular Muscles (the in∣vention whereof are due to Fallopius) were appositely conspicuous in them by whom they were manifestly moved while they lived, and are not onely de∣scribed by him, but most Anatomists, we will first describe them, and then see
whether any thing can be made of their motions. They are usually number'd foure, Common, and Proper. Attollens or the lifter up, Deprimens or the pulle down, Adducens ad interiora the To-leader, Abducens the Fro-leader. The Attollent seated in the anterior part of the Face placed upon the Temporall Mus∣cle the Attollent of the Jaw; From the externall end of the Frontall Muscle where it is contiguous to the Temporal is inserted into the upper part of the Auricle. The Detrahent seated in the hinder part of the Head fetching its o∣riginall from the Mammillary processe of the Tempils and ends in a Tendon which embraceth the whole roote o the Cartilage of the Eare so, that one portion of it toucheth the upper part, the other the middle, the third the lower part. The forward Adducent or To-leader is a Common Muscle, to wit a particle of that which they usually call Quadratus or the Detraent of the Cheekes, this ascending with its fibres is implanted into the roote of the Auri∣cle. The backward Aducent is placed in the Nowle arising from the Covers
of the Muscles of the Nowle is implan∣ted into the hinder part of the Eare. Since therefore Nature laid not in these Muscles as intending them for any  of Hearing, for we heare against our will; some other use they have, since no∣hing appeares in the Body that was made in vaine, or hath not some office signed. But our Anatomists that ac∣nowledge, name, and describe these Muscles, nay, appoint their very acti∣ns, expresse not what those Actions ay aime at, or are usefull unto, no ention of any advantage to the Head  their moving; why should these uscles passe thus by tradition from and to Hand, and yet remaine as non gnificants? they had as good be non Li∣ets. I confesse, so novell a thought which for all I can find was never en∣rtained or scand by any Head) would  a curious Fantsie, and such a one  is, whose Motto is, In nova fert imus, tentata relinquere pernox, to tempt a Comment upon this conceal∣ent, and the great silence of preteri∣n in all Dissectors; But having had  opportunity (since this Designe) to
observe any one that had this knack o auricular motion, I shall not suffer my Fantsie to drive far after a seeming Personality, our Scope being to describ such Actions only, which are generally and universally used by all men, as ap∣parent significations of their Mind  and indeed there could be little use o such a Nicetie, since few wise men de∣light much to shew their Eares. But a Columbus would not describe these Mus∣cles because they were but rarely found yet confesseth he had found two of them and at last that he had observed Eare like unto Brutes in men, which I sup∣pose he meant of their motion; So  shall leave others to guesse what pro∣portion these Auricular motions in me do hold with the moveable Eares o Beasts, who participate with us in point of Animal motion. It is well know that most of Creatures that have n Countenance to expresse the variation of their Sensitive Appetites and Imagi∣nation, do expresse their Senses by cer∣taine motions or wagging of their Eare for when they are fearefull or affrighted they do auriculis micare, wag their Eares
uccessively erecting and depressing, or anging one Eare, the other erect; when hey are faint and weary their Eares lan∣uish; when they are erect or furious, they  up teir Eares; when they are sick, heir Eares flag and appeare as it were esolv'd. Now, as in other Creatures he motions of the Ere have their di∣inct significations; so no question they ave in those men in whom they are erceived to move, and in most of us,  we had subtiltie enough to note them, nd such an open conveniency of obser∣ation as we have fo Auricular motions  Beasts. Memb. VII. f the Muscles that serve to the Significa∣tions of the Mind, exhibited by the motions of the Nose. THe whole Nose is not, indeed, mo∣ved, but only the inferior Cartila∣nous parts, which Anatomists are wont o call the Wings of the Nose; which nce they are movable, and were to be oved by a voluntary motion, there
was a necessity that Muscles should be inserted into them; for although their chiefe significations may seeme to be performed by the Muscles of the Lips, insomuch as they also touch the Wings of the Nose, even as the first Muscle of the Cheekes or Face, is inserted into the root of the Nose: Yet in those that have great Noses, Anatomists constitute two∣fold Muscles peculiar to the Nose. These move the Wings of the Nose with a voluntary motion, the other part of the Nose remaining immoveable; and being throughout connexed with the skin that lies over them, it administers unto the Motion and Corrugation thereof. So that it is apparent to the Eye that the Nose is moved with a vo∣luntary motion: So likewise it follows and is agreed upon that its motions are accomplished by Muscles, although the Controversie be great among Anato∣mists concerning their Essence, Originall, Number, Figure and Connexion; absurd therefore is their opinion, which de∣prives the Nose of all voluntary motion, affirming that it is only lightly moved by the intervention and tract of inspi∣red
Ayre, since this exterior motion of the Nose is so manifest, and appeares so obedient unto our Will, that no man but may perceive it, especially since in the Dissection of the Nose, you shall find Muscles which no skilfull Anato∣mists can deny to be the true Authors of this Action. Dissect XXII. SAgacity, Nose-wisdome, and Sensorious Derision, cause a man to crispe and rinkle his Nose upwards, the Nostrils being so raised and contracted, that the Nose seemes crooked and hooked, and by hat meanes becomes acute. These sig∣nifications of the Mind are exhibited y the Nose, through the operation of hose Muscles of the Nose, which are ommonly called Abducentes, or Aperi∣ntes, or Dilatores, the openers, or stretch∣ng Muscles, which are two paire. Cas∣rius (indeed) would have this to be ut one Muscle which hitherto hath een accounted double, dilating the ostrills by drawing the Wings of the ose upwards, that upon any exigency
of Passion the Aire might have a more plentifull Ingresse and Egresse; for, otherwise this Muscle would be void of all employment; yet somtimes being not sufficient alone, for some extraordinary necessity, it calls the Muscles of the Cheekes unto its aid, yet when reason requires, one part of it can act alone, the other part resting from action. But they are two paire, the first paire drawing its originall from the Jaw-bone neere the first proper paire of the Lips, is in∣serted partly into the lower wing of the Nose, and partly into the higher part of the upper Lip called the Philtre: The other paire covering both the sides of the Nose resembles a Triangle; For, it ariseth with an acute Origination from the top of the Nose, and descend∣ing obliquely by the bones of the Nose it ends in a broad Basis, and is implan∣ted into the wings of the Nose. Fallo∣pius sayes there are certaine fleshy fibre not few of them arising from th midle of the Eye-browes and the Spin or Ridge of the Nose, which descend∣ing obliquely, are added to the fir paire, and implanted into the pinnae o
sides of the Nose to draw or rivell it up∣wards, which you may reckon for a paire of the Dilators of the Nostrills, or for a part of the first paire it makes no matter which, so we know the use of of it in this revulsive action, and indeed these second paire are very properly by Dr. Rhead, called Erectores, or the Rai∣sers upwards. When these two paire worke together and are forcibly con∣tracted to their Heads, the wings of the Nose are drawn outward and upward▪ whereby the Nostrills are not a little dilated, and the skin of the Nose and the adjacent parts most ironically wrinkled: and because they are conti∣nued to the Muscles of the Lips, the upper Lip is drawn up together with the Nose, which sets a speaking emphasis upon the Action. Now be∣cause Nose-wisemen use this action, Snuffing up the wind withall, as if they smelt somewhat amisse; and that they arise from between the Eye-browes which are the naturall Censors of the Face, and the thrones of Judicature, obliquely descending to draw men as with a proboske, before the tribunall
of judgement; And the Nose which from its acutenesse in this action is often put for judgement, and dedicated to dry Derision or Sagacity, These Muscles might be significantly and most pro∣perly (in reference to the employment they have from the mind) bee called Musuli Sagacitatis, vel Censoriae judicatio∣nis, The Muscles of Sagacity, or Cen∣sorious judgement. Dissect. XXIII. CHoler, fuming and precipitate an∣ger or furious madnesse cause a man to blow up and downe his nostrills with wind, with which sudden and fiery sufflations the nostrills seeme to smoke like a Furnace. Galen seemes to be of opinion that the first part of this acti∣on of the Nostrills was caus'd by no Muscles, but by inspiration onely, and that in vehement inspirations, the wings of the Nose followed the impe∣tuous attraction of the breath; But Vesalius objects, that in very strong in∣pirations, the Nostrills may be pre∣serv'd in this posture. Aristotle (which
is no great marveil since he knew not the active force of Muscles) thought that in the profundity of the Nose there was a certaine valvula, which was ope∣ned with inspiration to give egresse to the Aire, which upon ceasing of the inspiration, was shut; which Galen re∣futes, pronouncing it to bee a thing very uncertaine, and that wants De∣monstration, and were to no pur∣pose; and if we should grant it (saith Galen) the motion of this Valvula must either be Animal, naturall, or violent. No man will say it is voluntary, because to Animal motion there is no neede of a Valvula, (such imaginary things as Henericus Regius hath gone about by demonstration to perswade us unto) nd an animal motion obeyes our will, ut this lid of the Nose is never open'd ut when we breath; againe, a Muscle is he instrument of a voluntary motion, but n the inner top of the Nostrils there are o Muscles: Nor will this motion be na∣rall as that of the Valvula of the Heart, because the motion of the Heart  perpetuall, and is not performed ac∣ording to our will: And we cannot
say it is violent, for Doores are open'd by the impetuous rushing in of Aire, without attraction of breath. But al∣though the Nostrills in great inspirati∣ons are a little elevated, and the wings are brought in as following the impe∣tuous force of the Breath, and in ex∣piration they againe reside and are blown out; yet the Nostrills were moveable and endued with Muscles for this purpose, because to greater and sudden inspirations and Efflations, they might not a little confer, their mobility wonderfully relieving the mind in such sudden Efflations of ang∣er; not a little assisted by the inter∣costall Muscles, which according to Galen serve for a plentifull Efflation, and in most vehement respiration, the Muscles above the Breast come into their aid. But although Columbus doth not acknowledge the constringen Muscles, yet we with Spigelius and o∣thers that describe them, must attribut this Action chiefely to them, althoug we can not fully agree with Stephanu That to the contraction of the wings o the Nose there are no opposite Muscle
who saith, when the Constringent cease from their action, the Nostrills are forcibly driven out with a Cholerique wind. These Constringent Muscles are very small as they can scarce be seene or distinguished, unlesse in those that have great Noses; and they are two paire, whereof the first paire is exter∣nall, arising from about the roote of the wings, and is inserted into the lit∣tle Globe of the Nose; the second is in∣ternall, and hidden in the cavity of the Nostrills, arising from the bones of the Nose where they end neere the Cartilages, and is inserted into the wings of the Nose: That contracted, depresseth the wings; this doth intro∣duce or bring them in, and so shuts the Nostrills. And it may be the orbicular Muscle of the upper Lip, drawing that Lip downward, doth withall constringe and shut the Nostrills, helping a little the attractive action of the Nose. Now because when incensed Choler gets into the Nose, the Muscles commonly call'd the Constringent are most active to bring wind to this Pepper-Wind-Mill, whereby it is put into a fuming motion,
they may be called Musculi magna Spi∣rantes, or Magni Spiritus, or Fumantes, or Excandescentiae, the fuming Chole∣rique, or the Chasing Muscles, or the Muscles of precipate Anger, or Mag∣namity. Memb. VIII. Of the Muscles active in the significations of the Mind exhibited by the Cheekes. FOr the advancement of the signifi∣cant motions of the Cheekes, there are two Muscles subservient to each of them, and these Muscles are seldome moved, but in the same motion they draw the Lips into consort of their significations; the Muscles being com∣mon to them and the Lips; for, these Muscles are not appropriated as peculi∣ar to the Cheek, but because they seeme more to serve the expressions of the Cheekes, than of the Lips, Spigelius thinkes it more fit, with that warning of their Community, to revoke them to the Service of the Cheekes, and so consequently to bee the instruments of
those voluntary motions which appeare in them, which are as Galen observes performed without the motion of the lower Jaw or opening of the Mouth, the Cheeke and the skin to which they are annexed being onely moved, which motion is evident before Dissection; the Region of their power being that infe∣rior looser part seated without the clo∣sed Jawes and is extended from the Chin almost unto the Eyes, and which by the breath recalled by the Lungs and reteined in the Lips shut, may bee blowne up. As for the Balls or Aples of the Cheekes, the seate of Shame, they have no Muscles, but are drawn in con∣sort by the motion of the Neighbour∣ing skin, not having any proper sig∣nifications appertainng to voluntary or locall motion; but although they have no Muscles disposed under them, yet is the skin loose having under it the membrane Periostium, and because its interior part adheres to the Cheekes, and the Superior part is united with the Musculous substance which is under the Forehead, it may be moved together with them. Galen allowes us, if we will,
to reckon this a fift Species of skin; but according to its proper Species, it differs nothing from the skin of the whole Body: yet because it hath this peculiar, to be conteined and hemmed in by two skins, and those movable, united and cohering with them, by that reason comes to be endued with a voluntary motion; and, therein, now differs from the skin of the whole Ani∣mall. So that being not moued per se, but per accidens, having no sensible mo∣tion, as not fitted for such an use; the signification of their motions do's con∣sequently depend, as Suffragans, upon the motions of the other parts. Dissect. XXIV. SCorne and Detraction make a man sometimes to distort his Cheekes, and draw one side of his mouth down unto the other side, in imitation of the Cynique Spasme, So that the Cheekes keepe not their owne situation and figure, but one followes the other; for, when we withdraw our mouth obliquely to the left side, the
Muscles are so drawne together, there is a necessity the Muscle of the other Cheeke should be drawn to follow the Retraction, which thereupon becomes more extended and longer than the o∣ther; for those that are Musculi conge∣neres, that is, which conspire to one and the selfe-same actuall expression, which are usually one on the Right side and another on the Left, as often as these Muscles in the opposite parts are paires in number, magnitude, and strength, the contraction of one makes a relaxa∣tion of the other, that part which is contracted drawing the other, to wit the whole Cheeke aside unto it, so that it alwayes happens that the relaxed part is carried to the contrary part, for that is drawn by the Muscle that caus∣eth the Action, which contraction of the perverse Cheeke happens by reason of the shortnesse of its Muscle, for, eve∣ry motion that proceedes from the will seemes to be done by the attraction of the Muscles to those parts whence they arise, neither could the attraction of the other Cheeke be done unlesse the opposite Muscle were drawn back to
its originall, whence it appeares that the Depraved figure of the Mouth or Symp∣tome of the function of the voluntary mover hurt, called by Physicians the Cynique Spasme, which this action seemes to counterfeit, by this account differs onely from the Naturall, that it is done besides our will, the Convulsion driving the Nerves and Muscles to the same affect, to which they are led by the Animall Faculty when they keepe their naturall habit; the Muscles are contracted into their proper heades, and with them they rivell that part into which they are inserted, which indeede is common to the naturall and praeter-naturall Plaise-mouth or Dog-Spasme. This ridiculous, action proceeding from a Detracting Disposition of the mind is performed by the square Muscle of the Cheeke by Spigelius called Detra∣hens Quadratus, the first that suffers con∣vulsion in those that are falling into the Cynique Spasme; the varying conduct of the fibres of which Muscle some be∣ing straight, some oblique, and some transverse, are to be well considered of by Chirurgions in their incisions in
these parts, which some not knowing, by an over free cutting of the transverse fibres overthwart, have caused both Cheekes to run as plucked to one side. This is a thin Muscle although broad and large lying hid next under the skin of the Neck, and encompassing the whole upper Jaw in the Face, draweth its origen from the regions of the snigs of the Vertebres of the Neck, the externall part of the Neck, the Sca∣pula, clavicula, and the Breast Bone, as∣cends by degrees with oblique fibres to the Face, and is implanted into that part of the Chin where the upper Lip is joyned unto the lower. This Muscle, which covers the Face, and out of which the Muscles of the Nostrills Eye-browes and Lips are made, being con∣tracted unto it selfe by aid of those ob∣lique and transverse fibres it hath, the Cheeke we command, is drawne awry, the Nose, Eye-browes and Lips follow∣ing the obliquity of that motion, there∣by making this Ironie of gesture most compleat, for, the Cheeke, the Seate of laughter leading, the Nose with dry mockery or Derison followes, the
Lips obsequious by a silent Detraction, manifest their agreement to the motion of the Nose, and though they two are in the midle, yet both agree to assist this action on the side stage of Derision, while the Censorious Eye-browes over∣looking, by a motion of assent and concurrence applaude the Irony. From the signification of Detraction which this Scheme or figure of motion aptly expresseth, this Muscle may retaine the name of Musculus Detrahens, and be call∣ed the Detracter, Detractions by Solo∣mon being aptly called Detrahentia labra, Detracting lips, alluding for all wee know to this action of the Cheekes, the Lips alwayes moving, when this square Muscle moves, which is common to them and the Cheekes. Dissect. XXV. ANger, Swelling indignation, Pride, Disdaine, Arrogancy, and Ambitious love of praise, puff up the Cheekes of selfe-conceited men, and make them looke big upon others. Spigelius thinks this motion is not performed by the help of any Muscle but onely happens by the relaxation of the fibres of the
Muscle Buccinator while the breath is reteined in the hollow of the Mouth the lips being shut this Muscle is Distended which makes the greatest part of the Cheeke. But the Muscle Buccinator be∣ing so called from the similitude at least of this affectation of the mind, com∣prehending all that part which is blown up when we sound a Trumpet is com∣monly assign'd to this action and con∣sequently to the signification of this af∣fectation of the mind. A Muscle thin and membranous, lying under the Square Detracter, interwoven with divers fibres, from whence its divers actions proceede, and is scarce any thing else but a fleshy implexure of fibres; this from the up∣per part of the Gums of the superior Jaw is terminated in the top of the Gums of the lower-Jaw in the manner of a circle, which since it emulates a circle, and in a circle what ever part is taken the same is both the beginning midle and the end, it matters not whe∣ther you say it proceedes from the up∣per Gums into the lower or from the lower into the upper. This Muscle ac∣cording to our Designe of referring
all names to the Affections of the Mind might be called Musculus Ambitiosus, the Ambitious or selfe-conceited Muscle; and there is a signature of the conceited Ca∣pacity of the Mind, in the most capaci∣ous figure of this Muscle, which is a Circle, which thus put in motion, by way of ostentation seemes to infer to others, how far they can enlarge and extend the Sphere of their ability, even to comprehend all within the compasse of their perfection, and personall worth; which least any man should not suffici∣ently understand, they are so puffed in mind, that they will straine themselves so far, as to sound the Trumpet of their own Praise, by making an unhandsome use of the Muscle Buccinator. Nor is it altogether unsignificant that this selfe-conceited and praise-seeking Muscle lies underneath the Detracter; for they that ambitiously arrogate to themselves the merits of applause are very apt to Detract from others; and indeed, Am∣bition and selfe-conceited Pride is but Detraction under a Visard. But if the puffe of Anger swell this Orbicular Muscle, he that puffes and chafes after
this manner, seemes to be his own Trumpeter, and to sound defiance to those against whom he presents himselfe with Cheekes so inflate. Dissect. XXVI. DEspaire makes the Cheeks to fall or sinke; they who think the for∣mer affectation of the Mind to be per∣formed by the help of no Muscle appo∣site to that action, conceive this ad∣duction or contraction of the Cheekes is performed by the Muscle Buccinator, which with them is Contrahens alter, as being designed by Nature unto it; and t may well be by its Contraction, or the Contraction of its fibres, a motion quite opposite to that of Confidence & elfe-conceit, being a contrary affection r motion of the Mind. But this action s not very remarkable unlesse in proud nd confident self-conceited men when hey are humbled by a counter-buffe of nquisition, and the bladder of their ride is thereby pricked, that makes hem look like the baffled Sons of Despaire.
Dissect. XXVII. CHeerefulnesse a pleasant and smiling Alacrity cause in many a Dimple in some part of the Cheeke, which Ana∣tomists call the Navell of Venus. This is caused by the moving of the same Mus∣cle Buccinator, which after the man∣ner of a Sphyncter encompasseth the Cheekes, which when it is contracted and drawn in, in some part of it makes that Pit or Dimple which so gracefully appeares in the Cheekes of some men. Memb. IX. Of the Muscles that serve the Mind in the motions of the Lips and Mouth. FOr the Declaring the Motions and Affections of the Mind, the Lip the cover of the Mouth, were to be mo∣ved with a voluntary motion; where∣fore they have obteined Muscles, with∣out which no voluntary motion can  performed; for the expediting there∣fore the significant motions of th Lips (besides the Muscles common t them, and the Cheekes) there ar foure paire of Muscles assigned unto them; which is the most received opi∣nion, although Fallopius would adde  new paire; and Riolanus saies we may
number eleven proper Muscles, besides those two common to the Lips and Cheekes. But their Muscles are but foure, because there are but foure prin∣cipall motions: by which foure, eight motions are performed. Columbus sais, that by mediation of those foure Labi∣all Muscles, we performe twelve moti∣ons at the least, (for to every motion there are not peculiar Muscles dedica∣ted, but the same Muscles that lift them up draw them also awry, to wit, when one of the Attollents work alone, whereas when they both act they cause a Right motion.) But they all upon occasion receive action and employ∣ment from the command of the Will. These Muscles of the Lips are so ming∣led with the skin, that the fibres do in∣tersect themselves acrosse, from whence the motions of the Lips are very divers, for, because the fibres are diversly mingled and enfolded together, being of two kinds, the Externall, and Inter∣nall, they do not only bring forth Divers, but Contrary motions. But the Commistion of the Lips with the skin is most admirable; for here you cannot
say they are laid under, and that they do adhere and cleave to above, as in the Front and other parts of both the Jaws, seeing that in these, we can di∣stinguish and determinate in perspicu∣ous limits, where the Muscle truly ends, and when the skin ariseth. But in the Lips the permistion is so through∣out, that both are abolished and confu∣sed in one another, as you cannot say this is a Muscle, and this skin, which is common and conflate of both, neither in the whole, or if you should divide them in parts, but you may rightly call them either cutaceous Muscles, or a Musculous skin. Galen where he reckons the severall kinds of skins in the Body, counts this the fourth kind, in which the Muscles are lost, (and as we may so say) confounded together with it; for, the foure beginnings of those Muscles which come to the Lips are perspicuous indeed, and manifest before they are mingled with the skin; but afterwards are to be found no more, and cannot be separated from its substance; inso∣much as he holds it worth our serious consideration, whether Anatomists
speak truly or properly in saying, both the Lips are moved by Muscles oblique∣ly inserted into them: or whether we might rather say that the Muscles of both are ex toto cuticular, but assisted by the fibrous Muscles; which Fungous and very moveable substance, and un∣usuall composition, deservedly accrewd unto the Lips, by reason of their pecu∣liar action, for unlesse the substance had been ordered after this manner, those Actions, the Signes of the Affections of the Mind, could not possibly have been done as now they are; or so significant∣y expressed: neither could the Lips have had such variety of important mo∣ions. But hereby so singular and re∣nowned is the choice substance of the Lips, and the various movings for which hey were ordained, that they are soon eady to any kind of use and action, hat the Will can call for or require. Dissect. XXVIII. THey who Contend and Dispute with some beate of Anger when hey heare their Adversary, and go about o answer them, are observed to open he Mouth, and lift up their upper Lip.
This motion is performed by the first paire of proper Muscles of the Lips, commonly called Attollens Labrum supe∣rius, The Attollent of the upper Lip, which ariseth out of the first bone of the upper Jaw where the Ball of the Cheeke is, and is inserted into the sides of the upper Lip neare the Wings of the Nostrills; when this whole Paire works together, it lifts the Lip straight upwards, from whence this Muscle might be called Musculus logisticus, the Logistique or Contentious Muscle, o the wrangling Disputant. But although this Muscle be chiefe operator in thi motion, yet we must note with Galen, that the whole substance of the Lip▪ doth much advance the Action. Not also that when this motion is don straight upward with the whole Lip then the whole Paire work together▪ But when one side of the Lip is oblique∣ly lifted up, then one of them is only employed. Dissect. XXIX. ANger and Discontent of mind▪ cause one to pout or put out th Lower-Lip, who are then said to han
the Gib, an action most commonly eene in children when they are ang∣red. Which motion is performed by the Muscle of the Lower-Lip, common∣ly called Deprimens, proceeding from that lowe and interior Seate of the Lower-Jaw where there is a certaine asperity, protuberating as it were to the sides of the Chin, and by and by obliquely as∣cending, is inserted into the midst of he Lip; which Muscle from this action might be properly called Musculus ristitiae the sad or discontented Muscle. Dissect. XXX. THey who would Mock, Deride and Contemne others, use to shoote out and bow back the Lower-Lip; this Action as I take it, is performed by the Discontented Muscle when the exter∣nall fibres of the lower-Lip are strained nd stretched out, not a little assisted by the fungous substance of the Lips which s easily filled, and being replenished protuberates: and because this outward Deflection of the lower-Lip, which Galen reckons among the straight mo∣ions of the Lip, is performed chiefely by the operation of the externall fibres
of the Lip, they Deserve to be called Fibres Sarcasmi, the mocking or cont∣melious fibres. Dissect. XXXI. THey who Scorne and Deride others are many times seene to Distort or wrest their Mouth by drawing it to one side, Like unto the Mouth of a Plaise, or in resemblance of the Cynique Spasm. This ironicall and voluntary Tor∣ture of the mouth is caused by the ope∣ration of the Second paire of the Mus∣cles of the Lips commonly call'd Abdu∣cens, or ad latera trabens, which arising from the Cavity under the balls of the Cheeks is inserted into that place where the Lips meete together and are con∣joyned. This motion being assisted by the Common Muscle of the Cheekes and Lips commonly call'd the Square or Detrahent Muscle of the Cheekes, by us call'd the Muscle of Detraction, whose oblique fibres doe not a little Contribute to the signification of the mind exhibited by this oblique motion of the Lips. From which operation the Muscles Abducent have in this signi∣fication of the mind they might bee
properly called Sanniones the Scoffers or the Muscles of Scorne and Derision. Note that this signification of the mind may be exhibited by the mouth drawn to both sides or either side ac∣cording as the whole paire or one a∣lone doth act. Dissect. XXXII. EFfeminate and Amatorious affecti∣ons in the mind make Harlots per∣petually to play with their Lips, and sweetly to bite them and sucke them in;  motion observed to be customarily used by such Creatures, performed by the tension of the internall fibres of the Muscles of the Lips, whereby the Lips are drawn to give way inward and to fold themselves in this Right motion as they call i) of the Lips being much furthered by thir fungous Substance which is asily Emptied & afterwards contracted. You may call these internall the ama∣ous fibres of the Muscles of the Lips. Dissect. XXXIII. WE shall see in unhappy Boyes that when they would mock and eride one another, they thrust out heir Lips after the manner of a Hens
rumpe, which we usually call to make a Mow, which ridiculous gesture is performed by the constringent Muscles, which are compounded of all the ten Muscles of the Lips, and are that Mus∣culous extremities of the mouth, and that fungous and vermilion Substance which wee see, and with orbicular fibres encompasseth the outer mouth, and shuts it in like a Sphincter; which Muscle is very conspicuous in them that have great lips. This mock Spinct∣er when by its hayry strings it workes this motion, making the mouth a port Esquiline of Derision, straigh∣tens and thrusts out the mouth for∣ward, and is (as Galen and Aviten compare it) like the shutting of a Purse with strings; for in this attracti∣on or corrugation, the Lips are so much encreased in thicknesse, as ther is of their length taken from them by that action: as if you should, putting two fingers upon them, on each sid one, and lightly compressing, contrac them, you shall advance them int such an altitude & thicknes, as you tak away Latitude by constringing them
on each side. By this meanes the tension of the Muscles while they are divers∣ly distracted at one time, deduceth the extreames to a medium, the fungous substance of the Lips not a little help∣ing them, for such a substance is easily emptyed and replenished; emptyed is submitted, and replenished, rais'd into a tumor. The Professors of Dissection before Galens time, made no mention at all of the priorums or anterior motion of the Lips, neither was he satisfied how this was done, but referres it to his Tract of obscure and doubtfull mo∣tions whose manner of moving is not fully found out; which ingenious Tract, by the injury of time, (to the great Damage of Anatomy,) is lost, for that which we have under that Title s Spurius, as Hofma thinkes, whose udgement herein admitted would omewhat weaken the Authority of he Quotations of that Tractat. There s also as I conceive a concurrence of he round membranous Muscle Bucci∣or which is inseparably trussd about▪ ith the Coate of the mouth, so that he signature and cooperation of that
Muscle seeme to exhibit a desire to pro∣clame as with a trumpet the Contempt and Scorne that is then exhibited. Dissect. XXXIIII. IN Salutation, Valediction, Reconcili∣ation or renewing of Love, Congratu∣lation, Approbation, Adulation, Subjecti∣on, Confederation, but more especially and naturally in oken of Love, we use to kisse, which is done by drawing to∣gether the Lips into themselves, and a little putting forth the parts that lye loosely scattered about the Mouth, this being the usuall Prologue to a Kisse, which cannot be decently done unlesse we a little contract our Mouth; which significations of our Will are thus ex∣hibited by the moving of the Muscle commonly called the Constringent Paire of the Lips, or Corrugans from puckering the mouth; which is done after this manner, the upper Lip is no only drawn together, but withall pul∣led downward, and the lower Lip lif∣ted up, whereby the Lips are Collected and reduced into themselves; this Mus∣cle I find from this employment to be called Osculatorium, because it contract
the Lips when we fasten a Kisse upon another: which name implies only the manner of the outward Action and not any inward Affection of the Mind exhibited thereby, the Latines having no word to signifie both, which the Greekes have, whih whom  is both to Love and to Kisse. This Muscle from its office might be called the love∣ing paire, Par Dilectionis, or the Sphin∣cter of Salutation. Note that this Mus∣cle is assisted in this signification by the Muscle Buccinator, which is com∣mon to the Lips with the Cheeke, which Muscle we have named the Mus∣cle of the Navell of Venus. Dissect. XXXV. THey who mock, wonder and admire are wont to Gape upon one with their mouth. Stupidity, Folly, Idle expe∣ctation, and Greey attention cause the same Action of the Mouth. The sig∣nifications of the Mind exhibited by this Gesture are performed by the Acti∣on of the paire of Muscles of the lower Jaw, commonly called, Graphoides & Deprimens Biventre; which arising from the Appendix Styloides, when it comes
to the Anterior part which is under the Chin, there it is inserted into its In∣ternall seat, which therefore is a little exasperated; this paire when they both worke together by pulling down the Jaw, open the mouth into a moderate figure, wherein the Temporall and maxilliary Muscles are at rest. The smallnesse of this paire of Muscles, as it shewes that the motion is easily done, the Jaw with its own weight tending downwards, needing no strong re∣tracter, but as a weighty thing is led downwards with very little ado: so by signature of the Instrument insinuates how prone by Nature the Mind of man is to these kind of significations, im∣plying withall, (that whereas the Mouth is the Gate of the Stomack, and now opened as the Gin of reproach by a dou∣ble-bellied Muscle, arising from such an Appendix as resembles a Needle or Pin of a Table-Book, and inserted into a part which hath therefore a signature of Exasperation,) an extraordinary Ap∣petite, even canine, with a silent stile to engrave a Scoffe in the Face of those against whom exasperated we
exhibit this Hieroglyphique of open Contempt, wherein there needs no words, the abused naturally too well knowing mens meaning by their Ga∣ping. Nor is the Caution and Provi∣so of Nature in the ordering of this Muscle to be passed over in silence; for in the midst between the Bellies of this Muscle there is a Tendon which a certaine Membrane growing to the adjacent parts doth involve, resembling a Pully, contrived to prevent an ex∣ception against the Generall Rule of Muscular motion: for, since these Mus∣cles (as they should have done accord∣ing to the Species of their intended Action) derive not their originall from the lower parts of the Neck, but arise rather from the upper parts, they are reflected about the lower parts of the Jaw, as it were, at a Pully, not without an allegoricall signature of the usuall effect of Mockery and scorn∣full Strife, of which a Pully is the Hie∣roglyphique, for as that turnes as it were returning upon it selfe, so such kind of Strife begets Strife, that it seemes to be rowled upon it selfe. Neither is
this Retraction or Depression of the Jaw performed without the assistance of the Square Muscle of Detaction, which hth great coherence with the Chin, Contempt and Mockery being never without some kind of Detracti∣on. ¶ There is also a naturall Rea∣son for this Action of these Muscles in greedy attention, because the Mind is furthered in that matter by this Action, for out of the very fift paire the Auditory Nerve there are remarka∣ble branches sent to the Pallte, the Bone Hyodes, and the Larynx in the mouth, wherefore from thence, that is by the mouth: sounds may be con∣veyed to the Eares, even to the Tym∣panum; for distinction (therefore) we call them Musculos avidae attentionis, the Greedy Gapers, or Muscles of the attentive bent of the Mind. You might call them as well Musculos otiosae expecta∣tionis, the Muscles of idle expectation. Dissect. XXXVI. IN some tedious beavinesse of Mind, in the Dislike and wearinesse of our ab∣sent mind, in the wandrings, and  loose and manifest security thereof we of
are drawn to Yawne, an extreme fi∣gure, as they call it, of the lower Jaw, wherein the Lips are most distant from one another, one protend∣ed upwards towards the Nose, the other drawn down towards the Chin, and with Galen, is one of the two Right motions of the Lips which are altoge∣ther straight. These significations of the Mind are performed by the same Muscles as the former motion is, which might likewise hence receive the name of musculi oscitantes, or oscedinis, the yaw∣ning Double-bellied Muscles, but more properly, in reference unto the affecti∣on of the Mind, we might call them Musculos Hallucinantes, vel fluxae Securi∣tatis, the Nauseous Muscles, or the Muscles of wandring Security. This Oscitation (how ever some speak) is from the Animal Faculty, and there∣fore is performed by Muscles, and is done by the Muscles of the Face, as it were, dilated by deliberation, that the crude vapour may go out, as Pandicu∣lation is a Deliberate Action of the other Muscles of the Body: Neither need it to trouble any one, seeing a thing
that is done out of Deliberation, and which seemes to proceed from Pru∣dence, to be done by Infants, and of us without considering of it; for, Na∣ture (as Hippocrates saies) is Learned without a Teacher. These are done by a certaine Instinct, but not such as most men take to be Naturall, for we under∣stand this Action to be voluntarily done, because when we please we can begin it and restraine it; And when we make others yawn, it is not done so much by Sympathy as by consent of parts, & con∣spiration to Action; for, our voluntary motion is done somtimes by Deliberation, and sometimes by Imagination; Imagi∣nation alwaies prevents and goes before Deliberation, when therefore the Mus∣cles of the Temples and Cheekes conteine any vapour (by Imagination) when one yawnes others are moved with that moving, and so they move the Faculty, not so much to expel, as to be a deponent, & to lay down the windy burden with which the Muscles were charged. Dissect. XXXVII. THey who by silence would ex∣presse the reverence and regard
they have of those who are in presence, use to close their mouth and hold their Lips together; which is performed by the moving of the Temporall attol∣lent Muscle, which filling the whole cavity of the Bone of the Temples, has its beginning from the bone of the Forehead Synciput Temples and Cuni∣formis is at last inserted with a strong Tendon into the processe of the lower Jaw. When this Temporall paire work together, they bring the lower Jaw to the upper, and so close the mouth which is held so still in the posture of silence by the Tonique action of the same Muscles which for the most part is To∣nique, unlesse when we speake or sleepe open mouth'd, for when we sleepe with our mouth closed, the Tonique action of these Muscles is preserved. Dissect. XXXVIII. ANger, Indignation, Griefe, Dispaire, Jealousie, Wonder, Admiration, and evill Cogitations, Cause men many times to bite their Lips, an Action which they also use who meditate and threaten revenge: which af∣fections
of the mind are expressed in th Lips and Teeth by the operation of the internall fibres of the Lips, and the strong Compression of the Teeth occa∣sioned by the forceable working of the temporall Muscles. Dissect. XXXIX. ANger, Cruell virulency in those that Threaten Revenge, Envy and Virulent Mockery and Insultation make men sometimes gnash and grind with their teeth, and to set them so firmely together that the Cheekes are drawn in o adverse partes. This action and virulent expression of the Mind also is performed by the violent Compressi∣on of the Teeth by the strong force of the Temporall Muscle. Memb. X. Dissect. XL. IN Derision, Scoffing insultation and contumelious Despight men are seene sometimes to lill out their tongue  those they Scoff & deride. Concerning this significant motion of the Tongue Auerres is of opinion that it is not done by the aid of the Muscles, but by
a proper motion, and would prove thereby that the Nerve and not the Muscle is the first and necessary prin∣ciple of motion. But Columbus and most Anatomists are of the contrary opinion. Galen indeed is very Scepti∣call about this motion and hath placed it among doubtfull and obscure moti∣ons which he was not well satisfied ▪ for sayes he, the Tongue doth not seeme when it is extended out in length to go uniformely out of the mouth, for it covers the lower Lip and descends somewhat to the Chin, and that is by reason of the Bridle which is beneath it before, we find not the cause by rea∣son whereof the Tongue is prolix or prolonged untill it be visibly put out of the mouth. No motion obeyes the will but the motion of a Muscle and no Muscle continued to the tongue dis∣tends it untill it bring it forth of the mouth, hence for good reason we fall to staggering when wee would know after what manner this action of the Tongue is done, and if any motion could bee found in the Body which is done by the will without any Muscle
there had no ambiguity fallen into this question. Indeed there is a rarity and porofity in the Tongue as in the virile member, but that there should bee such virtue in it as we observe the appetite to instill into that Petulant part so that it moves with competent motion and thrusts it selfe out of the mouth, how this should bee done that is to be con∣sidered. And yet the action in kissing, which some beastly Leachers use when their veines are inflate with lust would enduce one to think that there were some analogy between the extension of these two unruly members. The diffe∣rence betweene the erection of both parts is that the virile member is not onely encreased in length but in thick∣nesse and compasse: but the Tongue onely in length being not increased in all the dimensions of its body when it goes out of the mouth. And because they who use this Action of the Tongue doe it before they can thinke or under∣stand with what Muscle or motion they should produce it, it is agreeable & meete that the Muscle whose lust was imposed upon it, for this reason should
neurr a Satyriasis when it avoucheth lust, and imagines by the aptitude of the thing unto it. So that the cause propinque of the Egresse of the Tongue out of the mouth and of Piapisme is a thing of very subtile Speculation. It is no marveile that the Tongue volun∣tarily is moved onely by the Muscle. But there is a virtue in it by which it doth indeed weigh what the Intellect doth desire. So that it may move it selfe with motion for a competent Egresse out of the mouth, which doubt in effect insinuates the Tongue it selfe to be a Muscle, although he speakes not plainely out. But according to the most received opinion this significant action of the Tongue is attributed to the ope∣ration of the paire of Muscles called Geneoglossum or Extrahens Linguam, which arising from the asperitity which is in the midle of the lower Mandible, but is in the internall Face, is inserted neere the roote of the Tongue; this paire contracted, puts forth the Tongue beyond the Teeth and Lips, which paire in respect of this ironicall action performed by it, according to our
manner shall be called Cynoglossum, the Liller, Dog-muscle, or the Blaring Cynique; or the Muscle of Contumeli∣ous Despight. And there is something remarkable in the principle of this motion deserving to be remembred, which Fernelius and Bauhinus have ob∣served, according to whom, it is the onely Muscle of the Body that is the opifex of two contrary motions, and hath no fellow; for, every one hath but his simple action whereby it is re∣duced to its Head, and the Originall of the Nerve: But the greatest part of the fibres of these Muscles is carryed to the roote of the Tongue, but the small∣est part of them towards the Tip, so that the parts of the same Muscle pro∣duce contrary actions, for, with the greatest part of the fibres drawing to their originall, the Tongue is put forth without the Teeth and Lips: but the lesser part of them working, they recall it in, to which revocation some assigne the next paire Hypsioglossj which was appointed by nature to withdraw the Tongue straight back; otherwise as A∣rantius well observes it would follow,
that the same Muscle would be both en∣dued with a double action; and toge∣ther at the same time both act and suf∣fer, which is both contrary to Rea∣son, and the placits of Galen. And it falls not within the compasse of my un∣derstanding how this out-drawer of the Tongue should performe that as∣signed office, for it seemes to mee by its Originall to be onely qualified with a power to draw the Tongue to the Chin, and therefore I am gravel'd with Galen about the manner of this motion, yet am withall inclinable to the judge∣ment of Fernelius, a ferious and an honest man, who sayes, that because no Nerve is inserted outwardly in the Tip of the Tongue, which should draw or thrust it out, it is more probable to attribut [this ironicall eduction of the Tongue] to that Muscle, then with some to confesse, that there are cer∣taine voluntary motions in us, whereof no Muscle or Nerve is the author. Dissect. XLI. Of the Muscles serving to expresse all the vocall intentions and affections of the Mind exhibited by the motions of the Tongue and
Lips, and whether for those purposes the Lips and Tongue were made Muscles. BY Speech framed by the motion of the Tongue and Lips we have ano∣ther way to expresse all the motions of the mind; speech being a free and vo∣luntary motion, which it appeares to be in that it may be made or restrained at pleasure, it must therefore be performed by Muscles, and they that carry the greatest stroke in framing the vocall affections of the mind, being the Muscles of the Tongue, and even the Lips whose Muscles serve to order speech have neede of its helpe. And therefore the Tongue in respect of this Office it performes to the Af∣fections stood in need of many Muscles, whose proper Muscles according to some are six, according to some nine, some ten, or five conugations, some count them eleven. But not conten with these, some reckon the substance o the Tongue among the Muscles, among whom is Stephanus, yet Riolanus saye that although the Tongue may seem to be a Muscle because of its wrested, ob∣volutions and implications like an
or Lampery, yet it is not, and Bar∣tholinus is of the same mind, because it hath no fibres neither doth move any other part but is moved by its Muscles; others add this reason; for otherwise the motion would bee made towards the end, and the Taile of the Muscle would be moveable and the Head im∣moveable, but that reason is false as Bartholinus proves, for the principle or begining of the Tongue is neere the Larynx, and as it were arising out of he bone Hyodes, it seemes not to bee Consonant to reason, that the Body of the Tongue should be a Muscle and hat as some would have it a double one, for although it have such an Eele-like olubility, yet it were strange to the ondition of all other Muscles, for, first no Muscle is framed for it selfe, but or another part which is immoveable f it selfe, that so it might be moved by  Muscle. Hence to things that are moveable of themselves there was ne∣er any Muscle inserted, and therefore either in the Braine, nor in the Heart, or in the Arteries you shall find any Muscle, because these by an imbred
virtue are moved by themselves; i therefore the Tongue were a Muscle i would follow that it was made for it sel since it is inserted ito no immoveable Body. Secondly, no Muscle moveth i selfe, unlesse by accident, to wit when moving another to whose motiō it is ap∣pointed it is moved it self, but the tongu moves it self not for another, wherfore i is no Muscle. Thirdly, every Muscle act by fibres, but nature has denyed fibre to the Tongue. Fourthly, all Muscle are invested with a simple dense an thin Membrane, whereas the tongue i covered with a thick hard porous and rough skin. Fiftly, it is absurd to say a Muscle moves a Muscle, and that on Muscle is inserted into another, whenc if you call the Tongue a Muscle, i would follow that a Muscle moves a Muscle, for many Muscles are attribute unto the Tongue. Sixtly, if the Tongu is a Muscle and can performe so many motions by it selfe, it would shew a errour in Nature to have given it othe Muscles, for, Frustra fit per plura quo fieri potest per pauciora, Since therefor Nature hath not in vaine granted Mus∣cles
unto the Tongue, it will follow al∣o that the Tongue can be no Muscle. There are not wanting some who sup∣pose they have excluded the Tongue rom the order of Muscles by these fol∣owing reasons; every Muscle drawes us end towards its begining, which hap∣pens contary in the tongue, for that draws its Bginning towards its end But his Reason is false as Bartholinus proves, or the Principle or Beginning of the Tongue is neare the Larynx, and as t were arising out of the Bone Hyode: Againe, the Bgining of a Muscle is mmoveable, but they have a moveable nd, but it is contrary in the Tongue, whose end is rather immoveable than s beginning. Therefore it is manifest hat the Tongue cannot be numbred mong Muscles. But this Reason as the ther is rejected as contrary to the cular faith of Anatomie grounded up∣ sight of the thing done; Therefore ere is either somewhat that is moved luntarily besides a Muscle, or all the otions of the Tongue are to be attri∣uted to its Muscles. Casserius freely de∣vers his opinion in this matter. It
cannot be but the Tongue should b endued with a proper motion, and tha likewise voluntary; for, it is moved after so many manner of waies, and agi∣tated unto so many parts, that i were ridiculous to affirme all its moti∣ons to be performed by Muscles, yet notwithstanding he will not therefore call the Tongue a Muscle, but Mus∣culous, as partaking somewhat of th Nature of a Muscle, existing as a mean between a Glandulous and Musculous Flesh. But Fabricius ab Aquapendente a most industrious and acurate Anato∣mist, and the Corypheus of all the Tribes of Dissectors, who hath subtlely Ana∣tomized all the Organs of Speech, seemes to me to shew very good Reasons why the Tongue and Lips both should be Muscles, that is for the Dexterity o Speech, and the more ready expressing the Affections of the Mind; for,  Speech be made by motion, and signi∣fie the Affections of the Mind, which are motions without all question, th moving of the Instruments must be an∣swerable to the movings of the Mind but, since nothing is swifter than th
Mind, deservedly therefore the movings of the Tongue and Lips are very swift,  those which are to follow the moti∣ns of the Mind: It is fit therefore (as ature would have it) that such mo∣ions should not be performed by the Muscles of the Tongue and Lip, but on∣ from their Body as they are Muscles f themselves. The Tongue and Lips ve Muscles, as they have Muscles thy re moved of another, and therefore ower: but as they are Muscles they ove of themselves, and that most wiftly roled and driven, and for this ause the Lips and Tongue were made Muscles; the Tongue and the Lips i locution are moved of themselves, in ther Actions not only of themselves ut by another, that is, by the Muscles, nd that for celerity and expedition; , since Nature, with that which in oving requires no great strength, re∣ires also the quicknesse of motion,  makes the parts to be moved of emselves by mingling the Motory ower with the Part to be moved as in e Tongue and Lips, which since ey were not to agitate a Bone, but
most light Aire, and to performe  quick motions in speaking, for  cause we judge Speech to be done without the Ministry of the Muscles, only  the Body of the Lips and Tongu which if it should not be so done, th Affections of the Mind would be  slower in their Delivery. So that th Tongue is not the chiefe Instrument  Speech in regard of its Similar substance, such as is not in the Body,  in motive Actions we must not loo for a similar part to be the next  of motion, because in that it is a copounded Action it requires a compouded part which is the cause of an Actio▪ But only as it is movable, & it is  in as much as it hath received the Facuty of moving, & is a Muscle. Deserved therefore according to our Modell  Denomination may the Tongue an Lips be called Musculi Rationationis  orationis the Muscles of Discourse  Orall Reason. Creatori, Capiti nostro, in Quo movemu Cephaledoulia, in Excelsis. FINIS.
Ad eminentissimi acuminis, scientificum utriusque Physiogno∣miae Protomysten. GRata Manus, Facies nunc est gratissima no∣bis: Quae doctâ vultus mobilitate placet. ondita Myotomus nobis mysteria pandis: Organa & aspectus mira patere facis. elineas Mures talparum more moventes: Musculus o tenerum flectit ad omne Pathos vultus Rector moderaris habenas: Affectus, Fons est Frons, & Origo Caput. Oculs, sic ipse Manus, sic Ora movebas: At nunc in Causs ingeniosus eris. cta vides▪ Pulcra est Concordia cordis & Oris Dextram Myologi, Pathologia petit. iqua & temnas quasi sesquipedalia verba: Nomina quae signant, dum propior dabis. tomia nova haec, veterum quam nemo priori Tentare ausus, & hoc tempore nemo Novus. Admirari prope es fuit una, at Amice e non mirari est, res odiosa nimis.
To the daring Advan∣cer of all Somaticall Science his Selected Friend, on his PATHOMYOTOMIA. THou Grand Adventurer, wits Magellan To whom our Microsme or Isle of man By thy all searching Pen's so throughly There's now no part in us an unknown land; How thriving is thy Fleet in new Designes, To bring home not the Minerall but the Mines? This Pathologicall Anatomy Deare Friend hath wound our admiration hig A strange Essay indeed, that dares to trace All the rare Springs and Wards that move a To make Anatomy by Muscles wind The swiftest motions of the minged Mind Natures high piece of Clockworke this You Reason the Spring winds up, the Musces all
Like wheels move this or that way, swift or sloe, As the Affections Weight doth make them go. All the Soules motion's seen, the Head and Face, Discovering all, as through a Cristall Case; Here the Affections keep an open Marte, By Patent seal'd by thy Cephalick Art. This Itchnographie of thy Art do's smile, A promise on us, of some stately pile. And puts us in good hope abroad to see That Masterpiece of Physiognomie, Thy Magisteriall Quintessence of Bookes, Or extract Scientificall of lookes. Then that whereby as a Face-Prophet shewn, Thou know'st the Affections' are the Bodyes own, Whence subtilely thou 'rt wont to ken & trace The Critciall Disease-discovering Face, That though the humors bedded are within, Yet thou canst track their footsteps in the skin. Strange secrecy of Art and mysticall, To cast our Faces as an Vrinall; Nay, by a strangers Face well copyed out, For to pronounce by Art He hath the Goute. Such are thy common Aguries; we may Sure trust thy skil, that doth such beames display.
The last Yeare stil'd you Deafe & Dumbe mans friend, Now Thy Design more deeper doth descend. I see Thy knowledge and invention flowes As far in man as Sense and Motion goes. Then take the Chair, where maist Thou Doctorall sit, Command our health's, as Thou hast done our wits. Lure down thy soaring Truths, salve every doubt, And by convincing practice make them out To Faith-bound Sceptiques, who count nothing good Till flat experience make it understood. Now to the Art-forsaken Deafe dispence Thy skill as Aurist to restore their sense, Wert thou once known, Surdasters would come on To court Thee for Thy Autocousticon. Next as a Linguist teach the Dumb to breake, Or pick the Padlock lets his Lips to speake. Ransom each captivd tongue, weak speech improve, And the impediments thereof remove. Then as a Motist by this healing light, Set all our Heads depraved motions right. And may successe attend, while swelling Fame Fills up thy Sailes with an All-heaing name. Tho: Diconson. Med. Templ.
Judicium  cujusdam de hoc opusculo; in quo Sanctioris Anatomiae, & planènovae, Speci∣men Lectoribus exhibetur. QUI Manuum Loquelam, re∣conditioris Philosophiae Mystes, oculis suis pri∣mus hausit; qui Chirologiam (spissum & operosum o∣pus) primus , quatuor ab∣hinc annis, publici uris fecit; is ipsus Autor, ultra cutem & corticem, oculo∣um scalpellum, usque adeo Latenti Capitalium Musculorum Texturae pariter, & Indoli demersit, ut hodie pererudi∣um aliud cogitationum suarum & au∣dacis juxtà & felicis industriae por∣entum ( proditurae rudi∣mentum) prodierit, Vulgaribus Ana∣micis nostris, & Sciolorum Vappae, ec visum usquam, nec auditum. Ac
proinde nullius hic noster Manuductio∣nem secutus, nullius exempli premens vestigia, motuum  dilucidè nobis expedivit. Quin & ipsis Musculis, Affectuum organis & eorundem Pantomi∣mis, nomina concinnè aptavit; & indigi∣tavit insuper, Mentem quasi Corporis Na∣varcham ad clavum sedentem, moderari Artuum funes, & eosdem huc & illuc pro arbitrio remittere & contrahere. Qui ijdem Musculi dum Animi pathe∣matis sese attemperant, & inserviunt, ejusdem lineamenta depingunt, & quasi aspectui obvertunt; & exteriore modi∣ficatione suâ, palam illa faciunt, quae interiore impulsu machinamur. Ut hic libellus omnibus reconditioris Ana∣tomiae studiosis, & usui futurus sit, & voluptati. Scripsit I. H. C. W. M.
A Table shewing the chiefe Heads of the Sections of the Introduction to this Ana∣tomicall Administration of the sig∣nificative Muscles of the Af∣fections of the Mind. Sect. I. OF the Honour and Dignity of Ani∣mall Motion. Sect. II. That a Muscle is the proper and adequate Agent of the voluntary and patheticall mo∣tions of the Mind, outwardly expressed in the Body. Sect. III. Of the Nature and Constitution of a Muscle. Sect. IV. That the Appetite or will is the first Ef∣ficient cause, but not the Chiefe cause of mo∣ion; the Spirit and Faculty being the more propinque and conjunct cause, and that besides
the Commandement of the will, the endea∣vour and intention of the mind is necessary thereunto. Sect. V. That it is strange but not so wonderfull, that Animall motion should be performed on such a sudden Sect. VI. That in all outward Actions the Soule commandeth either manifestly or obscurely, and that wee are not stirred up to any such motion by nature or custome. A Table shewing the Heads of the Dissections of the Anato∣micall Essay, describing the Muscles of those Affections which are more con∣spicuously emphaticall in the emonstra∣tive Actions of the Head and Face. The Proem The Prerogative of the Head in point of Arbitrary and Significant Motion. Membr. I. OF the Muscles the instruments of vo∣luntary motion, whereby the general▪ significations of the Head are performed.
Dissect. I.II.III.IV.V.VI.VII.VIII.IX. The Anatomicall Administration of the Muscles of the Affections, whose operations conduce to the generall actions of the Head. Membr. II. Of the Muscles serving to the generall expressions, and most important motions of the Face or Countenance. Dissect. X. The Anatomicall Administration of those Muscles. Membr. III. Of the Muscles appertaining to the Fore∣head and the Browes or Eye-browes, and employed by the Mind in the significant mo∣tions thereof. Dissect. XI. and XII. The Anatomicall Administration of those muscles Membr. IV. Of the Muscles appointed to the Eyelids  the expediting certain significant moti∣ of the Mind. Dissect. XIII.XIIII. The Anatomicall Administration of those scles.
Membr. V. Of the Muscles which serve to expresse the significations of the Mind exhibited by the motions of the Eye. Dissect. XV.XVI.XVII.XVIII.XIX.XX. The Anatomicall Administration of those Muscles. Membr. VI. Of the Muscles assigned the Eares (as i is likely) for certaine significations of th Mind. Dissect. XXI. The Anatomicall Administration of thos Muscles. Membr. VII. Of the Muscles that serve to the significations of the Mind exhibited by the motion of the Nose. Dissect. XXII.XXIII. The Anatomicall Administration of the Muscles. Membr. VIII. Of the Muscles active in the significaons of the Mind exhibited by the Cheekes▪ Dissect. XXIV.XXV.XXVI.XXVII▪ The Anatomicall Administration of th Muscles.
Membr. IX. Of the Muscles that serve the Mind in the motions of the Lips and Mouth. Dissect. XXVIII.XXIX.XXX.XXXI.XXXII.XXXIII.XXXIIII.XXXV.XXXVI.XXXVII.XXXVIII.XXXIX. The Anatomicall Administration of those Muscles. Membr. X. Dissect. XL. Of the Muscles serving the Tongue, for some silent expressions of the Mind, with the Anatomical administration of those Muscles. Dissect. XLI. Of the Muscles serving to expresse all the vocall intentions and affections of the Mind exhibited by the motion of the Tongue and Lips, and that for those purposes, the Lips and Tongue were made Muscles. Errata. FOl. 47. line 9. read motions. fol 107. l. 16· Larynx. fol. 120. l. 26. They. fol. 119. l. 18.  That. fol. 204. l. 14. read revell.
An Introduction to the Dissection of the Muscles of the Affections of the Mind, in apparent signifi∣cations exhibited by the Head, In six Sections comprizing the Philosophie and generall notions of voluntary motion.
