C4715A 11179661 46571
A TRUE RELATION Of the persecution of Samuel Clift, by Samuel Hierne Priest of Min∣chin-hampton, and Iohn Stevens, one who is set to do justice. I Was moved to goe to the Steeple-house to Hampton, upon the first day of the week, and there I stood peaceablie amongst the people, for the space of an hour, or thereabouts, in which time Samuel Heirne was praying and preaching, as he so called it: and he seeing me, he seemed to be in great rage; and after he had entred into that called his prayer, he commanded the Officers to take me away, or else he could goe no further, as he said, or words to this purpose; so according to his desire the Constable did; thronged me out of the house, and abused me in words and actions, and put me in the Stocks, although I stood peaceablie▪ and did not disturbe him in word nor action, although I was thronged and abused as I stood amongst them; and after a while they let me out of the Stocks, and told me, I might goe about my business; but before I came out of the Town the Constable came and took me again, and kept me prisoner in an Inne, and
desired me to promise him not to trouble him for keeping of me in the Stocks, he being condemned in himself, that he had done me wrong, for putting me in without breach of any Law, or without any Warrant or command of any Magistrate, but onely through the Priests words, and so it did appear that he kept me prisoner in the house, to see whether I would promise him not to trouble him; but I be∣ing not willing to satisfie his will for to promise him, although I did not intend to do it: but at length he did let me goe, and about a month or five weekes after I was taken by a Warrant of Iohn Stevens, and brought before him, and when I came before him, he asked me, whether I was at Hampton at Church, as he called it, at such a time or no? To which I an∣swered and told him, I was at the house at the time; he asked me, whether Samuel Hierne did pray or preach while I was there, and I told him that he might call it praying or preaching: And he asked me, whether I kept on my hat while I was there? and I told him, I did buy my hat to wear it: Then he seemed to be in a great rage, and struck me two or three blows, although he being one set to keep the peace, he broke it himself, and commanded his man to make a Mittimus to send me to prison, with∣out I would give Bail for my good behaviour for disturbing of Sam. Hierne; and he falsly affirmed, that I confest it, and said, that I should go to prison, without I would give Bail; and I told him, that I should give no Bail, for I knew no Law that I had broken; and so he caused his man to make the Mittimus for to send me to prison; but yet I was
preserved from prison, but brought into the Quar∣ter Sessions, and there Sam: Hierne prefered a Bill of Inditement against me, and indited me for disturb∣ing of him in words and actions, and brought in his hearers to swear to the Bill, that I did wilfully and maliciously disturb him in words and actions, yet they themselves do confess, that I stood peacable, and did neither act nor speak. Here is also a Copy of the Bill of Inditement, which the Priest prefered against me, and he and se∣veral of his hearers swore to it as followeth. Glocest. shire. THe Jurors for Oliver Lord Protect or of the Com∣mon-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, upon their Oaths do present, That Sam. Clift late of A∣vening in the County aforesaid, Clothier, the four and twentieth day of May, in the year of our Lord, 1657. at Minchin-hampton in the County aforesaid, voluntarily and malitiously did by word, deed and overture molest and interupt Samuel Hierne Clerke, Preacher of Gods Word at Minchin-hampton aforesaid in the said Coun∣ty, in time of divine Service, and open prayer and preach∣ing by the said Sam. Hierne in the Church aforesaid, then and there settled; and he the said Sam. Hierne being licenced to preach, and in the peace of God being, in contempt of the peace of God, and publick peace and di∣sturbance of the Congregation in the Church aforesaid, then and there assembled, to the great dishonour of the Almighty God, and contrary to the form of the Statutes and Laws in that case made and provided, &c, and to
the evil example of all others in the like case offending, and against the publick peace. Samuel Hierne. Francis Maning. Charles Deane. George Renols. Will. Nicolas. Tho. Newman. Rich. Butt. These are they which swore to this Bill of In∣ditement falsly, for there are several of themselves do confess that I did neither act nor speak, but stood peaceable. This Bill being presented to the grand Iury so called, did upon their oaths find me guilty, and so brought to a Tryal, and being examined by the pet∣ty Iury, did upon their oaths bring me in not guil∣ty, and so freed me; so all whose eyes be open may see the unjust proceeding against the innocent, and their confusion in their proceedings, the one swear∣ing I was guilty, and the other swearing that I was not. So like Priest like people, for the Priest he falsly presents me, his hearers falsly sweareth against me, the Iury being of the same generation, some of them swear one way, and some another; so all whose eyes be open, consider what ye have been doing, and repent, and turn to the Lord while ye have time, and put not the day of your visitation afarre off: These unjust proceedings was done above a year ago, but now it lay much upon me to put it in print, and I to be clear of all mens bloud am willing to do it, known by the name of Samuel Clift. THE END.
