C4883 11229041 46947
Philosophia Maturata: AN Exact Piece of Philosophy, Containing The Practick and Operative part thereof in gaining the Phi∣losophers Stone; With the wayes how to make the Mineral Stone, and the Calcination of Mettals. Whereunto is added, A Work Compiled by St. Dunstan, concerning the Philosophers Stone, And the experiments of Rumelius and Preparations of Angelo Sala, all most famous Chymists in their time. Published by Lancelot Colson, Dr. in Phys. and Chym. London, Printed for G. Sawbridge, and are to be sold at his house upon Clerken-well-Green, 1668.
A Preface rela∣ting to the life of St. Dunstan, the Author. HOw reverent an esteem Antiquity hath had of this holy man wil appear, in that so ma∣ny famous Authors have written concerning him, to wit the Author of the Brittish Antiquities; Hi∣story of Great Brittain; Malmsbury, and Mat.
Westminster. He lived about the year of our Lord 946. having been at first a Monk, after that Abbot of Glastonbury, then Bishop of Worcester, next of London, and fi∣nally Archbishop of Can∣terbury: As to the Re∣ligious part of his life, it was so exemplary, that after ages even to this time have esteemed it mi∣raculous: He flourished in the Reigns of Edred or Eldred, Edwin and Ed∣gar three Kings of Eng∣land.
In Edwins Reign he was Banished, during which time the King by the Rebellion of his Sub∣jects was deprived both of his life and Kingdom, whom Edgar succeeding, highly favoured and pro∣moted. He Crown'd Edw. King at Kingston, this Edward was surnamed the Martyr, being mur∣thered by the procure∣ment of Queen Elfrida. After whose death Ethel∣dred was Crowned King by Dunstan, with whom
also he was so much in favour that he preferred him before all his Nobles and laid up all his richest royal Housholdstuff, Char∣ters and Records with all his Wealth and Treasure in his Monastery, so that all things were in his power, the King without his advice doing no∣thing either in the pub∣lick affairs of the King∣dom or in his own pri∣vate negotiations: And as he stood thus in his Royal Masters favour,
with all fidelity to that great esteem he employed his endeavours to enrich religious places either by the Danes wasted; or by bimself founded: in this manner did our Author by the favour of his Prince attain the highest honors, and surely not without great merit, his extraor∣dinary acquired parts and learning, deserving greater Eulogyes then this narrow scantling of Paper can allow room for. At last full of honour and
dayes and replete with the grace and affection of his Prince, be received his Quietus est from the cares of this world to en∣joy the happiness of a better, leaving behind him the pattern of his Religion, vertue and learning for the world to imitate, a tast whereof you have in the ensuing discourses. Et sic Vive & Vale Lector.
To the Understanding Reader. THou art here presented with an ingenious peice of curious Art which may well be entituled An exact Piece of Philosophy, for its subject is of such a nature as none but such as are  Lo∣vers of Wisdom, are able to com∣prehend, and that hath made some even pretenders to Learn∣ing cry out, That the Philosophers Stone is indeed an invaluable Gemme, but such as deserves only to pass among nominal, not real Jewels, but it would be a toylsom work, and to as little purpose as certare de lana caprina, to give an answer to such Anomalus Ca∣prichio's. The following tract (there is no doubt) will yeild great satisfa∣ction to all such as knowingly
pursue this kind of Philosophy, especially when they shall consi∣der the eminency of its Author, for it bears in front the Reverend Character of Learned Dunstan, of whom the present world, at least those therein that have con∣versed in this Science, cannot but know, that he was as exact as di∣ligent, and so diligent, that none before, nor hardly any since did ever arrive herein to equal perfe∣ctions with him. But why should we waste time in making Eulogyes of him, of whom not only antiquity, but e∣ven the wickedness of the pre∣sent age speak both great and ho∣nourable things, (to give them no greater a Title) Let the Work it self advance (as no doubt it will) its own praise, for its Au∣thor needed not the stilts of a vain-glorious sustentation. Fare∣well.
AN Exact Piece of PHYLOSOPHY. Touching the Stone of Phylosophers. IT is chiefly to be un∣derstood, That the An∣cient Phylosophers did often endeavour to com∣pose in a most short time above the Earth, those
things, which by Nature, in many years, were perfect∣ed under the Earth; viz. To make most perfect and most pretious Sol and Lune; wherein they imitated the foresteps of Nature, choo∣sing to themselves most pure Earths, white and Red, which they named their Sol and Lune; joyning them to∣gether as Nature doth, with∣out repugnance, untill at length they were brought to a fixation and subtilty: This thing also is needfull for you to perform, if you desire to obtain the desired end in this Science. For Sol and Lune, is no∣thing else, but Red and White Earth, to which Na∣ture
hath perfectly joyned Argent vive, pure, subtile, white, and Red, and so of them hath produced Sol and Lune. It is therefore needfull for thee, seeking this Science, That first thou get these Earths, White and Red, subtile, pure and fixed, and in these two Earths to fix two Mercuries, white in the white, and red in the red, without division, and by their least parts, so as they may endure the greatest examen of the fire, and may have such fusion, that as we see a great quantity of Wa∣ter coloured with a little Saffron, so they may in the least quantity abundantly
tinge every mettall, and all metalline spirits whatsoe∣ver, so as they be of the same Kind and Nature, and may altogether and fully bring them to their own quality. And moreover, that in themselves they may be in∣finitely multiplied, and able to free the body of Man from the worst and most deadly Diseases; which Properties truly are not found in common Sol and Lune, without great La∣bour, (and yet but onely in part) because that the Ve∣getative power, the Mother of all increase, for the most part, is long since extinct in them.
If thou know how to per∣form this, and to imitate the condition of the inferiour nature in making Mettals, thou mayst worthily rejoyce in the name of a Phyloso∣pher, as being not meanly expert in natural things. It is to be noted, That the more Antient Phylosophers used not common Sol and Lune in this Work, and therefore they said, That their work needed not great Cost and Charges, but that it might be as well perform∣ed by the Poor, as the Rich: Which were altogether different from the truth, if it could not be performed without Common Sol and Lune: For they are very
pretious and rare, and hard∣ly to be gotten of poor men without great labour. In∣deed, many have brought great quantities of Sol and Lune to nothing by this Art, and have unprofitably spent and wasted their Time and Labour, to the destruction both of their Bodies and Souls, which is much to be lamented. Moreover, in these our Times, we know no man who doth diligently and truly find out the Philoso∣phers Tinctures, but most of them labour absurdly and vainly in vulgar Mercury, and in common Sol and Lune; therefore few of them ob∣tain this grace.
Let us take heed; for al∣though Sol and Lune may be subtilated and mixed with tinctures, and so reduced into lesser tinctures and Elixers with mean profit; yet the true way according to the Doctrine of Philo∣sophers, is not in them: for Sol and Lune are two tin∣ctures Principal, red and white, buried in one and the same body, which by nature were never brought to per∣fect compliment, yet they are separable from their dir∣ty and earthy accidentall dross, and afterward accor∣ding to their proper qua∣lities, are made most fit fer∣ments for pure earth, white and red, so as in no sort
they are said to need any other thing. For the whole Work is one, and the thing it self is one, and all the whole is derived from an Image. For our Ancestors knew, that the parts of this our Stone are celestiall and concrete; which were altogether ab∣surd, if common Sol and Lune were needfull to the composition thereof. For it is said, Take a bo∣dy wherein is Argent vive, pure, clean, unspotted, and incompleat of Nature: such a body after its compleat and perfect cleansing, is much better then the Bodies of Mineral Sol and Lune. Of this self-same body,
which is the matter of the Stone, three things are chief∣ly said; namely, that it is a green Lyon, a stinking Gumme, and a white Fume. But this is spoken of Phy∣losophers, purposely to de∣ceive Folks, and to bring them into doubts, by the many and different names. But understand thou shalt, one thing alwaies is really signified, though acciden∣tally and by names it is said to be three: for the green Lyon, stinking Liquor, and white Fume, are spoken of one and the same subject, wherein they altogether lie hid, untill by Art they are made manifest.
By the green Lion, all Philosophers mean green Sol multipliable and sperma∣tick, which is as yet incom∣pleat by Nature, having power to reduce Bodies to the first matter, and to make fixed things spirituall and flying, and so it is fitly cal∣led a Lion. For as every Beast is sub∣ject to the Lion, so every Metalline body is confirmed and strengthened by the power of this Liony and green Sol; namely, of our Mercury, when it is Philo∣sophically prepared. This is bred and born with a certain water, which we call Argent vive of the Philosophers, and white
Mercury: Therefore their water White and Red, gi∣veth unto us two tinctures, white and red, proceeding from one body and sub∣stance: These are alwaies named our Mercuries; and after due conjunction, de∣coction, and digestion, we call our White and Red Stones. By the stinking gumme, we mean a certain stinking smell, proceeding from the unclean Body in the first di∣stillation, which is altoge∣ther like unto stinking Assa∣faetida, that with a certain sweetness, whereof it is said before its preparation, its smell is grievous; which is most certain: but after that,
in a due manner it shall be prepared and circulated in∣to any quintessence. This dignified matter of Philosophers abounds with unspeakable sweetness, ha∣ving power to cure the Le∣prosie, and other grievous Diseases; and without this our living Sol, it is impossi∣ble to make aurum potabile, to cure with; which of Philosophers is called the Elixer of Life, and of Met∣tals. Yet I deny not, but that Philosophers may very well and with good success, dis∣solve Mineral Lune and Sol with radical things of their own kind, and as yet not per∣fected by Nature, and so may
attain to the highest mysterie of this Art. But certainly it is not for every mean Wit; it is for Princes who do most abound with Sol and Lune: but this way is universally open and lawfull unto all men, yet chiefly for poor men, as be∣ing more brief, and of lesse Cost. It is called a white Fume, because that in the first di∣stillation, before the red tincture doth ascend, there riseth a fume truly white, whereby the receiver is clouded with a frequent milkish shadow and moy∣sture, for which cause it is called the Virgins Milk. Wherefore, wheresoever
thou shalt find a substance endued with these three qualities, know that it is the true matter of the Philoso∣phers Stone. There ariseth a Question very difficult, which much troubleth fantastick Heads, viz. our Stone sheweth it self in a foul shape, because it is in every thing, and in every place; whence ma∣ny men reading this, make choice of several and stink∣ing things, which with great labour they distil, calcine, & joyn together. But let such hear what the Philosophers say, Who so seeks the Philoso∣phers Secrets in Turds looseth∣his Labour, and in the end finds nothing but deceit.
Yet there is also another thing which troubleth these mens Brains, viz. our Stone is bred between two Mountains, it is cast out in∣to the Dunghill, and tro∣den under mens feet, it is counted a most vile and contemptible thing, it is generated between Male and Female, and lieth hide in Thee, in Me, and in such like things. And contrari∣ly it is said, Our Stone can∣not be in things differing from its kind, namely, from the Nature of Sol and Lune; for nothing can give that which it hath not. A Net∣tle cannot produce a Rose, nor a Woman a Dog; How then shall we resolve so
many doubts rising from Contrarieties? Truly, it is easily done; for it is plain, That nothing in this World, whether it be Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral, can be generated without a natural and a spe∣cial appetite. Therefore according to the Doctrine of Phyloso∣phers, which informs us on∣ly by obscure Examples; We must understand that the Stone may be by Simili∣tude in every thing, and in all places, chiefly, because it is nothing else but a specifical vertue and quality joyned with natural heat, whereby every compounded thing is brought to his perfectest de∣termined end.
Things generally spoken are alwaies generally to be understood, for what earth∣ly thing can be in every thing, and in all places, but only a specifical Appetite, and a natural Heat; for these are the immediate and near causes without which the Stone cannot be. Whosoever therefore desireth to understand the Stone, let him not depart from his specifical quality and Original. Of a Man cometh a Man, of a Rose a Rose; so like∣wise from a matter which is potentially Gold, having things necessary, and Excre∣ments purged, ariseth Sol by an inward Appetite; there∣fore
from a Mettal ariseth a multitude of metalline tin∣cture and perfection: The Stone is made of a mettal, living, hot and moist, when natural heat is joyned with it, whereby it is made apt to generate its like. For our Stone is most pure mat∣ter, viz. the nature of Sol, containing in it self a vege∣table heat, whereby it hath power and vertue alwaies to multiply in its own specifi∣cal and natural form; there∣fore it is called the secret Fire of nature, stirring up the compound, and per∣fecting it in our Glasse into a Stone, in like manner as seed, by reason of its own proper naturall heat, and radicall
moisture, if its mother Earth doth putrifie to admi∣rable Generation and Mul∣tiplication. Whosoever therefore keeps not this our heat, our fire, our balnium, our invi∣sible and most temperate flame, and of one regiment, and continually burning in one quality and measure within our Glasse; I say, whosoever understands not this Dunghill, horsebelly, and moist fire, shall labour in vain, and shall never at∣tain this Science. Thou seest therefore that the radical humidity, which is that first vegetable Ver∣tue, is the cause of multipli∣cation of every thing in its
kind. Therefore of the Composition of Sol and Lune take our burning water, that Aqua vite, which the igno∣rant do think, but falsly, to be extracted from Wine, Oyl, and such like Li∣quors. I say, such green Sol and Lune, in which the vegetable vertue is not extinguished, but is living, hot and moist, and hath power to reduce all Bodies to their vegetability; for by this, with Gods per∣mission, bodies extinct, and not multipliable, may more easily get the habit and ver∣tue to germinate, which of Phylosophers is called the beginning and tearm from whence the Stone is genera∣ted.
Marie the Prophetesse in an Epistle to Aron, writeth, That the Body taken from little Mountains, is a Body white and clear, not suffering putrefaction nor motion, and it is that which is generated be∣tween Male and Female; By those little Mountains is un∣derstood Sol and Lune, which are naturally separated from us by a great distance, by whose influence Gold and Silver are generated, both which are in our Mercu∣ry. By Male and Female, we understand Agent and Pati∣ent, Active and Passive, both which are also in our active Mercury, and in our Passive Earth.
Whereby, without doubt, is inferred, that a mineral Earth and Water are the Active and Passive matter, as the Philosophers Stone. And here hence appears that community be∣tween the Poor and Rich; seeing that the Stone may be made of one thing, without visible Sol and Lune. But here by the way, I advertise thee, that betwixt the Elixer and the Stone there is this difference; for the Stone rejoyceth in unity and simplicity, but the Elix∣er in plurality. The Stone therefore is one thing, our Mercury, Sol, Lune, our Lincture white and red, which may be na∣turally
joyned with its own proper Earth, or with the Earth taken from the little Mountains, and may easily be obtained by mortal men. But the Elixer is the same vegetable Mercury, which yet by reason of its fixation, is said not to be common, but consisting of many things, for it is absolutely fix'd in the Earth of com∣mon Sol and Lune: And therefore it alwayes con∣sisteth of many things, viz. of Mercury vegetable, and of a different Earth, which is neither Common nor fit for poor men. But of this Earth, it is not much to be respected of what substance it is, so it be fix'd.
Alphidius is of the same Opinion, saying, The Faeces, from whence this Earth is ta∣ken, seeing it is of no value, is altogether to be rejected, and the Mercury to be planted in another subtil Earth: For its own Earth is seldom na∣tural in the composition of the Elixer. Yet, my Friend, I will name it to thee by its own Name, whereby the com∣mon People name it; and it is the end of the Egg, where∣by we understand the na∣ture of Mettals, viz. Mer∣cury rightly mix'd by Na∣ture, with its own sulphur, of its own accord inclined by pntrefaction and growing.
From this Egg, three things must be considered; namely, The Yolk, the White, and the Shell; and this last is only and altoge∣ther necessary for Phyloso∣phers, which is called the end of the Egg; that is, the last part, rejoycing in per∣fection, having the likeness of a little Mountain, and also generated between Male and Female; which when it is perfectly calcined it exceeds all Earths what∣soever in whiteness and sub∣tilty, enduring the greatest fire, embracing Tincture, and desiring a metal in Na∣ture, which is hardly be∣lieved of Workers in the Art, unless they being
overcome by experience the Mistress of things, that they be compelled to confess and admire it. But another Earth, wherein there is any Mercurial humidity, will not drink up our Mer∣cury with so much greedi∣ness, and therefore it is not so commodious; the rea∣son is, because it aboundeth with its proper and natural humidity, but this hath non such, for its humidity was naturally transferred to the generation and union of the White and the Yolk. Yet we deny not, that this vertue is necessary, yet pro∣fitable for the preservation of man's Body, which is de∣rived from the outward
parts to the inward, yet so as it be mixed with the Elix∣er of life; this Earth is wholly contemned, when the matter included is cor∣rupted, and is cast out on the Dunghill, and every where troden under foot, and accounted unprofita∣ble. Sometimes I desiring to try whether it would joyn with our unctious humidity: I put it thereto, which it drunk up with so great ap∣petite as that it seemed spongious, & a most fat con∣gealation, rather then an Earth naturally naked; from which when I had gently evoparated Mercury, it remained very Citron.
Here I will end and shew what matter, and what way of practice is necessary for this Work and Art. Of the Practick, and Ope∣rative Part. In the Name of God take a Drop of the Green Lyon, which I have mentioned be∣fore, and dissolve him in di∣still'd Vinegar very well for ten dayes, stirring the Com∣pound strongly three times every day, that it may be well mixed: then separate the Foeces three times by fil∣ter; afterward evaporate the Vineger with a gentle fire, untill it be thick as
Pitch, then pour it out, and keep it safe. Having 12 pounds of the Green Lyon thus brought into Gum, thou may'st be∣lieve, that thou hast seen Earth of Earth, and the Bro∣ther of Earth, whereof Phy∣losophers have so often spo∣ken; put thereof three pound into a Glass, whose third part may contain at least four Sextaries of Wine: put it into a Furnace with Sand, so as the Sand may be two fin∣gers thick under the Glass, and about and above the Matter; then the matter be∣ing a little dryed with a gen∣tle heat, put a Receiver not yet luted thereto: after a few hours, having received a
certain light Water, when thou seest a certain white Fume begin to ascend, put thereto another most long & most large Receiver, which lay close, least the Spirits break forth, which are most necessary in this Work: Note also, that from the first appearing of the White Fume, the fire must be dis∣creetly increased by little and little: This same ting∣eth the Receiver with a cer∣tain thick and milky humidi∣ty which is our Lune, and therewith shal also ascend a most red oyl, called the Phi∣losophers acreal Gold, a stin∣king Menstruum, the Philo∣sophers Sol, our Tincture, Burning water, the Blood of
Green Lyon, our unctious humidity, which is the last comfort of Man's Body in this Life; the Philosophers Mercury, the Solutive Wa∣ter, which dissolveth Sol un∣der conservation of its Spe∣cies; it hath also many other Names. Continue this Distillati∣on from the first appearance of the white Fume 12 hours following: then remove the Receiver, and stop it close, lest the Spirits be lost, which are very volatile and pene∣trative: And thus thou hast the Bloud of the Green Ly∣on, called The Secret Water, and most sharp Vinegar, by which all Bodies may be re∣duced to their first Matter,
and purgeth Man's Body from all Infirmities. This is our Fire alwayes equally burning in one measure within the Glass, and not without: This is our Dung-hill, our Aqua∣vitae, our Balmy, our Horse∣belly, working and produ∣cing many Wonders in the most secret Work of Na∣ture: It is also the Exami∣ner of all Bodies dissolved, and not dissolved; a Fire hot and moist, most sharp, a Water-carrying Fire in its Belly; otherwise it could not have power to dissolve Bodies into their first Mat∣ter: This is our Mercury, our Sol, our Lune, which we use in our Secret Work.
Take the Foeces left in the bottom, as soon as they are cold; for they are our Cross-Bill, far blacker then Pitch, which thou may'st set on fire, by putting a kindled Cole into it; so as they shall be calcined of their own ac∣cord into a most Yellow Earth: But this Calcina∣tion sufficeth not for its per∣fect cleansing; put it there∣fore into a Reverberatory, with a moderate heat, for eight dayes, and so many Nights following, increa∣sing the heat and flame, till it be white as Snow; they may also be calcined in a Potters Furnace, being meanly hot.
Having this white Earth, thou may'st putrifie and al∣ter it, or the Calxes of other Metals prepared, as I will teach you in that which fol∣loweth, at thy pleasure, into a new Whiteness or Red∣ness, by meanes of our Lune or Mercury, which putrifieth with them by Generation, and Vegetation; which Properties they wanted be∣fore: for the Phylosophers say, first calcine, then pu∣trifie and dissolve; distill, sublime, descent, and fix of∣ten with our Aquavitae; wash and dry, and make a Mar∣riage between the Body and the Spirit; and if the Water be congealed, by a natural commixture with the Body,
then the Body shall dye of the Flux, shedding its bloud, and putting on many Co∣lours; after the third Day, he shall ascend and descend, first to the Moon, then to the Sun, through the round O∣cean Sea, and without end, sitting in a very little Ship; and when his Journey is ended, he shall immediately obtain the Victory, for do∣ing whereof, there shall not need any great expence: And thus thou may'st wait again patiently the Harvest, and thou should be fill'd with Joy and Riches. And now we will speak of Putre∣faction. Take an ounce of this Calx hidden before in the
Philosophers eg, and thereon put of the red tincture to cover it two fingers; then seal it, and set it to putrifie eight daies in a most cold place; which being ended, it will drink up the humidi∣ty; again pour on as much of the tincture, and let it stand as before for other eight daies, continuing again the said imbibitions and times: let it stand till it cease to drink any more tincture; remove it not from its place, untill it be blacker then any pitch; which being seen, set it into a natural balmy, that the moisture with the black Earth may be digest∣ed, and fixed into a white Mineral: then divide it into
two equal parts, and work the one for the white, and the other for the red stone: which thou shalt thus easily perform; Ferment the one part with the oyl of Lune, that is, with white water, and the other part with the oyl of Sol, that is, with the red water; and so by greater heat and digestion, it shall be converted into a most red powder, like Dragons blood. This powder being joyn∣ed with a part of our Mer∣cury, and circulated, is call∣ed Aurum Potabile, Elixer of life and of Mettalls, which transmuteth Mercury and all imperfect mettals into most perfect Sol.
But here learn a general Rule; If thou ordain the Elixer only for the white, then keep one part of the red work, distill the other part with a gentle fire, ta∣king the white water, which we call our white tincture, our Eagle, our white Mer∣cury, and Virgins milk, and having these two Mercuries, thou mayst practise with them, either upon their own Earths, or upon the calxes of Mettals prepared. For it is said, The Earth is not much to be respected, so that it be fix'd. There∣fore take which thou wilt, being first altered into whiteness; and for the white work, you may ferment thus;
Take the Calx of Lune and Earth altered, equall parts, grind them together, and temper them with white Mercury, named Virgins milk, which keep safe; sub∣lime the rest not fixed, and that which ariseth to the sides of the glass, like Mer∣cury sublimed, reiterate up∣on his proper calxes, grind∣ing and tempering with our Virgins milk, distilling and subliming as before, untill no fire will raise it. This our Mercury subli∣med and fixed, made of the white Earth of bodies alter∣ed, arising at first admirably by the vertue and help of water.
This is that Mercury, in∣stead of which the unlearn∣ed take the compounded of common Mercury, Vitriol, and Sol sublimed; wherein they are deceived: when this is thus fixed into white earth, it is afterward calcined, whereof is made an Elixer or stone as followeth; Put it into a circulatorie, and pour thereon Virgins milk to cover it, then circulate it to the thickness of oyl, by drying and calcining it, as often as thou wilt, for by this means it may be aug∣mented infinitely. But before thou make pro∣jection, congeal it into an oily powder, one part there∣of converts thousand, nay
ten thousand parts of Argent vive, and the other Mettals into pure Lune, enduring all trialls. In like manner thou shalt work with the Red Water upon the calx of Metals, by fermenting and subliming upon the calx of Sol alter∣ed. And note, That thou canst have no perfect ferment, un∣till it be altered with Mer∣curie from their first quali∣ties, into a new whitenesse and rednesse by means of Putrifaction and alteration, which before it wanted. But when after putri∣faction, it shall be reduced into Whiteness, then it be∣comes spiritual, and is more
apt to joyn better with our Mercurie sublimed natural∣ly, and by the least parts, and also to be fixed toge∣ther inseparably; which would not be so naturall, if one part were fixed, and the other part to be separa∣ted. Moreover, when spirits have not vertue to penetrate bodies, nor bodies appetite to imbrace spirits, it is im∣possible that they should be joyned by their least parts. But contrarily, when fer∣ments are made spirituall, then spirits will joyn with spirits, and the body which was most perfectly fix'd, is naturally disposed, and in∣clined to return to his for∣mer
fixation; which with∣out doubt cannot possibly be in bodies which were never perfectly fix'd, but the body before fixation, desiring a solid habit and fixation, draweth with him, and into his disposition, all spirits whatsoever, which are joy∣ned with him, and not dege∣nerating as Sulphur vive, Arsnick sublimed, Bole-Ar∣monick, and such like. Common Mercury subli∣med, may very well be joyn∣ed with spiritual ferments, which with calx of ferment not altered, wil never be perfectly joyned. Therefore this part of natural Phylosophie exclu∣deth all citrinations and
dealbations, which were not produced by a perfect alte∣ration before the tincture, were joyned to their bodies and spirits. For nothing can be made an Elixer, untill it hath pass'd the Philosophical Wheel; which being unknown, all labour comes to nothing.
Of the abbre∣viation of the Work. Wherein almost all Elixers are contained, and the wayes to make them. The First Abbreviation. TAke Vitriol, calcine it into ashes, then beat them into most subtile pow∣der; put them in an Urinal, and pour thereto Virgins Milk to cover them, stop the Urinal with a Linnen cloth, and let it stand eight
dayes, then adde thereto as much of the aforesaid Milk, reiterating this from eight dayes to eight dayes, and when it will drink no more, let it stand in a cold place, close stopt, untill a certain Cristalline earth like Fishes eyes, appear in the upper part thereof, which separate from the gross part remain∣ing in the bottom, which put into the Philosophers Egg to digest discreetly un∣till it be perfectly fixed. Then increase the fire, till it be perfect yellow, and then again increase the fire, until it be red as Dragons blood: Then add to this a part of red Mercury, to co∣ver it, and congeal it by cir∣culation
into Oyl, and after∣ward into Powder, and do thus three times. Project one part of this Powder upon forty of most pure Lune, melted with one part of most fine Sol, and it shall be converted into most pure Sol: or if you project it upon Amalgum of Mer∣cury and Sol, or of Mercury and Lune, it shall be more certain, and more plenti∣full. But if thou wilt have Gold most perfect, and most high, take the Elixer out of the Egg, put it in an Urinal, and poure upon of the fore∣said red Mercury, equally compounded, and mixed with a strong Corrasive
made of Vitriol and Sul∣phur, which evaporate from the Elixer with a most gentle fire, and by this means the tincture of the one wa∣ter and of the other, shall be fixed with the Elixer, by augmenting its quantity and colour; which being often repeated, the Elixer shall be converted into the form of Oyl, in which if you quench Lamins of Lune nealed, they shall be throughout ting'd into most perfect Sol, which being melted with a part of most pure Gold, it shall be purer then any com∣mon Gold. But if you take as much of the white Earth of Mars altered as before, of Vi-
Vitriol, fixing it upon the calx of Sol altered, and afterward rubified, and then convert it into Oyl as before, with the said compounded water; thou shalt have a great E∣lixer, converting every Me∣tall into most pure Gold. This work may be done in twelve weeks: but it is not good for the health of Mans body. In the same manner with the ferment of Lune altered, thou mayst fix the white Earth of Vitriol, and of Mars altered, which are re∣duced into Oyl with the foresaid Virgins Milk, being equally mixed with water of common Mercury, sub∣limed, fixed, and calcined,
so hast thou the best Elixer to convert all Bodies into most pure Lune. The Second Abbreviation. IF thou canst artificially prepare the aforesaid white or red water, thou mayst farr sooner attain the end of the work. First there∣fore fix Mercury sublimed, and calcine it, and then dis∣solve it in the other Mercury white or red, untill they be made one water: purifie this water three weeks, and it will alter the calxes of any Metall; for in this work is
joyned a twofold Water, namely, natural and against nature. The way to fix Mercury sublimed, is thus: First sub∣lime Mercury; if there be half a pound of it, joyn here∣to half a pound of Saltpeter, and as much of Vitriol, grinding and tempering the mixture with distilled Ace∣tum, till all become like white Paste; when they are thus incorporated, sublime seven times, that of his own accord he may be clear, then fix it in this manner: put two or three pound in a long re∣ceiver, stop the mouth, place it in ashes, so as the Globe may be wholly covered; the first week, give it a gentle
fire; the second week stron∣ger, and the third most strong: this done, it shall be very well fixed. Again, dis∣solve it in Virgins Milk, af∣ter the foresaid way and order; if thou wantest mo∣ney, thou mayst obtain a branch or particular, in farr shorter time. Thus, take the foresaid white compoundèd Mercu∣ry, and fix it upon the calx of Lune, not altered by cir∣culating it thereon, and when one part is fixed, add more, repeating it often, un∣till the calx it self melt like Butter on a fiery Cole. One part thereof pro∣jected upon ten of Mercury purged, maketh good Lune
for Vessels and Houshold-Ornaments. This self-same way thou mayst handle our red Mercuries composition, being made as before with the said water extracted from Mercury sublimed, fix∣ed, calcined, and dissolved in the said red Water, so as it be then calcined upon the calx of Sol not altered, and thou hast the best tincture to convert Lune into Sol, whereof Rings and other things may be made.
The Third Abbreviation. PUt into a Circulatory, an ounce of the calx of the Egg-shells very well re∣verberated, and pour there∣on of white or red Mercury to cover it; then nip the glass, or stop it close with lute made of powder of Iron, Vitriol, and Honey, well boyled together, circulating in balnco, till it be dryed up into powder. This done, pour in more, observing the same order, untill it be made oyl; This converts Mercury, and the
other Metalls into most per∣fect Sol and Lune, according to the nature and disposition of the Elixer. After the same manner thou mayst circulate our Mercury upon the Calxes of Metals. There can be no way shorter than this; for if thou put an ounce of calx of Sol with Mercury, before likewise fixed, and pour thereto as much red Mer∣cury as may cover the calx two fingers breadth, then stop it close with Paste com∣pounded with Hony, Bole∣armenick, and Iron dust, mix'd and strongly tempered and boyled, till it be stiff and black.
Then set the circulatory in a Furnace, and with gen∣tle heat digest the red Mer∣cury into a red and fixed calx, then adde thereto as much more of that Mercury, circulate and dry it as be∣fore, till the Calx have drunk as much Mercury as it can, and be converted into a thick blackish oyl, and so thou hast an Elixer which converts ten parts of Mercury, purged and heated, into a most red powder dry and fixed, which if thou also put into a Circu∣latorie with increase, and digest by imbibition and con∣gealation, as before, it shall be so much increased in quantity: And thus thou mayst multiply this Elixer infinitly.
One ounce thereof will congeale a hundred of crude Mercury into powder; of which powder, one ounce will convert ten of any metal into most pure Sol. And this way thou mayst work with the Calx of Lune and Mercurie joyned toge∣ther, so as evaporation be made by Circulation, and adding our naturall white Mercurie, untill it be redu∣ced into oyl, proceeding in all points as in the former, with the red Mercurie upon the calx of Sol, and so thou shalt have a white Elixer converting all bodies into most pure and perfect Lune.
The Fourth Abbreviation. TAke an ounce of the Earth of the quintes∣sence, smelling most sweetly, and an ounce of the Mercury of Virgins Milk; powder the Earth, and joyn it with the Mercurie. This way shall be made a perfect composition in the first order for the white Elixer, which by longer time and greater fire is redu∣ced into a red Elixer; put therefore the compound in∣to a blind Urinal (as it is call'd) very close stopt, and
gest it in dung equally for 15 dayes; then take it out, and shut it up in a Philoso∣phers Egge, and digest it in a gentle heat, till it be black, and so unto perfect whiteness. This we call a white Elixer: within this time, the fire being increa∣sed, will be red, of which one ounce cements hundreds of Mercury into Sol. To multiply it, take a part thereof, and joyn it in the foresaid manner with Vir∣gins milk, digest as before, unto whiteness, and then un∣to redness. In this second repetition, the Projection will be upon
four hundred. By this Pro∣jection thou mayst multi∣ply it at thy pleasure. The Fifth Abbreviation. DIssolve the red Calx of Sol and Mercurie in the first most strong Corro∣sive composed of Salt-Peter and Vitriol the common way; put the solution▪ in a pellican in balneo, drawing off the one half, then stop it most close, dry it up with a gentle heat; then add more of the Corrosive, observing the foresaid order, in dissol∣ving,
evaporating and con∣gealing ten times, untill the Corrosive cease to arise; which is then done, when by no fire it can be fixed into powder, but remaineth like oyl and thick. This Elixer converts Mer∣cury, and every metall into most perfect Sol; This work ought to be done in a Circu∣latory placed in an Earthen Pot, wherein it must stand covered with dung to the middle; This Pot must be full of holes in the bottome, and must be placed upon the mouth of a Copper Ves∣sell half fill'd with hot wa∣ter, as a Copper Vessell is placed of a Furnace, where∣in fire must be made to be
continued discreetly for ne∣cessity of digestion. This Experiment is called Rustum. Of the Minerall Stone. GOD is wonderfull in his Works, who is Vertue, teaching the Truth. Take in this name the Mercury white or red, simple or compounded, and dissolve therein five stones of the Sea; Doing in all things as you did in Vitriol, and thou
shalt have the great Elixer. By the same way of u∣trifaction, all Mineralls may be altered, and so of every fixed thing (a due matter be∣ing added) may be made an Elixer, for our Mercury white and red must be joyned with fixed things which want Mercury; and this way the Metalline Bodies may be brought into a metalline form, namely a Vitrified Powder, as also Egg-shells, which when they are per∣fectly calcined, will endure fire more than Sol; and thereof being well and arti∣ficially ting'd, Philosaphers have made Sol in the space of one day, which Nature cannot do under-ground in a
thousand years: A thing hard and incredible to the unlearned; yet true and most certain, and confirmed by the Testimony of many men. Be thou therefore not so∣licitous or curious in choo∣sing thine Earth, so that it be of a Metalline Nature, and induring the Fire. Hereby Glass is made malleable, and by meanes of this Tincture, is converted into transparent and fixed Mettal, whereby it appear∣eth, that this Science is pos∣sible. For there is no Earth which doth more easily em∣brace the Spirituality of our Mercury, than that which is
most deprived of Mercury, and moisture; which Priva∣tion thou shalt not find in Bodies of another Nature, although yet they be very much calcined. Wherefore it appeareth manifestly, that seeing Sol and Lune, are nothing else but Earth, Red and White, wherein a most pure Mer∣cury is fixed and joyned by the least parts, that Philoso∣phers (having the same Ele∣ments) may artificially imi∣tate Nature in her Compo∣sition under the Earth, to produce the same effect: for it is certain, that Earth may be fermented to Water, so as it be fixed; and Water fermented to Earth, if it be
perfect and cleansed; and this without the help of any common Sol or Lune: And therefore Philosophers in their Writings have taught, that the Stone is equally common both to the Poor and Rich. These things considered, thou shalt understand, that our Stone lyeth hidden, and fecretly lurketh, often in places least suspected, and nothing esteemed, whose matter and nearness, if it should be known, would produce most great dan∣ger. It is to be noted, that the Philosophers have found out divers wayes of handling this one thing: But I answer for them all, and briefly
conclude, That our Earth doth drink up and fix our Mercury; and that this Mer∣cury doth wash and ting our Earth, and so doth perfect it into the Stone, without any further ferment. For the white Mercury giveth a most perfect Tin∣cture of Lune, and the Red Mercury of Sol: Therefore, when they are fixed in con∣venient Earths, they make Sol and Lune, without the help of common Gold and Silver. Behold thou un∣derstandest this Tincture, which we draw out from a vile thing of no price: yet note, that he that hath Salt in his Breast, may ferment this Tincture with common
Gold, whereby he may ob∣tain incomparable Riches, yet with Wisdom, with most great Cost, and not without danger. For from Sol alone, by means of this Tincture, which is our burning Wine, is made a most pretious and a most perfect Elixer, white and red; for it rejoyceth in fulness of white and red Sul∣pher, whereby may be made most perfect Silver. Of this Work, I have written more fully in my Se∣venth Book; wherein I Treat of the manifold plen∣ty of Gold, and of the great∣est Elixer of Life: But here also I will briefly touch it. Understand therefore, that it
behoveth thee to alter the Calx of Gold (with the foresaid Stone, equally mix'd with the Water of Mercu∣ry, sublimed and perfectly fixed) into most white and fixed Sulpher. Then calcine it well, that the strength and poyson of the Fire against Nature put to it, do hasten to Putrifacti∣on and alteration, may be ut∣terly destroyed. Then imbibe it with the foresaid simple Milk, untill the Calx it self have drunk up a reasonable quantity thereof, and that it be fix∣ed. Dissolve it again with the same Milk, and make it vola∣tile; afterwards fix and cal∣cine,
and then bring it into Oyl, with a little part of that Virgins Milk by circulation, and so it shall be a perfect Elixer, converting Mercury, and each imperfect Mettal, into most perfect Lune: and by the same way, thou mayst rubifie the other part with our Red Mercury, by fixing and calcining, and after∣ward dissolving it with the same Red Menstruum; and at last by circulating it into a thick Oyl, which we call potable Gold, a curing and preserving Exixer of Life, and of Metals. Know also, That if our Red Mercury equally with Mercury sublimed and fixed, be circulated with Lutrie,
Vitriol, or Iron, before and after Rubification, be digest∣ed into Oyl, it will convert thine Lamins, of Lune neal∣ed and injected into pure Sol, which if thou afterward taketh out, it will serve for all need to live withall. It is a general Rule, That if thou wilt be a Master of this Art, it is needful to make all Medicines gumous and fusible, melting like wax of their own accord, with∣out Fume, upon a Plate nealed. For by this means, each part will follow the other in Projection and will joyntly dilate themselves through the Pores of the Metal, with∣out any disjunction: but if
any part be ponderous, it will separate the parts of the Metal, & make it brittle. Therefore the Medicine must be often subtilated, af∣ter that it is perfectly fixed, that at least it may be an in∣combustible Oyl, and rather may be called a Species, then a Genus, because it is nothing else but a fixed Tincture of Colour. If (this thing observed) thou canst prepare thy Me∣dicine thus, thou shalt make fair Metals, and malleable, or else not. Also here understand, two Bodies to be dissolved with the Natural Menstruum, is always the second Calx, not the first; and therefore it
behoveth thee to dissolve Calx of Mettals with a com∣pound Mercury, as before is taught, that they may sooner putrifie, and be altered into the second Calx (which we call Sulpher of Nature, and Foliated Earth) which we then dissolve and circulate into Oyl, with a Simple Menstruum; namely, Na∣tural.
The Calcination of Met∣tals. NOw learn how Met∣tals are to be calcined: Know therefore, that Saturn and Jupiter we calcine onely one way, which is this: Put either of them into a great Iron Vessel, and in the Fire, so that the Flame may beat upon the Mettal; and draw off the Scum with an Iron Rake, to the sides of the Vessel, stirring it often, until it grow white; then searse it, & gather the subtile Pow∣der; one Ounce is sufficient for thee.
Sprinkle Venus and Mars with the best Viniger well distilled, that they may ga∣ther Rust: burn this with most strong Fire in an Iron Dish; when it is red-hot, cool it in the best Acetum, evaporate that Acetum, and gather a most red Earth; which dry, and keep safe∣ly. Amalgame Sol and Lune, and grind it on a Marble with Powder of Salt, pre∣pared without any moisture, untill no Mercury appear: then sublime and evaporate the Mercury with strong fire; grind that in the bottome in∣to most subtile Powder, and sublime, untill no Mercury remain with it; wash the
Calx with hot Water, to take away the Salt; dry it, and thou shalt have a Calx more subtile then Meal. Another way is thus: Take thin Lamins of Sol, neal and cast them into Mercury, heat∣ed on hot Ashes; so the Mer∣cury will drink up the Sol. Note, That every Ounce of Sol requireth four and twenty Ounces of Mercury; put this a malgame in a larg Glass; bury it in Sand in a great Furnace, give it Fire by degrees; after the sixth hour make it vehement: con∣tinue this heat five dayes and nights, at each hour put∣ting down the Mercury which ascendeth, with a lin∣nen Cloth, bound with a lit∣tle
Iron Rod, and stopping the Glass with Lute, till at last all become a Powder redder then Blood, which then we call the first Calx, good and perfect; with which, if you mix Fire of Nature, to use his Vertues, as it requireth, thou canst not erre in this Science. The Recapitulation. I Have told out of what, and how thou shalt make our Mercury white and red, and how this Mercury is to be actuated and sharpned; how thou shalt prepare
Calx, how to purifie and al∣ter them into a new White∣ness, which we call our Mer∣cury sublimed; how to ab∣breviate the time of Putri∣faction and. Alteration; how to fix and dissolve again, and then how to circulate into a white and red Elixer; how by Imbibitions, with proper Waters white and red, they may be infinitely multiplyed to an incredible profit. Learn therefore Patience, fear God and love him, keep these Secrets, and then the Lord will bless thine En∣deavours. Saint Dunstan lived, and was Archbishop of Canter∣bury, in the Reign of King Edgar, and Etheldred his Son,
as appeareth by an Antient Monument yet extant, in St. Paul's Church in London, containing a Prophecie in these Words: HEre lyeth Etheldred King of England, Son of King Edgar; to whom (on the Day of his Consecration, after his Coronation) it is re∣ported, that St. Dunstan, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, Prophe∣cied openly this Curse; Because thou hast aspired to the Kingdom, by the Death of thy Brother; in whose Blood, the English, with thy infamous Mother, have conspired, the Sword shall not depart from thy House, but shall be against Thee
all the Dayes of thy Life, de∣stroying thy Seed, untill thy Kingdom be transferred to ano∣ther Kingdom, whose King and Language the Nation, over whom thou Reignest knowest not: Neither shall thy Sin, and the Sin of thy Mother, and the Sin of those men, who were accessary to that wicked Coun∣cel be expiated, but by a long Revenge. Which Things came to pass, as were fore-told by that Holy Man: For Ethel∣dred having been in divers Battles miserably vexed, and put to flight by King Swans-Dansh and his Son, and at last straitly Besieged, and
shut up in London; He there miserably dyed, in the Year of our Lord, 1017. after he had Reigned 36. Years in great Tribulation.
DUNSTAN of the Stone of the Philosophers; With the Experiments of Rumelius of New-Mar∣ket. I. TAke of the best red transparent oar of gold, as much as you can have, drive its Spirit from it through a Retort; this is the Azoth and the Acetum of Philosophers, from its pro∣per minera, which openeth
radically Sol that is prepa∣red. II. Take the Minera of Venus or Saturn, drive their spirits in a Retort, each of these dissolveth Gold radically, af∣ter its purification. III. Take Pulverised oar of Saturn, or vulgar Saturn cal∣cined, extract its salt with Acetum, or its Antinae, puri∣fie it in the best manner, that it be transparent as Crystall, and sweet as honey, and be fluid in heat like Wax, and brittle when cold.
This is the Tree, which is cut off, of unwholesome Fruits, on which must be inoculated the twiggs of Sol. IV. Take of that Earth which lyeth waste in the Field, found every where in Moo∣rish grounds, into which the Astrals ejaculate their ope∣rations, being adorned with all manner of Colours, ap∣pearing like a Rainbow; ex∣tract from it its purest and subtillest. This is the Uni∣versal Menstruum for all; and is all in all.
V. Take of the Oar of Sol and Mercurie a like quantity, grinde each very well, pour on it the Spirit of Mercurie, that it stand over 3. fingers deep; dissolve and digest it in a gentle warmth. VI. Take of the best Vitriol, or of the Vitriol of Venus, drive their Spirits in a Re∣tort, white and red; with this red Spirit being rectified and sweetned, you may fer∣ment and inbibe the subtile Gold Calx, and with the white Spirit you may dis∣solve
it after it hath been purified. VII. Take quick Mercurie, pu∣rifie and dissolve it so long in alcolisated spirit of Wine, till its impurity be separa∣ted from it, and become in∣to its extream transparent easie fluid essence; like un∣to the white gluten of the Eagle, and capable to re∣ceive the blood of the Red Lyon. VIII. Extract the salt of the crude and white calcined Tartar, Purifie and Clarifie
it as often, till it be as bright as the tear of the Eye, and can be brought no higher; therewith you may sharpen its own spirit of Wine, which dissolveth Sol and Lune. IX. Take of the ranck poiso∣nous matter or stone, called Kerg swaden, exuviae, or husks of the Metals, drive its spirit very circumspectly, receive it so, that it may turn unto water, it redu∣ceth all metalls to a potable∣ness.
X. Take of the ayre or hea∣venly dew, being well pu∣rified, ten parts, and of sub∣tile Gold Calx one part, set it in digestion, dissolve and coagulate it. XI. Take the Urine of a whole∣some Man, that drank meer∣ly Wine, make of it, accord∣ing to Art, the Salt of Mi∣crocosme, purifie it very well, which doth so much accuate the Spirit of Wine, that it dissolveth Sol in a moment.
XII. Take of the best Oar of Gold, pulverise it very well, seal it with Hermes his Seal, set it so long into the vapo∣rous fire, till you see it spring up and grow a white and red Rose. XIII. This last Experiment he calleth the Light. Take in the Name of the Lord, of Hangarish Gold, which hath been cast thrice thorow An∣timony, and be laminated most thinly, as much of it as you will, and make with quick Mercury an a Malgame, then
calcine it most subtilly, with flowers of Sulpher, and spi∣rit of Wine burnt, as often, till there remaineth a fair subtile Gold Calx, of a pur∣ple colour. Take one part of it, and two parts of the above mentioned red mat∣ter, grind it very well toge∣ther for an hour on a warm∣ed Marble, then cement and calcine well by degrees for three hours in a circle fire. This work must be Iterated three times, then pour on it of the best rectified spirit, that it stand over it three fingers deep; set it in a gen∣tle and warm digestion, for six dayes to be extracted, then the Spirit of Wine will be ting'd as deep as blood;
cant of that tincture, and pour on another, as long as ir will tinge it; put all these ting'd Spirits of Wine into a Violl, so that the fourth part only be fill'd, and seal it hermetically, set it on the vaporous fire of the first de∣gree, let it be of that heat as hot as the Sun shineth in July; let it stand thus for forty dayes, then you shall obtain your wish. The Author recommend∣eth this last Experiment very highly, affirming upon his experimental practice, that this aurum Potabile is the highest Medicine next unto the universal, and being ta∣ken in appropriated vehicles,
Cureth all Diseases, with∣out causing any pains at all. Item, With this Aurum Potabile is Antimony prepa∣red, so that it purgeth only downwards, and carrieth forth all ill humours without molestation, and is called the purging Gold; hence are his Pills of Gold. It is prepared also by the help of Antimony into a dia∣phoretick gold, to expell by sweating all malignant hu∣mours; and Mercurius vitae is made also with this potable gold (if it be kept in a long digestion), their dose is ac∣cording to the Quality of the person.
Some Principall Preparations OF ANGELO SALA. TAke of Sugar one ounce, of Rosewater one spoonful, boyl these in a Skillet, till it afford a small thred at the pouring forth; take it off the fire, being cold pour to it one scruple of Annis oyl, pour it on a a Trencher; this serveth against phlegme.
A Purge of his. Take of the best Rhubarb, Mechoacan ana one dram, of Andromachus his Treacle one scruple; infuse these over-night in Wine, cant it off, and let the party drink it, and fast three hours upon it; it purgeth down∣ward gently. Hidromel, or Metheglin. Take of the odoriferous crude Honey one part, of Fountain water six parts, boyl these, do not scum it, stirring it continually with a woodden Spatule, let it not settle to the bottom, boyl it
way to the third part, then take it away from the fire, let it grow cold, strain it through a cloth, barrell it, hang into two drams of Ginger, and one grain of Musk, then stop it very well, set it in the Sun or warm place for 6. weeks, thus the pure separateth from the impure; draw it off into a clean vessel, stop it well, it will keep long, the staler it is, the better it is. The use of it; This Li∣quor tasteth & smelleth like Malmesy, & is good for such as have a short breath, and are troubled with a Ptissick; it is of an abstergent and le∣nifying quality, it purgeth the Breast and Reins, cutteth
phlegme very much, pre∣serveth the vigour of the radical moisture. A Water for the Tooth∣ache. Take of the Greek Pyre∣trum, of the root of Master∣wort, and Angelico, ana one ounce; of Dragons blood, of calcined Lead, of each two ounces; of simply di∣still'd Vinegar two pound; infuse and extract its sub∣stance, in a warm place for a sennight; then adde to it one ounce of Niter, dip into it Cotton Wooll; apply and hold it to the place af∣fected, it allayeth the Flux, and healeth all Infirmities,
and stayeth the Rheum; it mundifieth the gums, it car∣nifieth, sicatrizeth, and con∣solidateth, and instantly al∣layeth the pains of the teeth. Balsom of Tobacco. Take spirit of Turpentine, spirit of Juniper, of each one pound; of Indie Tobac∣co leaves six ounces; infuse and circulate it for a sen∣night, and press it out in the press, it cureth all wounds in 24. hours. A Stomachical Aqua-vitae. Take of cut Galanga four ounces, of Ambergreece four grains, of rectified Aqua∣vitae
20 ounces, infuse these for a sennight, caut it off, dissolve as much Sugar in it, as you may; it is good for a weak Stomach, for the Cholick and griping in the Guts. Aqua-Theriacalis, Against the Plague. Take of Andromachus his Treacle two ounces, of the root of Angelica, and Ma∣sterwort, of each one ounce, of calcined red Corals (which are calcined be∣tween two Crutibles, for six or eight hours in a strong fire) four ounces; of Flow∣ers of Sulphur one ounce, of rectified Aqua-vitae three
pound: infuse these for four days, and extract, then add to it of rectified spirit of Vitriol one drachm; one drachm of this used, serveth against all cold Defluxious, Megrums, Giddiness. Pills for the Head, comfort∣ing and strengthening the Brains, which defend the same against Corruptions. Take wild Thyme four ounces; of white Agarick, of the best Rhubarb, of each 3. ounces; of Spick, Ginger, Galanga, of each one dram; of rectified Aqua-vitae 15 ounces: infuse these for a sennight, caut it off, and press it out as much as you
can; then take of wash'd Alloes Succotrina six ounces: boyl it in a glazed Pot or Pan, to the thickness of Pitch, mingle one scruple of Saf∣fron, and 5. grains of Musk, keep it in a Leaden Box. It is to be used after Supper from one scruple to one dram; take it in a new laid Egg, or in Wine made up into Pills, purgeth gently, expels Wind. For the Gowt. Roast a sweet Apple in hot embers, and the flowers of Cassia, of a like quantity, inbibe it with a Womans milk, make a cataplasme; it is a certain lenitive against
the tormenting pains of the Gout. A laxative Conserve of Roses. Take of old Conserve of Roses two ouuces, of Dia∣gridium one drachm and a half; of Cinamom, of Cloves, of each one scruple; of spi∣rit of Wine, one dram; of spirit of Vitriol, ten drops; of the best Musk 3. grains: make an Electuary accord∣ing to Art, without fire, in a glass Morter; and when it worketh too dry, or grow∣eth too dry, then put to it some Julip of Roses, and keep it in a Venice glass: its Vertue is to purge without
any detriment, it consumeth all superfluous humiditie of the body; its dose is even to half an ounce, to be ta∣ken fasting. A Compound extract of Diagridium. Take of the best Diagri∣dium two ounces, of the root of Mechoacan four oun∣ces, of Galanga, of Cinamom, of each one drachm, of white Ginger half an ounce, of oriental Saffron half a dram, of Musk five grains: Beat these and infuse them in Aqua-vitae; extract and ex∣press according to Art: then reduce it to a viscous mat∣ter, then adde of Salgema
half a scruple to each dram, and keep it in a Glass. Its dose is from five to eight grains, in wine or broth; it purgeth the Body without danger. A Confection of Diagridium. Take of the Compound extract of Diagridium six drams, of the powder of Diacorels two drachms, of white Sugar three ounces; of Baulm water a sufficient quantity; Make Lozenges, and keep them in a Glass well stopt. It purgeth the Body without hurt, and is very good against abound∣ing humors; it purgeth the Brains and Back, and pur∣geth
the whites, and running of the Reins, let the cause be what it will; it is good against the Dropsie, and such like symptoms. Its dose is from 2. scruples to 3, and is to be taken fasting. A Laxative Unguent. Take Alloes Heppatick, of Mirrh, of each six ounces, of Coloquint, of Agarick, of Scamonie, of each one ounce and a half; of Sallet oyl 24 ounces; of Goats suet fix ounces; of old wine four pound; All these bea∣ten grosly: Then boyl them gently in Wine in a glazed Pot, keep close the Oyl and Suet, till the Wine be con∣sumed,
then strain and keep it. But if you will prepare it better, first boyl them, then set it in purification, in warm horse dung, for a whole month, then separate it, as above: If the Belly be an∣nointed warm with it, and then a warm cloth upon it, it purgeth the body from abounding humours; it kills the Worms, and operateth in other wayes. Our Dragons Blood. Take of rectified Mercury 12 ounces, of lamins of steel 3. ounces; put these into a Urinal well luted, and pre∣cipitate according to Art,
iterating it a second time; then take it out of the Ves∣sel, put it into an Earthen Pan or Glass, kindle five or six times Aqua-vitae on it; then being dryed, keep it for use: This is our Dragons Blood, which purgeth up∣ward without any danger. Its dose is seven grains even unto ten, in Conserve of Ro∣ses, or Conserve of Baulm. It must be taken mornings fasting, and drink some wine after it. A sweet Confection of Diadragon. Take of our Dragons Blood six drachms, of the salt of Red Corals, and
Pearls, of each two scruples; of Saffron, Galanga, Cina∣mom, of each one scruple; of the best Musk and Am∣bergreece, of each 6. grains, of white Sugar six ounces, of a sufficient quantity of Rosewater. Let the Sugar be boyled to the thickness of Manus Christi, in an Iron Pan, then adde the other Ingredients, and make rolls, which are kept close in a glass; This Confection may be used in all Diseases where there is need of purging; it attract∣eth from the Remoter parts, cuts Phlegme and Humours, where it is needful. Its dose is from one drachm to two, fasting: There is no
better Purge for Quartan and Tertian Agues; and is Medicinal against the Pox. The bitter Confection of Diadaragon. Take of our Dragons Blood six drachms; of the Salt of red Corals, of Mo∣ther of Pearls, of each two scruples; of Cloves half a drachm, of Saffron half a scruple; of Aloes Succatrina two scruples; of Sugar six ounces; a sufficient quantity of Marjoram water; make a Confection, as above: It may be used against such Diseases, where Amber and Musk cannot be used, and where no sweet things are admitted.
Head Pills. Take of fresh Tyme (Epi∣thimus) four ounces; of the best Rhubarb, of Mechoa∣can, of white Agarick, of each two ounces; of Galanga, of Cloves, of each 2. drams; of Marjoram one handful; of Musk, of Ambergreece, of each 5. grains: Beat these, except the Musk and Am∣bergreece, then according to Art make an Extract, with Aqua-vitae, to a solid form; then adde Ambergreece and Musk, then add the powder of Mastix, and the powder of Amber, of each one dram and a half; make a masse, keep it in a glass or leaden Box. Its dose is one scru∣ple, to be used after Supper,
or mornings, fasting; they purge without any danger, and may be used severall times, against several Infir∣mities of the Head. Conserve of dry Roses. Take the subtile powder of red Roses one ounce, of Rosewater 3. ounces, of the spirit of white Vitriol one drachm, of the best Musk and Ambergreece, of each one grain, of white Sugar 12 ounces; infuse the Ro∣ses in Rosewater and the spirit of Vitriol, keep them in maceration for 4. hours, in a glass, then boyl the Su∣gar with the Rosewater, to the consistence of Manus
Christi, then incorporate with them the Musk and Amber∣greece in a glass Morter: Thus is your Conserve pre∣pared, which is sufficiently red and odoriferous: This sort of Conserve is more ef∣fectual than those which are prepared in the vul∣gar way, especially where strengthening is needfull, by reason of the spirit of Vitriol; and the older this Conserve is, the better it is. Electuary of Diacorals. Take of our Conserve of Roses 12 ounces, of the salt of red Corals 2. rams, of pulverised Orras, and of pulverised red Santals, of
each one dram; of Rose Julep two ounces; make an Electuary without fire in a glass Morter, keep it well closed; it is good against the Chollick, and illia passion, provoketh Urine, and corro∣borates the whole body; it mundifieth the reins and panicles of the brains, and subtillateth the blood by its mundifying quality; and it is a very good astringent af∣ter purging, and consequent∣ly it is admirable good for the superfluous courses of women, as well of the white as of the red; yet so, that the party be first purged. Its dose is from one dram to two at once, to be used fasting.
An Electuary for the Stomach. Take of our Conserve of Roses, of Conserve of Baulm, of each 3. ounces; of the pulp of Quinces two pound; of skim'd honey four ounces; of spirit of Vitriol 20 drops; of Galanga, of Cina∣mom, of each half an ounce; It is best to incorporate it in a Glass; It serveth to com∣fort the stomach, being weakned by superfluous hu∣mours; it strengtheneth and exhilerateth the heart, if continually used. Its dose is half an ounce, at a time, to be taken mornings fasting.
Electuary Therebiminated. Take of the whitest pul∣verised Sugar six ounces, of most subtilly pulverised Or∣ras, and powder of Mastix, of each one dram; of syrup of Cinamom three ounces; Let all these be incorpora∣ted in a glass Mortar; then add of the spirit of Turpen∣tine one drachm, of oyl of Nutmegs 5. drops; keep it in a glass. This is an excel∣lent Electuary to cut tough and viscous phlegme in the stomach and breast; there∣fore it is good for those that are Rhumatick, and short breathed, it purgeth the Reins, and provoketh urine;
being obstructed by gross viscous humors; it may serve also against many in∣firmities and corruptions conceived in the womb: It is of a digestive evacuating and mundifying quality, and consolidateth also; its dose is from one dram to two, at evening to be taken going to bed. A Confection against the Hart∣ake. Take of the siderial Pow∣der, one ounce; of white Su∣gar six ounces, a sufficient quantity of Marjoram water. Make Lozenges of it, they are admirable good for the a∣king of the heart: its dose is,
as occasion serveth, from two scruples, to foure scruples, more or lesse, as the Physitian shall direct, and it may be ministred at all times; but the party should use it continually, then let it be taken morn∣ings fasting. An Antidote for the Womb. Take of Pulegium Syl∣vestre, four ounces; of Mug∣wort two ounces; of Galanga, Ginger, of each an ounce. Make an extract with these, with Aquavitae, according to Art, to the consistence of Hony, and keep it in a Glass, adding to each dram, half a scruple of vegitable Salt. Its
dose is six grains, in water of Mugwort. It provoketh the Courses of Women strong∣ly, therefore make use of it circumspectly. An Antidote against the suffo∣cation of the womb. Take of the Extract of Casto∣rium 2. ounces, of the Extract of the Root of Peony 1 ounce; of the Magistery of the Mo∣ther of Pearls, and Corals, of each one dram; of subtilly pulverised Craine, Humany two drams; of Saffron orien∣tall, half a dram; of Rectified Oyl of Amber two scruples, incorporate these in a Glass Morter, and stopt close, keep it. It is of an admira∣ble efficacy, for the suffoca∣tion
of the womb; its use is fasting, and may be continu∣ed for eight dayes, or as long as there is occasion for it: Its dose is half a scruple, and are to be made into Pills: it may be ministred also in water of Marjoram and Pyony. A Powder of Diacorels. Take of Red Roses two ounces and a half; of the Salt of Coralls, half an ounce; of the Spirit of Vitriol, two drams; of Sugar-Candy, one dram; of Ambergrease and Musk, of each four grains. Make a Powder accord∣ing to Art, and keep it well stopt in a Glasse. This Pow∣der
is good against Convul∣sions, and pains of the heart; it strengtheneth the brains, and subtillateth the blood, and maketh the heart glad, and causeth a good digesti∣on in the stomach. Its dose is half a dram, in Wine, or other proper Vehicle. A Confection of Diacoralls. Take of the Powder of Diacoralls two drams; of the Spirit of white Vitriol, two scruples; of white Sugar two ounces, and a sufficient quantity of Rose-water. Let the Sugar be boyled to the consistence of Manus Christi, put in a Glasse in warm Sand, then add the Powder
to it, afterward the spirit of Vitriol, then cast it forth into Tablets, and keep them in a Box of Wood, this confe∣ction is a true Conservative of mans body: It is of an ad∣mirable vertue. Its dose is half a dram, which is to be taken fasting. A pretious Antidote. Take of our pretious Ma∣gisterium of Extractum le Zourdicum, of each two drams: of our pretious gol∣den Bezourd, of our golden Cordiel Electrum, of the Ex∣tract of Opium Thebaicum; prepared with the juyce of Lemons, of each one dram; of Ambergrease two scruples,
and fifteen grains of pure Musk, gr. b. of the whitest Sugar an ounce: the dry In∣grediences must be well grounded on a Marble; for two or three hours, to an impulpable Powder. A Balsum of Treacle. Take of the Treacle of Andromachus four ounces, of the Root of Masterwort, An∣gelico, Pimpinella, Tormentilla, of each an ounce, of Galan∣ga, of Ginger, of each six drams, of the Salt of Rede Coralls, and orientall Pearls, of the Lemnian Earth, of each half an ounce; of Ori∣entall Saffron, one dram; of Camphire one scruple; of the
best Musk, and of Amber∣grease, of each half a scruple; of the spirit of Turpentine, and of the spirit of Juniper∣berries, of each ten ounces, of the best Aqua-vitae two pound, infuse all according to Art, put it in a Glasse, lute it, let it circulate in a Balny, for a month, then se∣parate the two Liquors, one from another. This Balsom looks very red, and then this Aqua vitae, is deservedly called the Mother of the Balsum, both are very good against all Infirmities, and are admirable good against the Plague; the Balsum is for inward use, half a scruple, and of the water one dram. Both cause sweat & Urine.
A Magisterie of Coralls and Pearls. We have an Universall way to make the Magisteri∣um, not onely of Pearls and Coralls, but of all other Gems. And this operati∣on is performed only by the help of our Phylosophick Aqua-vitae: we will tell you the manner how you ought to proceed about the Ma∣gisterie of Coralls, which shall be the Patern to pro∣ceed also with the rest. Take of the Powder of red Coralls, six ounces, of our Aqua-vitae twelve ounces. Let the Coralls be infused in the Aqua-vitae, and let them
be dissolved thereinto a clear water. Then separate the pure from the impure, by inclination, taking heed that you do not stir the feces; then take this dissolution, set it in ashes in an Urinall well luted, distill the Spirits and flegme from it, so that a dry matter be left in the bottom of the Vessel; take out that, and set it into a moyst place, which in a short time, will wholly be dissolved, leaving some earthliness of no value; take this Liquor, set it in Sand, so that the humidity being dissolved into fumes, may have a dry matter be∣hind. Take it out of the Vessel, add a triple quan∣tity of Spirit of Wine to
it, or Aqua-vitae, which is thrice rectifyed; Set it on circulating in a gentle heat, for a moneth, either into a balny, or at the Sun, and it will yield some Sediment; separate the clear by incli∣nation, and in a balny, sepa∣rate the Spirit and Phlegme, and in the bottom of the Vessel remaineth the Magi∣sterie, in the form of a mu∣cilaginious Oyl, and this is the true Prima Materia; and thus you have the Magiste∣rie of Coralls, which looketh very white, but the Magi∣sterie of Pearls, cometh near to the colour of Gold. Thus you may proceed with all precious Stones which our Menstruum dissolveth into a
clear water. The Vertues of these Magisteriums, can∣not so easily be described. Their Dose is from three grains to five, and the use of it may be continued as long as there is need of, and that without danger. It is mini∣stred in Wine, Broth, or distilled water. Electuary, or Confections, even as the Physitian shall see it conve∣nient. The great Magistery of Vitriol. This Magistery is made by meanes of the four Prin∣cipall Operations, which are distillation, dissolution, Sublimation, and Circula∣tion.
The first operation produceth this Liquor. Take of Roman Vitriol, or any other, which is good, as much as you please, distill it in a retort, extracting onely the spirit and water, and increase your fire as much as you can, so that at last, nothing appear more in the neck of the Retort, then let the Receiver grow could, take out the Liquor and keep it: take out the feces also, or the Colchotar, for the following separa∣tion.
The second operation produceth the Salt. Take the foresaid Col∣chotar, pulverise it very subtilly, dissolve it in com∣mon water, and extract ac∣cording to Art all its Salt, so that all the sharpness be gotten out of the Colchotar Calcine this Salt: dissolve, and coagulate it five times, so that it be very well recti∣fied, still adding the Col∣chotar left, to the other, but keep the Salt. The third operation produceth Sulpher. Take the foresaid Col∣chotar,
burn it in a great Crucible, then pulverise it very subtilly, and add a third part of that quantity of Salt Armonick; incorporate these two very well, then sublime it very well luted in an U∣rinall, observing the de∣grees of fire, and there will appear in the Alembick, a yellowish matter; continue the fire, when no more fumes come forth out of the Uri∣nall, then let it cool, take out the sublimed matter, put it into common water warm∣ed, that the Salt Armonick be extracted, separate the clear water from the Sedi∣ment; iterate this as often, till all the Salt Armonick be extracted, and in the bottom
will remain the Sulphur of Vitriol; of a green colour, which being dryed, keep it. The fourth Operation affordeth the Magisterium. Take all the former Li∣quor, the Salt and Sulphur, joyn these three in a Circu∣latory very well luted, cir∣culate it in a Balny for a Sennite, then separate the cleare, and distill it in an A∣lembick, in a Balny, so that all the water come over in the bottom, there will re∣main a green Liquor, which containeth Salt, Sulpher and Mercury of Vitrioll, which keep, for it is the true Ma∣gisterie of Vitriol.
The Compound water of Vitriol. Take the separated water in the Balny, from the said Magisterie, and to each pound of it, add the follow∣ing Ingredients, viz. take of rectfied Aqua-vitae, two ounces, of the Root of Peonie half an ounce, of red Roses of Palm, Marjoram, of each one Pugill, put all into a Balny, into a Circulatory, for 24. houres, then strain the Liquor, which will be very red, then add to each pound of these, the follow∣ing things of Cranium huma∣num one ounce, of Spodium half an ounce, of Camphore
half a dram; of Saffron half a scruple; of Ambergrease two grains; put all these into a Glasse, and circulate it for six weeks continually, then separate by inclination the subtile from the thick, which keep in a Glasse well luted. And this is the most pretious Liquor, which worketh marvellously, in all the Spices of Convulsions, and is administred in the fol∣lowing way. The use of the Magistery of Vitriol, and its Compound Water. If you intend to admini∣ster such noble Medica∣ments, which are of such an
admirable efficacy in the Falling-sickness, then this Order ought to be obser∣ved; Before you begin, you must expect the new Moon, because this Disease is then in its vigour, and then you must proceed in the follow∣ing manner: First, the sick party must be kept from all such meats and Sents, which occasion and cause such a Disease; However, Wine must not altogether be pro∣hibited. Secondly, you must make an Aromatick, and vi∣triolized water to be his Diet-drink, when ever he is thirsty between meales; in the mornings fasting, you are to give three or five drops, according to the con∣stitution
of the party; if our green Magisterie, with half a dram of the compound water in Marjoram Wine, then the strife will begin a∣gainst the Disease, and will cause a Vomit to the party of clear water, refresh him after four houres are past. Thirdly, the fit must be ob∣served, and alwayes when the fit is past, you must mi∣nister unto him one scruple of the Compound vitrioli∣sed water, with Marjoram Wine, and if the fit cometh often, then you ought to mi∣nister but half a dose, conti∣nuing it till the Disease be diminished, which will be about the new Moon. At last, when you see it need∣full,
minister the Magisterie once more: in brief, he that will undertake to cure such a Disease, must be a Physi∣tian, and not a Woman. The Compound Liquor of the vitriolised Tartar. This Lemmon Liquor, by reason of its temperature, may very well be used to se∣verall infirmities, and to all such persons, where there is need of opening, subtilia∣ting, mundifying, and con∣solidating, and it worketh by sweat and Urine. Take of white crude Tartar, of Viscous Vitriol, of each two drams; beat these two together, distill them
in a Retort, as much as pos∣sible you can, then let the stilling-Vessels grow cold, and take the Liquor out of the Receiver, which is mud∣dy and stinking, poure it on again to the Caput mort, in a new Retort well luted, ap∣ply a Receiver, and distill again; iterate this work a third time, so that the Li∣quor be as clear as water: weigh the Liquor, add half its quantity of rectified A∣qua-vitae to it, then take of albified Vitriol, and calci∣ned Tartar, of each 20. oun∣ces, put all these into a Re∣tort, adding to it all the Li∣quor, distill as long as any water and Spirits run over, then let the Vessels grow
cold, and keep that Liquor in a well stopt glass, to which add the following matters: Therefore take the said Liquor, and add to each pound three drachms of Sas∣safras; of white Ginger two drachms; of Galanga, of Treacle, of Andromachus, one dram and half; of Orien∣tall Suffraca, six grains, of Ambergreece and Musk; of each 3. grains. Put all these into a glass, circulate for six weeks in a warm place, or in the Sun, then separate the subtile from the thick, by inclination or decauting, and keep it as a Jewel.
The Vegitable Salt. Take the Caput mort of the said Tartar and Vitriol, ex∣tract its Salt with distill'd common water, coagulate away one moity, and let it grow cold, to the bottom∣ward you see the transpa∣rent salt like Cristal, then coagulate the water more, and let it grow cold, conti∣nue it so long till all the salt be gotten out; which keep for a Medicinal use. The use of the Compound Liquor of Tartar. This Liquor may be used safely against all manner of
obstructions of the body, and it is a Specificum against the Pox. But its particular ope∣rations are against the Scia∣tica, Gout in the hands, Chol∣lick, Illiac Passion, and against the torments and gripings in the Belly. The manner of the using of it is this; You must take mornings an hour before day in the best Wine, then the party must abide in the bed for half an hour, then let him take warm broth, and the party will begin to sweat all the body over, which cometh very easily; After two or three hours sweat∣ing, let him shift himself, and rise out of the bed, and eat some restorative: And this
may be used twenty or thir∣ty times more or less, as you shall see occasion, using eve∣ry fifth day a moderate pur∣gative; in this manner many Chronical Infirmities are cured. Its dose is from two drams to 3. drams in Wine, and the oftner the party ma∣keth use of, the better it will be for him, for it remo∣veth all peccant matter, and reneweth the blood of the whole body. The use of the Vegitable Salt. This Salt may be mini∣stred with such things which work and operate against the gravel in the Reins, and the Stone in the bladder, be∣cause
it is very proper for such diseases. Its dose is half a dram at once. A Specificum against the Cholick. Take of the spirit of Juni∣per, and spirit of Turpen∣tine, pour it on St. Johns-wort, press it out, add more of the fresh Flowers to it, till it be very red; one scruple of it taken in broth, is an appro∣ved Medicament against the Cholick; If St. Johns-wort be digested in spirit of Wine for a moneth, then its pre∣tious oyl will swim at the top.
The green oyl of Vitriol. Take of Vitriol 2. pound, put it in an Urinal in a balny for a month, let it be dissolved into a transparant green Liquor, its combusti∣ble Sulphur remaineth in the bottom, decaut the Liquor from the phlegme, rectifie it in a balny, then you have the purging green oyl where∣with you may cure the Fal∣ling-sickness. FINIS.
