C5666 12633122 64822
Episcopalia: OR, LETTERS OF THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, HENRY, Lord Bishop of London, TO THE CLERGY OF HIS Diocess, LONDON: Printed for Timothy Westly, in Loth∣bury. MDCLXXXVI.
Episcopalia: OR, LETTERS OF THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, HENRY, Lord Bishop of London. Good Brother, YOU may remember, that by the help of your ready compli∣ance, we had three Conferences, the last year, upon
the two Sacraments and Cate∣chising, in the reason of which, that you may be the better provided to satisfie such as shall enquire, especially those that are immediately under your care. I have thought fit to let you know, in short, what in∣duced me to take this method. Which was in general, that notwithstanding the great duty and importance of each particu∣lar, with the necessary and pru∣dent directions of our Church for their due observance, there was so great a neglect in most places, that the substance of Religion, unless timely reme∣dy'd, would be lost among us.
Baptism. THE first Conference we had was concerning Baptism, for the performance of which, you are directed by 29 and 30, and 68, 69 and 70 Canons, and the Rubricks con∣tained in the Office for the Administration of Baptism. And to perswade us the more earnestly and effectually to pro∣secute this, we consider'd, 1. Of how great use and experi∣ence publick Baptism was in the Church, 2. What might be the best means to recover the shameful disuse of it.
1. The great use and expe∣dience did appear from the se∣veral advantages the Church receives by publick Baptism, which are all lost in private. 1. There is the joynt Prayers of the Congregation to give a blessing to that holy perfor∣mance. 2. There is an occa∣sion given to the people to re∣flect upon their own promises, both which are exerecises of mutual Charity. 3. It makes us not to be asham'd of our vow of Christianity. And, Lastly, It gives that solemnity, which is due to so great a Sacrament, and from which a greater awe and regard is contracted upon the minds of men, who are in a great measure mov'd by the
outward appearance, and for the want of which, by being hudled up in private, I fear I may but too truly say it is grown into contempt among us. That which adds great weight to confirm these reasons, is the constant and universal pra∣ctice of the Church in all a∣ges; which, however different in the manner, was always attended with two circumstan∣ces, a high Reverence to the Sacredness of the Institution; and a solemn and publick Per∣formance: witness the Primi∣tive usage in the burying-pla∣ces of their Martyrs, where their Assemblies were then held, and afterwards their magnifi∣cent
Baptistaries, the remains of which, are to be seen in some Cities to this day. It would be to little purpose to quote either Councils or Fa∣thers for this, when there is not a Church, to this hour, that does not appoint as pub∣lick an Administration as its condition can allow of. And if any come shorter of this de∣cent observation than another, (except some wild Christians) it is the Church of Rome, ▪which by superstition has defa∣ced the beauty of it. 2. The way therefore to recover this decent and most useful practice, and to restore the Church to its just Disci∣pline, is, earnestly to lay be∣fore
those who are committed to our care, not only the rea∣sonableness of their duty in complying, but likewise the great obligation that lies upon us, escecially in obedience to so just a command. So that at the least, if they will not bring their Children into the Congregation (supposing they have health to bear it) we ought to refuse the Registring of them.
The Lords Supper. THE next Conference was upon the Lords Supper, in the obser∣vation of which, you are di∣rected by 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, and 28 Canons, as likewise by, the Rubricks in the Office. All which we did unanimously, agree, not only intirely to o∣bey, so far as concerns our selves, but likewise to promote in others where we are injoy∣ned, as having sworn to ob∣serve all such Injunctions. But we found our misfortune here, not so much to lye in unwor∣thy or irreverent Communi∣cants,
as that there is a gene∣ral Apostacy (if I may so call it) from this sacred Institution. Our great work therefore in this particular, was, and still is like to be, to perswade men of the great benefit and necessity of this Sacrament; and from thence to excuse our selves, while we leave no means un∣attempted to bring them to this Communion. Nothing certainly can be more positive than the Insti∣tution set down in three of the Gospels, nor the benefit and great advantage more clearly exprest than 1. Cor. x, xi. Cha∣pters; where you have in the xi Chap. v. 26. a plain decla∣ration of the continuance of it
to the end of the World, from this expression, Ye do shew the Lords death till he come. It is evident to any that shall impartially read the fore∣mentioned places of Scripture, that none can pretend to Go∣spel-Obedience that omit this Ordinance. And it does as e∣vidently appear, that there is a shameful neglect of it through∣out this whole Kingdom. The reason of which is plain to any that will look back to the late times, and observe how industriously by an universal discouragement, either through a superstitious terror, or pro∣phane contempt, the omission of it was promoted. And this was natural under an usurp'd
Power, where sin was the Law, and Transgression the best Obe∣dience: But now that these hardships are blown over, where shall we find the Bond of Peace, and the Unity of the Spirit, without Communion? What security have we of being one. Body, if we are not one Bread? 1 Cor. 10. 17. How know we that there are not more Papists amongst us than Protestants, and more that offer up sange Fire, and partake of other Altars than Ours, if they eat not of the Sacrifice? ver. 18. Surely, if we condemn the Church of Rome for putting off half the Communion, they will rise up in judgment against us at the last day, and utterly
condemn all such as neglect the whole. Since then the security, not only of every private person, but even of the whole Church, depends upon the due Observa∣tion of this Sacrament; it may easily be concluded what dili∣gence we ought to use to bring the people to a just sense of this duty, by Exhortation, Reproof, private Communication from house to house, especially at such times as we appoint Com∣munions, and whatever else Law or Prudence can suggest to us.
Catechism. THE last thing we met upon was Catechising, the want of which has left the Church without a foundation; for as the wise man says, If early provision of good principles be not laid up in the youth, wherewithal shall a man have to support himself in his riper years? Eccles. xii. 1. I am sure the Church has order'd the care, in this particular, with great exactness, as may be seen in the Rubricks of the short Cate∣chism, and in the 59th Canon, besides the several publick ad∣monitions, whereby its execu∣tion
has been recommended to us. What reverence or respect can be lookt for from the peo∣ple to the two Sacraments, when they have never learnt what they are? What Obedi∣ence or other Morality to be expected, when they have ne∣ver understood the Command∣ments? What Faith shall we think to find upon the Earth, when the first Principles of its Articles have been never laid? And therefore, if Parents will not answer at the last day for the ruin of their Children; if Masters and Mistresses will not take upon them the miscar∣riages of their Servants and Apprentices; if we do not in∣tend to be found guilty of the
sins of the growing Generation in our respective Flocks: We ought certainly to use all dili∣gence and Authority to bring such as have need of it to re∣ceive due instruction at the ap∣pointed times, or oftner if we find it needful; that at least, whoever miscarries, we may save our own Souls. I hope I have prest this duty so often, and earnestly, to my Brethren of the Clergy, that I shall never find cause to com∣plain of their neglect: which, should I find my self disappoin∣ted in, I could not but resent it with great grief. But in full assurance of your complying, I shall only recommend one me∣thod to you, that what part
of the Catechism you expound one day, you would make those you Catechise, give you an ac∣count, the next day, of its mea∣ning: That so you may be assured of the understanding and improvement each person receives from that Instructi∣on. All this, and whatever else, in your own discretion, you shall find necessary for the pro∣moting of what has been said, I do beseech you, from my self, and conjure you, by the Obedience you owe the Church you are establisht in, that you omit no care nor diligence for the effecting of it. For this you may be confident of, that I shall never enjoyn you any
other thing, than what you have already submitted to, and are bound to observe. Our Canons and Constitutions are the common voice of the Church; the words of which only, are they that can direct us to an obedience of 1 Cor. 1 Chap. ver. 10. That we all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among us, but that we be perfectly joyn'd together in the same mind and in the same judgment. Other∣wise, without some common direction and mark to steer ourselves by, it were imposible to avoid the same confusion as they are subject to, that are dis∣ordered by uncertain sounds, 1 Cor. xiv. That God would
direct you and your Flock in these and all things else, is the most hearty Prayer of, SIR, Your affectionate Friend and Brother, April 25. 1679. H. London.
The Lord Bishop of London's Second Letter. I. The half Communion. Good Brother, A More hardy thing cer∣tainly was never underta∣ken by men, than directly in the face of an Institution of Christ's own appointment, to enjoyn the contrary practice, Christ hath said, Drink ye all of this: But says the Papist in the Council of Constance, Sess. 13. Christ indeed instituted the Com∣munion under both kinds, but to avoid the dangers, and probable scandals that may happen, we do forbid the Administration of the Cup at all to the Laity, and e∣nerally
to any, but to him that Officiates. It would be conside∣red, whether the positive com∣mand of Christ, or that of the Council is to be obey'd, as it is attended with the reasons of inconvenience? I do presume a positive command of God can∣not be disobey'd without guilt, unless some one or more of these Grounds: Either, 1. That God dispenses with it, as he did with Circumcision in the Wilderness. Or, 2. That some evil greater than the consequence of the non-performance of it will certainly follow; as when Da∣vid ate the Shew-bread, and they that were with him; which depends upon that Rule of our Saviour, which, though
apply'd to the Sabbath, yet extends to all other positive commands, that man was not made for them, but they for man: Or lastly, in case of in∣capacity, as the Children of Israels not going up to Ierusa∣lem in the time of captivity. And I beseech you, what has the inconveniency alledg'd by Papists to do with any of these Reservations? For they do not pretend to a simple Dispensati∣on, which can proceed from God only, whose Institution it is. Nor to an incapacity. Then for the inconvenience alledg'd, the spilling the Wine, &c. It is not attended with one just cir∣cumstance. It should be cer∣tain, whereas it is only proba∣ble;
it should be of equal weight to the disobedience, and is not; nay, without questio∣ning the wisdom of God, it cannot be, because it should be something that falls out extra∣ordinarily, whereas this was a perpetual Objection from the first Institution: So that you must either say, Christ was not aware of this inconvenience, which had the same aspect upon this part of the Sacrament then, as it has now, and naturally must have whilst the World len∣dures; or else he did not think it of consequence too hinden the receiving the Wine as well as the Bread▪ As for those frivo∣lous pretences of the usage sometimes, to Administer in
one kind to Children or to the Sick, or the carrying home of the Consecrated Bread. To the first, it is very improbable that ever it was so done; or if it was, the Authority is so slender, as is not worth consideration: To the second, whatever super∣stitious usage there was of car∣rying home the Bread, it is plain none received at the hands of the Minister, but under both kinds. To omit the constant Authority of the Fathers in this case, I will only set down what Pope Gelasius de Consecr. dist. 2. cap comperimus, commands those who through some superstition abstained from the Cup, that they should either receive the Sacrament compleat and entire,
or be entirely rejected: that the separating one and the same Mystery, could not be done without gross Sacriledg. And now I conclude with Cassander, Consult. art. 22. de administrati∣one S. Sancti Sacramenti Eucha∣ristiae: It is evident the Uni∣versal Church to this very day, the Western for above a Thou∣sand years after Christ, did ad∣minister the Wine as well as Bread to all the Members of Christ's Church; which is ma∣nifest from a Cloud of Witnes∣ses, ancient Greek and Latine Authors, who founded them∣selves upon the Institution and Example of our Lord.
II. Prayers in an unknown Tongue. IF Scripture or Reason might prevail, this practice could never have passed among the Sons of men: but whilst inte∣rest and other Indirect ends are the scope of too many that pro∣fess Religion, it is no wonder if darkness be upheld for light. The Holy Ghost says expresly, 1 Cor. 14. That the Church should not allow Praying in an unknown Tongue, unless somebody be by to Interpret; because, other∣wise the unlearned could not say, Amen. Whereby it appears that the Intention, as well as
Pronunciation of the supplicant is required. And indeed, how can it be imagin'd otherwise, that God should expect less then the offering up to him what he has given us, not to talk like Parots, but with our understanding a reasonable Sa∣crifice; And how can that be, when the best pretence Papists have, is, that the People have a general notice of what it is they Pray for. If they are ca∣pable of a particular, does not the Church of Rome make them come short in their duty to God, in hindring them from a com∣pleat performance? For cer∣tainly no general notion can make that Impression, as a di∣stinct understanding of every
term of expression would do. Therefore says Amalarius, the unlearned hearing what he un∣derstands not, knows not what he Prays for, and therefore an∣swers not Amen: De divin. offic. l. 3. c. 9. So all the Fa∣thers that have treated of this matter. III. Prayers to Saints. IT must be acknowledg'd, that whoever holds Com∣munion with the Church of Rome, must Pray to Saints after the same external manner, as he Prays to God, that is, he kneels down, and worships in Gods house in the solemn time
of Gods Service by a Form set down in the Liturgy. He bowes before the Saints Image in the House of God, and offers up Incense. In short, there is no outward part of Divine Wor∣ship omitted. Now, I would fain know how it is possible to avoid the just imputation of Idolatry, when the first and second Commandment are so many ways intrenched upon? Here is another Object besides God fallen down before, and worshipped in the House of God, joyned with the Service of God. And what if there be a diffe∣rence of Address in the expres∣sion and degree of Devotion, can that take off the scandal given to the greatest part of the
world, who judge by the eye, and cannot judge otherwise? Does that answer that Chastity of Worship, which God has so suitably to our understandings expressed himself to expect from us: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God? But (alas!) when we consider the supersti∣tious nature of mankind, how apt to run after other Gods, how unable to resist the strong∣er impression of the more sensi∣ble Object, be the other never so considerable; nay, that we see the common People in Po∣pish Countries run so fast into the sensible Devotion of their Fellow-Creatures, that they have let go their hold on Christ the Head. Coloss. cap. 2. and
have forgot God; their Guar∣dian Angels and Protecting Saints fill their Hearts and Souls, and through will-Wor∣ship and affected Humility, God is hardly in all their thoughts: how ought we to fly from such Temptation, as from the Plague, and declare with S. Austin, that we honour the Saints in Love, and not in Worship! Haeres. 39. de vera Rel. And thus I have given you a brief hint, of what I hope short∣ly you will with the former Conferences have in full mea∣sure, and what I must needs confess was by many of you carefully and accurately discus∣sed. You cannot in so narrow
a compass expect more than the state of a Question, which will however (I hope) answer my purpose to mind you of your own conceptions, and what in the Conferences you heard from others, and to ad∣monish you of your duty from the above-recited Canons. SIR, Your affectionate Friend, and Brother, Fulham, July 6. 1680. H. London.
The Bishop OF LONDON HIS Third Letter. Good Brother, THose two Confe∣rences we held the last year, were up∣on Subjects so use∣ful in their kind, that I can∣not forbear repeating to you the Substance of what was then Discoursed. Not that
I question your constant Heed of these things; but that I may not be wanting on my part, to mind and remind you of so important Conside∣rations. Confirmation. IT is acknowledged by the most considerable Au∣thors of the Reformation, as well as others, That the lay∣ing on of hands, Heb. 6. 2. does refer to the Rite of Confirmation. Some Pra∣ctice like this was used a∣mongst the Jews, when they admitted Adults into their
Synagogues: to which that passage in the Cospel seems to relate, Luke 18. 15. where the Disciples would have hindred the little Children from being brought to Christ. For it is not improbable, that they had in their Eye the Confirmatory Usage in the Synagogues, to which none were admitted, before they were of age to undertake for themselves. Our Saviour, when he saith, Thus it becom∣eth to fulfil all righteousness, Matth. 3. 15. comprehended no doubt the whole Ceremo∣ny, that was then to be pas∣sed upon him, in which seems to be contain'd, 1. Baptism. Then he suf∣fered him.
2. Confirmation. When he was baptized, he went up straightway out of the water; and lo, the Heavens were o∣pened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. Ps. 16. 3. His Mission or Conse∣cration to his Office: And lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Thus hath Optatus against the Donatists, and Cyril, Catech. 3. interpre∣ted this Passage. However, that Christ did not immedi∣ately, or in person constitute this Rite, we must acknow∣ledge. But on the other side, that it was established by the Apostles in the Authority of
the Spirit of Christ, will as evidently appear. So that, as we ought not to give it the Title of a Sacrament, nei∣ther ought we to pay only an ordinary regard to it, since it is ordained by him whom Christ has sent. The extra∣ordinary Signs that were gi∣ven at the first practice of it by the Apostles, have made some imagine, that it was but a temporary Usage, du∣ring the power of Miracles; and that no more was effect∣ed thereby than the outward and visible Tokens of the Holy Ghost, coming upon them by the Gift of Tongues, Prophecy, or some other Sign or Appearance. But how weak this conceit is,
will be seen from two or three Observations. 1. In that very place, Acts 8. where this power is menti∣oned: There is no exception of Age, Sex, or Profession; but all indifferently that had been baptized, received the Holy Ghost by Imposition of Hands. So it is said, Act. 10. 47. when S. Peter Prea∣ched at Cornelius's House, the Holy Ghost fell upon all that were to be baptized, as a To∣ken of their being fit for it: Verse 48. If the Case be thus, that the Holy Ghost fell on all in∣differently, and that all could not prophesie, all had not the Gift of Healing, or of Tongues, nay, that all had
not a share of any outward Gift: then certainly they, whom God separated not to any Office of the Church by some outward Gift for the Conversion or Edification of others, had only some out∣ward shew passed upon them, for the greater evidence of the inward Gifts of the Spirit of Grace, Gratiae gratum faci∣extis. 2. That Passage, Heb. 6. 2. places Laying on of hands amongst the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and as part of the Foundati∣on-Work common to all that come into the Church, as appears from Verse 1. There∣fore surely it imports more than a temporary external Act,
and may at least, in some measure have relation to these Words, Ye were sealed by that Holy Spirit of Promise, Eph. 1. 13. 3. The universal and con∣stant acknowledgment, and practice of the Churches of God in all Ages, as a conse∣quent Rite after the Sacra∣ment of Baptism must needs put it beyond dispute with men of tolerable modesty. Tertul. de Praescript. adversus Her. cap. 36. is very express in the benefit, as well as usage of it. Cyril, Optatus, Aug. Irenaeus, Eusebius, Theo∣doret, and many others, put it beyond dispute. What if S. Herome says it was in bo∣norem Sacerdoti? He does not▪
say that, as the whole end of the Institution, but why it was appropriated to the Bi∣shop. That Myron or Chrisma was used early in the Church must be acknowledged: but it is as true that she never used it otherwise than a bare Ceremony, whatever the modern conceits of Rome in prosecution of her superstiti∣ous methods have arrogated to the usage of it. As the constant and due observation of this Rite has been ever carefully pursued under the best times; and as for many other reasons, so particularly to avoid the al∣most impracticableness of it, repetition in this Point has▪
ever been forbidden; so has our Church, amongst other good Provisions, out of its great and wise care, so or∣dered the execution of it, that without great inadvertency and carelesness it can neither be omitted, repeated, nor miss of the best ends it could be improv'd to. And this you may easily perceive from the Directions given to the several Persons concerned in it. As 1. To the Bishop, who is obliged by the sixtieth Ca∣non to make it one of his spe∣cial cares to confirm all that shall be disposed for it. 2. Every Minister within his Cure, is so to prepare the Youth by Catechizing and
other good Instructions, as that they may be able duly to present them to the Bi∣shop, whenever he calls up∣on them. And for your bet∣ter Direction, pray consider well the last words that you say at the end of the Office of publick Baptism; but e∣specially the third and fourth Rubrick at the end of the short Catechism, and Can. 61. 3. As it is the solemn ad∣mittance of all men into the Communion of our Church, by their then taking upon themselves their Baptismal Vow; so it is ordained that none shall be admitted to the Holy Communion until he be confirmed, or be ready
and desirous to be confirmed. As you have it in the Ru∣brick at the end of Confir∣mation. And for that pur∣pose, in the Rubrick of Bap∣tism for those of riper years, such are admonished to take the first convenience of being confirm'd, that so they may be admitted to the Holy Communion.
Visitation of the Sick. THis is an Office that cer∣tainly carries in it not only the most grateful per∣formances to the nature of mankind, but the most sui∣table to the dispensation of the Gospel, and him that Preached it. All the high∣est Acts of Compassion are contained in it. For if we take it in its just Latitude, it has regard to the sick in mind, as well as body, to those that are destitute, or distressed any way.
In the prosecution of this duty, we ought to take our Blessed Saviour's Example, who did not stay till he was called, neither remained in Heave ntill the World should become worthy to receive him, but came unsought for, and unwelcome, to a World that preferred Darkness be∣fore Light; that hated him, whilst by the utmost practi∣ces of its malice upon him, he brought Salvation to it. Therefore nothing less than an absolute impossibility should discourage us from performing this Duty. It is true, The visiting of the sick seems to be injoyned as a Christian Duty upon all that will obey the truth; but
if all are obliged to it, as no doubt they are, it does not hinder, that there may not lie a greater obligation upon some, than others. They to whom especially the Cure of a particular number of Souls is committed, are doubtless under a higher ob∣ligation to take care of those Souls, than the rest of Chri∣stians; and they that are sent, and have thereby a pow∣er of administring the great∣est comfort, are more nearly concerned, than others; be∣sides that our Calling and the Dispensations that belong to it, are for the good of Christ's Body, which is the Church. But to take this Subject in the narrowest sense, in re∣spect
of those that are sick: can there be a greater Chari∣ty than to help our Neigh∣bour, when he is not able to help himself? Can there be a more pressing occasion, than at a time that may prove the last opportunity of our Brother's receiving any good at our hands? Can there be a time more hopeful to bring men to a just sense of their duty, and the folly of their sins; than when all passions are quieted, and the hopes of enjoyment mortified? Can any thing get us a better name and esteem amongst men, and by consequence gain a greater interest and power to do good upon them, than to endeavour to
help those, that are least a∣ble to help themselves, and extend our care and charita∣ble attendance to the last breath? The sixty seventh Canon gives a full direction how to behave our selves in this point, and the Office con∣tains as much as the nature of the thing would allow of. For there are so many various cases may happen from the different operations of Disea∣ses, and disquietness of mind, that it were impossible to provide for all accidents. Therefore the Canon allows the use of discretion, where the case requires it. That which constantly will need our consideration, is the dis∣pensing
the several parts of this Office. For sometimes Prayers are only required, sometimes the Communion, sometimes Absolution. Now for the discouraging of the sick person, if it should please God to restore him to his health again, and for a warning to others, the two last should not be admini∣stred without strong tokens of Repentance, if he has been a careless liver, and some earnest importunities on the sick man's side, and a re∣luctancy and difficulty on ours. But you will say, If a Person be Excommunicated, how shall I discharge this duty to him, so far as to
make him capable of Chri∣stian Burial? The sixty eighth Canon plainly di∣rects you in all but one case, when it says, Christian Bu∣rial shall not be refused, ex∣cept the party deceased were de∣nounced excommunicated ma∣jori excommunicatione, for some grievous and notorious Crime. No doubt then spiritual com∣fort cannot be refused to such as Christian Burial is allow∣ed. But even in this case of the greatest Excommuni∣on, I make no question, but at the hour of Death, if the person seem heartily to desire reconciliation, and to be sinking under the bur∣den of despair, Absolution may be administred to him:
which will have its effect in foro interno, according to God's acceptance, and his own sincerity: tho the sen∣tence fori externi be not thereby released. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost, Mat. 18. 11. This I think is most of what was discoursed: and a diligent practice of it, with our other Duties, is, that we must reconcile us to God and Man, and give us temporal, as well as e∣ternal peace. I have, I bless God, no reason in the general to mistrust your care. And therefore with my hearty prayer, that the Holy Spirit may ever rest
upon you, and work more and more in you, for the edification and increase of Christ's Flock: I remain, Your Affectionate Friend and Brother, Fulham, 1682. H. LONDON. The Bishop of London's Fourth Letter. Good Brother, I Do acknowledge that I am bound to lay my self out in any thing that may conduce to your Assistance, for carrying on that Great Work, which lyes upon you, of the cure of
Souls. But when I reflect upon the cheerful concur∣rence I met with in those endeavours I have hitherto used for the promoting that Unanimity, which is the Life and Strength of your per∣formance, and Cements and Embodies your whole pro∣ceeding to a lasting strength: I cannot, but with a most thankful Heart to God, re∣joyce in that just disposition, with which, by his Grace, he has fill'd your honest Mind. That therefore I may never be wanting, and that this Repetition of what you were my Councellour in the last year, may the more quicken you to do your duty in those things, which you
did then so readily consent and advise to: Take your own and my sense, so near as I can recollect it, concern∣ing the Subject of our last conference. Upon Canon 54. THe Title and Substance of this Canon is, The Licenses of Preachers refusing Conformity, to be void. And to compleat the expectation of the Church in matters of this nature: We must look to Canon 38. which ordains, That Obstinate Revolters af∣ter Subscription, are to be de∣pos'd from the Ministry. The
reason of these Severities, proceeds from the absolute necessity of keeping up Dis∣cipline in the Church of God. For Nature, the Constituti∣on of the World, Experience in the subsistence and success of things, teach us, that the Maker of all things is a God of Order, and hates Confu∣sion. Therefore is the Church of Christ likened to a Build∣ing, which consists in an orderly disposing of different Materials into one Structure. I will Build my Church, says our Saviour, Mat. 16. 18. You also are Built together, &c. Eph. 2. 2. St. Paul writing to the Schismatical Separa∣tists of Corinth, As a wise Ma∣ster Builder, I have laid the
Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 10. Ye are Gods Building, 1 Cor. 3. 9. In whom all the Building fitly fram'd, Eph. 2. 21. And so in many other places. It is also express'd as a Body; See 1 Cor. 12. how the Apo∣stle adapts the Constitution and Frame of the Natural Body, to that of the Church, and concludes, vers. 27. Ye are the Body of Christ.—For the edifying the Body of Christ, Ephes. 4. 12. and vers. 16. The whole Body fly joyn'd, together, &c. maketh increase of the Body. From which the Body by Ioynts and Bands, Col. 2. 19. For his Body's sake, which is the Church, Col. 1. 24. There are many more expressions of this kind; but
I mention these especially, to shew after what manner we are Embody'd, and to what end. Sometimes it is called a Kingdom, which is a Body Politick, under one Head▪ The Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4. 23. I appoint you a Kingdom, Luke 22. 29. And so in divers other Portions of Scripture. But to let us un∣derstand how necessarily the utmost Rigour of Discipline is to be observ'd in a Chri∣stian, we are most truly re∣presented to be in a state of War, continually encoun∣tring the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, at the Peril of an Everlasting Death: And therefore he says, Put on the Armour of Light, Rom.
13. 12. Put on the whole Ar∣mour of God, Eph. 6. 11. Now we know under what severe Penalties almost the least fault is forbid by Martial Law, and how strictly it is Executed, not from the roughness of the Profession, but the Nicety of the Case; where every little disorder, or disobedience to command, always gives advantage to a watchful Enemy, and many times endangers a total over∣throw. We are therefore to consider what is expected from us, for the fitting our selves to this posture, that we may be able to stand in the day of tryal. 1. The first thing we are to do, is so well to dispose
our selves, by an humble and peaceable Mind, that in the Church where it has pleas'd God to place us, In what state soever, there∣with to be content: To stu∣dy to be quiet and mind our own business: And to yield a hearty, willing and tho∣row Conformity to the Rules we are under. For if nothing be ordain'd contrary to the express Will of God: Every Ordinance of Man is to be sub∣mitted to for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. To this end, the two Acts of Uniformity ought to be strictly read, and Observed by us. As also the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, Anno 1603. with the Rubricks to the se∣veral
Offices in the Liturgy; taking great heed at the same time to our Doctrin, by ha∣ving a special regard to the 39 Articles, as expounded in the Books of Homilies. That neither in word nor deed we may hurt, or offend the Church we serve in. What less can we think our selves obliged to; when we consider in what manner St. Paul conjures the Corin∣thians? Ch 1. 10. Now I be∣seech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no di∣visions (or Schisms) among you But that you be perfectly joyn'd together in the same mind, and and in the same Iudgment.
And, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing, Phil. 3. 16. Let all things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Surely after this we may safely con∣clude, that whosoever trans∣gresses the Rule upon a less account, then obedience to the express Will of God, or shall teach men so; he shall be call'd the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. We are not here to under∣stand every breach of the Rule, to lye under this guilt, but such as are committed wilfully, or out of supine negligence. Neither need we think it a neglect of Du∣ty in those things, which by an Universal omission, the
silence of our Superiours gi∣ving way to it, lye under a tacite consent of Abrogation, or Suspension at least. Nor are we to think it a small matter, the leaving these things undone; because it is of greater immediate duty to observe the weightier mat∣ters of the Law. I say imme∣diate, inasmuch as the conse∣quence in the omission of les∣ser matters, may occasionally and too freequently does prove more fatal to the peace of the Church, and Mens Consciences, than the other. 2. In the next place, we are to consider our selves in the State of Church Disci∣pline, as Watchmen and
Shepherds to guard and se∣cure our Flocks. We must for this Reason, not only see that we our selves, but be carefull that others do not offend those that in a special manner belong to us. We must drive away all errone∣ous Doctrines, and avoid dis∣orderly Walkers. We must drive away the bold Wolves, the little Foxes, and all Beasts of Prey, as we will otherwise answer for the care com∣mitted unto us. If any come upon us, or go out from among us, and discover the Savageness of their natures, by not being content to forsake and re∣nounce Order themselves,
but teach and encourage men so to do; these are Beasts of Prey. And it is one of the great advantages God has bestowed upon us, in that promise to his Church, Isa. 49, 23. Kings shall be thy nur∣sing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers. That all of∣fensive and disorderly Wal∣kers may by their Protection and coercive Power, either be reduc'd, or secur'd from harming of us. For there is no pretence of Persecution in this, no more than if a Man should so call a just Convic∣tion for an Action of Battery: Bcause he is Self-condemned, Tit. 3. 11. and is not punish∣ed for his Opinion, but for
his disorderly acting upon that Opinion. Such was Di∣otrephes, who loved to have the preheminence, 3 Joh. 9, 10. And if you should pass over the Deeds which such Men do; you would be the Betrayers and Murderers of your Flocks. Like the Hireling, who-fleeth, or sitteth still, when he sees the Wolf coming, Joh. 10. 13. There is another sort of disorderly Walkers who still keep amongst us, of whom I may say in the Apostles Words, I have told you before, and now tell you even Weeping, that by a base compliance and a servile Aw of the most Blameworthy of their Flock, they discover so cowardly a
temper, and unsutable to that Christian courage, which should place them above the fear of Men; that they be∣come the Enemies of the Cross of Christ. Such Men should not be suffered to herd with us, but ought to be avoided as infectious Creatures. Mark them which cause divisi∣ons and offences, contrary to the Doctrine which ye learnt, and avoid them, Rom. 16. 17. Such Wretches lye un∣der a complication of disea∣ses; being disobedient, through omission of their Duty; Traitors, in not Faith∣fully discharging the trust committed to them; dis∣orderly, in not Walking ac∣cording
to the Rule; per∣jur'd, in breaking their Oath of Canonical obedience, and that of Supremacy; injuri∣ous to their Brethren and the whole Church, by che∣rishing the unruly expectati∣ons of the People; and are so many ways Unfaithful, that had they any sence of Religion, the consequent words of St. Paul must needs make them asham'd, and confounded. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Iesus Christ, but their own Belly. 18. Or as it is in a∣nother place, Whose end is destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is in their shame, who mind Earth∣ly things, Phil. 3. 19
In short, do but mark the careful admonition against all  or disorder in the Church. Warn them that are unruly, 1 Thes. 5. 14. Now we command you Brethren, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that ye withdraw you selves from every Brother that walks disor∣derly, 2 Thes. 3. 6. And then observe with what pleasure that  or good order is men∣tioned; For I though absent in the Flesh, yet am with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding , your order, Col. 2. 5. This word should be written in the Forehead as well as Heart of every Christian, but especi∣ally of the Clergy, as Pilate's Inscription upon the Cross, in
Hebrew, Greek and Latine, that from East to West, and throughout the World, the Glo∣ry of our Christian consent might be understood. You may remember upon the recommending a Hearty & Serious pronunciation of the Divine Service, it was thought very adviseable and reasonable to forbear long and expatiating Prayers before Sermon: Lest either we should be thought our selves to esteem the Pub∣lick Offices deficient, or give Occasion to others to be of that Opinion. Upon which Occasion was mention'd Mr. Seymours little Treatise of Pub∣lick set Forms of Prayer. Then
likewise were recommended for your People to read, Mr▪ Al∣len's little Books, viz. A Per∣suasive to Peace and Unity. A Serious and Friendly Address to the Nonconformists. The dan∣ger of Enthusiasm. And I shall now add his Book call'd Catho∣licism. As also Mr. Lamb's two Books, viz. A stop to the Course of Separation: And a fresh suit against Independency. And this I did, not only for their brevity, bu because they are written by Laymen. And such whose expressions are so fair, and their integrity and man∣ner of living so well known in in the City: That it were im∣possible to propose more un∣exceptionable▪ either as to the
Style or Authors. I then wished you, as I still do, to Read the Canons to your Congregation once a year, as it is ordered in the Kings confirmation of them: And that such Acts or Procla∣mations as have been appoint∣ed to be Read upon the thir∣tyeth of Ianuary, the nine and twentieth of May, and fifth of November, might be for the future observed. The urging necessity of Per∣secution forceth Men into order. But in times of Prosperity, there is great danger of falling asleep: Especially in ours, where the corruption of the Age makes unruliness pass for a vir∣tue. And yet the Censorious humour which it produces, is a
strong motive on the other hand, where any sparks of Wisdom or common prudence remain, to observe a very strict and close Order in our own Defence. Take away then the Glory of ordaining Rules, by that which is of infinitely more value, the observation of them. And let not the great and painful care of the Fathers of the Primitive Church, both by Private endeavors, and in Councels, rise up in Judgment against us, for destroying that Discipline by disorder and neg∣lect, which at the peril of their Lives many times, they upheld for the preservation of Christs Body, which is the Church. I pray God strengthen your
Heart with a courage suit∣able for the times we live in, and every way enable you to answer the just expectations of, Your Affectionate Friend and Brother. H. London. Fulham, April 6. 1683▪
THE LORD BISHOP OF LONDON'S FIFTH LETTER TO THE Clergy of his Diocess. 1684. Good Brother, THE Care and Diligence which the perverseness of this World does exact of us
to keep the Flock of Christ in any tolerable good order, is so incessant, as well as great; That all occasions of incitement to our Duty, are but too little for the mightiness of the Work. Yet still there is a blessing goes along with honest endeavours, and God will not require more of us than what we can do, by the measure of that grace and success he gives us. That part of your Duty which I shall now insist upon, is, Canon CXVIII. I did not pitch upon this Ca∣non, for the Subject of our last conference, with an intent to press the whole Observation of
it, otherwise than to introduce the consideration of that Pre∣sentment in particular, which relates to the Holy Communion. As an entire obedience to the Constitutions of any Govern∣ment is absolutely necessary, both upon account of the suc∣cess, which the mutual assistance one Law affords another, can only carry on, and the honour and reputation of them and their Maker. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. For he that said, &c. Iam. 2. 10, 11. so is a Coercive Discipline to bend our stubborn humours to that compliance which is requi∣site. But that which will most contribute to the justifying of
what I am now to press, will be an impartial presentment of all sorts of Recusants, and all Pro∣phane and Debauched Persons, that the excusing of one kind of sin, may not raise a clamo∣rous pretence for passing by another. And you would do well to observe that the Minister is by this Canon enjoyned to pre∣sent as well as his Church-War∣dens, &c. A measure more for the Honour and Service of the Gospel, and more suitable to the great wisdom of a Nursing Fa∣ther could not have been taken, than asserting the observation of this Blessed Sacrament, where∣in the whole Mystery and Be∣nefit of the New Covenant is
contained. There may be, and are certainly, many other parti∣culars, the observation of which, if they were more strictly en∣joyned, would conduce much to Peace and Conformity in the Church, and will no doubt in time be thought on. But what could be more suitable to the Majesty of a Prince to be∣gin with, than that in which the Majesty of Gods wonder∣ful dispensation of the Gospel is seated? You are not to wonder when you meet with a loud outcry upon the legal pressing of this duty, if you do but look back to the late times, and consider what a dismal confusi∣on and wast the Consciences
of Men were then left in, for want of having been instructed in the plain and true Princi∣ples of Christian Religion, be∣ing Deceived and Deluded, by Canting and Obscure Notions, which left them so bewildred, that every true Call, is to them a Voice out of the Clouds and like the Children of Israel, They desire to hear it no more. For it is a beloved Wilderness, where the Doctrine of censuring others, and observing no order them∣selves is the whole Catechism. But you are to consider what is good and necessary, not what is pleasing, tho the more you love, the less you are beloved▪ He must be a very indifferent Christian, that can think it rea∣sonable
to let People thus set∣tle upon the fowlest Lees. If a Heathen, a Jew, or a Mahoma∣tan live amongst us, we must first perswade him to enter in∣to Covenant, before we require him to obey the Laws of it: But when a Man will declare himself a Christian, and yet violate the most Sacred Insti∣tutions of it, he is self condem∣ned, because he has put himself under the power of that to which he will not conform. Patience and forbearance, in∣treaty and gentleness ought to be used, and when that will not do, severer applications are to be made, especially in so essen∣tial a point, by which the Lord himself was made known to his
Disciples, Luke 24. 35. that if by any means. The Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. If these men were not stran∣gers to the constant and uni∣versal practice of Christendom, and so miserably seduced out of their sense and reason; they would easily acknowledge the justice of expecting a confor∣mity in this matter, and would be ashamed any longer so fool∣ishly to fight the battle of the aliens. Would they but consult the Ninth Canon of the Apo∣stles, but especially the Second of the Councel of Antioch they would find, that no Man came to Publick Prayers, but, under pain of being turned out of the Church, was likewise to re∣ceive
the Sacrament: And who∣ever had incurred that Penalty, was not to be received again into the Congregation, with∣out doing publick Penance. Let them but look into the Discipline of the Reformed Churches, and all others that are, or ever were, and see if there be not a Catholick con∣sent in this particular. What can we say then less of such un∣happy Men, who either for want of true knowledge, or from the insolence of a private Spirit, will pretend to wear a Wedding Garment, and yet not go to the Feast: But as St. Paul said of the Jews—They please not God, and are contrary to all Men?
The Care our Church has ta∣ken for the Observation of this Holy Sacrament, is, First, That you give notice of every Communion in the Congregati∣on the Lord's day before, Can. 22. Secondly, That you admit no Scandalous and Notorious sin∣ner, lest the solemnity be evil spoken of, Can. 26. Thirdly, That no Schismaticks and dis∣orderly walkers be suffered to Communicate, lest the breach of the publick Peace of the Church, which is so great a sin, should be thought none at all, Can. 27. Fourthly and Lastly, That notice be taken whether all the Parish receives, and that none of another Parish be allowed to Communicate with
you, Can. 28. Which Canon was certainly ordained upon most useful and weighty rea∣sons. For you otherwise hurt the Discipline and good Order of the Church, by invading the right of his proper Minister. You know not but that you may admit of Prosligate and unruly persons, and thus take spots into your Feasts, to your own shame and the Scandal of others. You may unawares re∣ceive Hereticks and Excom∣municated Persons, and so grie∣vously wound the very Vital Parts of the Churches body Ha∣ving thus in short aid the rules before you in the discharge of your duty towards yo Flock: Take what you
do in case of refractoriness from the words of Can. 112. The Minister, &c. of every Parochial Church or Chappel shall every Year within Forty days after Ea∣ster, give in the Names and Sur∣names of all of each Sex, within his Parish, who being above the age of Sixteen Years, have not come to the Holy Com∣munion that Easter. After all, there is a Christi∣an temper to be used in these performances. Of some have compassion, making a difference; and others save with fear, pul∣ling them out of the fire, Jud. 22, 23, For tho we cannot see into the Hearts of Men, so as to discern the sincerity of each Per∣son, yet there will be much
discovery by outward behavi∣our, that we may easily judge of. If a Man obstinately assert and instruct others against the rule, if a Man be wilful and froward, if he give ill lan∣guage, or make use of his Non∣conformity for a Cloke of Se∣dition, and the like; surely none will say, but fear is the best argument against such. On the other side, if a quiet beha∣viour towards the publick, and in private conversation, appear in any of these Men, all gentle∣ness is to be used, but so as nei∣ther the one nor other sort be left unattempted by means and in manner suitable. Such a spirit then ought to appear in you, as that nothing
seem to be done out of Malice, Revenge or Enmity, but what∣ever remedy you find needful, or your duty to apply, that you do it not as a tormenter, but as a good Physician, who may give bitter Potions and disagreeable to the Palate for saving the Man; who if not sensible of his own illness, it renders his case more desperate, and may require severer Me∣dicines. The Chirurgion when he Cauterises, Lances, or Cuts off a Limb, does it for the good of him he thus uses: A Furnace of Affliction may be applyed, tho Fire and Fagot be unlawful. Whatever you do, let the spirit of love and sobriety direct you in it; thus
you cannot easily correct a∣miss. For a Minister of the Gospel ought not to act with∣out fear or wit. One great work there is still to do in order to make our at∣tempts successful, and that is to walk uprightly our selves. However the duty is incum∣bent upon them, and that the unworthiness of the Minister be no just excuse for their for∣bearance, yet by the subtilty of the Devil, and the deceivable∣ness of Lusts, such objections will perswade Men to abhor the Offerings of the Lord. There∣fore as in Religion we cannot expect a blessing upon our en∣deavours, unless we please God, so neither in prudence may we
hope to prosper, unless we bear a Conscience void of of∣fence towards Man. Pray then Earnestly for the Assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, and in your Prayers, I beseech you, forget not. Your assured Friend and Brother H. London. 1684.
Good Brother, YOU see with what Diffi∣culty we persuade Christi∣ans to do that, of which in for∣mer Ages, and in most Churches, except ours, at this Day, it is counted the severest Penance to be debarr'd. So that either some new Gospel is crept in amongst us, or else we have shamefully perverted the Old One. To say we desire to be at Union, and yet refuse that Bread which Sa∣cramentally makes us so; to say we expect to partake of the Benefits of Christ's Body and Blood, and yet reject the Com∣munion of them; to expect the end, and avoid the means, is such a piece of Contradiction, that we are not to wonder at any
Absurdity after this. If it be possible then, let us use all our Endeavours to recover the Peo∣ple from so Fatal a mistake, and the Reputation of our Church from so foul a Reproach. See that your Church-Wardens do their Duties in this particular; which if they be men of Con∣science they cannot refuse. And I must desire your Hand to the Truth of what they present. And I pray read this to your Congregation at Morning and Evening Service; that it may not be pretended, that timely Notice was not given, to pre∣vent an Easter Presentment. Fulham March 19. 1684. H. London
THE LORD BISHOP OF LONDON'S SIXTH LETTER TO THE Clergy of his Diocess. 1685. Good Brother, I Have been the more careful to repeat to you the Sub∣stance of that Conference we
held the last Year; because it will be impossible for me this Year to appoint a time of Meet∣ing; tho I have reason to hope, I shall not wholly be detain'd from you. However, I wish your whole two Years intent upon a Reformation in this particular, may be able but in some measure to recover our decay'd Disci∣pline. Canon XIII. It is not only ordained in this Canon that Sundays and other Holydays shall be obser∣ved, as they are appointed by the Church; and in the 64th Canon, that Parsons and Curates shall bid Holydays under pain of Censure; but from the
beginning of the Reformation it has been enjoyn'd to do the like, as may be seen in the Injunctions of Edward the 6th. 1547. and in those of Queen Eliz. 1559. as likewise the first of Eliz. Sect. 4, and 5. where the Archbishops and Bishops are in God's Name earnestly required, &c. So that in this case there is a Rule for us to walk by; and there∣fore it was worth our consi∣deration to examine, First, Why? And Secondly, How we should follow it? First, The Inducement to this performance, is grounded upon Authority sufficient to pre∣vail with any meek and quiet Spirit to acquiesce, and to stop
the Mouths of those that are otherwise: For if there be no harm in the Practice the Au∣thority of the Church under whose immediate Discipline we live, is a sufficient ground for our Conformity: But we have the Churches Practice from the beginning. It is true indeed, for the first three hun∣dred years it does not appear, that there were more days ob∣serv'd, than the Lord's Day, Easter, Ascension, Whitsunday and Christmas-day; this last seeming not of quite so ancient Observation as the for∣mer; tho' we are told by the Emperor Constantine, in a Letter recorded by Socrates, that Good Friday was ap∣pointed
by the Lord himself▪ But this ought to be no Ob∣jection against the Addition of a few more in after Ages: For when the Church was at ease, Christians were more frequently called from their Devotion to the business of the World; which would certainly swallow up the whole Man, were not set and appointed times ordain'd for serving God, and calling to mind the wonderful things that he has done for us. In times of Persecution every day was a Holyday, and every hour the Example of some blessed Mar∣tyr pass'd before Mens Eyes; the Memory of which again was refresh'd when they As∣sembled at the Martyria; but
in prosperous days all these things would be forgot, were not the Fundamental Dispensa∣tions of our Religion, and th great Examples of the blessed Apostles every Year in their turns set before us. And therefore if Authority were wanting, the reasonable∣ness of the Practice would in∣duce us to it. Not to urge the Morality of the 4th. Com∣mandment, can we imagine a more effectual way of Im∣printing the Remembrance of the great Mysteries of our Reli∣gion in the Minds of Men, and to convince them, that it is in the power of Man, so far to come up to the Merits of them, as the Gospel under the favora∣ble
acceptance of God, exacts at our Hands, then by setting apart solemn times for the Remembrance of those great Mercies the Gospel has dis∣penced to us, and by setting forth the power of God's Spi∣rit in the Example of the holy Apostles, who were Men of like infirmity with our selves: But when we consider the Benig∣nity of his Wisdom, which has so disposed the course of the World, that what in Du∣ty and Gratitude towards our Maker, we are bound to do, falls out to be the indispensible support of Humane Nature: We can never despise the Ob∣servation of days, as it is con∣sistent with Christian Liberty▪
but we must at the same time, in our Hearts despise Religion it self: For to allow of a time of Refreshment for the wearied Limbs of the Labou∣rer, and a Relaxation to the Man of Business; and not to make use of that Occasion to stir up to Spiritual Exercise, were to level us with the Beasts that perish. Plato de Legibus Lib. 2. says very well to this purpose; The Gods in pity to the Miserable State of Humane Nature have appointed Holy∣day for their own Honor, in which Men may rest from their Labour. The Petrobrusian Heresie slat∣ters it self with two or three Texts of Scripture, that make
nothing to their purpose, when duly considered, Coloss. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in respect of an Holyday. It follows, or of the New-Moon, or of the Sabbaths. Which plainly shews, that it refers to the Weakness of the Judaizing Christians. Gal. 4. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years, I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you Labour in vain. The whole Epistle refers to Judaizing. Rom. 14. 5. One Man esteems one day above another; another esteemeth every day alike; That is, one Man is superstitious upon the Holiness of a Day; another reckons all alike, and that ac∣cording to the true Rule of
Christian Liberty; the day is not in it self sanctified by a Re∣ligious▪ Observation, but only he who observes it, the day being but a mark of the appoin∣ted time. For by the Scriptures silence in this particular, it is plain that the choice of Festi∣vals was left to the Church, which may determine what days she pleases, and alter them at will. And therefore as the stated times in the Iew∣ish Church were sanctify'd by Gods appointment, and did for that reason bind up the Consci∣ence to a precise observation of them: So because they that are under the Christian Oeco∣nomy are left to mans discreti∣on, they do no otherwise con∣cern
the Conscience, than in regard of Scandal and Con∣tempt of Authority. Lest the uncertainty of Peoples meeting should prove prejudicial to the Faith in Christ, particular days were set apart for Christian Assemblies; not that there is any excellency in the day it self, on which we come together, says Saint Hierome upon the Ga∣latians. Secondly. Our other consi∣deration is to be, how we may best carry on this part of Disci∣pline. And this must be done, as to the bare Observation of it, according to the Laws and U∣sages of our Church. But then we are at liberty to improve
it by such Methods of Exhor∣tation, as we Judge most edi∣fying. And in my Opinion none can be more likely to do good then explaining whatever Mystery or Commemoration it is, that the day relates to and having fully set forth, or unfolded the matter to press it home by a Conscientious appli∣cation. Some Homilies are very proper for some certain days; but that which will be of most constant use, is ex∣pounding the Gospel for the day; whereby the History of the present Subject may be fully laid open. And yet to our grief, at least, if not to our shame, we have
harder a Task to perform before we come to Church; That is, to prevail with the People to meet us there. The easiest and most gentle way of perswasion is most suita∣ble to the Spirit of Christiani∣ty, and most agreeable to the rational part of the World, Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2. 5. Who in a meek and lowly conversation came to seek, and to save that which was lost. This is the mind of God, as you may see by what he says concerning Israel. I drew them with Cords of a Man, with Bands of Love. Hos. 11. 4. And that
which will make this and all other Religious Duties easy and pleasant to our Flocks, is to possess them with a true sense and value of things above, and to convince them of the in∣consistency of disorderly walk∣ing, whether through spiritual Pride or carnal affections, with true devotion. If our People would be prevail'd upon to be∣stow some of those precious hours they wast at Tipling houses in frequenting this Ordi∣nance, I make no question they would soon tast and see the difference to their comfort. But if men will be obstinate in their Prophaness, God has not appointed Authority in
vain. It is in the power of the Civil Magistrate to make such uneasy Laws pass upon Offen∣ders of this kind, as well the Entertainers as the Guests; that a due Execution of them, would in all probability contribute very much to a Reformation in this particular. Neither are we always to forbear the power which God has given us, but as Christ drove the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, and as his Blessed Apostle Saint Paul▪ deliver'd the incestuous Corinthi∣an unto Satan for the Destruction of Flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5. 5. So ought we to pass Ecclesiastical Cen∣sures upon such as will not
amend by fair means. The Psalmist does most emphati∣cally describe the patient pro∣ceeding of God in this case, Psal. 7. 12. If the Wicked will not turn, he will whet his Sword, he hath bent his Bow, and made it ready. Observe the goodness of God even in his advance to severity: ob∣serve and imitate. I will con∣clude with the advice of Saint Cyprian in his Epistle to Roga∣tianus Bishop of Noba. This per∣son, and if there be any more such, who Act any thing against their Pastor, you may either prohibit or Excommunicate him. Unless, which is my Counsel and Advice, you could rather by some fair meansmake them sensi∣ble
of their Fault, so as to give satisfaction, and suffer us to go on in our purpose: For we had much rather overcome Re∣proaches & Injuries by the mild∣ness of Patience, than by our Pastoral Power. Go on then with that Pati∣ence and Courage as becomes a true Shepherd, and beware that you fall not under the con∣demnation of a Hireling, who cares not for the Flock. As a good Steward watch and pro∣vide for those that are commit∣ted to your charge. Be not wanton with, nor abuse your Sheep, neither be slothful and negligent, nor flee when the Wolf comes; but consider
the example set before us by the Bishop and Shepherd of our Souls; and be not discou∣rag'd with the difficulty or dan∣ger of your work, for as much as your Labour is not in vain in the Lord. I pray God direct you in all things, and Your most assured Friend and Brother▪ H. London Fulham, April, 18. FINIS.
