F888 12408938 61457
The Fifth and last PART OF THE Wandring whore: A DIALOGUE Between Magdalena a Crafty Bawd, Julietta an Exquisite VVhore, Francion a Lascivious Gallant, And Gusman a Pimping Hector. Discovering their diabolical Practises at the Half-crown CHUCK-OFFICE. With an Additional List of the names of the Crafty Bawds, Common Whores, Wanderers, Pick-pockets, Night-walkers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners. Delivered to the Publisher hereof by a late Hector, several deep Pyemen, and decayed Gamesters amongst them. Sine Cerere & Baccho friget Venus. Printed in the Year 1661.
THE WANDRING WHORE CONTINUED. Magdalena. Silence in the Court, not a word amonst us three confederates, but what's spoken under the Rose, it is not fit to let Francion go off thus for 135 pounds; wee'l make him marry thee Julieta, or make thee a good joyn∣ture all thy life time; Hee'l believe all to be Gospel that we say, whilst we agree in one and the same Tale, he won't be long absent from us, therefore lets be fore∣warn'd and fore-arm'd against his coming. Gusman. The project will hit doubtless, we have such a grand earnest of his folly before-hand, 'tis but making him believe shee'l turn and be honest ever after, which if it were not so, you know Cuckolds have the best luck, for my part, I wish I were the richest Cuckold in Europe: Ju is not overworn, therefore not past turning, and a good two leav'd book left to look in still. Magdalena. Ay, and a good fat A—too thou mayst lay thy lips on't but 'tis customary here to receive mony with wives, (who like light gold will not pass without al∣lowance,) but give mony for wenches, and that hee'l do I warrant yee, wee'l make thee a President for others to imitate and follow: what must matrimony be made a matter of mony where there's a dainty Cunny? I'le make him believe she hath as many suitors as there are days in the year, to make him more zealous of cozening his
orrivals should such an Amazonian beauty, accomp∣lisht with such transcendant endowments both of body and mind, proportion'd with such equal parts, enrich'd with Silver and Golden habiliments, be parted, with at an easy rate, so, as to make a slave her master, or a ser∣vant her Commander. Julietta. My very teeth water at the Contrivance, if it falls right, expect I will reward you both out of his estate, 'tis but his believing that I will be honest after all my Lusts and Lechery, and that's all one to a fool; for what the eye sees not the heart rues not, I shall not be the first where that has turn'd honest, in the flower of her age, 'tis but your getting another to supply the place during my absence, for common Jades (such as Mal. Savory, Honor Brooks, and Nan. Jones,) are nu∣merous enough, and will sit with their leggs spread over the sides of a chair with their petticoates and smocks in their mouths, whilst their Comrades run a tilt at their touch holes in that posture, paying twelve pence a time for holing; and for his part and mine we have taken a sure course to try each others abilities before-hand; we shall not fear commencing of Law-suites for want of due benevolence, or for being unpenetrable, yet Ile have him sign and seal these following Articles for an Assu∣rance of his future Affections, viz. Inprimis, That I Mounsieur Francion do freely, and willingly settle 300 l. per annum upon julietta, for and during her life time. Item, That I will allow her a Coach and four Horses, with Attendants answerable. Item, That I wont be jealous of any man's coming, or visiting her, of what Quality, Rank or Condition whatsoever.
Item, That I will allow her a Lusty Black, to hold up her train whilst she walks from room to room. Item, That she shall have free liberty to make choise of her own Chamber-maids, and others belonging to the family, and chuse a-new every month, if they do not keep close their chaps, what ever they do with their legs. Gusman. They are singular ways to provide horns for his head, but I would not wish you to stand upon such Iunctilios, if he will but marry thee Ju, for if he should deny to let thee have thy will and pleasure af∣terwards, 'tis but taking a touch or two with a Councel∣ler, (who freqently takes his fees that way, if his Client be handsom,) and hee'l sue him for Alimony, and make him maintain thee out of his Estate in spite of his teeth, and then play the where under his nose as many brave lasses have done before thee, and he shall not help himself, whereof we have a thousand Presidents of women running from their husbands, and chusing other Stallions for their Guardians, as appears by a late Treatise emituled the Trappn, written by Mr. Vernon in the case of Goodwin the Dyer, &c. Julietta. Thou hast done well to satisfy me so cleerly, Ile follow the example of yong Starky the Hosiers wife, who receiving some seeming abuses from her husband, (when the major part of her Portion grew due) ranaway from him, carrying all his bonds, bills, Goldwatch, Jewels, Rings, &c. suing him for mainten∣ance, as he found by woful experience, and the leaving off of his trade, under the pretence of his having the Pox. Gus. I shall tell thee of another way besides that, if
thou hast a mind to make him run mad; take a hand∣som Gentleman usher to satisfy thy Luxury, and please thy lechery, into the house, love and lie with him and hate thy husband, lie naked in the bed rather then have thy smock sowd to his shirt, when thou wouldst under pretence of rising to piss, or going to a close stool, go to bed with thy Gentleman-usher, and if he be angry, call him rogue, raskal, and jealous Cuckeld; and if that fayls comb his head with a joint stool, or break his pate with a Bed-staff, and it will cool his courage quickly. Magdalena. Thou'rt a prime Tutor indeed, if thou hadst but a whore to match thee, for to read a Lecture in a two-leav'd book, thou hast evermore had a natural propensity to, as to venery, and knowst how to ride post to the Devils Mansions; for I dare swear there's scarse a rule in all Aretines Postures, but thou hast it ad unguem, readier then thy Pater Noster; for thy zeal, (like Harry Martins with the Beggar Wench, Thom. Scots with the Bonelace-wench of Wickham, and Hugh Peters when the Butcher cudgel'd the 5 pounds out of his Carkass for lying too neer his Brindle) is lockt up in a Down-diddle more then honesty, yet I like thy merry devices. Gusman. Every man to his trade, as the Rat-trap∣maker said to the Parson, be sure I have not my name Gusman, an old beaten soldier for nothing: I have told, Ju, a woman will have her will, and you are not to seek in that point, Im'e sure on't. Magdalena. Thou say'st very true, good wits wll jump together, as thou didst with my Cousin, but me∣thinks we are grown huge modest in our debates be∣wixt each other, but I wonder Francion tarries all this,
while, I wish we had so me pleasant tale, told to drive away the tedious night. Gusman. Rather then want, I would invent a story, but this I shall tell you stands upon record, is very true, and was try'd at Salisbury Assizes of a bouncing Girl, who was courted by a neighbor whom she did not fan∣cy: this yong Enamorato out of spight, reports she had no C—and scarce a pissing place; a second suitor en∣gages her affections, but upon noise of the rumor relin∣quishes her; a Crafiy Lawyer (as most of that function are) tells her he would sue this slaunderer in her behalf, and demand nothing till Recovery, to which she assen∣ted, the party being arrested the suit was shortly brought to tryal, where a Jury of women were sum∣moned (not men) to search her, who upon demand from the Judge, what they had to say in the business, one of the eldest Matrons answer'd that she had a good thing (meaning the maid, not her self,) the Judge told her that was not enough to satisfy the Jury, she must speak broader and plainer? Why, then (quoth she) she hath a very good commodity: I tell thee again wo∣man thou must speak plain; why, then if I ust I will, and will swear it again and again, before your Worship and the Jury, she hath a C—large enough for the beggest mans P—in the Parish, at which they all laughed, and the Jury (for that she was a handsom wench) fined her adversary threescore pounds dam∣age which was accordingly paid the Plaintiff. Julietta. That was honestly done of them, and is neer a kin to a passage I have heard of a fellow who helping a Gentlewoman on Horse-back, slipp't his hand under her belly and tore a tufft of hair off her
Commodity, waring it in a Bnavido in his hat; which her husband hearing of, su'd him for it, and it cost him forty pounds for his frolick. Magdalena. Well I am bound to tell a Tale or let a fart, therefore give ear to this following, concerning a Gentleman who had continu'd with a great deal of eagerness a suitor to a Gentlewoman, whose incivities could not retract him, nor perswasions withdraw him, at length when nothing would serve his turn, she unco∣ver'd her breast naked, ranckled, rotted and corrupted, which he espying took leave of her, and never set eye on her after. Gusman. I believe neither of you two would have uncover'd your infirmities, in such a Case, but for my part I conceive it lawful for men and women, to go na∣ked, and were it customary as in preceding times, your enticing habits, perfum'd carkasses, and stately gestures would be less in request, both with your selves and o∣ther's, and fewer provocations to lust and Lechery, which is seldom occasion'd by a brown skin, a crook'd back or legs, or poor habit, but often by holland smocks, silk stockins, rich gowns and petticoats, with other cost∣ly garments, which cover your greatest foulness and deformities: I have known many women, taken out of (their better part) their cases would have been a loath∣ing to themselves and others, who otherwise were do∣ted upon in their bravery. Julietta. Should you men, see all onr actions in a true, (and not a counterfeit) glass, we should be the most dispised wretches in the world, but we can or∣der you in that point, as most of your Citizens Wives do their Coxcombs, who if they won't let them have
their desires and pride to boot, 'tis but dissembling a tertain or quotidian ague, a burning feaver, or some o∣ther distemper, and their lying in shall cost them more mony in Doctors visits, Apothecaryes Bills, (who now and then cornute them into the bargain) Caudles, Po∣tions, and Cock-broths, then if they had granted their desires at first. Cusman. I am no stranger to those tricks, for if I were, I should have a better opinion of your sex, then they have deserved (the number of wicked women, being numberless) amongst which number are Mr. Sa∣vage in white cross-street, who broke her husbands head with a marrow-bone, and had like to have kill'd him with it, Mrs. Barron a fidlers wife, who us'd to comb her husbands head with a base viol, into which his head was strick as if he had been in the Pillory, or got a ruff about his neck, Mrs Hewson at the further end of White-chappel, a tearing Ranter, who is never quiet but when Clark the Hatband-maker in Hounsditch, is at work in her Saw-pit, and Mrs. Blakesly, who not∣withstanding her husbands lawful and due correction, will tempt, Jack Hunt the Butcher in White-chappel, to make her husband a Cuckold: well if you think to have Francion I hear, and see coming Iu, you must behave your self with more discretion, as a Chaundlers wife in Ab church lane, said her husband did her. Julietta. Prithee Cusman keep thy breath to cool thy pottage, but stick close to us in our new found Plots; Mounsieur Francion, truly devoted of your servants salutes you, and rejoyces at your appearance, why so long absent from her so deerly loves you, why at such a distance from her whose life and fortunes lie and
truckle at your foot-stood, whose presence is my life and absence death. Francion. Thy company's no less to me my sweet∣heart, my deer, and my beloved one, of whom I le say: In twining armes let me my deer conceal And from thy rosy lipps long kisses steal Let me thy complete parts touch without light, And with sweet joyes protract the pleasing night, In thy sweet armes hugg thou my hanas and face Let me in my kind bosom thee embrace, 'Tis not for gold that Lovers do complain They'r rich enough if they theyr Ladies gain. Magdalena. That you have gain'd Julietta is no news, I would advise you Sit to marry her, you may meet with a slut, and that's worse then a whore, but she hath vow'd chastity for the future. Gusman. I can assure that to be true, that she's resol∣ved to turn if you l marry her. Francion. I thought I had remov'd all scruples in that point, is the motion of your mentioning Julietta? Julietta. Truly sir, I am very weary of this life, and would gladly turn, would you let me be devoted wholly to your service. Francion. 'Tis no sleight Question to answer, much more to execute, so that you must pardon me in that Point. Magdalena. Why then you must allow her a yeer∣ly revenue to maintain her for your self, and keep her in her quondam Equipage and gallantry. Gusman. There's all the reason in the world for't,
what would not some men give for a dainly bit in a cor∣ner, the forbidden fruit is sweetest. Francion. Well what's your demands, what will maintain her from the scourge of necessity, come speak out or let Magdalena do't for you, but marry I may not. Magdalena. Sixty Pounds a year is as little as can be to maintain her honesty and bravery. Francin. Well, provided she layes no claim's to marriage with me, I'le settle 50 Pounds per Annum Durante vita. Magalena. Come she shall do't, Ile be her Advocate, fill us some wine to seal the bargain. Jul. Content till our next days meeting. A new Additional List of the Names. Crafty Bauds, &c. MRs. Linley▪ by whetstone Park. Mrs. Waller, Mrs. Bull in Puxfield-lane. K—on Horseback Istington Mrs. Kerby, bell in Fins∣bury Robin Hood and Little John, in Holborn Common Whores &c. MRs. Barker a Bar∣bers wife in Tha∣mes-street Betty Winn— Mrs. Webb neer Thames street. Mal. Peatley Mrs. Everet Mrs. Hewson in white Chappel Mrs. Barron at Shadwel Mrs. Blackesley, Jack Hunts mob the Butcher Bitty Sydney, in Hearts∣born court in white Chappel Mal. Cooper, at the Globe in East-Smith field Mal. Thresher Mrs. Drue and Mrs. Buck neer Thames-street Mrs. Osbridges scolding Daughter Iud. Mills a paviers wife Mrs. Peacham a Cole∣meters wife Mrs. Bedberry Nel. Maddocks Jone Arras Betty Lemmon in Che∣cquer-ally neer Bun-hill Mrs. Rod in Poplar Mrs. Gill Mrs. Hench in white Chappel Hectors, Pye∣men, &c. —Griffith —Warren —Jackson John Clark in Houns∣ditch Farmer a Poulterer Burges a Turner Robin Hicks Th. Latimer Jack Ruddock Jack Hunt Sam, Peel Tho. Middleton George Darby Thom. Clark Pimp. Ledsum Jack Hyde.
Another Additional List. Crafty Bawds. OLd Bawd Fotheringham in Cow lane Mrs. Pope in Petty France Mrs. Redman at Cow-cross Mil. Ames Mal. Lovel, in Patridge Alley in Holborn Mother Daniel. Gridiron in Seacoal Lane Horseshooe in Beech Lane. Mrs. Treely in Bloomsbury. Common Whores. JAne Campion in Hollowel Court in White-chappel Nan. Jones, a pockey whore Mal. Foster Nan. Farr, an Oyster wench Mrs. Watson, an Orange∣seller Mal. Thomas. Orange Nan Grace Cull Bess Sturdy Mrs. Walters, in St. Katherines Mrs. Popes Daughters Mal. Gummer, in Seacoal Lane. Franck Hancock Mrs. Simpkins Mrs. Sadler Mrs. Elwick Mal. Bennet, a Paviers wife in Cock Lane Nan. Greek in Seacoal Lane Mal. Marten Mrs. Worster Mrs. Jane, and Mrs. Louse, be∣longing to Mrs. Treely Hectors, &c. NIcolls in Thames-street, a Spunge Sweetman, a Spaniard Mason, the Lobster Tim. Holly Nich. Pits, a Sollicitor in Little Queen street Tom. W—a T—
Another List of Crafty Bawds, Maiden-sellers, Com∣mon Whores, Night walkers, Pick-pockets, Wanderers, Shop-Lifters, Foylers, Kidnappers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappaners, and their usual Meetings. Crafty Bawds DAmrole Page Pss, Fotheringham at the Chuck-Office Mrs Mason, in Hors-shoo-Ally in More-fields Mas Farle, in Pepper-lane by Grayes-inn Mrs Cater senior Betty Farmer, Tom. Beards, wise and savages Mobb Pimp Allens, wife, in Goodmans yards John Baker Bess and Mal. Walsgrave, in Dog and Bitch yard Elean. North, in Crosslane Abigail Littleton Gravener's in Morefields Mal Pulver Prudence Maisters Frances Coleman Elizabeth Herbertson, in New-market Mal Winter Grace Holland Rachel War in Dog-yard Nan Hartcock Frances Sands: Ragged∣staff in Chiswel-street Wiggins, in Checquer ally in white-cross-street Green Lettice i' mi∣nories Mrs Crosbow, in the mi∣nories Mrs Eaton a Maiden-head∣seller on the Ditch-side neer Hogsden Pimp Yopes wife Jon Harman, a runnin baud Mrs Hughes, in Rn-ally Mal. Ceco Mrs. Stone. Mrs. Creswel Mrs. Garrish Mrs. Habbiger Turks-head in Moorfields Mother Baker Sn. Lemmon Mrs. Whetston Mrs. George Mother Lockyer Mother Baxter Mrs. Arnol Mrs. Joes Mrs Salmon Virginia, going to Hackney Crow, white-cross-street Mrs Osbridg, Bedlam Mrs Gletberel Mrs Waller, Thomazin in white Chappel Mrs Thomas, Stepney Jeremyes and Services, Booths by Hackney river Mrs Bull Mrs Halfpenny Mrs Harrison Three Sugar-leaves in Grub-street Ship, in long Ally turns Jones, at the Cock in long Aere Mrs Barber, a Midwife in Holborn Mrs Howard, in Lincolns In-feild Mrs Hughes Mother Cunny The Cherry Garden Black Swan, in St. Mar∣tins-Le-grand Mrs Brooks, Mile-end Hanna Hickman, Baud and Whore Margaret Leech Margery Wilson Mrs. Page, Old-street Ann Price Houkins, Baud Paskins at the Armitage Margery Lawson Alice Hulburt Mrs Burges Joyce Ebbs Nel Yate Mrs Wellaston Mrs Stockwel Mrs Lawton, by Hatton∣wall Mal Ledger Mrs Sadler Mrs Gibbins Frank Tilt Mrs Davies a Midwife Black Pegg Doctor Sherleys wife Mrs Dennis Mrs Glover Mrs Love Betty Buly Mrs Windbo Mrs Roberts Mrs Sammond Nel Lawrence Mrs Woodburst
Jane Haywar Nan. Bennet Bess Mundel keeps three Baudy-houses in Dog and Bitch-yard. Mrs Thomzin mrs Brooks Jacobs Well J. well-street Mrs Lockyer Nan Evans Mrs Jones in Cross-lane Mrs Simpson Mrs Plikering The Last and Lyon, in East-smith-feild. Mrs. Saunders Mrs. Kemp Mrs Abigail mrs Kempster Common Whores, Night-walkers Pick-pockets, Wanderers, Shop Lifters, and Whippers. Mrs. Snow Nan Langsden Mrs Phaenix, neer Jewen-street Mrs Farmer Betty Cater, junior Bess Cox, Jone Broith∣wait, Amy Butler, Shop-lifters Rebecca Wharton Tho. Langley's mobb Nan Lidford Shop-lifter Ursula Bunny Johanna White, a but∣tock-whore Jone Horton, alias Singleton Rebecca Tentch Marget Read Nan. Williams in New-gate marget Gladwel Grizel Conference alias Wood Nan Stanley martha Chester mrs Debbenham, mrs. Clark-two crackt-brain'd whores mrs Smith, a Brick∣layers wife in white-chappel mrs Fletcher mrs Ives mrs Holland mrs Lettice mrs Wells Betty Hyde mrs Elwick mrs Betty, at Crosbows Peg the Seamans wife at mrs Crosbowes Ruth Shaw in morelane mal Crumwel alias Hyam Nan Robon Penelope mantle alias Fle∣teher Jane Johnson Thomzin Cobb, alias Day Nan Stacy Jane Powel Mrs Reading Betty Edwards Betty Holly Mal. Nun Welsh Nan Mal. Avory Esther Clark Nan Love Mrs. Warren Nell Gulliford Sarah & Nan Fullam Betty Yong Faith Clayton —Cross Betty Orange Mrs. Curtes Betty Laurence Mrs. Sherley the yonger Mrs Smith Jane Stamford Mrs. Spencer Mrs. Taverner Mrs. Marten Mrs. Watson Mrs Berry Mrs. Green Green Mll, alias Joan Godfrey Mall Chauncy Betty Cox Mall Hogg Mall Horsfield Mall Savory Peg Williams Alice Spilman Kate Hare Mall Tremain Mrs. Westover, Band∣string-seller to the Offices in Chauncery-lane Peg Cross Nan Bret Ursula Higgins Betty White Betty Farmer Margery Noble Jane Dixon Mall Peak Sarah Martin Nan Glascock Mrs. Honor Queen of Morocco
Mrs Mate Toothless Betty Bess Gering Gzzel Wood Mrs. Holliand Mrs. Diamond Mrs Cupid Mal Grey Nan Carper Betty Cooper Mrs Ames Nan Wats Betty Bates Betty Eton Mal. Bell Butter and Eggs Jane Thebey Mrs Owen Mal Fink Betty Baxter Betty Gansford Black Betty Nan Taylor Neck Lunn Mrs Love Mrs Lote Bess Whitle Bess Bunt Mrs Simmonds Betty Downes. Luce Brook Nel Syder Mal Craford Mal Bell Mrs Wood Mal Rose Mrs. Flower pey Frank er, alias Ulls Foyth Anderson Dutch Whore Wilkis, a weavers Wife at smock Ally-end Mrs Dawes Denues wife in shoreditch Mrs Swails maid Bess, Mrs Joy Mrs Bulls Daughters Mrs Bourn a Scribes wife Mrs Tippit Shards wife in Dunning-Alley Mrs Mail, by the Cur∣tain Play-house Su edge Jone Thorn at Newington butts Ensign Websters wife Mrs Harfed—Robinson Woodst Compter Mr Sweetman Long-haird Mrs Spencer in Spittle-fields Mrs Wroth, Grubstreet Mrs Phillips Peg Angel Greens Satchel—. Mall Rose Nan Rash Betty Knight Su Harris Nan Braithwilt Boulrun the bayliffs wife Wil Martins wife Mrs Fransces, alias Mal. Robinson Pimp Hollilands Pockey pug-nasty Mrs Spicer, in Mobb-lane, alias Browns Mrs De-maroy Mrs Carr in Rose-lane Mrs Bonsly Tanners wife Wheeler str. Mrs Dickinson Jane Glisson alias Roberts Frank Evitt Tracyes wife Mrs Taverner Wheeler∣street Frank Rigs, alias Robin∣son, a thieving whore Betty Wilson —King Sarah Price Kate Wilkinson Grace Steel. Elizabeth Smith Betty Blunt Mary De-gret, Mobb to Tho. Crouch Allice Jones Mall. Cole Nan Lowe —Fox Mary, Paget Mrs Cadman Sarah & Joyce Price Bess Cox Cock Birch Sarah Bostwid Jone Bouner Jone Bouder Nan Southern Frank Palmer Silver-lac't Bess Frank Ouden Fair Rosamond Sugr-C—a constant wanderer & night-wal∣ker Mrs Dodman Peg Hodgson Nan Stephens Sarah Blades Mrs Blis Mrs Russel Mrs herman Mrs King a Sempstress.
Foylers, Kid-nappers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trapanners. ARmstrong Pets Pierce Savage Thom. Beard Joseph Riches Thom. Allein John Baker Gravener beyond Bedlam∣gate Wil. Cox. Lion Breithwait Tho Largley Harry Baily, Ned Jervois, Peter Goodjeway, Tho. Orrel, Shop-Lifters and Foylers, Pimp Singlecton the ex∣temporary poet Wil Peise, an entorting pimp in Long Acre, who is burnt in the band Ned Tope Roger Kiffner, with a Wen over his eye John Pierson, by Hatton∣wall Tho Blackberry Jack Miller. Tim. Thorn∣her, Newgate Birds Damon a Hardy Hector. Fox Tho. Hurst Wil. Taverner Dick Gartwright George Clark Will Gill Holliland, a great Cheat Gladwin, an ignorant whelp Tho. Stern Barr Higgins Tho. Dodson Nat. Lummocks, Apoth. Anniseed Robbin Wil Nash. Man. Middleton Frank Ashburn Jack Jones Wat. Gulliford Carter, Rabbit-seller Dick de Lane Jo. Cocks Robin Thrower Tho. Rand Wil. Overrit Wat. Stainton. Raymon, Trump-alley Crone Green by Newgate Harry Martin, Vintner Pimp Skipwith. Ned Brooks Traey a Hector Brown a Chyrurgion Raiford a Troiper Tho. Player Nd Traford Hrry Bird Will ossel Will Jack Daines Taylor the Prigg Little Taffy Sam Pink, a slovenly pimp James at Dog-yard Gandamore Shatterwait, scribe Hopper, Writing-master Winch the Nailer Jack Berry, & Jack Harris, Billiard-players Pimp Howard Fair Rosamonds pimp George Paskins, a Kid-catcher, at the Crooked-billet at the Armitage Pimp Glover Jack Gould Jack Wallis Ralph Ashington, alias Shitten-arse, Gr Tho. Ebbs Dick Stockwel Will Ledger Will Sadler Wat. Gibbins Tho. Hayward C—Jackson Pimp Sh Hammond FINIS.
