H1548 31355288 110382
Here is a true and perfect Relation from the Faulcon at the Banke-side; of the strange and wonderful aperition of one Mr. Powel a Baker lately deceased, and of his appearing in several shapes, both at Noon-day and at night, with the several speeches which past between the spirit of Mr. Powel and his Maid Jone and divers Learned men, who went to alay him and the manner of his appearing to them in the Garden upon their making a circle, and burning of wax Candels and Jenniper wood, lastly how it vanished. The tune of Chevy Chase. STrange news, strange news, I here have write come lissen and Ile tell, The strangest news that ever yet within our age befell. And Ile repeat it word by word to let the Nation know, The mighty wonders of the Lord, which he to them doth shew. For near upon five moneths ago, there was a Baker yed, Cloe by the Faulcon many know, which is on Southwarke side. His body after buryd was, in earth for to remain, But not leng sence it came to pass, that his Spirit ros again. And walked up and down the place, where he before did dwell, And lookt most Ghasful in his face, that hundreds there can tell. And ratling throw the house would he, afrighting people that. He sometimes like a Goat would be, and sometimes like a Catt. He into several shaps would turn, with dolful voyces then He'd like a flame of fire burn, streight to a man agen. This house he constant haunted that, at midnight and noone-day And sometimes seemed like a Catt, which scar'd his Son away. Then none within this house did dwell, but one poor servant Maid Which very often did perceive this ghasful Ghost she said. Whose pale and dreadful glemering sight, reduc't her to a fear For making of the bed one night, it to her did appear. She then beholding of his face, poor Soul it made her quake And she lay trembling in the place, that every joynt did shake. He up and down the Chamber ran, his hands abroad were spred His Nose was waxed pale and wan, his eyes sunk in his had. At which the Maid cry'd out O Lord, I heartily do pray That by the power of thy word, chase this same fieend away.
Repeating these same words agen, with lifting hands upright At which the Aperition then, quite vanisht out of sight. But on the morrow morning next the same appear'd again▪ He on the house so much reflect, few durst within remain. The Maid a fire making was, about the house did stur Which time she heard a dolefull voyce, one knocking at the door. The Mid reply'd then who is there, and to the door did run Quoth he thy good old Master's herte; come tell me where's my Son. At which the Maid run backward in, and not one word did say And for that time the spirit then, did vanish quite away. But afterwards it came to pass, late in the Evening tyde He underneath a Peartree was, where he again was spyed. For he within the Garden walkt where Jone came by chance, And this same spirit with her talkt, that she fell in a trance. Beside her sences they were lost, at such a sight to see For pure Nature with a Ghost, can never well agree. Then Learned men of Art came there, this Spirit to alay Which did immediatele appear, and they to it did say. Gods holy Saints did much convert, there actions now are blest We Conjure thee for to depart, unto thy place of rest. The aperition in a pause, did vanish none knew whether Saying woe to them which are the cause, of this my coming hether. By skill these Learned men doth sea and by their art discry Some hiden treasure there must be, and in the Garden lye. And yet these Conjurers doth say, their task hath proved so The spirit they cannot alay, whatever they can do. O what strange wonders now are these; the Lord amongst us sed God grant hereafter they might cease, and we our lives amend. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and William Gilbertson.
