H569 12279466 58619
OF THE POVVER OF THE KEYES: OR, OF BINDING and LOOSING. 1 COR. 11.31. . LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1651.
The Preface. THat the prime Act of Power enstated by Christ on his Apostles, as for the governing of the Church, (and ex∣orcising or banishing all devils out of it) so for the effectual performing that great act of Charity to mens souls, reducing pertinacious sinners to repentance, should be so either wholly dilapidated, or piteously deformed, as to continue in the Church only un∣der one of these two notions, either of an empty piece of formality, or of an engine of State, and secular con∣trivance, (the true Christian use of shaming sinners into reformation, being well-nigh vanished out of Christen∣dome) might by an alien, or an heathens, much more by the pondering Christian, be conceived very strange and unreasonable, were it not a title clear, that we are faln into those times of which it was foretold by two Apo∣stles, that in these last dayes, there should come scof∣fers, walking after their own lusts: the Pride and contumacy (which have almost become the Genius) of this prophane polluted age, heightning men to an Atheistical fearlesse scoffing and scorning of all that pretends to work any cures, to lay any restraint on them, to rob them of any degree of that licentiousnesse, which is become the very religion, and doctrine of some (under the disguise of Christian Liberty) and (the Lord be merci∣ful
unto us) the practise of most rankes of Christian Pro∣fessors. This is the more sad & wounding a consideration, because it was antiently resolved, that Christianity where∣ever it entered in its purity, did plant all manner of exact and strict conscientious walking, all humility, meeknes, purity, peaceablenesse, justice, charity, sobriety, imagi∣nable; that wickednes and dissolution of manners was to be lookt on as the only heresie, (and therefore Simon Ma∣gus, the Nicolaitans, and Gnosticks, with other their neer∣est followers, that led the Van of hereticks in Epiphanius, are notoriously known to have been persons of the most vi∣tious, debauched, libidinous lives) and good life revered as the only orthodox professor▪ from whence (as nothing can be more consequent, so) I shall designe to inferre no farther conclusion, then onely this, that they which live ill in the profession of a most holy faith, (or farther then so, em∣brace and disseminate doctrines which tend to the dissolu∣tion of mens lives, making the good spirit of God the au∣thor or cherisher of any of their unchristian enterprizes) but especially they that discharge and banish out of the Church those means which might help to make the genera∣lity of Christians better, have the spirit of Antichrist work∣ing in them, even when they think themselves most zea∣lously busied in the beating down his kingdom. What those means are which might most effectually tend to the amen∣ding the lives of Christians, I shal need no farther to inter∣pose my judgement, then 1. by submitting it to Christs, who put the Keyes into the Apostles hands, on purpose as a means to exemplifie the end of his coming, , Mat. 18.11. to save that which was lost, not to usurpe au∣thority over the temporal power or sword, and like an apo∣plectick palsie-it , to invade, or smite, or
dissolve the sinews of civil government or peace, (tis a most sacred truth, that the spiritual hand hath no manner of ju∣risdiction, nor was ever believed to have for the first 1100 years, over Princes in their temporals; and the composition of the Anglican Church most perfectly, I had almost said, peculiarly acknowledges it) nor again to give an office of splendor or grandeur to the Clergie, an authority valuable onely from the ability of hurting others, or magnifying our selves over them, (which where it is pretended to, is indeed somewhat of the making of the heathen  and , that lorded it over Gods heritage, served them∣selves, either their purses, or their ambitions, or their pas∣sions out of the subjects under them) but as Christ saith, , to administer charitably to them in the matters of the highest alloy, the divinest, valuablest charity of not suffering sin upon the brother, Levit. 19. And 2. by minding my self and others, what the Apostles say of this power, that it was given them , to build up the Church of Christ by it in general, and in particular , to discipline them, whom no fairer means would work on, and teach them not to blaspheme in words or actions, to work them off from all lees of speculative, but especially of practical Atheisme. That these are the [not weak or carnal weapons of the Churches warfare, but mighty to bring down every strong hold] i. e. the most con∣tumacious, stout, importunate sinner, that doth but acknow∣ledge the truth of the Gospel, I shall anon have leisure to shew you. In the mean, the only design of this Praeloquium is, to awaken (if it be possible) the drousie world, and quic∣ken them so far from the mortified, putrified state of sinne and stupidity, as to be willing but to hearken to Christ him∣self when he comes but on a message of mercy to them, to re∣deem
them from iniquity,Tim. 2.14. and purifie to himself a pos∣sessed purchased people (or the people which he had pur∣chased for that one end, that they might be) zealous of good works. If this general proposal, (so pertinaciously de∣cried by our actions) might once be thought worth the hear∣ing, then sure Christs peculiar way and method of work∣ing this cure, would be thought of some use and advantage also; not lookt on as a meer engine, or artifice of ambiti∣ous men, as they cannot be blamed to conceive it, who think it doth any way entrench on those regalities which are placed by God, I most willingly professe to believe, far above the reach of any humane authority, solo Deo mi∣nores; or else suppose it a tyrannizing, or triumphing o∣ver the most inferiour offender, (he that can take any car∣nal or sensual pleasure in the exercise of those Keyes, in the using that sharp engine of surgery, or ever draw it but in meer necessary charity, (to edification, and not to destruction) is one of the  sonnes of blood, not fit to be admitted on a common Iury, much lesse advanced to be a spiritual Iudge) but as a most soveraigne medici∣nal Recipe, that which hath the inscription of Christ on it; not as of a Lord, but as a Iesus; not as a Law-giver, but as a , a Saviour and a Physitian of souls. And this peculiar way is the power of binding and loo∣sing, (the subject of this ensuing Discourse) which that it may be restored to its full vigor in this Church again, and (where ever sobriety shall advise) by addition of peni∣tential Canons be reformed or regulated, and being put into the primative Channel, may there be permited to shew forth it self in the native purity and brightnesse, and so being ordered according to Gods designation, obtain Gods blessing to make it effectual to its end, (the almost
only piece of reformation which this Church of England, as it hath been long, and as yet stands established by Law, may justly be thought to stand in need of) shall be the prayer of him, who professes to love and admire the beau∣ty of this Fabrick, even when it lyes polluted in its blood, and to wish no greater blessing to its dearest Friends, or, for whom he daily prayes, most implacable Enemies, then (that of old Batimaeus for himself, Lord that they may receive their sight) that the scales may fall off from all our eyes, that we may see and value what is so illustriously conspicuous, and stimable in it self, and not so blear our sight with the observation of the miscarriages in this kind as not to discern or value the designation; which, if the abuses, and excesses, and mistakes (that have crept in in that matter) were timely discerned, and removed, and that which is Christian and Apostolical revived, and restored in prudence and sobriety, might yet again shew the world the use of that Prelacy, which is now so zealously contemned, and recover at once the Order and the E∣stimation of it, set more Saints on their knees in pe∣titions for reducing and restoring, then ever imployed their hands toward the suppressing of it. I shall no longer need to detain the Reader in his entrance, having no use of any popular topick to court, or get advantage on his affections, but desiring only to treat with his reason (as that is elevated by Christ) his more noble masculine faculty, and 1. From the institution of Christ, to shew him the benefit that will accrew to that better part of him, by continuing within subjection to this government: and 2. By the peculi∣arity of the Fabrick of this excellent (yet establisht) Church of England, to challenge the most sharp-sighted opposition to shew where the due execution of this power according to
Law can provoke him to any thing, but charity and grati∣tude, both to the Saviour that designed, and to the Prelate that is his Angel in conveying this seasonable mercy to him; and more generally, where, or in what point of con∣junction, or motion, it can any way enterfere, or disturbe the civil interest. Which it would be hard to affirm of any other national Church in Europe, which hath any power either of repressing hereticks, or of reforming, or but of shaming notorious offenders, left in it. The Lord grant us unprejudicate honest hearts to judge uprightly of it, and every one of us, that , pretious ornament, 1 Pet. 3.4. (in stead of that , that bravery of hell in Macarius, that the proud is so well pleased with) I mean that meeknesse and quietnesse of spirit, to think some others may possibly discern betwixt good and evil, as well as our selves; and when that prayer is once heard, I shal then suppose that  that hath given The∣mistocles the  or preheminence over his fellows in the judgement of all posterity, (viz. that every man named him next after himself) will certainly end the present Church-controversie of these sad times. A moderate E∣piscopacy, with a standing assistant Presbytery, and Vid. Con. of present use con¦cern. change of Church-gover pag. 16. e∣very of those assigned his ful task and province of employ∣ment also) being the onely fourth, which as it will certain∣ly satisfie the desires of those whose pretensions are regular and moderate, (having by their study of learning & Chri∣stianity attained to some measure of that grace which A∣ristonymus of old recites among the benefits of Philoso∣phy, ) cra∣ving nothing more, and in many things lesse then the stan∣ding Laws of the Land allow them, so will it appear to be that which all other parties can best tolerate, and which
next himself, both Presbyterian, and Independent, and Erastian will make no question to chuse and prefer before any of the other pretenders. This, I conceive, is not by me magisterially dictated, but already demonstrated à posteriori, by the experience which the few last moneths have yeelded us, since the pretensions of the Prelacy grew weaker, and of the other three more flattering and hopeful one against the other. Where in e∣very turn of the trembling motion, that which hath feared most to be supplanted by either of the other pretenders, hath been content to acknowledge, that their cost and in∣dustry in the eradication of Prelacy, is not likely to be re∣warded in this life, but with sorer pressures, or more dan∣gerous loosnesse, then that which formerly they had mourn∣ed under. And for a demonstration à priori. I suppose it sufficient, if it be but calmely considered, that the several excellencies of the other three, by which they set them∣selves out amiable and desirable to admirer or followers, (the Presbyterians sharpnesse and severity against all ignorance and sin, the Independent zeale against mixt Congregations, and the Erastians care that the civil power may not be entrencht on, and that they that might receive benefit by the Word and Sacrament, should by no means be interdicted the use of them) may all and each of them be found (at least, as in mixture, refracted &) com∣pounded in this fourth: Which to shew particularly, would require a length beyond the bounds of this Preface, and on that civility to the Reader, it is now omitted, as also that I may not seem to have mistaken the point of the present controversie; which certainly among the quickest sharpest designers or managers of it, is not, what are the uses and excellencies of this power, but what the properest seat, who the fittest to be intrusted with it.
One thing yet more there is, which in this matter will deserve to be considered, viz. the Conscience of Our So∣vereigne, in order both to our common duty to Him, and to an honourable and durable peace, toward which how neer soever we conceive our selves advanced by provi∣dence, we cannot reasonably expect the sure blessing of God, to consummate and crown our hopes, if we doe not  in the Apostles phrase, i. e. use all the expedients, that any ambitious man would employ to the attaining his worldly designe, I mean, all that prudence will suggest, and sober Christian conscience not reject, to the making up a happy compliance with him; in a word, if we do not by all moderate lawfull means love and follow peace, and consider them who have the le∣gal power over us. O that wee would know, at least in this our day, the things belonging to our peace, before that fatal voice go out, But now are they hid from your eyes.
Of the Power of the Keyes: OR, Of Binding and Loosing. FOr the clear stating of this point, there is but one Method seasonable, (because but one asterisme that hath any powerful influence upon it) the conjunction of the severall passages in the New Testament about the do∣nation and exercise of this power. For in matters of Christs institution, which have no foundation in the Law of Nature, it must needs be improper for reason to interpose and assert, or define what that accounts most agreeable, (for that is to subject to our tribunal, not the acts of his justice, which God hath been willing to yeild us, Isa. 5.3. and Ezek. 18.25. and in them to appeal to our own reason, but the acts of his wisdome, (for such are all his institutions) which God will not allow us to judge, or dispute, Rom. 9.20.) any farther then by discourse to conclude from the context, and words of that institution, what is most agreeable to the importance of those words, and by way of advice to direct us to compare our conceipts with the doctrines of those, who were nearest to the times of that institution, and might probably know more of it (and be more instrumental to us for the deci∣ding any difficulty) then those that being farther removed, look on at that greater distance. And therefore, as in the businesse of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the surest course to compose the controversies, and satisfie the scruples of men in that point, were to reduce it to its principles, and to resolve by consent to assert no more in that point (as matter of faith at least) then
might be naturally and infallibly concluded from the places of Scripture concerning the institution, use, and nature of that Sa∣crament, or the antient primitive understanding of those places, and naturall deductions from them (for the reducing of which operation to practice,Pract. Cat. l. 6. an attempt hath been made in another place) so will it be the most probable towardly course, I con∣ceive, least subject to any dangerous mistake, to resolve and ob∣serve in this businesse. CAP. I. ANd then the first thing observeable will be, that the three onely places to be met with in the Gospel concern∣ing this institution (Matth. 16.19. Matth. 18.18. Joh. 20.23.) are no two of them fully parallel to one another, or coinci∣dent; I meane, no two of them narrations of the same one speech of Christ, but (as by the occasion and circumstances of time and place it will appear) each delivered by Christ at a seve∣rall time; the first Matth. 16.19. was (upon occasion of Peters confession) a promise of what should be conferred afterwards upon him by way of reward and encouragement [I will (not yet de presenti, I do; but de futuro, I will) give thee the Keyes, &c. and then , whatsoever thou shalt &c.] The second Matth. 18.18. was an exemplifying of that glorious truth ver. 11. that Christ came , to save that that was lost: upon the heeles of which bare assertion, followes first a Parable, ver. 12.13.14. (a speciall piece of Christs Logick and Rhetorick to prove popularly, and so to perswade) and then v. 15. the institution of a piece of discipline perpetually to continue in the Church of his plantation, as most eminently instrumentall to that designe, the reducing obstinate sinners to repentance. The consideration of which one thing, that these Keyes, when Christ was gone, were to continue imployed on that same great work, or designe, which brought Christ into the world, the saving of such as were lost, will be able to set a competent value on this Institution, and rescue it from the contempts and scornes, which the impious world is pleased to make its portion; very agreeable to that greater stra∣tagem
of Satan, who by complying with our wishes and our interests, easily prevailes with vitious men, to believe neither re∣surrection, nor judgement to come; and this, as it is noted by the Fathers, the , the only beloved doctrine of the effeminate and voluptuous. The third place Joh. 20.23. is apparently part of Christs speech to all his disciples (after his resurrection, and his having confirm'd them all but Thomas, in the truth of it, v. 20.) and was a kind of farewell to his Church, and an actuall inauguration, or consecration of them from disciples into Apostles, as  disciples, v. 20. and  sent, v. 21. put together do import, (and the  they that were with them, Luke 24.33. doth not contradict, for there is no mention of these words, of Binding and Loosing in that Gospel, and if there were, it would not follow that the power of binding was delivered to that mixt company, any more then the power from on high was promised to them v. 49. which surely be∣longed onely to the Apostles, as will appear by the words im∣mediately precedent, , being rightly interpre∣ted, [and be ye witnesses of these things] i. e. of his death and re∣surrection, which we know was peculiarly the office of the Apostles;) which being a solemne donation was set out by a speciall ceremony, viz. that of Christs breathing upon them, a significant one to expresse the , the eternall breath or Spirit of God, which he would suddenly poure on them, and for it . Theoph. in Joh. 20. The words [receive the holy Ghost▪] signifie, be you ready to receive him. prepares them by this , receive the holy Ghost (which were the words annext to that ceremony, the words of Consecration, the same that we now retain in the Or∣dination of a Priest) whose sins you do remit, (or , if you doe remit any mens sins) they are remitted to them, and if you do retain any, they are retained. From all which Three places thus compared, the first gene∣rall  result is this, that the power of binding and loosing is a so∣lemn priviledge or . Theoph. in Mat. 16. in the sense of  Joh. 1.12. for priv∣lege, or right, or power. Prerogative of the Church of Christ, thrice in∣sisted on by our Saviour. 1. By way of Prediction, that he would conferre it, Matth. 16. then secondly, by way of a more particular description of the manner, and direction for the end and use of it, Matth. 18. And thirdly, by a preparatory ind of instating them in this power, an initial investing them with this sacred ghostly au∣thority,
Joh. 20. (immediately before his final departure from the world) which seemeth to have been . Theo. in Joh. 20. The perfect gift of the holy Ghost was distributed to them in the Pentecost, a preparative only admini∣stred to them in that breath∣ing. throughly perfected and compleated, when after his ascension the holy Ghost did visibly descend upon those to whom these words were by Christ then delivered, [Receive the Holy Ghost, &c.] This formal compleat instating of this power (of binding and loosing) upon them, and not only the giving of those gifts of tongues, &c. being a main branch and effect of this descending, and their receiving of the Holy Ghost, according to that of Isa. 32. if you compare ver. 1. of the [King and Princes ruling in judgment, prophetically intimating Christ and his Apostles] with ver. 15. & 16. where the descent of the Spirit is mentioned as a preparative to the exercise of that judicative power. And so Ephes. 4. He gave gifts unto men, v. 8. and gave some Apostles, &c. v. 11. And this I conceive will direct us to the importance of those words, Luke 24.49. [I send the pro∣mise of my Father upon you] so as they may be parallel with this place, Joh. 20.23. receive the Holy Ghost. No doubt that promise of the Father was the Holy Ghost, Joh. 15.26. and the [I send upon you] (both as a verbum olenne, I send, i. e. I instate on you; and that in the present, I send, not in the future, I will send) all one with the [, receive him] and so the power from on high, in the end of the verse, clearly signifies that visible mission of the Holy Ghost, which they were to expect, as the means of compleating this donation: and so 'tis clear by comparing it with Act. 1.4. & 8. where the same phrase are used. And therefore Joh. 20.21. im∣mediately before the [Receive the Holy Ghost] he saith, As my Father sent me, so send I you; intimating that as at his mission to his office he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, Act. 10.38. viz. upon his Baptisme, Luk. 3.23. (whereupon 'tis said, that he by the Spirit cast out devils, Mat. 12.18. which is clearly symbolical, and parallel to his loosing, or remission of sinnes) so the Apostles at their mission, or entrance on their power, should be anointed also.
CAP. II. HAving proceeded thus far by way of generall precognition, that which is behind, will, I conceive, be most intelligible, if it be reduced to these few heads. 1. On whom this power was be∣stowed. 2. In what it consists. 3. To what use 'tis designed, and to what sort of men it belongs objectivè, or who are to be bound and loosed. 4. What is the reall effect of it, or what conjunction it hath with bind∣ing and loosing in Heaven. For the first, though to him that considereth the place of  Matth. 18. alone by it selfe (which is an obscure place) the mat∣ter be not so cleare to whom this power was given by Christ, and though thereupon some mistakes have arisen, and occasion of conceiting this power of binding, &c. to be instated by Christ on the whole aggregate of any particular Church, yet surely the mat∣ter will be sufficiently clear, if (as it is most reasonable) we first allow that obscure place leave to borrow light from the two other most evident ones (and not obscure the more evident by that:) and secondly (after we have brought that light to it) ob∣serve, what glimmerings of light we shall be able to discern (by that help) even in that obscure place it selfe, which will (as the weak light of the Moon, with that treasure of light, borrowed from the Sun, added to it) become by this meanes exceeding lightsome. For although these three places are not parallel one to the other, in respect of the times and occasions of delivering them, and other circumstances, yet there is no doubt, but they belong all to the same generall matter, the power of binding, &c. And that being (as it is apparent even by that of Matth. 18.18.) instated not on the whole world, or community of men, but deter∣minated to some peculiar subject, there is all reason to resolve that that subject, though diversly exprest, is yet the same in all those places, unlesse some evidence of Scripture or authentick testi∣mony of antient Church, or practise shall demonstrate the contra∣ry; which that it doth not, will (as far as concerns the Scripture, which deserves our first search) be thus cleared by considering the severall places. And first Matth. 16.19. which was occasioned thus; Christ
examining his disciples what opinion they had of him, is an∣swered by Simon, that he was the Christ, the Messias, the Sonne of the living God, vers. 16. upon which Christ pronounceth him a blessed person, as having received the supernatural gift of faith from God himselfe, which no humane means could have helpt him to, and upon this, changes his name from Simon Bar-Jona (the only name he had, vers. 17.) to Cephas in Syriack, that is  in Greek, or as Homer and other good Authors, and (which beares most affinitie with the dialect of this book) the Author of the second book of Mac. cap. 4.31. used it in the masculine , signifying a rock or stone, to Intimate that he should be (as a foundation or strong rocky stone in a building is a principall ingredient in the building, and a meanes of the future stability of it, Matth. 7.25. the storme and flouds and winds came upon it, and it fell not, because , it was founded on such a firme rocky stone) a principal part, call it foundation, or rocke, or pillar of that Church of Christians, which partly by this confession of his, here recorded to all posterity, and partly by his future teaching, he should be a meanes to erect for Christs ser∣vice: and then being so glorious an Instument of converting so many, Christ is pleased to give him the Keyes of this Kingdome; . Theophyl. in Mat. 16. authoritatively he gave him the keyes, as his Father had done the Revelation, , &c. as he goes on, a power of binding and loosing, &c. so , the pardoning and punishing of sinnes, in a word, is spirituall grace or power, or jurisdiction over these future Converts of his (as generally in the Apostles times, and after, he that converted any Country or chiefe City in his Apostleship, was setled as their Bishop or Governour in spirituall matters, and so continued all his life, unlesse having setled them, he thought good to commit that office, and power to some body else, that so he might be the more free to go and preach and convert more) though not as yet, because they were not by him as yet converted, yet by way of promise in diem to be performed, when time should serve; I will give thee the keyes, and whatsoever thou shalt bind, &c. the summe is, Peter was to be an Apostle, and to do wonders in converting whole Nations to Christ, and
among those whom he thus converted, Christ promises that he should have a Jurisdiction, a power to govern, and discipline, and censure, as there should be occasion in those Churches. This being thus promised to Peter, as a chiefe Apostle, and  Confessour of Christs, not exclusivè by way of exclusion, that none should have this power but he, but honorificè by way of honour mentioned first to him by the priviledge of , of being (as I conceive he was) the first that was call'd, but more pecu∣liarly as a reward of his notable confession, v. 16. is by Christ a little before his parting from the world, after his resurrection Joh. 20.23. actually instated both on him, and , &c. Theoph. in Matt. 16. p. 94. Though 'twere said only to Pe∣ter [I will give thee] yet 'twas given to all the Apostles: when? when he said, If you remit any mans sins, Joh. 21. the rest of the Apostles, who were to ioyne in the same office with him of begetting unto Christ, and educating those which were so begot∣ten, of converting and preserving, or governing, and in order to that end were to have their severall Provinces assigned them (, saith Chrys. every of them his distinct part) for Preaching first, as afterward for Jurisdiction, which I shall adventure to affirme not improbable to be the meaning of , to go to his own place Act. 1.25. applying it not to Judas, but to Matthias, or the , him that should be chosen, and so againe most probably of the , the part, or lot, or portion of Mini∣stery and Apostleship, in the beginning of the verse, (the former of them belonging to the office of preaching peculiarly, the latter to that of governing also) distributed to each, either by lot, or by joynt consent, and designement of that great , the Colledge of the Apostles; It being most proper and according to analogy, that the  those which had laboured and toyl'd in the word and doctrine, for the converting and beget∣ting men to Christ, should be also thought worthy of the , or , the elder brothers priviledge and pre∣rogative, to be rulers or masters of the family after the Fathers departure, and so be endued with a paternal power of chastisements (i. e. discipline) and government for the keeping of them in some compasse, within the terms of a peaceable, holy, ▪ Chrys. in Joh. 20. As a King that sends out rulers over Provinces, gives them power to cast in person, and to let out; so sending the Apostles he endues them with this power. truly-Christian
Congregation; and therefore after the ( Joh. 20.21. I send you) (the forme of words that made thm Apostles an∣swerable to the  nuntio's, messengers among the Jewes, and not farre unlike to the Proconsuls sent out, though on a quite distant arrant of secular power, among the Romans) immediate∣ly follows the , he breathed on them (proportionable to God's course of making a living soul, Gen. 2. v. 2. by breathing on him the breath of life) and said, Receive the Holy Ghost, If you remit any mens sinnes, they are remitted; if you retain, they are retained; which words were apparently delivered, (and in them this power) to as many as were breathed on, i. e. to as many as were . Theophyl. To all the Apostles sent by Christ, and indeed to no more, unlesse either first by way of Communication from them to their successours, or second∣ly by speciall immediate vocation from heaven, by the bath col, as the Hebrewes phrase is, the daughter of thunder, i. e. voice from heaven sent to consecrate them. Thus St Paul who was none of the twelve, yet speaking of the power of excommunicating, saith, it was given to him (to him not as a successour of the Apostles, but to him as one called immediately from heaven) by the Lord, or by Christ, 2 Cor. 13.10. In a word, it was by Christ immediately then given to the Apostles all and each of them, and to none else, till Matthias was received into the place of Judas, and St Paul was afterward extraordinarily designed, and called unto the same office, together with Barnabas, Act. 13.12. proportionably it may seem to what befell the twelve Patriarchs, Ephraim and Manasses being taken in, in Josephs stead that died, as these two in the place of James the brother of John, who was cut off, before he came to do that work to which he was sent, the preaching to all Nations. Those two places thus agreeing on the subjects of this power, or objects of this donation, 'tis already more then probable, that the third witnesse producible will agree with those two, or if it seem otherwise, sure 'twill not be thought reasonable, that these two shall be forced and violenced to consent to that, which is but an alien sense, by some Interpreters imposed upon that third. This third place I shall set down at large, because I acknow∣ledge there is some difficulty in it, Matt. 18.15. If thy brother shall
offend against thee, it seems the place belongs not (primarily, but onely paritate rationis, by analogie of reason) o all sins in the lati∣tude, but peculiarly, to trespasses or personal injuries done by one brother, one Christian to another; as besides the expresse words v. 15. (if thy brother trespasse against thee) is more clear by S. Peters question to the same purpose, v. 21. (How oft shall my brother trespasse against me, and I forgive him?) Go and reprove him,  i. e. either reprehend him for it, (as the word is used sometimes when 'tis joyned with , chasten or discipline, Heb. 12.5. Apoc. 3.19. or again, ,  Phavor. & , ib. & so Joh. 3.20. He that doth evil cometh not to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved,  [discovered] in our margent: and therefore 1 Cor. 14.24. when 'tis said of the unbeliever, that he is convinced of all, &c. 'tis added, v. 25. Thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest. so Ephes. 5.13. All things that are reproved, or discovered, are made manifest by the light; for whatsoever doth make manifest, is light. make him sensible of the wrong he hath done thee, or as it may be rendred, , & , & . Ph. make him a∣shamed of his fact) betwixt thee and him alone, (i. e. do thy best by private admonitions to bring him to a sense) If he heare thee (be thus wrought on) thou hast gain'd thy brother, gain'd him, first to thy self (gotten a friend in stead of an enemy:) and se∣condly to Christ, gained a Convert, a Proselyte to him, and this also a great acquisition to thee, to have had the honour of do∣ing that glorious thing, and of being capable of the reward of them, that convert any to righteousnesse. But if he heare thee not, if this first method of thy charity, and  discipline of this calmer making succeed not, another assay must be made, another artifice used, Take with thee ( farther, or over and above) one, or two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established, i. e. that the thing which thou laist to his charge, be so confirmed; according to that, Joh. 8.17. The testimony of two men is true, i. e. of sufficient authority in law (according to an Hebraisme, whereby  true, among the Greek translators signifieth  fit to be credited) that so either by the testimony of these as witnesses, he may no longer be able to deny the fact (as Heb. 6.16. an oath is said to be ▪ for establishing, or confirmation, in that it is  an end of affirming & denying. The thing so establisht () or ) by oath, cannot be denyed, or the parties denial will
longer stand him in stead) or by authority of these he may be induced (as the Judge is on the accused, Deut. 10.19. Heb. 10.28.) to give sentence on, to condemne himself; which if it may be ob∣tained, is the prime end of all these charitable artifices, to bring the injurious to a sight and shame, the best preparatives to refor∣mation; To which purpose is that of Tertullian, Apol. c. 39. Disciplinam praeceptorum inculcationibus densamus, We thicken the doctrine of precepts with waies of inculcating, i. e. presse them to re∣formation, whom our doctrine will not prevail on; where he mentions these three degrees, exhortationes, castigationes, censura; exhortations, and chastisements, and then censure. By what hath been said of this place, and in it by observing the method of the first and second admonition, you will by the way understand the meaning of that obscure verse in St Paul, 2 Cor. 13.1. This third time I come unto you, in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established, &c. It refers clearly to this usage of the second admonition. St Paul had written before, which was as it were the first single admonition, which v. 2. he cals ( I told you formerly;) but that prevailing not, at his third coming (which it seems was his second medling with this matter, , I foretell you the second time, ver. 2. he doth that which is answerable to the taking with him , one or two more, as appears by the addition of these very words which are in Matth. [in the mouth of two or three witnesses, &c.] which is, you see, the stile and character of the second admonition. This by the way. But if he hear not them (, if he be still refractary, either through non-conviction of the fact, or non-contrition for it) if this second admonition be not in event , 2 Cor. 13.10 to edification, or instruction, if it work not on him, then tell it to the Church, (I shall tell you what that is presently) and if he hear not the Church (continue his refractarinesse still) let him be unto thee as a heathen or a publican] which may possibly signifie, that in that case thou hast liberty to implead him, as thou wouldst do any heathen, in any foreign heathen Court, for that injury, that trespasse done to thee, which was at the first mentioned. For certainly though it were unlawful for a Christian, both here, and 1 Cor. 6.1. to implead a Christian for a personall trespasse be∣fore
a heathen tribunal, yet to deal thus with a heathen (or publican which was in account the same) was not either by Christ, or the Apostle counted unlawful (but only the , i. e. Christian with Christian, v. 6.) and consequently with a perverse refractary brother, whom you see Christ gives leave to account and deal with, as with a heathen or publican, it would not be unlaw∣ful also. But another interpretation I shall not doubt to propose to you, that by heathen and publican may be meant a desperate deplored sinner, such as the Rabbins call  i. e.  a sinner, as in the Gospel , a deplored sinner; Thus in Musar, If he will not then, (i. e. when two or three friends have been taken to be present at his admonition) be reconciled, go and leave him to himself; for such an one is implacable, and is called , of whom again 'tis there said, Si nec hoc modo quicquam profecerit, i. e. adhibitis amicis, if this second admonition doe no good, debet eum pudefacere coram multis, he must be ashamed before many, (which may be the meaning of Dic Ecclesiae, Tell it to the Church, as will anon appear by 1 Tim. 5.10.) and this inter∣pretation of that phrase will seem most probable, if you mark 1. That  &  publicans and sinners are frequently joyned together in the Gospel, as once Publicans and harlots, those  sinner-women. 2. That the heathen are call'd  sinners, as when 'tis said that Christ was by the Jews deli∣vered into the hands of sinners, i. e. Romans heathen, and in St Paul [not sinners of the Gentiles:] and then those words, [Let him be to thee a heathen and a publican] will sound no more, but [give him over as a desperate deplored sinner,] to whom those priviledges of a Christian (viz. of not being impleaded before an heathen tribunal) &c. do not belong, i. e. leave him to himself. This sure is the simplest rendring of the place; and then he that is such, that is capable of that denomination, is certainly fit, and ripe for the censures of the Church, which follow in the next verse, nd are appointed to go out against this refractory incorrigible. For so immediately it follows, Verily I say unto you: who are  those you? why 1. In the plurall number [.] Secondly▪  to you disciples (for so in the first verse  the disciples came to him with a question, and v. 3. he said, Verily I
say to you, i. e. to you disciples, and v. 12. , what do you think? asking the disciples, or appealing to their own judgement, and so still the same auditors continued, and his speech ad∣drest to them, I say unto you disciples) whatsoever you shall bind on earth, &c. After this, it follows v. 19. again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree upon earth, &c.] Many false illations are by men of different perswasions made from these words, which will all vanish, I conceive, and the truth be dis-involved, if the Reader will not despise this one observation which I shall offer to him; and it is this, that the method oft-times used in Scripture is, (when it hath proposed one or two severals to speak of) to resume the last first, and so orderly to go back, till it come to the first, to which you may accommodate that expression, and de∣scription of Gods method in other things. Many that are last, are first (the last in proposing, first in handling or resuming,) and the first last. If there be two things mentioned one after another, and any occasion to adde any thing on each of them, then I say the observation is, that the Scripture sometimes uses to resume the second first, and the first after that. And so if there be more then two. I said this was oft-times the manner and stile of Scripture, and to make good my observation, I am a little obliged to go out of my way, and present you with some examples. Three visible ones I shall offer you out of one book, the Epistle to the Hebrews. First, Chap. 5. where in the foure first verses there are three things propounded of an High Priest, 1. That he offer for sinne, and negotiate the cause of men with God. 2. That he be compassionate toward sinners, and to that end he himself infirme, and offer for himselfe as well as the people. 3. That he be cal∣led to this office by God himself. To these three the Author speaks particularly (and applies them to Christ) in the remainder of the Chapter, by way of , to the last, first, v. 5, 6. So likewise Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest, &c. To the se∣cond next, v. 7. & 8. who in the dayes of his flesh offered up prayers, and supplications, prayers, and the ceremonies of petitioners (for so . Phavor.  properly signifies, olive branches, the embleme that petitioners used to have in their hands) with strong crying and
teares to him that was able to deliver him out of death, (as when he commended his spirit into Gods hands, and cryed with a loud voice, Matth. 27.50. Mark 15.37. Luke 23.46. at the delivering these words) And . was heard, for, or by his piety, through the great ardency of that his prayer (exprest both by the loud voice in three Evangelists, and by the bodily worship, bowing of his head, in the fourth, Joh. 19.30.) or as it may possibly signifie, He was delive∣red from his fear, i. e. from that which he feared and prayed against. And though he were a Son, yet from the things he suffered, he learnt obedience, (whether to God thus designing him to those sufferings, and to that office of hearing prayers, or to men, by giving them audience in their prayers, as  signifies, so to heare, as to answer a request.) And then the Author returns to the first, last, v. 9. Being made perfect he became the author of eternall salvation, &c. Thus secondly, Heb. 9.1. the Author having named two things, the , the ordinances of worship, and the , he dilates first of the latter of them, v. 2, 3, 4, 5. For there was a tabernacle made, the first, &c. and after the second vaile, the tabernacle, &c. and over it the Cherubims of glory shadowing the  the (not mercy-seat, but) So  from  (which signi∣fies both to propitiate and to cover) is here to be rendred covering, and though the Greek be  from the former sense of the word, yet being to denote a part of the Ark in this place, it must be taken in the other sense of the Hebrew, and rendred, as if it had been , As 'tis Exod. 26.34. and 30.6. or as the Hebrew  if it had been retained, would have imported. covering of the arke, &c. all these belonging to the second particular, and then afterwards he comes back to the former, the ordinances of worship, v. 6. Now hen these things were thus ordain'd, the Priest went alwaies, &c. So thirdly, Chap. 10.33. the Author having mentioned two acts of suffering in them, the first personall in themselves, by re∣proaches, and afflictions, the second by way of sympathy with their Apostle, , partakers with, or relie∣vers of others that were so tossed; in the next verse he resumes both again, but first the latter, For ye had compassion of me in my bands, ver. 34. and then secondly the former, took joyfully the spoyling of your goods. This is farther evidenced by an example in this Gospel,
Matth. 5.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine, lest they tread them under their feet, and turning again, tear and rend thee. Where there is no doubt, but the for∣mer of these latter speeches belongs to the latter of the former, and the latter of the latter to the former of the former; per mo∣dum regressus, by way of going backward thus, Lest the swine tread the pearls under their feet, and Lest the dogs rend and tear thee. For it is not the manner of swine to fall upon men, and tear them, but of dogs it is; and it is not the manner of dogs to tread a thing under their feet, but of swine it is; So the 2 Cor. 2.15. St Paul having mentioned the  first, and then the , them that are saved, and them that perish; he goes back, ver. 16. First to the latter of them, to those a savour of death unto death, but to these a savour of life unto life; So in the Epistle to Philemon v. 5. hearing of thy love, and faith which thou hast towards the Lord Jesus, and towards all the Saints; 'tis apparent that the Lord Jesus is the object of the faith, and the [all Saints] the object of the love. So again Rom. 14. having set down two heads of discourse, that the strong should not set at nought the weake; nor secondly the weake judge or condemne the strong, v. 3. he resumes the latter first, v. 4. who art thou that judgest? and then v, 10. returns to the former, and thou why dost thou set at nought thy brother? So Matth. 23.25. Christ having mention'd first the outside of the cup or plat∣ter, then the inside, v. 26. he returns first to the cleansing of the inside, then the outside of it. So 1 Cor. 6.11. after the generall of washing, which contains the two subsequent, sanctifying and ju∣stifying; the mention of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is first na∣med, must belong to the latter of the two, that of justification; and the Spirit of our God to the former, that of sanctifying. Other examples of this observation I shall leave the Reader  to observe, when he reads the Scripture more ponderingly, and only proceed to help him to take notice of it in the point in hand. Three cases, it is apparent, are here mention'd orderly by our Saviour in the matter of trespasse, 1. Telling the trespasser of his fault between him and thee alone. Secondly, taking one or two with thee, to do it more convincingly, and with greater au∣thority. Thirdly, telling the Church of it. Having said some∣what to each of these, as he delivered them in the three first
verses, 15, 16, 17. he resumes the matter again, and speakes first to the last of them, v. 18. telling them, what, after the not succeeding of the third admonition, the Apostles and their suc∣cessors are to doe, when the cognizance of this injury and con∣tumacy comes before them (which, that in every case of tres∣passe, it alwayes should, I conceive, doth not hence appear to be necessary, save only in case that the Magistrate or secular tribu∣nal be heathen, because that supposition may perhaps be the ground of the sit tibi Ethnicus, on which the other is super∣structed) viz. excommunicate such a refractary till reformation, and then upon that, absolve him again, and [verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall bind on earth, &c.] From this view it is not irrational to conclude, that the  and the , the Church and the disciples (considered prophetically under the no∣tion of Apostles, i. e. Founders first, then Governours of Churches) may in that place signifie the same thing. So saith St Chrysost. in Mat. Hom. 6. , Tell it to the Church, i. e. to the Presidents and Rulers of it; and Theophyl. in Mat. 18. , &c. the Church for the Rulers of the Church; To which purpose it is observable, what Kimchi a Jewish learned Rabbi hath affirmed, that the Governours, and Rulers are oft meant by the word , or Congregati∣on; and so Philo, , the Congregation is the Priests. Agreeable to which is the inscription of the ancient Apostolical Epistle of Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians, , The Church of God that dwels at Rome, meaning, I conceive by the title [the Church] himself (who wrote the Epistle, and was chief there, or Bishop at that time) and the other Clergy with him; For so the other part of the inscription [, to the Church of God at Corinth] is after explained by him, in the words , to the Bishops, and Deacons; but if this will not be acknowledged, then by  I shal give you leave to understand any meeting or Congregation of pious men, either a consessus Presbyterorum, a Colledge of Presbyters, which were ordinarily assistant to the Bishop in the antient Church, or possibly the whole or any part of the people convened, whose authority or consent may work somewhat upon the offender, as St Paul conceives it were apt
to doe, when he commands Timothy, , to rebuke the offenders before all men, i. e. in the presence of the community of the people, 1 Tim. 5.20. and perhaps when he speaks of the , 2 Cor. 2.6. the rebuke that was by or under the many, though it be not certain whether that signifie the chastisement, (as our English reads) punishment and censure inflicted by the Presbyterie, or  under them, those assisting or joyning in the censure, , acts of Canoni∣cal severity, (which in case of sorrow and relenting of the of∣fender upon rebuke, or admonition before ejection out of the Church, were wont to be thought sufficient without excom∣munication, and after excommunication, as in this place to the Corinthians, if they were submitted to, were sufficient, though not presently to restore him to the communion, yet to make him capable of being prayed for by the Church, 1 Joh. 5.16. and to be delivered from the stripes of Satan, the diseases that the deli∣vering to Satan in the Apostles times brought upon them;) or whether, as the words may be rendred, it import the rebuke, or reproof, viz. the third admonition, (or the second given by the Bishop, which was equivalent to that) which was  under, or in the presence of many, viz. of the people or Congregation. The former of these senses seems more agreeable to the place to the Cor. the latter rather to belong to that in the 1 Tim. and so that which even now in Musar was coram multis, before many, and in S. Paul (if not  under many, yet)  in the presence of all men, Christ may here expresse by  the Church. This interpretation being admitted, or not rejected, it then follows commodiously, and reasonably in the text of the Evangelist, that after the matter is brought to them (i. e. to those many) or after this act of reproofe, or rebuke before them, & upon continued refractarinesse to these last admonitions, then the  (that sure is) the Apostles or Governors of the Church, the Pastors, (which cannot be in any reason excluded from un∣der the former word  Church, whatsoever it signifies) and those already promised this power, chap. 16. may, or shall bind, or excommunicate them. And that is the summe of the 18. v. in reference to the 17. and then v. 19. Again I say unto you, (or as a very In Coll. Magd. Oxon. antient Manuscript, and some printed copies read
it, , again verily I say unto you, that second ve∣rily noting the speech to be of a new matter) that if two of you shall agree upon the earth, or here below, (in reference to the se∣cond thing mention'd, v. 16. take with you one or two) concerning any thing, which they shall aske, it shall be done unto them of my Fa∣ther, &c. For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, which words are brought to give authority to the solemn admonitions of the second order (ad∣drest by the injur'd man, accompanied with one or two assistants or witnesses to inforce them) by telling them, that as the con∣sessus trium virorum, the assize of three men among the Jewes had some power; so shall any two or three Christians be considerable in this matter, having the priviledge of Gods presence, as in their prayers thus united, so also in this act of united admoni∣tion; for, first, God is to be thought to be in the midst of them, (as that fourth person added to the three children in the furnace, and the face of that fourth like the Son of God) to be present with them (as it is 1 Cor. 5.4.) in this his ordinance, in this piece of Discipline apointed by him; whereupon the  the refracta∣rinesse of the transgressor is become so much the greater in this case; and besides, secondly, if upon admonition, they shall be hearkned to, it will be in their power to pray for the penitent trespasser, (as James 5.16.) and that prayer of theirs joyned with the injured person is likely to be more effectuall then a single prayer, and so in both these respects a greater weight is set on the  the taking of one, or two with him. Thus having returned to the second of the three, in the second place, and dispatched that, the method would direct to go on to the first again in the third place; but in stead of that, St Peter it seems asks again about it, how long a man is to forgive private inju∣ries; and the answer in the following words supplieth the place of having proceeded to that, and serves for the conclusi∣on of the whole matter. The result then of this whole Chapter is this, that of the  three places of the Gospel, concerning the donation of the power of binding, and loosing, two of them at the first sight most clearly convince, this power to be given to the Apostles, as governors of the Church, (which will not be communicable to any, but either
to others that are  also, set apart to the office, im∣mediately by Christ, or to their successours, . Theoph. in Mat. 18.) and the third upon a thorough consideration doth the same also. For this we have the plain testimony of Theophylact on that place Mat. 18. , &c. The power of binding and loosing was given to all the Apostles; When? why, when he said, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, &c. i. e. in this place of St John: and again, [] . [and I will give] it signifies the future, i. e. the time after the resurrection, which is that in S. John also; and again on Mat. 16. , where the binding in S. Mat. and the remitting in S. John are put together, as belonging to the same matter: and it is confirm'd by no mean authority, that of S. Paul himself, of himself, 2 Cor. 13.10. where speaking of these censures, (noted there by  using excision, & , which is all one, and which, it seems, he as an Apostle was to use among them, he, not the Congregation;  I will not spare) he addeth , according to the power that Christ hath given me, (which sure was not peculiar to him, but common to the rest of the Apostles, which had it be∣fore him, and in a more ordinary way) and ver. 3. he distinctly calls it, Christ speaking in him, a high expression, making every such act of judicature in him, an act of Christ. CAP. III. THe only difficulty remaining in the point, will be, who are the Apostles successors in that power; and when the que∣stion is asked of that power, I must be understood of the power of governing the Church peculiarly (of which the power of the Keyes was, and is a principal branch) for it must again be remembred, that the Apostles are to be considered under a double notion: 1. As Planters, then as Governors of the Church. The title of  in its literall notation of Missus, sent, (Embassadour or Messenger) belongs peculiarly to the former of these, and so though it have some extraordinary privileges annext to it, ne∣cessary
to the work of planting, (as the gift of tongues, the po∣wer of working miracles) which ennobles it beyond the order of Governours in the Churches since their plantation, yet in the per∣sons of the Apostles, it was but a precedaneous power, prepara∣tory to that other of ruling, or governing, which no doubt is the reason that Chrysost. calls Ignatius the martyr, both  & , an Apostle and Bishop, and perhaps is the meaning of that saying of an Anonymus writer, in Bibl. num. 254. Photius, , That the Apostle Timothy was by St Paul ordained, and enthronized, or seated Bishop of the Metropolis of the Ephesians, i. e. that he that had helped to plant Churches, and so was an Apostle sent out to that purpose, was at length or∣dained Bishop to govern that of Ephesus being planted. Which di∣stinction being premised', the question will now more easily be satisfied, being proposed in these terms, [Who were the A∣postles successors in that power, which concerned the governing these Churches which they had planted] And 1. I answer, that it being a matter of fact, or story, later then that the Scripture can universally reach to it, cannot be fully satisfied, or answe∣red from thence, any further then the persons of Timothy or Titus, &c. and the severall Angels of the Churches in the Apoca∣lypse (who are acknowledged by all the Antients to be single per∣sons, that had power over all others in those Churches,) but will in the full latitude through the universal Church in those times, be made clear from the next evidences, that we have, viz. from the consent of the Greek and Latine Fathers, who generally re∣solve, that Bishops are those successors. This I shall not be so unreasonable as to attempt to prove at large through the writings of those Fathers, but content my self with one or two of the first of them. Of this number I conceive the testimony of Clemens Roma∣nus in his Epistle to the Corinth. (which hath been so often of late produced) might to any disinteressed person be allowed to have some force in it; where speaking of the Apostles, he saith,p. 57. that they foreseeing that there would be contention and emulation,  about the name, or (as  may denote, ) dignity of Bishops or Episcopacy,
(for I doubt not but that is the reading, and the sense there) they set down a list, or continuation of successors, (as when He∣sychius, (and out of him Varinus) renders , per∣haps it may be a false print, as there be many in the edition of that book, for , but howsoever the Analogy from thence will extend to this also, that as  signifies , so , will signifie , inheritance, or suc∣cession) that when any dyed such a certain person should succeed him. To which affirmation of Clemens, when I have added (that which all Ecclesiasticall Stories have made familiar to us) that there were preserved in several Churches such . Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. & successio∣nes Episcopo∣rum quibus A∣postolicam quae in unoquoque loco est, Eccle∣siam tradide∣runt, Ib. lib. 4. cap. 63. rols and catalogues of Bishops beginning from the Apostles in each See, I shall con∣ceive that that of Clemens was a pertinent testimony to this purpose; especially when the voice of antiquity is so clear, that , Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Clemens himself was one of those Bishops (an Adjutor of the Apostles in their life time, and after the departure of Linus, and Cletus, the onely one that retained the name of Bishop in Rome, all others being stiled Presbyters only) that Solus Clemens superstes, solus Episcopi nomen retinuit, tum quia inter adjutores Apostolorum solus ipse restabat, um quia jam invaluerat distinctio Episcopi, & Presbyteri, it a ut caeteris Eccle∣siae Romanae Presbyteris qui cum solo Clemente essent, nomen illud non fuerit tributum. Vedelius at Geneva hath at large acknowledged it, Exercit. in Ignat. Ignat. Epist. ad Mar. Cassabol. c. 3. After Clemens (an assertor at once, and example of this truth) I must next appeal to the Martyr Ignatius himself also Bishop of Antioch, that lived in the Apostles age, and is by the enemies of Episcopacy discerned to be so full a treasure of this truth (and of others in this kind) in so many notable passages, that there hath been no way (imaginable by those who resolve to have it otherwise) to resist the plainnesse of his authorities; but first by Ignatius  ubique in∣culcat Episco∣porum supra Presbyteros gradum emi∣nentem. Salmas. apar. ad l. de prim. Pap. p. 55. scoffes and defamations; Secondly, by Non esse Ignatium tam certò scio quàm me haec scribere. ib. p. 58. non esse Ignatium luce clarius est, &c. nemo mihi unquam persuadebit, &c. p. 56. confident reje∣cting of our whole volume of his Epistles, as spurious, and of a latter birth; and thirdly, by some very slender shewes of proof, that they are so. One special of this sort (which I see
lately made use of by Salmasius, and for which it Haec argu∣menta praestan∣tissimo Salmasio nuper probata gaudeo. Blon∣del. Apol. now appears he was beholding to a sight of Blundels book, not then printed) I shall mention to remove prejudices, and it is this; that in the Epistle to the Magnesians, he distinctly calls Episcopacy , which, saith that learned Grammarian, signifies it to be a new Order, and he attempts to prove it, because , saith he, cannot be referred to the age; and  signifies , agree∣able whereunto he interprets , 2 Tim. 2.22. to be novae, or novarum rerum cupiditates, new desires, or of new things. The dealing of this learned Grammarian in this businesse will  be sufficiently strange to him, that considers the whole matter. I shall only (in passing) give some few hints of judging it, by telling you first, that the generality of Copies read not , but  the youth of the Bishop (and no one of the Greek editions hath so much as mention'd any various lection in that place, till now the Florentine or Laurentian copy hath given us that variety.) Secondly, that the whole context of the Epistle drives to this of , as even this Author confesses, by saying, that he perswades them to receive their Bishop, and give him honour, quamvis aetate juniori, though he were younger then they, and again that he goes on to tell them, , that it becomes them not to be too familiar with the age of their Bishop. But then besides this, third∣ly, the vulgar, and even Geneva edition reading , back it with citation of places of Scripture pertinent only to that sense, as that Wisdome is not alwayes with the hoary hair, &c. Fourthly, that other reading is not avowed by, or cited from any Greek manuscript, but onely that in the Laurentiana Bibliotheca, and the old Latine, made use of by the most Reverend Primate of Armach, which is directly translated out of it, and so doth not at all adde to the authority. But then fifthly, if that reading of  should be acknowledged, yet would it con∣clude nothing against the Order of Bishops in those first times. For 1. what if it were a new Order in Ignatius his time? that were pretty antient, Ignatius living with the Apostles; for that it was written by some body else above 200. years after Christ, wil want some other probation. Secondly, there is no necessity
that  must signifie a new order, for although, as he saith,  doth not signifie age, nor  young, but may be interpreted  new, &c. yet we are not bound to accept that interpretation of it, when the Context of the Epistle belongs to another matter, and when another interpretation of this phrase may be given, which (if that reading were acknowled∣ged) wil reconcile all difficulties; For why may not  signi∣fie ordination? and  that, that belongs to a , or a young man, and so it shall be the Ordination of a young man, or a young mans being Bishop, which might have been apt to pro∣voke contempt in inferiors, if that good Martyr had not forti∣fied them against that temptation. And lastly for the interpre∣tation of that place of S. Paul to Timothy, it is so new, and so ir∣rationally preferred before the ordinary one, that one may justly conclude, 'twas prejudice, and willingnesse to find an ex∣ample for his novelty, that made him think of this; for why should not the lusts (there appointed to be avoided) be youthfull lusts, or such as young men are subject to? why new lusts; or de∣sires of new things? were not the old ordinary lusts (so frequent among young men) fit enough to be avoided? might any other be enjoyed, so they were not new? I am sorry I have insisted so long on so weak an objection, and yet it is the best that that learned man (so much looked on, and believed in this matter by those who desire change) hath produced, on which to build al his confidence, that those Epistles are not Ignatius's: And 'tis a little strange that another learned man Grot. discuss.  p. 400. And. Rivet should speak of Episcopacy as of a novell order, and adde [sive  ut lo∣quitur Ignatius ] making Ignatius to say this, which if he doth, then is not only his Illustriss. Salmatius deceived, but also Episcopacy must be acknowledged in Ignatius's time, in which if it were acknowledged to be novel, it will still be antient e∣nough; and so 'tis indeed by that Author confest (perhaps by incogitancy) in the next page, when he acknowledges, that the custome of Presbyters joyning with the Bishop in imposition of hands on a Presbyter (which sure is to suppose, not to deny the office of Bishops) ex veteris aevi reliquiis mansit, and specifies what age he means, by [juxta illud Apostoli per impositionem manuum Pres∣byterii] wherein yet it had been more ingenuous to have
rendred  cum, and not have chang'd it into per, quite con∣trary to the text; but this by the way. As for that other argu∣ment added by Salmasius, that in that Epistle to the Magnesians there is mention of the word  (as when he saith that Christ was not, ) by which he concludes that Epistle writen after Valentinus, whose Idiom that was; if the argumemt were concluding, (as Annot. p. 277. Is. Vossius in his late Edition hath sufficently proved it is not) it cannot sure be in force against us, who find no such thing in our former Greek Copies; or, if we did, could readily acknowledge any such passage to be supposititious, and those few words taken into the text out of the margent, without casting away the whole volume of Epistles in that fit of jealousie, or rage; if I could discerne in that wri∣ter any other shw of argument against that general opinion, which the Christian world hath had of these Epistles, I should proceed to the weighing of it. But now upon the Edition of Blondels book (out of which Salmasius only brought us some gleanings) we find a great deale of paines taken to cast off those Epistles; and it is very observable first, that he that hath taken in all the antient Church-writers into his catalogue (even Her∣mas himselfe, without any note or character of apocryphal set upon him) and out of each of them laboured (though very im∣prosperously) to gather some honey to his hive, some word or other, that might look like an accordance with that opinion which he asserts out of St Hierome, and, it seemes, had skill enough to make even Tertullian, Irenaeus, and Cyprian, (and ma∣ny others that have innumerable manifest places against the  or equality of Bishops and Presbyters) instrumental to his designe, was not able to find one sentence in Ignatius, which might be perswaded to be usefull to him, and therefore hath ex∣prest that severity on him, that he hath not thought reasonable on any other, even those which all antiquity hath rejected; So partial and unequal is the mind of man, when that  (that I say no worse) hath the ruling of our counsels. The exceptions which this learned man hath made against Ig∣natius being the author of those Epistles, are 1. Scriptionis genus affectatum, an affected kind of writing, pompous Epithets (which saith he, could not agree with an Apostle, panting in the chaines
of Martyrs) such as , &c. , and among them ] the very na∣ming of which, I suppose, doth shew the frivolousnesse of the charge, and weaknesse of the inference from it; for sure an Authour may use compounded words, (yea and words of his own making, as, I suppose, St Paul's  is acknow∣ledged to be, and yet many of these recited from those Epistles are not) without the crime of affectation, as well as St Paul might his , and the like: and though a holy Martyr in his chains may not be allowed the vanity of affectation as that hunts for glory from men, yet sure he may be allowed to have elevated affections, and by the command of them, to use expressions which are not vulgar & ordinary. The second is his barbarous words, , which indeed are Latine words made Greek, but so there are many more in the New Testament, in stead of those four charged on Ignatius as barbarismes, these fifteen which are ready at hand to me, (I will not take the pains to seek for others) , and many as Latinizing (i. e. barbarous) phrases, , and the like. And 'tis a little strange how this learned man hath minced this matter, confes∣sing indeed that there is  in the Gospel (naming only one of so great a number) and  in Hegesippus: and for the excuse of that one word in Hegesippus,Euseb. l. 3. cap. 27. adding that he was at Rome from the year 150 to 170. whereas this liberty might be allowed either Ignatius, or Hegesippus, without having been so long at Rome, as wel as the Writers of the New Testament, which have three times more of such words then he cites out of both of them. The third is, severall passages, quae incommodè dicta videri possunt, which may seem incommodiously spoken, (and if it be but [seem,] and that but [may seem,] and at last but [incommodiously spoken,] sure this charge will not wound deep) & comparationes non exactae ad amussim, comparisons not drawn by the rule exactly, (and truly the Martyr that was not to be permitted to have the vanity to affect, might as well be thought not to have
the leasure to take the line and the plummet, and delineate every expression so exactly; But what are the miscarriages, and defects in this kinde? why, that he calls the Spirit  a cord, and Faith  the Leader, whence, saith he, in Ignatius's esteem, Fidei potior quàm Spiritus functio, Faith hath a nobler office then the Spirit. But why may not I more truly say, that the advantage in that comparison is given to the Spirit, because that is said to draw, when Faith doth lead only? 'Tis certainly clear that his anger was very causlesse, who could quarrell at that do∣ctrine, which is in effect no more then this, That the Word of God apprehended by Faith doth lead us our way to heaven, and the Spirit of God is the cord to draw us thither. 2. That he calls his bands , spiri∣tuall jewels, in which he wishes he might rise, whereas, saith Blondel, there is nothing properly spirituall in the bands which wicked men put on the body of a martyr, and no hope that he should rise in those bands. But sure his sufferings may be called his bands, and those be matter of joy, and  to his Spirit, more then all the Gemmes to the most vain glorious worldling, and this be very commodiously exprest by those words, and then sure he might wish, (though not hope) (and  is no more) to have this matter of joy continued to him, and so that he might rise with them. 3. That he uses  and  so oft; What a cru∣elty upon a patient Martyr is this, not to give him leave to use such frequent innocent words as these frequently, as well as St Paul is allowed the very same, &  and , &c. these are certainly streined exceptions, the learned man was at great leasure to quarel, when this provocation was accepted. 4. That when Baptisme is called  weapons, he calls Faith  as an hlmet; love,  as a spear; patience,  as a compleat armour. For Quid enim Fides, &c. con∣erunt jam per Baptismum ar∣mato? Si Chri∣stiani  Patientia est, quid novi jam accedit ex Fide galealo? what, saith he, doth faith and love, &c. confer to him that is already armed by baptisme? and if patience be the Christians compleat armour, what new advantage hath he by having a helmet from faith? but why may not Baptisme be called weapons in the plurall, and every of those graces profest and vowed in baptisme, have their severall uses in the after life? and sure the armour of baptisme is not so perfectly of proof, but that there is need of the exercise of every one of those Christian
virtues to hold out against the impressions of Satan, which are like to be so oft repeated; and if faith do not defend the head, and charity the heart, and patience and perseverance every part of the body, i. e. every action of the future life, that subtle enemy may chance to wound us mortally. As for the new advantage of faith to him that hath the compleat armour of patience, the Author of that Epistle saith no such thing, but on the other side first requires the helmet of faith, and then the  of patience, that sure is the arming of all parts, which were not before armed, and that may go for an addition, as perseverance is to sanctity, and as our Saviour saith of his believers, that he that endureth to the end shall be saved. 5. That 'tis not likely that presently after Ignatius comming into Asia, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons should be ordained ejus rogatu, at his intreaty, qui ad Antiochinos Asinorum gratulatorias Epistòlas deferrent, who should carry the gratulatory Epistles of the Asians to the Christians of Antioch. I shall only say to this, 1. That they were ordained to some other end beside this, yet might perform that task also, and that very solemnly. 2. That a probable argument, or a conceived improbability against a narration of a matter of fact (which re∣lies not upon a confluence of all probabilities, but only on the authority of the Relatour) is of all other the most unconvin∣cing; there was nothing ever done 1600 years ago, but a good phansie will observe some improbability in it, and the matter of fact being still but one, when the possibilities which never did come to passe, are infinite, some one of those possibilities may perhaps become at a distance, to him that knows nothing of the fact (but would perswade others that 'twas never done) tolerably probable also. 3. That he bids follow the Bishop as Christ did his Father; and the Presbytery, ut Apostolos, as the A∣postles, and saith that he that doth any thing clancularly without the Bishops knowledge, is to be thought  to serve the Devil: whereupon, saith he, An Episcopos ullos Prerbyterorum comparatione Dominos, imo Deos à Christi martyre habitos credere par est? Is it fit to believe that any Bishops in comparison to Presbyters should be counted Lords, yea Gods by that Martyr of Christ? But sure this is to pervert and torment the sense of that Martyr; For to bid follow Bishops as Christ did his Father, is far enough from making Lords or Gods
of them: nay if the comparison were bound to hold that way, it were more proper to prove the , or equality of Bishops and Presbyters, for sure Christ was equall with his Father: and 'tis observable that in the place of Polycarp set down by this learned man, p. 15. when obedience is required to Presbyters and Deacons as to God and Christ, he finds no fault with it, though that be the very thing actually said by Polycarp of Presbyters and Deacons, that here he unjustly first imposes on, then accuses in Ignatius's words of Bishops, which yet are, onely for the man∣ner of performing the obedience due to Bishops, as Christ obeyed his Father, and cannot be extended to any equalizing the Bishop to God, or the least appearance of doing so. 'Twere too long to go thorow, and render formal answers to the rest of the heap of exceptions, which are every one single so slight, and of no value (and consequently the totall of them will not a∣mount any higher, it being not in the power of 1000 probables to become one demonstration, or to be equipollent to one, much lesse of a few slight improbables) that 'tis clear the number of the exceptions was the thing depended on, and not the weight of them: Witnesse these four more, that shut up the rear; 1. That he saith that all pious men are changed  into a new lea∣ven, which he thinks inconvenient, when St Paul calls the Godly  unleavened, whereas Christ being by Ignatius in the next words expressed to be that  new leaven; there is then nothing fit to be quarrel'd in it, unlesse to grow in grace, and the practise of all Christian duties (which is the meaning of that expression) being an inconvenient advise. 2. That he bids fly to the Apostles , as to the Presbytery of the Church, whereon having resolved that by the Apostles he must mean the Apostles writings, (because in the ninth of Trajan then past all the Apostles were dead) he concludes that the Author of that saying makes no more of the Apostles writings, then of the Congregations of men subject to error. Where in all sober reason and equality, if the Apostles signifie the Apostles writings, then the  need not signifie any other latter Presbytery, but those Apostles themselve, who when they wrote those writings, were the Christian Sanhedin, or Presbytery of the Church, which was to decide all their controversies in Religion.
3. That writing to Polycarp, tanquam ad plebeum nescio quem, as unto an ordinary person, he saith, , observe your Bishop: as if forsooth the Epistle written to Polycarp might not be written to the Church under him also, to whom 'tis clear that plural precept [] must belong, and not to any one man, though he were never such a plebeian. 4. That he saith he will flatter, nay, if they will not, force the wild beasts to kill him, which saith he is like the desperabunda saeculi mancipia, the most desperate slaves among the heathen. As if these fervent expres∣sions of desire to suffer for Christ were thus to be deformed, and charged against a pious man. After all this unprovoked severity, one act of grace and mercy these Epistles are vouchsafed from this Authour, viz. that he contains himself from making use of one passage which suppositionis earum argumentum videri possit, might seem an argument of the supposititiousnesse of them; (and yet no greater an argument then that [multa quae incommodè dicta vider possunt] made up a great number of arguments even now) the passage is, that he disputed profestly against the  those that affirm'd Christs, humanity to have been but an appearance, no reality; for saith he, whether you make Cassan with Baronius, or Satur∣ninus, Basilides, and Valentinus the antesignanos Docetarum, the prin∣cipal Authors of that heresie, these being under Adrian and Anto∣ninus Pius, will appear to be after Ignatius: having gone thus far, he comes off again, with a Volens hoc argumento abstineo, he wil∣lingly abstains from using this argument; because saith he, Simon Magus was before Ignatius, and he, saith Irenaeus, taught this do∣ctrine of Christs appearing only, not being a true man; and that Cassan, &c. were call'd the chief of them, must signifie, not that they were the first broachers, but in their times the chief maintainers and abetters of that heresie. This mercy, I confesse, was but seasonable, and had much of Justice in it, and shews that that Author was able to have answered his other arguments, if he had so pleased, particularly that which is made use of so confidently both by him and Salmasius of , the Valentian dialect, which is by Isaacus Vossius satisfied with this very answer which here Blondel gives to the use of the word , viz. that Valentinus was not the first that said  ortion, but that 'tis agreed on by the Antients, that he was not the founder of a new, but reviver of
an old opinin , saith Irenaeus, and other Fathers to the same pur∣pose as Isaacus Vossius hath collected their affirmation sin his Annot. on the place. Having gone thus far in rejecting these Epistles, he is at last at leasure to remember and acknowledge, Plenom illis ipsis, quas confictas putamus Epistolis, fidem habere Patres, that the Fathers (indefinitely, if not universally, and it seems he had no one to produce to the contrary, if he had, he would certainly have produced it, and with reason have depended on it more, then all these other Topicks) afforded a full plenary belief to these very Epistles, which the two Champions of the age Salma∣sius and he think to be supposititious, [putamus] is but a poor word, Salmasius could speak bigger on weaker or fewer arguments, [tam certò scio, quam me haec scribere.] To this authority of the Fathers against his opinion, his answer is short, but hath much weight and asperity in it (which they that have as strong an appetite to lay the Presbyterians flat, as the Presbyterians have ex∣prest to destroy the Bishops, they that have the same exceptions against all distinction, or discrimination of Lay and Clergy, as Blondel and Salmasius have against the impariety and inequality of Bishops and Presbyters, will, when they can hope to be heard, be ready enough to make use of, and must not be denied to have urged an argument ad homines unaswerable, whensoever they shall please to make use of it) and 'tis but this, Quid tum? What then? the authority of the Fathers in a matter of fact (as that Ignatius wrote these Epistles) cast off without any ceremo∣ny, or difficulty in two syllables. And the reason for so doing, which is added will help the matter but little; Quàm multa minimè suspicaces ac imparatos & fefellerunt semper, & quotidie fallunt? How many things have alwayes deceived, and daily do deceive men that are not suspicious, nor upon their guard? And if all the Fathers of the Church, beginning from those that were nearest Ignatius's time, must be involved in the number of these incautious, cheatable men, I shall be afraid to mention the con∣sequences, that will too readily be deducible from hence. I shal only say; May not this liberty, or licence rather, be soon ex∣tended very inordinately to the invasion of the sacred Canon of Scripture? Nay, when the same current, and consent of Fa∣thers,
which delivers down all the books which make up our Canon of Scripture, for Canonicall, and Theopneust, shall be found at the same time to deliver down, and make use of these Epistles of Ignatius, onely with the distinction of Apocryphal, (and mean by that, not supposititious books, or books which are under suspition that they are not their off-spring, whom they call Father, but only books of inferior authority, as Apocryphal is opposed , to the books of divine Scripture, & legi Domini, to the Law or word of God, &  to those that are put in the Canon, and in a word, , as you may see in the end of Nicephorus's Chronography, and in others; inter scripta novi Testamenti novi apocrypha, numbred among the apocryphal books, not of Ignatius, but of the New Testament, and appointed to be read by pious men, though not allowed that same authority and dignity, in which the books of Sacred Scripture have been justly estated) when, I say, the same hands of the antient Church shall deliver both the Epistles of St Peter for Divine Scripture, and these Epistles of Ignatius for the Epistles of Ignatius, though not for Divine Scripture, who can say that Wal. Messalin. Salmasius when he had thus confidently thrown off these Epistles from being written by Ignatius, did not consequently, and agreeably to his  in throwing off one of St Peters Epistles also? And who can think it reasonable that our wa∣rinesse and censoriousnes shall enable us at 1500 years distance to judge more truly of a matter of fact, (which none but they that are near, be they never so wary, and suspicious, can discern any thing of) then they that lived in those times which were nearest to the scene of action? Nay, how much more rational is that of the same Salmasius? who in the controversie about the parts of the Crosse, i. e. when he conceiv'd antiquity to be favourable to that opinion which he defended, hath made this argumentative against his adversaries, An credibile est Gregorium qui vixit tanto tempore postquam crucis supplicio nemo amplius afficebatur, certiorem esse testem de habitu crucis totius, &c. quàm eos authores qui scripsere cùm adhuc passim in usu esset commu∣nissimo nocentum crucifixio? Is it credible, that he that lived so long after the use of that kind of death was left off, should be a surer witnesse of any thing that belongs to it, then those Authors that wrote when it
was in use? De Cruce, p. 255. And again, if Blondel may say with∣out proof, that the Fathers were incautious in general, and thence conclude, that they were actually deceived in this par∣ticular; Why may not I as reasonably affirm (having given my reasons, when he hath not) that Blondel is too censorious, and partial, and willing to bring all to the cause he hath espoused, and thence conclude (knowing how contrary these Epistles are to his interests) that he hath actually exprest his passion, and in∣justice in this causlesse censure of these Epistles? I have done with this learned mans observations in this matter, and when I shall hear of any other argument which can seem of force against these Epistles, I shall be glad to consider it, professing my self to conceive, that as long as that one Author stands in the Church in his just value, the cause of Prelacy and Hierarchy can∣not want supports, every page almost of those Epistles being sufficient (which the adversaries acknowledge in saying he doth  in season and out of season, at all turns assert Episcopacy) to interpret the obscurer vestigia in the New Testa∣ment, and to assure us what was the practise and doctrine of the Apostles and Primitive Churches in that point; and that is the reason I have insisted so long on a thing which may seem so extrinsecall to my first undertaking, and shall not think my self out of my way, if I be content to return to this contro∣versie again (as having such an immediate influence on the cause in hand) whensoever I shall be call'd to it; In the mean, I shall content my self with this view of that matter; and for the present, as I cannot but conceive it rashnesse to cast an Epistle of St Peter upon a bare affirmation in a Parenthesis (quae sola planè genuina est) so will it be in a lower degree, but in like manner, to deal with a most antient Apostolical-spirited volume, upon such unproved censures as these; and it is observable, that the first writer that ever undertook to be thus severe a∣gainst that whole volume of Epistles, did with as much confi∣dence, and as little pretention to argument, cast off one of the books of Canonical Scripture. This I thought not amisse here to insert, to vindicate the writings of that antient Martyr, though it may be taken for a parergon in this place. Supposing then this writer to stand in the same repute in
the Church of God, in which he did, before he was observed to be unreconcileable with the designs of the new Reformers, I shall proceed to make use of his testimony. He commands obe∣dience to be paid to Bishops , as to the Apostles; to the Presbyters as to the Seventy, to the Deacons, as to the Deacons in the Acts. The passage is known, and although in another place, he makes the Presbyters parallel to the Apostles, and the Bishops to Christ, yet these places are easily reconciled, it being clear, that that latter place considers the Apostles at the time, when Christ was here on earth, at which time they were in∣deed but a second rank (and in that respect it is that Origen saith, Tr. in Mat. 24. Propriè Episcopus Dominus Jesus est, Presbyteri Apostoli, Christ is properly the Bishop, and the Apostles Presbyters) but the former place considering that after Christs departure, is that which more properly belongs to this matter; this power (though promised before) being not yet instated on them, till after his resurrection, immediately before his leaving of this world (or indeed till the coming of the Holy Ghost) at which time they were left the Governors of the Church, as Christ had been before, and the Bishops, their successors ever since. To which purpose St Cyprian, Ep. 65. Apostolos, i. e. Episcopos & Praepositos Do∣minus elegit, the Lord chose Apostles, i. e. Bishops and Governors. So Judas's Apostolical function is called  Bishoprick Act. 1.29 so Theodoret thinks Epaphroditus was Bishop of the Philipians, because he is called  Apostle, and on 1 Tim. 3. saith thus, , those that are now call'd Bishops, they then call'd Apostles, so Titus, saith he, and so Apollos, and so (saith Remig. on 1 Cor. 4.) Sosthenes also. Thus St Hilary frequently calls St Paul Episcopum, Bishop. And Hila∣rius Sardus in Eph. Apostoli Episcopi sunt, the Apostles are Bishops. So the Scriptor qu. in vet. & nov. Test. qu. 27. Nemo ignorat Epi∣scopos Servatorem Ecclesis instituisse, ipse enim priusquàm in coelos ascenderet, imponens manum Apostolis, ordinavit eos Episcopos. No man is ignorant that our Saviour instituted Bishops over the Churches. For he himself before he ascended to heaven, laying his hand on the Apostles ordained them Bishops. So saith Rabanus Maur. in 1 Tim. 4.14. of the Apostles times, Episcopi provincias integras rege∣bant, Apostolorum nomine nun cupati. The Bishops were call'd Apostles.
So doth Blondel himself confesse not only out of Gildas, that St Matthew Episcopatum sortitus est, was Bishop, but acknow∣ledges it of St James the brother of the Lord, as the voice of all antiquity, that he was Bishop of Jerusalem. Jacobum Hierosol. Ec∣clesiae Episcopatum constanter asserunt veteres omnes. Apol. pro Sent. Hieron. p. 50. And if it be said, that he meant by the word Episcopus Bishop, no more then a Presbyter, one of many; I shall only then put him or the Reader in minde, what the same Blondel in his censure of the Pontif. Epistles (when they say he was not so severe against Bishops) hath put together of St James. Hierosol. Ecclesiam rexisse statuunt veteres, & à Christo Episcopale munus accepisse, ait Hegesippus apud Hieron. in Cat. Epiphan. haer. 78. Hieron. in Gal. c. 1. Greg. Turon. l. 1. c. 17. Nic. Methon. de pane con∣secr. à Christo & Apostolis. Eus. l. f. 7. c. 19. Constit. l. 8. c. 35. Ab Apo∣stolis, Constit. l. 7. c. 48. l. 8. c. ult. Clem. Alexand. apud The same au∣thor in his Chron. p. 43. af∣firms that he was by the A∣postles ordain'd Bishop of Jeru∣salem, the nine∣teenth year of Tiberius, i. e. the very next year in his ac∣count after the death of Christ. Euseb. l. 2. c. 1. Athanas. in Synop. Euseb. l. 2. c. 2. Hieronymus de Script. Eccl. Beda de 6. aetat. & Martyrl. ad Cal. Maii. & Chron. Gr. anon. Scriptor. , acknowledging all, that as Bishop he governed that Church, as a single person, sae in the see or throne; all the difference between the Antients being, whether by Christ or the Apostles, or both, or by St Peter only, he was ordained Bishop. Thus, saith S. Hom. 86. in Joh. Chrys. did Christ invest the Apostles with this  power of retaining and remitting sins, , &c. as when a King sends Governors over Provinces, he gives them power of imprisoning and releasing, intimating the  or Rulers of the Church to be the men that are here re∣presented by the Apostles, and so in L. 3. ▪ speaking of the weighty office of Bishops (to excuse himself who had fled from it) he principally insists on the power which is intrusted to them, and in that respect applies to them the style of the faithfull and wise Servant, whom God makes Ruler over his house∣hold. So Theophylact on Matth. 18. , They that after the manner of St Peter, are vouchsafed the honor of being Bishops, have the power of binding and loosing. So again appears by the forecited Testimonies of the  Presidents in St Chrys. and the  Praefects of the Church, in Theophylact. And so
in the name and sense of the Greek Church, Gabriel of Philadelphia,  in his second difference betwixt the Greek and the Ro∣man Church▪ , The chief Priests, i. e. Bishops, are the successors of the Apostles, and in plain words, , So that 'tis manifest, that the Apostles were Bishops, and applies to them that of the Psalmist, Psal. 45.16. of Gods constituting them rulers over all the earth, and names the severall Churches wherein the several Apostles ordain'd Bishops, St John in Asia, St Andrew in Achaia, St Thomas in India, &c. Thus also among the Latines St Jerome who was not very  favourable to Bishops, saith expresly that they were the Apostles successors, Episcopi omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. Ep. 83. ad Evagrium. So St Ambrose, Claves illas regni coelorum in beato Petro Apostolo cuncti suscepimus sacerdotes. All we, that are stiled Sacerdotes, in the blessed Apostle St Peter received the Keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven. And what Sacerdos signifies among the Writers of that time, and particularly in St Ambrose, the obser∣vation of any diligent Reader will instruct him; viz. that which the [suscepimus] applyed to St Ambrose's person, will inforce, he being Bishop of Millain at that time, (and this is a∣greeable even to the heathens acception of the phrase, who use Sacerdos and Pontifex promiscuously; witnesse Servius in Aen. 3.) So de dignitate Sacerd. c. 2. he shews out of Scripture, that the sheep are delivered Sacerdotibus, I shall render it to Bishops, be∣cause it follows, and so must be subject to those Rulers. So in St Chrys. in the fore-cited . l. 2. The word  (which together with Pastor in Latine, is ordinarily the Bishops Title, in order to the Shepherds office of ruling, and governing, as well as feeding the flock) and , Sacerdos, are promiscuously taken, and the latter by the Interpreter there rendred Episcopus, Bishop. And to the same purpose most clearly St Cyprian, Ep. 12.  speaking of the Lapsi, those who having fallen were under the censures of the Church, and how the Presbyters had presumed to reconcile, or absolve them, he concludes that they did not (Reservare Episcopo honorem Sacerdotii sui, & Cathedrae (reserve
to the Bishop the honour of his Priesthood, and chaire, shewing the in∣different use of those words Episcopus and Sacerdos, at that time and that in opposition to Presbytery, appropriating to the one the Power of the Keyes, exclusively to the other. This he had set down more plainly before Epist. 10. shewing and aggrava∣ting the greatnesse of the fault of those Presbyters that had ta∣ken upon them to use the Keyes▪ in that case, Praepositum sibi Episcopum non cogitantes, not thinking that there was a Bishop set over them; quod nunquam omnino sub antecessoribus factum est, resolving that it was a fact without any precedent in the Church; and again, L. 1. Epist. 3. having proved the Episcopal power to be immediate∣ly from God, he expresseth it in these words, Sacerdotalis au∣thoritas & potestas divinâ dignatione firmatur, The Sacerdotall power is setled by divine dignation, and addes the occasion of all Schismes in the Church to be, quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, that the Bishop is not obeyed: Nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, & ad tempus Judex, vice Christi cogitatur; and that 'tis not considered, that the one Priest, i. e. Bishop, and Judge, is for the time in the Church in Christs stead; which is yet more clear by his making Sacer∣dotum Collegium, The Colledge of Priests, all one with Coepiscopo∣rum consensus, The consent of Fellow-bishops, and presently adding, that he that sets himselfe above this unus Sacerdos, one Priest, se non Episcopi, sed Dei Judicem faceret, makes himself Judge not of the Bishop, but of God. And therefore 'tis a strange proofe of Blondels, that Episcopacy and Presbytery is all one, from that speech of Pontius Diaconus concerning this Cyprian,Apol. pro Sent. Hieron. Quod ad of∣ficium Sacerdotii & Episcopatus gradum novellus electus est, having before said, Presbyterium & Sacerdotium statim accepisse. Whereas the equipollence of the word Sacerdos and Episcopus being ob∣served, and the difference of Presbyter from them, doth clearly infer the contrary; and that is apparent by the very place, Multa sunt quae jam Presbyter fecit; ad probationem bonorum operum satis est, quod ad officium Sacerdotii & Episcopatus gradum adhuc no∣vellus electus est. He was it seems a Presbyter first, and did many things in that state, and a proof that he did so, was his election to the office of Sacerdos or Bishop, when he was a novice, then presently or soon after his conversion, where the difference of his being a Pres∣byter and a Bishop is most manifest. So when St in Psal. Hilarius Pictav.
saith, Aarone Sacerdotes significari non ambiguum, in Levi, mini∣stros ostendi; the same Blondel concludes, Sacerdotes sive praepositos, & seniores to be all one, not knowing or observing again that that Sacerdos signifies Bishop, who is there set parallel to Aaron, in lege primus Sacerdos, the first Priest in the law. Many other evidences might be produced out of those and after times, as in the Councel of Taurinum speaking of Palla∣dius; A Triferio sacerdote fuerat mulctatus, he was punished by Triferius, who, that he was a Bishop, (if it were doubted) would appear by the acts of that Councel, and particularly by his ex∣communicating Exuperantius, a Presbyter, Can. 4. which sure none but a Summus Sacerdos, a High Priest, or Bishop could doe. But there can be no need of more proofs in this matter, and if there were now any more doubt, that the Bishops were the confest successors of the Apostles in this Priviledge or Preroga∣tive, that one Canon of the Apostles might satisfie it, , &c. Let not the Pres∣byters, or Deacons do any thing without the consent of the Bishop, for he hath the people of the Lord intrusted to him, and shall one day be re∣quired an account of their souls: which besides that it is evidenced to belong to this power of the Keyes, by the usefulnesse of that to the discharging the trust about souls, appears further by the , the prohibiting of Presbyters to do any thing without him. A saying, which whatsoever is thought of it, is the voice of the first Antiquity. Ignatius must begin the number in Epist. ad Trall. . It is necessary that whatever ye do, ye do nothing without the Bishop. And if, because it follows immediately, , obey the Presbyters, as the Apostles. it be conceived, that that precept belongs to the people onely, and not to the Presbyters, it will then be easily replyed, that to the whole matter the same Ignatius in Epist. ad Magn. hath given it in a latitude, which had prevented this scruple . As the Lord Christ doth
nothing without the Father, so you also without the Bishop; You, whe∣ther Presbyter, or Deacon, or Laick. Once more in Epist. ad Smyrn. . Let no man without the Bishop do any of those things which belong unto the Church. And the Councel of Laodicea hath (almost in Ignatius's words) commanded the same. Can. 56. , The Presbyters must do nothing without the consent of the Bishop; and many more acts and Canons might be produced to the same purpose. And if against all these, this exception be made, that by the  force of such Rules not only the power of the Keyes, but also all other power belonging to the Church is appropriated to Bi∣shops: to this the Answer (as it will be easie, so it) will tend much to the clearing, and serve for the shutting up of this whole matter; That indeed there is great truth in the objecti∣on, that all power in all matters Ecclesiastical did primarily be∣long to the Bishop, and no others, even Presbyters themselves; but as it was by the Bishop communicated to them, not only by that first act of Ordination, in giving them the , or first power, but also by a second act necessary to give them that other power to use or exercise that power, when they have it. This is the plain sense of the Canon of the Councel of Arles, Can. 19. nec Presbyteris civitatis sine Episcopi praecepto amplius ali∣quid imperare, vel sine authoritate literarum ejus in unaquaque Paro∣chia aliquid agere. The Presbyters of any City must not command any thing without the precept of the Bishop, nor do any thing in any Parish, without authority of the Bishops letters licensing them to do it. Thus, I say, it is not only for the power of the Keyes, but even for the Sacraments. Ignatius's saying last produced in Epist. ad Smyrn is by him thus in larged, . Let that Eucharist be reputed firm (or rightly celebrated) which is done by the Bishop, or by him to whom he shall give leave; and for Baptisme, and that to∣gether, , It is not lawfull without the Bishop, i. e. without his leave, either to baptize, or administer the Sacrament, , but when he shall think fit according to Gods pleasure, , that all that you do, may
be safe and firme. It seems the consent of the Bishop was thought necessary to make it safe for any Presbyter to doe any Ecclesi∣astical act, or to give validity to it, when 'twas done by him. So Tertull. de cor. mil. Non de aliorum quàm de praesidentium manu Eucharistiam sumimus, We receive the Eucharist from none but the Presidents or Governors. They are all one with the  in Just. Mart. Apol. 2. to whom that whole businesse is there re∣mitted. So again Tertul. de bapt. Dandi baptismum jus habet Sum∣mus Sacerdos qui est Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri & Diaconi, non ta∣men sine Episcopi authoritate, propter Ecclesiae honorem, quo salvo salva pax est. The Chief Priest who is the Bishop, hath the power of giving baptisme, after him the Presbyters and Deacons, yet not without the au∣thority of the Bishop, for the honor of the Church, which as long as it is preserved, the peace of the Church will be preserved also. So when the Scriptor. anon. quaest. in V. & Nov. Test. which is thought to be Hilary, saith, In Alexandriâ & per totum Aegyptum, si desit Epi∣scopus, consecrat Presbyter; that in Alexandria and Aegypt, if there be no Bishop, the Presbyter consecrates, 'tis clear by the mention of that liberty in the Presbyter, as of a thing peculiar to Aegypt, and that too, only when there is no Bishop present, that regular∣ly this power belong'd to none but the Bishops, and to those Presbyters to whom he gave it. Where by the way will appear a great mistake of Blondel and (I suppose out of him, as his ma∣ny other Notes in his apparatus against Bishops) of Salmasius, who in another place of Hilary in Eph. 4. cited by both of them, [apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit Episcopus, In Aegypt the Presbyters consigne, if the Bishop be not present] in∣terpret consigning, either to be Sive baptiza∣torum confir∣matio, sive poe∣nitentium bene∣dictio, sive or∣dinandorum consecratio. Blond. Apol. p. 57. & Salmas. in appar. ad l. de Prim. Papae. confirmation or blessing (I sup∣pose absolving) of penitents, or ordination. It being clear by the other place, just now cited, that consignatio signifies there con∣secrating of the Sacrament, which is peculiarly call'd consecration, that of giving orders being ordination, not as he calls it ordinan∣dorum consecratio (which what it would grammatically signifie I know not, unlesse some benediction of them that are after to be ordain'd) and it seems Sive de Eu∣charistiae confe∣ctione, sive de Chrismatione, sive de ordina∣tionibus sacris interpretari placeat. Blondel himself, p. 61. thinks it possible that consignatio may signifie the consecrating the Elements, and by what follows, I conceive him to use it in that sense, saying, quod antiquis per solam Episcoporum absentiam licuit, omnibus
nunc absolutè licet, that which antiently was made lawful to all (i. e. to Presbyters) onely by the Bishops absence, is now absolutely lawfull to all: Which I suppose he must mean of consecrating the Sacra∣ment, and I am sure could not reasonably believe of ordination. But this by the way, in passage, to confirm that assertion of Ignatius sufficiently, that the Church was by the Apostles put into the hands of Bishops, that ordinarily the consent of the Bishop was required to enable a Presbyter for any Ecclesiastical act, the plenitude of power being by Christ delivered down to the Apostles, and through them to their successor-bishops, and by them dispenst out to others in that measure, and those porti∣ons, which they should think fit. And if it be demanded here, What it is which in our Church is given to Presbyters in their Ordination, as the full importance of the form then used [Receive the Holy Ghost:] I answer, not all that is at any time contained under that phrase, when it is used in the consecration, but only the particulars which are after mentioned; and so distinctly not the power of ordaining, which is not mentioned, and which is a particular, that never was regular for any Presbyter in the antient Church to assume to himself, or to any number of that order without a Bishop over them (and it would not be hard to give an account of all that hath been produced of late by Salmasius, or any other from the origines Alexandrini, or any other record of antiquity to the contrary, but that it is , and would be too large a  in this place:) and if the practice of some few Protestant Churches in this last Century be opposed against it; then 1. I shal conceive those very unfit to be confronted against the Ʋniver∣sal for 1500 years; and therefore secondly, I shall not doubt to affirm, that want is not only a defect, but a corruption among them. Thirdly, it will be observable, that even those that want it among them, have formerly thought fit to excuse it by the case of necessity, and to acknowledge it their infelicity, but not their fault, (their superiors in the State not permitting them to have Bishops to ordain them;) and to give their judgements free∣ly, that where Episcopacy is, it is to be preserv'd; and where it is not, it is to be wisht for; which is a sufficient expression of their sense of it. And if the improsperousnesse of the cause of late in this
Kingdome hath moved some of them to change their style, I suppose there is no greater reason to depend on their judge∣ments who are mov'd or wrought on by such extrinsecal ar∣guments, then on his, who lately made no scruple to confesse, in giving his opinion of H. Grotius, Ego non probo prudentiam mi∣nùs felicem. He lik'd not the choice of that side which was not prospe∣rous. And then fourthly, that this cannot be applicable by way of excuse to those who desire to cast out Bishops where they are, on purpose that Presbyters may usurp the power which belongs to them. Secondly, not al power of binding and loosing, retaining or remitting, though those words are there added (whose sins you do remit, &c.) but so much as the Bishops or Governours are presumed to have thought fit to impart to them, and what that is, will appear by other acts of our Church, especially by the Liturgy: as 1. The declaring of absolution in the Church after the Confession of sins; 2. The absolving them by way of prayer before the Sacrament (in case the Bishop be not present) and 3. in Baptismal washing, and 4. upon speciall Confession on the sick∣bed; or any time else which may by analogy or reduction come under these same heads, as in the case of private confe∣rence, and confession at other times: In all these the remitting of sins is allowed among us to a bare Presbyter, not only by way of pronouncing, or declaring of absolution, but (as a ministerial act) actually absolving him, (by Christs authority committed to the Presbyters) from all his sins. All which yet will not extend to the absolving from the band of Excommunication, or proportionably to such power of bind∣ing, any further (at most) then to confer the first power of it, which if it be then given, doth yet remain (as the other power of Preaching, and administring the Sacraments) bound and re∣strained from being exercised, till they be further loosed by the donation of a second power, as Luke 24.49. when Christ sent them the Promise of his Father, which was at the time of his breathing on them, Joh. 20.22. and gave them a , a grace, or first power of it, he yet restrains the exercise of it, till the actuall descent of the Holy Ghost, (but tarry you in Jerusalem till you be indued with power from above) and that is not done in this Church as it stands established by Law, (in this particular
of the Keys) till he become a , a ruling Elder, whether by being made Bishop, or otherwise by having Juris∣diction vested on him: and thus much will serve turn for the first enquiry, on whom the power of the Keyes was bestowed. CAP. IV. I Come now to the second general enquiry, in what this power  consists, and shews it self: which I shall make no stay, or scruple to define in this proposition, That the power of binding and loosing in these places of the Gospels, is , &c. Chrys. in Jo. 20. . Theoph. in Joh. 20.  &c. Ib , a spiritual gift, or grace, and belongs to the , in Theoph. in Mat. 16. the pardoning or punish∣ing of faults, the former to the Censures of the Church, the Eccle∣siastical punishments of Excommunication, and the later, the power of loosing, to that of absolving from them. This position I must vindicate from the contrary interpre∣tations, or objections which are thought to keep these Texts from concluding or countenaning any such Censures. And of these, though they are not all to one sense, yet one interpreta∣tion I have chosen rather to insist on, because it hath not yet been considered by others, and because it seems to pretend to more antient grounds, then the rest formerly have done, I mean that, which proceeds by interpreting the Phrases out of the writings of the Talmudists, and from them concludes (I shall  give it you in the learned writers own words) that the power of binding and loosing is  facultas de∣cernendi, explicandi, interpretandi, declarandi de ligato & soluto, quod planè millies in Talmudicis ex vetustissimae Ecclesiae illius usu denotat, quid vetitum ex lege sacrâ, quid permissum (quemadmodum & Graecis Vide Eustath. & Did. in illud Iliad . & In∣scrip. Isid. apud Diodor. Sic. l. 1 scimus , quod ligare est, etiam interdicere sonare, & , quod est solvere, etiam permittere, seu obligationem sive auferre, sive non∣dum inductam monstrare, aut asserere) adeóque ad docendi, seu inter∣pretandi, seu Theologiae Praeceptivae munus solum ibi attinuit, &c. ma∣king it no more then the faculty of explicating, or interpreting what is lawful, what not, &c. in a word, no more then the power of deciding cases of conscience, seu sic de jure publicè respondendi
illúdque dicendi, &c. The truth of which, I shall, with all due re∣spect, for a while take boldnesse to examine. First, by yeelding, or for the present not denying, that there was or might be an office or power among the Jews intrusted to some select Elders of the people, of teaching and giving publique responses (by way of deciding cases of Conscience, though not by way of Judicature) what was to be accounted lawful, what not, both by the Law of God, and the Tradition of the Antients; which yet being suppo∣sed and granted, I must secondly interpose, that it is not there∣by proved that this is called in the Talmud, or by any of those writers, the power of binding and loosing, (or that the power of binding and loosing, is by them so described) but (which is quite another thing)  a power of teaching or instructing, &c. what is lawful, what forbidden. Nor will it be a proof of any force to conclude (that which we have no reason to believe with∣out a proof, or some kinde of affinity in the phrases, viz.) that this power of binding is that power of teaching, and no more, only because there was such a power of teaching among the Jews. For if we will judge à pari, experience proves the contrary, in this Church of ours; where though there be a power of binding, and a munus docendi, an office of teaching, &c. yet no man is bound from thence to acknowledge these two to be all one, but we have long believed them to be two faculties, or offices, the one given the Apostles in the donation of the Keys, the other in the mission to preach; (and though it were granted that we were mistaken in affirming them to be two such distinct faculties, yet would not that hinder the truth of this assertion, that in our books they are so distinguished, the question being now of the fact, & not of the right, and it being clear that in our practice our Preaching is one thing, and our Excommunicating is ano∣ther) and secondly, because 'tis clear, there were two distinct powers among the Jews, one of declaring in foro, as well as the other extra forum, one judicial, as well as the other doctrinal; and sure it would be but a poore supersedeas, or prohibition to keep the Sanhedrin among them from judging and punishing any offender brought before them, by telling them that there was among the Jews a  a licence or faculty of de∣claring what was lawful, without any power of punishing; For
they would be soon able to say, that 'twas by some other power (and not by that of declaring) that they undertook thus to judge and punish: and let me add that although the power a∣mong the Jews were acknowledged only to be a civil power, yet might Christ in his Church set up an Ecclesiastical power propor∣tionable to that, and imitate that in the sacred, which they used onely in civil judicatures, as anon we shall have occasion to de∣monstrate. And thirdly, the phrase of the Gospel, from whence we pretend, is not the facultas, faculty, or power of binding, but the donation of Keyes, and with that, Christs Promise, that whatsoever they shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and therefore I conceive this will not be a convincing way of inferring this conclusion. We must therefore in the next place proceed to examine the  reasons, or arguments produced to perswade us, that the power of binding and loosing is no more then the power of declaring, &c. what is prohibited, what is permitted, the office of the Casuist only. And these reasons I can finde to be but two. 1. That ligatum & solutum planè millies in Talmudicis ex vetustis∣simo  Ecclesiae illius usu denotat quid vetitum, quid permissum. 2. That in some places of Greek Authors,  and , to bind and loose are used also. For the first of these, I shall first say, that if it were true, that  the Idiom of the Talmudists were ex vetustissimo Ecclesiae illius usu, out of the most antient use of that Church the Law of Moses, and the Scriptures of the Old Testament, being the Records of the most antient Church, some footsteps of it might be expected there; but I shall suppose there are no such to be found, not onely because I have there sought them in vain, but because I pre∣sume the Author would have conceived any Testimony from thence to be more Authentick then the Talmud, and so would certainly have produced them, if there had been any. Secondly, for the Talmudists acception of the phrases; first I might say, that we are no way obliged to interpret Greek words in the New Testament by the use of the Talmudists, because though the traditions concerning Hebrew customes mentioned in the Tal∣mud may reasonably be thought antienter then Christs time (and so the Testimonies brought thence be worth the heeding for
such, and fit sometimes to be used for the explaining the like customs mentioned in the New Testament) yet the booke it self, and consequently the word in it (which only we have now to consider) was written, and set out long after the New Testa∣ment, the Misnaioth, or first , which contain the Text of the Talmud, being set forth by the  Tannaim, or Doctores Mischinici, about the year 150 after Christ, who as they professe to have had their beginning per continuam successio∣nem acceptionis legis oralis à Mose, saith Buxtorf, by a continual succession of tradition of the oral law from the times of Moses, so they acknowledge to end in R. Jehudah hakkàdosch, (stiled Han∣nasi, the Chief or Prince, and by way of eminence Rabbi, when he is cited in the Gemara) who lived under Antoninus in the midst of the second Century. After these Tannaim, are the  Amoriam whom Scaliger cals , the Au∣thours of the Gemara, and of that Gemara, i. e. those disputations, and decisions of those learned men at Jerusalem together with the Mischna forementioned, doth the Jerusalem-Talmud consist, and was set forth Vid. Buxtorf. Lex. Rabb. p. 283. an. 230. as the collection of the like dispu∣tations and decisions on the Mischna, which were had in Academiis Pombedithana, Soriah, and Nahardeah, make up the Talmud Babylonicum, which was compleated an. 500. This will be sufficient to shew that the words of Christ, either as they were spoken by him, or repeated by the Evangelists, ought not to be conceived to have imitated the phrases of the Talmudists so long after them; and there will be as little reason to believe (what is left the only possible) that the Writers of the Talmuds have imitated the phrases in the Gospel, being themselves both Jews and enemies to the Christian Religion; and besides, if the Idiom of the Talmudists were of any weight in this matter, yet sure it is not sufficient to weigh down the contrary Interpre∣tation of the Christian Fathers, (who are to us in all reason to be heeded, as the veryer Talmudists of the two, the Traditors and deliverers of our Gospel, and Creed unto us) or the use of it among the Jews that have written in Greek, particularly of the Author of Ecclesiasticus, who is conceived to be the famous Ben-Sira, and with him , is punctually to forgive sins, c. 28.2. however no way able to extend it self to that
other place in St John, where the phrase is varyed, and the [power of remitting and retaining of sins] is given to the Disciples, which will have no analogy with that which is here preten∣ded; for whatever should be granted of the words ligatum & solutum, bing all one with prohibited, &c. the retaining or remit∣ting of sins, will be distant from it, for sure that will not be, to declare one mans sins unlawfull, anothers lawful, which it must do, if this interpretation be applyed to that place also. This being premised as an Answer sufficient to take away  the force, or convincingnesse of this interpretation, I shall ex abundanti superadd, that I have used som care to examine those words, and to observe their importance in those, and other Jewish writings: I shall give you an account of it. The Hebrew word for binding is , which I shall make no scruple to acknowledge, doth in the Talmud many times signifie to forbid and prohibit; and from thence  and  signifies a thing forbidden, prohibited, unlawful; onely by the way I shal crave leave to shew you by what degrees it comes to signifie thus. The word in the Old Testament signifies to bind, (and sure that is the best interpreter of Idioms in the New) and accordingly is rendred by , &c. and is used commonly for binding with cords, and sometimes for that band, or obligation, that proceeds from having made a vow as Numb. 30.4. and is then rendred  definition or decree, because by that vow I bind, or define, or determine my self to such a performance; Farther then this, 'tis true this word is rendred by our Translators, Num. 11.28. to [forbid] Lord Moses forbid them, where yet 'tis observable that the forbiding there, which Joshua desires, is applied to the persons, and and not to the thing, and signifies a checking, repressing, [Lord Moses suffered them not, cohibeto eos] as when by chiding, or disciplining, a superior restrains another; according to which use of the word it is, that Philip de Aquin. makes it agree in sense with , and  prohibuit and cohibuit, forbidding, and repressing: and thus it will be very agree∣able with our sense of binding, as that signifies Church-censure, , disciplining, repressing offenders by that means. In the whole Scripture I believe there will not one place be found where that word is rendred by the 72. by any word signi∣fying
barely to prohibit, or the like, unlesse you will say it doth Dan. 6.7, 8, 9. where the word  is rendred , and , a decree, and yet if you examine that place, and the na∣ture of the decree, you shall finde, that it was not a bare prohibi∣tion, but a binding to punishment upon non-performance (for the decree was there, v. 7. that whosoever shall ask any petition from either God or man, but of thee, O King, shall be cast into the den of lions) and so the decree is that designation to the punishment of casting into the den, which is there call'd  binding, as when the Jugde decrees the Offender to be Excommunicated, that act of judicature is a decree, yet neverthelesse a binding, (this binding be∣ing a judicial act, and from thence receiving its force of obliga∣tion) and è converso in that a binding, or obligation to punishment; that it is such a decree, to wit, a decree sub poenâ, that such a thing shall be done, so saith Schindler, that the Chaldee  is obligavit ad obedientiam, aut poenam, binding to obedience, or penalty, and Elias Levita, that  &c. Every thing from which either sinne or punishment commeth unto him that doth it  is said to be bound, or is call'd Assur; and therefore Munster giving an ac∣count of the use of the word in the Commentaries of the Rabbins, saith  or  signifies edictum aut sententiam, quâ quis tene∣tur, &c. by which any man is bound to punishment, if he obey it not. In like manner as he that vows, binds, (and the word  Num. 30.4. &c. belongs peculiarly to that) because in vowing he doth either by words of execration explicitly, or else by intima∣tion implicitly, call punishment upon himself, if he perform not his vow, and so binds himself to that punishment. And so still the word [binding] by denoting a decree in this kinde, doth not at all vary from our present sense of binding by way of censure, which now we contend for, but rather confirm and concurre with it; and so I conceive (in those excerpta about excommuni∣cation,Exc. Gem. Sanhedr. p. 147. which J. Coch hath set down in Latine out of Maimoni∣des) those words of Maimonides do import, Quod totus Israel decrevit, non observat Princeps, &c. What all Israel decreed, the Prince observes not: he speaks of inflicting anathema's, and I shall grant that the word rendred decrevit, is in the original  the word for binding (in reference to which it follows in the next words, by him set down, remittitur à laeso, si ei satisfecerit, &c.
The injur'd person remits, if satisfaction be made him) and from thence shall conclude, that even when it is to be rendred decre∣vit, it may yet note punishment, particularly that of excommuni∣cation, or decree ad excommunicandum, sentence to punishment be∣ing a kinde of Legislation, and all binding to that, an act of Com∣mand or power. Having thus considered the verb  I shall as freely grant  that the participles, or nounes deduced from thence,  and  among the Rabbins or Talmudists, signifie very often a thing forbidden, prohibited, unlawfull (though in the Old Testa∣ment again the nouns there used , and  signifie not so, but are taken in a regular sense, and so rendred by the 72  a band, and  an ordinance or decree, and  and , bound or imprison'd, and the like, and not the thing unlawfull or prohibited) which yet being granted and added to what was before granted of the Talmudical use of the Verb, comes not home to prove the objecters conclusion, wch is this, that the verb  signifies among the Talmudists, decernere, ex∣plicare, interpretari, declarare, de ligato, vel quid ligatum sit, i. e. quid vetitum: to decern, explicat, interpret, declare concerning a thing bound, or what is bound, i. e. what is forbidden: for to prove this sense of the verb, that other supposed use of the participle is not sufficient, any more then my confessing amatum to signifie a thing loved, will conclude me to affirm, that amo signifies to de∣clare a thing to be loved, which we know signifies formally to love, and nothing else. That the verb signifies to forbid, or decree, per modum legis∣lationis (which is all that could be deduced from these premises, (though supposed true) of ligatum in the Talmud signifying no∣thing but illicitum) 'tis acknowledged, but that will not serve the turn, thereby wholly to evacuate & nullifie the power of the Keyes, which is pretended to belong to the Church from these texts; If the Apostles had this power to forbid or decree, this were 1. more then to interpret or declare a thing to be unlawful, the office of making laws is more then that of the Casuist, or Coun∣sellour, or Preacher: and beside, secondly, it would be but rea∣son to suppose those decrees backt with some power of censures against resisters, and so indeed the word imports, to decree
sub poenâ under penalty, and not simply to decree. But the thing for which this Talmudical interpretation contends, and which we oppose, is that this power of binding is onely a power of de∣claring, and explaining a thing to be unlawful; and for this from all that is pretended, or offer'd to our view, I have after all my search no temptation to suspect, that even the Talmudists them∣selves do use the word. The verb with them may signifie [to prohibit] and the nouns, and participle, a thing prohibited, or un∣lawful, and that is the utmost that Buxtorf could observe of the words among the Talmudists, or that the author of the inter∣pretation offers any proof for [ligatum & solutum, i. e. millies in Talmudicis vetitum lege sarâ aut permissum;] and if these notions will be taken, then the meaning of [whatsoever yee shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven] will be, that whatsoever they shall by decree prohibit on earth, shall be prohibited, or unlawfull in heaven; which were onely to exchange the power of Censures, for the power of giving Laws, which, as it is more then that of the Casuist, so, I conceive, is never to be found any where without power of punishing also. This I conceive to be answer sufficient to all that is produ∣ced, or pretended, even upon supposition that the Talmud were the umpire, or the use of words there the best Nomenclature for the New Testament. But then over and above, we must again remember, that this Talmudical observation will be but little conviction to us, who finde that the writers of the New Testa∣ment have no sympathy with the Talmud in this matter, but use variety of other words to expresse [commanding, or decreeing, or forbidding;] such are , and the like, but never  or any of that making; and in like manner have other phrases to expresse a thing un∣lawful, or forbidden▪ , and the like, but never , or any thing like it: neither is it, I conceive, pretended, that these words  and  have any such sense in any other place of the New Testament; but onely in these two, which are (parallel one to another, and so) in effect but one, and that the matter of the present controversie, and so a petitio principii, when 'tis made use of to confute him that concludes the Cen∣sures from thence.
Adde unto these yet farther, that even in the Talmud it self  the word  (of which this observation is made) signifies binding too, and that not only in the obvious vulgar senses, but in that also which we here contend for, of binding by censures, or binding over to punishment, (obstrinxit ad poenam, as Schindler renders the Chaldee, and as Elias Levita the Rabbinical word, be bound over to punishment) and so with great reason may be resolved (even when it signifies to prohibite) to belong only to such penal prohibitions, or at least, (belonging at first to such only) to have fallen after in common use (which sure hath been observ'd to bend words from their primitive sense) to signifie  all kind of decrees or prohibitions: which surely will not exclude, but contain under it that which we now contend for. I shall shew the strength of this argument by a parallel, as I conceive, exactly proportion'd to it.  in Arabick signi∣fies millies, very ordinarily [to Vetare, prohi∣bere, illicium statuere. forbid, or resolve any thing to be unlawful, from thence the noun  and  is vetitum, any thing prohibited or forbidden, and  and  prohi∣bition; Suppose now in some discourses concerning the kinds or degrees of excommunication among the Iews, or of the power of the Sanhedrin, or indifferently in any Jewish writing, I should meet with the word  and render it in Latine prohibuit, in∣terdixit, and a friend ingenuously admonish me that it ought to be rendred anathematizavit, devovit; would it be thought reason or ingenuity in me to reply to my admonisher, No, but I have rendred it aright, for in Arabick  signifies prohibuit, and therefore 'tis but an ignorance in the Arabick dialect, to render the Hebrew anathematizavit, and but a popular error (to be reform'd from hence) in them, that conceive there was any kind of excommunication among the Iewes, meant by that word  whereas 'tis clear, that word signifies onely prohi∣bition, and therefore belongs among the Jews only ad Theologiae praeceptivae munus, or to the office of teaching and interpreting, what is [vetitum, vel interdictum lege sacrâ.] If, I say, I should deal thus with any peece of plain Hebrew, my first question would be, whether this account of my rendring that word would be accepted; and if not, my second now is, whether the
processe of the present arguing hath not done the like, or somewhat more. This wilbe yet clearer, by proceeding to consider the words which are opposite to it, (and to which this Author refers when he saith, Solutum millies in Talmudicis licitum aut permissum; A thing loosed is taken a thousand times in the Talmud for lawful or permitted) such are  and  which I also acknowledge to be taken amongst the Talmudists for licitum & permissum, lawful and unforbidden. Of which yet somewhat must be further observed, 1. That  from whence they come, in hiphil signifies solvere, to loose; (as indeed that which hath no obligation laid on it, which is loose from all band to obedience, or obligation to punishment, is properly resolv'd to be lawful) but then this hinders not, but that the verb in hiphil may still signifie, (and indeed even a∣mong the Rabbins ordinarily doth) to loose, both properly & meta∣phorically; properly, as to loose or unty those that are bound with cords, or such like bands, properly so called, as Ps. 146.7.  solvite vinctos, loose those that are bound, & Ps. 105.20. the king sent  and loosed them, where the Chaldee para∣phrase reads  & solvit eum, and the 72 , and Psal. 146.7. Dominus  qui solvit vinctos, loosing men out of prison: or metaphorically, and that in a double sense, either as it is ap∣plied to doubts, or difficulties, and then 'tis to dissolve them; or to persons, and then 'tis to let loose or unoblige, and in this latter sense J. Coch cites it ex cap. 1. Nedarim, that on whom the anathe∣ma or cherem is inflicted coram, or in his presence  it shall not be remitted to him, but before his face also: where this word signifies clearly remission or absolution, and that from a sentence of excommunication; so again in that constitution of the law cited by Buxtorf,Ep. Hb. insti. p. 57. the word is twice used most clearly in our sense, He that continues in Niddui 30 dayes  and desires not to have it loosed, they separate him, or put him under Niddui again, & if he continue so 30 dayes more,  and desires not to have it loosed, (or as he renders it, relaxate) they excommunicate, or put him under cherem; & therefore Schindler mentioning , and the Rabbins use of it, renders it simply solutio, loosing; and there is a saying in  in which
it bears this sense. If any man swear in this form, [If this be true, let me be excommunicate in this world, and in the other] and be per∣jured, he cannot be absolved by any. Another word synonymous to this, and ordinarily used by  the Talmudists is , and that primarily signifying (as the o∣ther did) to loose or dissolve, as to loose cords which tye, or Camels which are tyed with them, is by the Talmudists taken for Vid. Buxtorf. Rabb. . absol∣ving, remitting, forgiving, pardoning; so saith Elias Levita in Thisby, it is used by the Rabbins for pardoning and remitting, as,  The merciful God pardon Hillel! and in the prayer that begins,  All shall be remitted, or pardon'd. So in a place cited by Coch out of Gem. Moed. Caton. c. 3. Quid remedii? age cum ipso  ut remittat tibi, that he may loose you from the excommunication: and again, adi principem,  that he may remit it to you. So c. 1. Nedarim, Steti coram R. Huna, cum audiens quandam nomen Dei in vanum proferre, eam excommu∣nicaret, & statim eâ praesente anathema relaxaret; there the word  is used again, for loosing in our sense, relaxating of, or freeing from a censure of excommunication, directly all one with  remittatur ipsi, following in the same place, which even now we produced. A third word there is ordinarily used to this purpose, of  the same importance, and that is . So in Vid. Buxtorf. Lex. Rabb. p. 2465. Moed Katon, Sapi∣ens potest seipsum excommunicare, a wiseman may excommunicate himself  and free or loose himself again: and so in that out of 1. Nedarim, in J. Coch, excommunicationem posse è ve∣stigio rescindi, there the word is  in both, contrary to excommunication. By the little that hath been said, it may sufficiently appear, that to bind and to loose may be found even among the Talmu∣dists to signifie somewhat beside interpreting or declaring, quid vetitum, quid permissum sacrâ lege, what is forbidden, what permitted by the law of God, as that referres simply ad solum docendi, & interpretandi, vel Theologiae praeceptivae munus, onely to the office of teaching, and interpreting, and of preceptive Divinity, &c. and that 'tis no way contrary to the stile or idiom of those writers to affirm, that binding and loosing belongs to Censures, (and not only to stating of Cases of Conscience) even if the Talmud were
our judge: for sure there is nothing more ordinary in that, then to heare of loosing them who are excommunicate; which must needs imply, that they which were so excommunicate, till they were loosed, were supposed bound also. And therefore it may be observed (in passing) that the learn∣ed H. Grotius having in his Notes on Matth. 16.19. made this Talmudical observation, that  to bind, &  or  to loose, are by the Hebrewes attributed to the interpreters of the law, (which seems something agreeable to this observa∣tion) conceiving the Keyes there spoken of, to be the keyes of knowledge, Luk. 11.52. doth yet on Matth. 16.19. interpret  and  binding and loosing there, by  and  re∣taining and remitting, Joh. 20.23. and in his notes on that third place acknowledges, that thus the Apostles did remit, either when by Baptisme they received into the Church those that pro∣fessed the faith, or when after the testimony of serious repentance they received into their communion those that had been lapst or fallen, and applies to it that of the 2 Cor. 2.10. To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also, (which belongs clearly to the excommunicate, incestuous person, in the former Epistle, who was it seems by this Ecclesiastical course brought to a capacity of remission, and absolution by that time, and now absolved by St. Pul) and for the conjunction of both these senses in the inter∣pretation of that place, he produces S. Cyprians authority, Ep. 73. To which I shall only adde, that in another part of his Notes upon the Gospels, Luk. 6.22. this very Judicious man (whose education might have given him as great preju∣dices against the Prelacie, as any other) hath given us a very excellent tract concerning this subject of Excommunication, or Censures; And at last resolves out of St. Cyprians Epistles, Totum ferme Christianae disciplinae vigorem in istis judiciis constitisse, &c. that well nigh all the vigor of Christian discipline consisted in those judgments of the Church. Quem morem qui ex Ecclesiâ sublatum volunt, gravissimum infligunt vulnus disciplinae, quam corruptis adeò Christianorum moribus ad veterem severitatem reduci maximum sit operae pretium,p. 680. tantùm abest, ut ulla ejus pars reliqua laxari debeat, &c. Which custome they which would remove out of the church, inflict a most grievous wound on discipline, which (now in
this notable corruption of the manners of Christians) it were most ex∣cellently worth any mans pains to have reduced to its antient severity, so far is it from being fit, that any remaining member or part of it should be loosed, or put out of joynt; and in another place, Disci∣plinam morum ego non refugio, ut modò pax coeat, nulla futura sit tam severa, cui non libenter me meosque sim subjecturus. For the discipline in order to manners, I would willingly subject my self, and all that be∣long to me, to the severest that could be brought into the Church. But this by the way. For the perfecting of this answer, and satisfying all the con∣trary  appearances fully, it must yet farther be observed, that there is one thing presumed, and not undertaken to be proved in this objection, without which all the observations from the Talmud are utterly invalid and unconcluding, and that one thing not at all to be granted by us, being indeed, as I con∣ceive, very far from truth. It is this; that by the particle  and  [whatsoever ye shall bind, &c.] is noted the thing, and not the person, for so that interpretation requires [what thing soever ye shall declare to be unlawful, &c.] whereas it's no new thing in all lan∣guages and dialects to put the neuter for the masculine gender, things for persons, and that in the New Testament, is not without example; as Joh. 17.7. 'tis our Saviours dialect (and it is the very word , which we have now in hand) ▪ &c. whatsoever, i. e. all those men, v. 6. and so 1 Joh. 5.4.  expounded by , &c. v. 18. every thing, i. e. every one, that is born of God. Thus when S. John, Apoc. 21.27. speaketh of man, and other the like inhabitants of the new Jerusalem, he saith, there shall not enter in there any thing that defileth, or that worketh abomi∣nation, or a lye;  in the neuter, which is, no doubt, no unclean abominable person, &c. So 2 Thess. 2.4. the Apostle speak∣ing of Antichrist, saith, that he exalteth himself above all that is called God; where the [ all] in the neuter, sure signifies in the mascline, every person that partakes of that name, the King and Potentates of the Earth; so Heb. 7.7.  in the neuter, for the lesser or inferior person, v. 19.  for no man; and Ch. 12, 13.  for him that is lame: With which Examples the phrase in this text beas such proportion, that it cannot be unjust to resolve, that it is at least possible, that the neuters here may
in sense be masculine also; which very possibility were enough to evacuate the Talmudical observation, the accommodation of which to this place supposes the neutral sense of the  and  to be certainly there meant, and is not reconcilable with the Masculine. For to say [Whomsoever you shall declare to be unlawful or prohibited, &c were not sense; whereas on the other side, the granting the neutral sense, would not so necessarily destroy our pretensions, this rendring of the words being proper e∣nough, and home to our turn, [whatsoever yee shall bind on earth, i. e. whatever sins of any trespasser ye shall conclude under the Cen∣sures] or again, whatsoever punishment you shall bind on mens shoulders (the speech being still limited to this one sort of pu∣nishments) it shall be bound or ratified in heaven: though the truth is, the personal notion of the , being so agreeable to other phrases of the Scripture, I have no temptation to doubt but that it is the importance of the place [whatsoever, i. e. whom∣soever you shall bind on earth, by the power of the Keyes, shut out of this lower kingdom of heaven, conclude under the Ecclesiastical bands, or censures, &c. shall be bound in heaven, &c.] i. e. by God ratified there, (supposing that what they do, they do according to the rule,) this is most commodious & agreeable to the men∣tion of the Keyes (to which 'tis annext, Matt. 16.) which cer∣tainly denote power of receiving, or excluding not some thing, but some person, & to the trespassing brother supposed to become refractary (to which 'tis annext, Matth. 18.) who is still a person also; to which I will onely add that in the beginning of that discourse, Matth. 18.11. there is another manifest example of a neuter word in a masculine sense, The Sonne of man came to save, , that which was lost, i. e. those little ones, v. 10. of whom God would not that one should perish, v. 14. To this account of that first argument (sufficient I conceive to prove that this interpretation hanging thus loose from the Talmudical use of the word, is not in the rendring this text of the New Testament, necessary to be received) I shal yet farther add these two observations more, 1. That the Talmudical sense cannot have place in the latter part of Christs speech [ shall be bound in heaven] and therefore will be improbable in the former. For sure the binding in heaven] is some∣what
more then Gods interpretation or declaration of the lawfulnesse of any thing; and if the Church should be thought unfit to have any kind of power, yet heaven is acknowledged capable of it; besides, the form and composure of the words will enforce, that if that pretended Talmudical sense were admitted in both places, Gods declaring any thing to be lawful, or unlawful, must be consequent to the Ministers declaration here, which will be very unreasonable; for though Gods Censures may by vertue of his promise follow the Censures of the Church, yet Gods Laws (for such are his declarations of what is law) sure cannot, or if they do, this will be a great assurance that there is some power in the Church, when it is so backt by God. A second argument to this purpose may be taken from the  Analogy of Scripture, or comparing the two places in Matth. of binding and loosing, with that third in John of remitting and retaining; which I conceive is proved to belong to the same matter, whatsoever that should prove to be, but then will not be so capable of the Talmudical interpretation, for sure that will not be so clear from those writers also, that  to re∣tain, hath that sense among the Talmudists, which was imposed upon , to bind, which for the present I shall take for grant∣ed, till some proof be offer'd to the contrary, and in that found the power of the Church, (supposing it were not deduci∣ble from S. Matthew) and then by analogie of those places in S. Matthew, with this in S. John, apply it to those places also. Now for the second proof which is offer'd by the same hand  against the received interpretation, the places in Greek authors where the word  or binding is vouched to signifie forbidding onely, though I might justly say, that forbidding is much more then declaring, or interpreting a thing to be forbidden, that an act of power, and not onely of doctrine, of a Magistrate, and not onely of a Casuist; and secondly, that we are not wont to require the dictions of the New Testament, which have so much of the Old Testament Hebrew idiom in them, to be tryed by Attical heathen Greek writers, yt shall I not now need to refuse that trial which is here offer'd. Two onely places there are pro∣duced (or in the margent appointed to be consulted with) to
purpose, Eustathius and Didymus in Hom. II. , and Inscription. Isidis ap. Diod. Sic. l. 1. These two places I have with all attention considered, and shall truly re∣port what I have found in them. Eustathius brings several interpretations of these words in Hom. the first of which is, that  may signifie , i. e. ; which that you may understand, you must know the occasion of Homers speech, it was this; Patroclus was slain, and Achilles knew not how to help him, or avenge his death, for which he hath very passionate sorrow, even to wish he were dead himself, because he could not avenge that death of his, this he thus expresses in Homers language: . I would, or, O that I might presently dye, in that I was not able to avenge the death of my Companion! He dyed far from his countrey, and Mars, or the Fate of war hath bound, or hindred, or restrained me from being avenger of his blood: where it must be observed, that Mars did not give any precept or interdict to Achilles not to avenge Patroclus, or declare that it was unlawful, but only that the fate of the war had not so far favour'd him, as that he could find any means to do it, which he calls binding or hindring him; and therefore Didymus, to whom we are referred, renders it , hindred, and explains the whole matter by this pa∣raphrase: . The fight having deprived me of my Arms, would not suffer me to go out and help Patro∣clus; and so it seems the forbidding, by which they render , is only that of hindring or stopping (which is a natural effect of the vulgar notion of the word, as it signifies hinding, he that is bound being hindred or stopt from his course or action) not of pro∣hibiting or interdicting. But then moreover you must consider, that the same Eustathius and Didymus observe in that last verse many different lections, as for example, one especially, in stead
of  Mars in the Nominative case,  hurt, or mischief in the Genitive, which reading they reject not, but accordingly ex∣plain the place, and render , damni averruncatorem▪ and , Patroclus had need of me, to avert that mischief from him; and this, saith Eustathius, the antients thus paraphrase , Mars wanted my action, or the help which might have come by me; and Aristarchus somewhat to the same pur∣pose, , he wanted me to avert the danger of the warre; and agreeably Didymus, : which different lection thus ex∣plained by them, takes off all colour, or pretence of affirming that binding signifies prohibiting, or interdicting in that place, but onely standing in need of, which is another sense of the word , and so still 'tis apparent, that  may signifie somewhat else in that place, and if it doe signifie binding, and that be ren∣dred  to forbid, that yet it must not be taken in that sense, that forbidding signifies preceptive interdiction, especially not the bare pronouncing a thing unlawfull, (the sense which 'tis brought to prove, and which alone is against our pretensions) but only forbidding, as when the matter forbids, hindring, or restraining, or binding from a possibility of doing it, and just so the Hebr.  by which Philip de Aquin. renders  binding, ordinarily signi∣fies to hinder. As for the other place referr'd to, the Inscription of Isis, thus  it lies in Diodorus Siculus, l. 1. p. 16. of Stephanus's Edition. , I am Isis the Queen of the whole Region, edu∣cated by, or under Mercury, and whatsoever I shall bind, no body can loose. What advantage can be taken at these words thus lying (& not restrained, by either antecedents, or consequents) toward the justifying or approving of the foremention'd inter∣pretation, or acception of the phrase, for declaring, or pronoun∣cing of the unlawfulnesse of a thing, I do not fully discern; for why may not the later words passe for an interpretation of the former, and so the sense be, that she being Queen of the whole region had all power in her hands, to do, or constitute (not onely
what lawes, but) what punishments she would, and then, that no body had power to undo whatsoever she thus did, to rescind, or loose, or absolve what she so bound? In as wide a sense as this, I could produce many places in Greek Authors, particularly a passage of Proclus out of Plato in his sixth Discourse about the Eternity of the world; where to prove the world cannot be dis∣solv'd by the Creator of it, and yet by none but the Creator, he expresses it often in these two words,  [] meaning by binding, the compo∣sing the whole compages of the world, and by loosing the destroy∣ing, or, as we say, the dissolution of it: this, I confesse, is nothing to our sense of the words, (and as little to that other) and yet very neer as much as the place now cited. Being left to guesse what was the occasion of producing this place to that other purpose, I shall think it possible that it was occasion'd by this, that in the margent Stephanus hath set , in stead of , which if it were conceived to be a Scholion, might be taken to be a testimony, that binding signifies making of lawes, as far as that Scholiasts authority would reach. For the present, I shall suppose that this is it, because I cannot think of any other way to help this medium to inferre the desired conclusion in any degree, and yet make no question but there was some: But then, if that be it, I must interpose, 1. That that in the margent is not a Scholion, but an emendation, or various lection, as the mark prefixed signifies; and then seeing 'tis assured, that Diod. Sic. or the inscription it self which he sets down, had not both these readings, it will thence follow, that either it was truly , (and then there is no authority from thence for any signification of ) or else that it was , and then there is no appearance of proof, that  signifies there ; and this is sufficient to the matter in hand, which part soever of the dilemma be accepted. But having said this, I shall superadde ex abundanti my opi∣nion of the importance of that inscription, viz. that Isis the Queen of that region, was taught or instructed by Mercury in the , hidden philosophy▪ , dark representations of truth, , the enigmatical wisdome which their theologie was full of, mention'd by
Edit. Paris. p. 354. B. Plut. de Is. & Osir. and that no body was able to reveale, or ex∣pound her riddles or mysteries. The ground of this my interpreta∣tion is, an inscription of Isis's temple mention'd by Plutarch, im∣mediately upon his discourse of that enigmaticall theology in the place foremention'd. . The temple of Minerva (which they take for Isis) in Saos had such an inscription (not literally this, but such an one, or to this purpose) I am every thing that hath been, and that is, and that shall be, and my vaile (or what I shall think fit to conceale) no mortall hath ever been able to discover. This seems to be a paraphrase of that other inscription in Dio∣dorus, and then though the words differ (which the  [not the very same, but such an one] intimates) yet the sense of the one seems to be fully exprest by the other, & then the con∣clusion will be this, that as  in Diodorus, signifying no more then  to reveale in Plutarch (as to loose a riddle, a se∣cret, is to reveal it, to which the Key of Knowledge in the Scrip∣ture may also referre,) belongs not at all to the matter in hand, or declaring a thing to be lawfull, so the contrary  is not applyable to that purpose of forbidding, or declaring a thing to be forbidden▪ and so much for that testimony also. To all this which hath been said the Reader may farther add, that Suidas, Hesychius, and Phavorinus have no other notion of ▪ then that of binding in bands, and therefore render it by , nd  Onely in Hesychius in one place I find these words, : which words stand in need of some emendation (as a very great part of that book doth) & may be thus set right, , A man bound by law, i. e. a prisoner; or , bound, i. e. a prisoner of the law; or else this seems to be the designe of them, that the word  is used in a sense proportionable to that wherein  law, is  a band, as indeed every law is a band to all those that are under it: but then you may observe, that this is a very distant sense of the word from that which was cited from the Talmudists, (where the thing bound is said to be forbidden,) for here  signifies bound, or commanded, and so this (beside that it gives the Church a power from Christ, of commanding and
making laws, to which in any probability the power of punishing would be consequent) is little to our present dis∣quisition. I cannot satisfie my self, that I have vindicated my position sufficiently, unlesse unto the consideration of the former objecti∣ons, I add also some few words in taking notice of what the Socinians have resolved to this matter; which I shall tran∣scribe out of Volkelius, de ver. cel. l. 6. c. 4. Where having ex∣prest the power of binding and loosing, to be the power, Alios quidem reatu peccatorum quodammodo constringendi, alios verò ab illo absolvendi; of binding some in some manner under the guilt of sins, but of absolving others, he resolves this to consist in this onely, ut pro authoritate muneris, quod tanquam Christi ligatus sustinebat, aliis qui∣dem nempe omnibus in Christum credentibus, atque ex animo ei obtem∣perantibus, remissionem peccatorum, ipsius nomine offerret, aliis verò poenas sempiternas denunciaret. That by authority of that office which he sustains as an Embassador of Christ, he should offer in his Name remission of sins to some, to wit, to all that believe in Christ, and cor∣dially obey him, but denounce unto others eternall punishments. So that in effect the power of binding and loosing should be onely the power of offering remission of sins to penitents, that is, preaching the Gospel, and no more. This magisterial affirmation having no tender or offer of proof annext to it, will need no long stay to consider it; what ever is in it of poyson, or danger, will easily be dispell'd by an antidote, which the very same shop in another box will yield us, and that is another very distant interpretation of that power of binding and loosing, c. 15. of that book (how faln from the same pen of him that had before said in eo tantum fuisse constitutam, ut remissionem offerret, &c. that it consisted onely in the offering of re∣mission, &c. or, by what means reconcilable with that sense, I will not go about to conjecture) where affirming the power of exterminating impious Christians, to be intrusted to the Church, he proves it, 1. from the words of St. Paul about the excommunica∣ting the incestuous Corinthian; then from this, that Christ speak∣ing of the contumacious trespasser refusing to obey the Church, and thereupon commanding him to be accounted as a heathen, and a publican, in coelo ratum esse dicit, quicquid Ecclesia in terris ligat,
aut solvit, affirms that to be ratified in heaven, whatsoever it is the Church on earth bindes or looses, i. e. quoscunque vel à fidelium com∣mercio segregat, vel in eorum numerum reponit, whomsever the Church separates from the commerce of the faithfull, or restores to the number of them: where I conceive it apparent, (unlesse some ve∣ry close sophisme lye hid under plain words) that binding signi∣fies disterminating, excommunicating, segregating from the commerce of the faithfull, which I willingly embrace, as the concession of that man, and the sense of his fellows, very fit to be confron∣ted to his former negation, especially being backt, as it is, with a conjecture of his (which I have long thought to be most pro∣bable) that St. Paul forbidding Timothy, to lay hands suddenly on any man, 1 Tim. 5.22. lest he partake of other mens sins, refers to the reception of penitents that had been formerly excommunicate. For such, he truly saith, were wont to be received into the Church again by imposition of hands. Evidences of that custome he brings from the narrations of  Victor, about the Vandalick persecution, l. 2. Qui nobis poenitentiae manus collaturi sunt, & reconciliationis indulgentiam, obstrictos pec∣cato peccatorum vinculis soluturi: Who confer on us the hands of peni∣tence, and favour of reconciliation, loosing from the bands of sinnes, those which are bound by sin. Where the poenitentiae manus, the hands of penitence, and loosing from bands of sin, belong to those which were bound, but now are reconciled: and the like from the 5th Canon of the Councell of Carthage, dist. 50. Presbyteris ac Diaconis, si quando de gravi aliquâ culpâ convicti à ministerio remoti fuissent manus non imponerentur, ut poenitentibus, vel aliis ex fidelium laicis. That Presbyters and Deacons, when upon conviction of any grievous fault they are removed from the Ministry, should not have imposition of hands, as penitents, &c. and out of Fulgentius, Ep. 1. de conjug. Illâ aegrotâ acceptâ manus impositione poenitentiam secundum morem, quem habet Christiana religio, peregit; she performed her penance by receiving imposition of hands according to the manner observed in the Christian Religion. To these you may add that of Alcimus Ep. 24. Manus impositionem adhibete converso ab haeresi; They that were recover'd from heresie, were to have imposition of hands, a signe of absolution. Interdictâ nominis ejus in posterum, si ex corde con∣vertitur, mentione; and his name no longer to be mention'd in the bed∣role
of the hereticks.p. 148. And the Author contra Praedestin. l. 3. Non ausi sunt Ecclesiarum Pontifices manum imponere poenitenti, nisi con∣fessionem voluntariam ostendenti. The Bishops durst not impose hands on the penitent, unlesse he exprest a voluntary confession; and many the like. And in the Chron. of Jo. Gerundens. speaking of the Arrians Synod of Toledo, congregated by Leovigildus, one of the Canons is, De Romanâ religione ad nostram Catholicam fidem venientes non debere baptizari, sed tantummodo per manus impositio∣nem & communionis perceptionem ablui. They which came over to them from that which they counted heresie, should only have imposition of hands, &c. and not baptism anew, and many other passages there are of that kind. This is a very probable interpretation, as an∣tient as S. Cyprian, and may, by the way, farther be attested not only by the analogy between absolution, and healing diseases, of which Imposition was the ceremony, but also by the context it self, where v. 19. is set down the proceeding, by way of Censure, against a Presbyter, and the publike checking of sinners, v. 20. a charge to do all , v. 21. without prejudging, and , nothing by favour or inclination; and then im∣mediately follows, lay hands on no man suddenly; Absolution very properly annext to Censures, (and I conceive a caution, that by knowing mens sinnes, he be not brought to partake with them, but that he keep himself unpolluted, in the remainder of that verse, up∣on which the 23. verse may follow pertinently, though as in a parenthesis, that Timothy may drink a little wine for his health, and not incurre that danger of partaking of other mens sinnes) and then v. 24. a rule of direction for that whole matter, that as some mens sins are conspicuous before-hand, and so bring them per modum meriti praecedentis, by way of precedent merit, to censure; and in some other men the sins follow after censure also, as when there is no re∣formation upon censures, (in which case there must be no absolu∣tion) so in like manner also mens good works (in case they do re∣form upon censure) are, or must be manifest before absolution, (and therefore the antient Canons require the  good works or almes-deeds in the penitent to prepare for absolution) and those that are not so, (i. e. their not bringing forth such worthy fruits of repentance) cannot be concealed, and so by that means Timothy may discern who are fit to be absolved, who not, and so all the
context clearly belongs to this matter. But this by the way. Onely having so pregnant an opportunity, I shall add what  I conceive concerning the imposition of hands, Heb. 6.2. joyned there with the doctrine of Baptismes. The Apostle there had mention'd , the discourse of the beginning of Christ, i. e. the first things that we read of in the Gospel; and he refers them, as I conceive, to four heads, 1. Repentance, or change from dead works; 2. Faith on God: These two he calls the Doctrine of Baptismes, & of the Imposition of hands, either by way of  (of which I gave you Cap. 1. sec. 10. examples in the sacred stile) and then the Doctrine of Baptismes will be appropriated to Faith on God, unto which men are baptiz'd, and the doctrine of Imposition of hands to repentance, which is the preparatory to absolution; or else both of these together, Faith and Repentance, must be affirmed to be the doctrine both of Baptismes in the plural, and of Imposition of hands too, and that both as it denotes confirmation, Act. 15.41. parallel to Christs blessing (of those which had been baptized before) with laying his hands on them, and absolution too, parallel to his laying hands on the sick, Luke 4. when he healed them, which is called loosing  from a band, Luk. 13.16. and all this will be proper: for both the Baptisme of John, and of Christ, required of them that came to it, Repentance and Faith; and Confirmation being but a kind of sealing, and repetition of the Covenant, and the promises made in baptisme, (without water, onely by laying on of hands) was so too; and Absolution, though it peculiarly required Repentance, yet it included also Faith on God, and peculiarly that branch of it, the believing remission of sins upon repentance. Besides these, there follow two doctrines more, the Resurrection, and Eternal judgment, which may be also reduced to these two heads, The Resurrection to that of Faith in Baptisme, of which it was a peculiar part, (the trina immersio, the three dippings, so antient in the Church, referring distinctly to his rising the third day, and so perhaps the , 1 Cor. 15. i. e. in S. Chrysostomes opinion, be∣ing baptized into the Faith, or belief of that Article, intimated, or briefly exprest by  the Dead) and Everlasting judgment to that of Repentance from dead works, which if not repented
from, i. e. forsaken, would bring that judgement upon men. But this by the way, and a a conjecture incident, and agreeable to the former. I have thus far proceeded in this matter for the removing of prejudices, & vindicating our position from two sorts of ob∣jecters, & might now think it reasonable to proceed to a third view, viz. of Erastus's structure, and all that he hath said of this matter; but this would require so intolerable a length, that if I should apply my self to it, I should both tire the most patient Reader, and leave the rest which I have to say on the other points at first proposed, to be overwhelmed or lost under the shade of so vast a . Some prudence therefore there will be need of for the compounding of this businesse, that I may neither too much despise, nor too largely prosecute this objecter: And the most convenient middle betwixt these two extremities, I suppose, will be, 1. To bring you acquainted with the Person, 2. To give you an account how he fell out, or on what occasion his quarrell to Excommunication began. 3. To view the place, and the weapons, at which we are likely to meet, i. e. to follow him · so far, till we see directly what the state of the questi∣on is, wherein the point of the difference between us consists; and then to put off the combat, till the spectators are ready to call for it, and shall professe themselves armed with patience to fit it out. For the first of these, the view of the person, I shall say no more, then that he was a Dr. of Physick in Geneva, who having fallen on an age when novelties were in fashion, (the Bishop turn'd out, and a Government brought in, which within few years before was acknowledg'd so new, that Calvin was fain to write to the Protestants in Helvetia, that they would but signifie their approbation of it, and could not obtain that neither, though soon after, it undertook to be the only divine Modell in the world since Christs time) thought it not unreasonable to step out of his profession, and offer to the world his novelty too; and having in his own profession exprest in some particulars, a zeale, which others of his faculty will affirm to have been with∣out knowledge, (as when he speaks of the preparation of Sti∣bium,
or crocus metallorum, and the Antinomian receits, he re∣solves that no man can salvâ conscientiâ, with a safe Conscience administer them, which yet every Physitian knows now by dai∣ly experience to be very useful and safe) it will not be matter of wonder, if he committed the like mistake in the businesse of Excommunication (a medicine more out of the proper rode of his studies) and conceived that poysonous noxious recipe in the Church, (judging, it seems, at a first view, that they which were most wicked needed rather to be invited to the Church, then driven from it) which the experience of all Christian Churches, and the advice of Christ himselfe, as a Physitian of Souls, have concluded to be very harmlesse and medicinal. I shall say no more of his person, but that he doth not seem by his book to have considered much of Divinity, save only of this one head, and in order to that present controversie. And then though I should not make an objection against an Author, that his book and he were of divers Professions, and faculties, be∣cause he that is not a Divine by profession, may yet, if he have no calling, have spent his whole time on Divinity, and if he have undertaken another profession, may yet neglect that, that he may spend his time in this nobler faculty, or may have those excellent abilities, that he may attain to as great an height in two faculties, as others of meaner parts may do in one, yet, if it appear by any sure  that that Physitian which writes in Divinity, hath studied little more Divinity then at that time a few moneths could help him to, and thinks this provision suffi∣cient to furnish him, to write contrary to the whole judgement of the Church before him, I may as safely commend a Divine, that when he is sick first of a disease, then, through impatience of his Physitian, shall by looking over some Physick-hooks take confidence to control his Physitian, and that he may do so the more authoritatively, cast off all the antient Masters of that faculty before him, or affirm that in them he finds nothing con∣trary to his opinion, when they that have read them all, know there is nothing more contrary. This I have said, because this Doctor makes his complaint of the opposition, and contempt,I Praef. and affronts put upon him by those friends, to whom before the set∣ting out he had communicated his book, objecting, saith he, no∣thing
against him, but that he was besides his calling, which therefore with him, I confesse, to be an unsufficient argument against his book, if it have no other to joyn with it; and I ra∣ther conceive, that it was a civility in his friends which used it, then an entire and sole objection, designed by them as a means to take him off from a confidence that he had done well (by telling him, he was no competent judge whether he had or no, and advising him, that being a stanger in that faculty, he should not depend too much upon his own judgement) rather then an acknowledgement, that they had nothing else to object to him. And if civilities be apt to be thus mistaken, the truth is, a little plain dealing were a more friendly office. I shall there∣fore have no necessity of replying to his answers to those friends: That [Scrutamini Scripturas] and [Probate spiritualia] [Search the Scriptures] and [Try the things that are spiritual] were a sufficient comminssion to him for that attempt, especially if 'twere true which he addes, Si stipendio conductus theo∣logica docerem, nihil sec. ipsos ab officio, & muncre in hac parte alieni facerem. Paes. that if he had had a stipend to read Divinity, this fact of his would then have nothing in it, in their opinion aliene from his office or duty. Where yet, I suppose, the office might be distinguisht from the stipend; and though the money be not apt to inspire, as a  or grace, yet sure the muns, or calling to the office may go for a , to which we may hope for the annexion of Gods blessing, more then to the , (the meddling in faculties, or studies that belong not to us,) we have any promise to authorize us to expect. 2. For the occasion of his quarrel against Excommunication, I shall give you no other account, then what from himself I have received (who, I suppose, was able to speak the bottom of the truth, and nothing else) and while I do so, shall desire the Rea∣der to observe, how certain it is, that the fabrick of the Church of England, I mean the antient structure, as it stands by Law, and the doctrines thereof, would never have provoked him to this enmity, if he had lived here under the best, or perhaps worst daies of our Episcopacy; and then as his Hippocrates in his excel∣lent tract , will tell us of a mighty in∣fluence, that the place, the air, or some such accidentall circum∣stance may have upon the bodies first, and through them, the minds of men, so will the Readr find, that his having chang'd
the air, had been excellent effectuall Physick for him, and in all probability, might have made a shift to have changed his opi∣ons also. The first thing, which, saith he, cast him on those considera∣tions  against Excommunication, was the unseasonablenesse of the time for the administring of such purging Physick. There was then saith he, a great paucity of Protestant Professors, and the number of Papists extremely overtopt them in those parts; and of the Protestants scarce the thirtieth part understood, and approved the doctrine; and therefore it must be, in his opinion, a strange improper season for the setting up this course of severe ruggid discipline, which would exclude from the Sacrament so many of the few Protestants, that it would both unpeople their assemblies, and necessarily cause a dangerous scissure in the multitude. The second thing was his having observ'd the unfitnesse of the  persons, that were imploy'd and presided in this matter (their Mini∣sters and Lay-Elders) fit, saith he, neither for age, nor experience, nor wit, nor judgement, nor manners, nor authority, to be esteem'd able to sustain so great an office with dignity. The third thing (and that which advanced him in his conceit  that he had faln upon the right sense of the Scriptures produ∣ced and pleaded for this discipline) was, the consideration of the state of the Commonwealth and Church among the Jews, God having said, Deut. 4. that that people had Laws and Statutes so just and wise, that the institutions of no Nations, the sanctions of no Commonwealth, no Ordinances, though never so wisely thought on, could compare with them, and therefore that that Church must needs be best, and most wisely disposed, which came nearest to the Jewish form. A con∣sideration indeed, that it seems, was of great weight with him, not observing that that comparison in Deut. was made on∣ly betwixt the Jewish, and other heathen nations of the world at that time, and only in relation to their present state, and not to the prejudice of Christs institutions after, when that nation and religion was destroyed; and that if that argument were of weight, (besides that he must be bound to prove his Modell out of the Mosaicall Law) he must be obliged also to bring back all the Sacrifices, Passeover, Circumcision, Ceremonies of the Jews into the Christian Church, and turn both the Lords Day, the Sacra∣ments,
and the very Religion of Christ the , the Law of Faith, out of it. The fourth thing, saith he, and that which set him on wri∣ting was, an accident that he then observed, An English man which at that time had quitted this Kingdome on the dislike of Ceremo∣nies, and came to Geneva, and proposed his Thesis there de adiaphoris & vestibus, of things indifferent, and of vestments; particularly, the Surplice, &c. he was, saith he, not permitted to maintain them publickly, ne Anglos offenderent, that they might not offend the English; This man therefore changing his purpose, chose a new Thesis, In quavis rectè institutâ Ecclesiâ hanc servari procurationem, in quâ ministri cm suo delecto ad eam rem Presbyterio jus teneant quosvis peccantes etiam Principes excommunicandi: That in every well o der'd Church this government was to be observed, in which the Ministers with their Elderships chosen to that purpose should have power of Excommunica∣ting all offenders, even Princes themselves: and this Thesis, saith he, he was permitted to maintain. I hope, he did not beleeve, that the English would be better pleased, or lesse offended with it, then with that other about Surplices, but only that 'twat a doctrine, wherein that Common-wealth of Geneva was more concern'd, and so did not so much consider how the English might take it from them, as in the other, where they were lesse interessed, they had leasure to do. That the doctrine of the Anglican Church, and constant practise of it, is utterly abhorrent from this dan∣gerous sacrilegious excesse, I shall not be so wary or humble, as to think it necessary to demonstrate, but confesse that he which saw that doctrine so confidently, and so early avow'd by the Disciplinarians, had a great temptation to write against their Ex∣communication, though no ground of assurance, that all which he should say against that subject, would therefore prove true, be∣cause that one doctrine of those which asserted it was so far from being such. Mr Hooker hath given a very good judgement of his enterprise; that Beza and he divided the truth betwixt them, neither of them saying all truth, nor all falshood, each of them , disguising, and allaying, and drowning a little of wholesome doctrine, with a great deal of the contrary. And let me say, to conclude this point, that both in the taking up his opinion, and in maintain∣ing
it, Erastus hath more to impute to Beza's and the Genevan's errors, and innovations, and excesses and extravagances (which upon inquiry into the antient Church records, he truly saith, he could not find avowed, or authorized) then to his own grounds, or arguments against Excommunication. The last motive, which, he confesses, perfected the work, and  put him upon the Presse, was the contempts and affronts of his friends, i. e. in effect, the opinions and good advises of all men that saw his Theses, and could by no means like them: but this hath been occasionally mentioned already, and only gives the Reader occasion to admire, and bewail the infelicity of passionate men, who cannot receive any benefit by their friends, are in the unluckiest condition of all men living, (beyond which no enemy can wish them a greater curse) sure to be the worse for that, which God meant us for the most inestimable blessing, I mean th , their telling us truth, and (out of desire of doing us good) admonishing us of our miscarriages; which he that cannot make any other use of, then to interpret those hugest obligations for affronts, those friendships for rudenesses, and therefore resolves to publish his conceits, because all his friends to whom he communicates them, advise him by all means to suppresse them, may well be allowed to write a vo∣lume against all kind of Excommunication, being already, it ap∣pears, so far from being able to bear such strong Physick, that the most private prudent, first, or second admonition of single persons, or , the joynt act of a College of friends and Physi∣tians do but make him more incurable. I come now to my third undertaking, i. e. to view his Theses  of Excommunication, and follow him step by step, till we have sprang the point of the difficulty between us; and, I think, that part of the progresse will sufficiently discover the weaknesse of his fabrick; at least how little appearance of advantage he hath against us, that are not for the Geneva-Presbytery, how well soever ad homines he may be thought to have disputed. His Th. 1. Excom∣municationis nomen videtur ex 1 Cor. 10. desumptum esse, atque amotionem significare à communione illâ, quae ibidem corpus Christi nominatur. first Thesis layes the ground of his discourse, and of his  mistake. The word [Excommunication] he will have taken from
1 Cor. 10. which is false, and not endeavored to be proved, and upon the back of that errour, another falsity, viz. that Communion is there call'd Corpus Christi, The body of Christ; all that is there said toward that matter, is, that the wine is , The Communication (not Communion) of the bloud of Christ, the bestowing his bloud upon us, a means or a pledge of making us partakers of that rich mercy, that bloud that was shed for us. That that is the right rendring of , is undertaken in another discourse upon the Sacra∣ment, and needs no further to be repeated here, the notion of the word Excommunication being most clear and uncontrover∣ted, that it is the sequestring of an offender from the Sané nunc excommunica∣tio ab omnibus definitur exclu∣sione è societate & communio∣ne fidelium. Ib. Com∣munion, i. e. the visible Society of Christians, without ever think∣ing to cut him off, but on the contrary desiring to engraffe him the more firmly into the invisible, and then also again into the Church, the visible (but mystical) body of Christ. And therefore, For the distinction of that Communion in the Th. 2. Est au∣tem duplex fi∣delium Socie∣tas, interna, sc. c spiritualis, externa seu visibilis ac po∣litica. second Thesis, into internall and externall, visible and invisible, we say that one onely member of the distinction belongs to the point in hand according to our stating of it. (And if the adversary of Geneva did presse the other, we do not defend him in it) viz. the exter∣nall and visible Society of Beleevers or Christian Professors, from which onely we affirm any man to be cut off by the act of Ex∣communication; and if he that is so cut off from that, be also finally cut off from the other, this is but accidentall, and very extrinsecall to that act, and distant from the design and end of it, being the effect onely of his sin, which, before he was ex∣communicated for it, is supposed to have concluded him under the wrath of God and of his Contumacy, which will not permit this most fatherly punishment of the Church to work any good upon him; to which though it be consequent indeed, that this censure obtaining not the desired effect, shall tend to his greater condemnation, yet will this consequent no more be chargeable on that censure, then on any other the methods of mercy or chastisement, by God used on purpose for his Re∣formation.
In Th. 3. Tantum verò inter utram{que} discrimen est, ut qui in alterutrâ continetur, non etiam comprehendatur in alterâ necessariò. Nam ut membrum Christi esse potest qui injuste ex visibili aliquâ Ecclesiá ejectus est, aut inter infideles latere habitarve cogitur, ita qui in visibili ctu numrantur non omnes etiam membra viva sunt Christi, ex quo sequitur discrepare res illas posse, quae uni nos con∣jungunt non alteri, & ab unâ nos abjungunt & non ab alterâ. the third Thesis it is by us acknowledged true, that inter∣nall  and externall society go not alwayes to∣gether; and the consequents which Erastus builds on that, are true, and acknow∣ledged in an unjust Excommunication, but these belong nothing at all to a just, nor consequently infer any thing against the institution, which giving rules that it may, and commands that it should be alwaies exercised justly, may be permit∣ted to suppose it is so; or if by error or miscarriage it be not, it doth not exclude him from that inward Communion, that was not before excluded, (supposing that he behave himself meekly and Christianly under that unjust cen∣sure) and if there be (as indeed there is) great difficulty to judge, whether the person thus to be excommunicated, be first excluded from the inward communion or no, yet will not this conclude the censures unlawfull, because if he be not quite out before, this puts him not out (nor is occasion of doing so, any more then chastisement from God, which may possibly work impatience and blasphemy in the person, but is not of necessity, or in any propriety of causation to do so) but rather is a means of keeping him in, of setting him upon his guard, of awaking or rescuing him from the danger of falling out of it, (and then abundans cautela non nocet, he that is awake already will be never the worse for calling) and withall of exercising some Christian virtues in him, which might possibly lye use∣lesse by him, if they were not thus imploy'd, and call'd out to practise. To the Th. 4. Mem∣bra quidem Christi effici∣mu, i. e. inter∣nae spiritual{que} Christi societa∣ti conjungimu▪ per solam fidem, quae per charitatem est efficax, & âdem hâc per solam infidelitatem excidi∣mus, pronde non potest nos huic insercre, aut câdem excludere, nisi qui fidem donare, eandemque nobis iterum auerre potest. fourth Thesis we say, that No man thinks, or accor∣ding  to our principles, hath any need to think, that any but God can joyn any to that internal Communion of Christ and the faithful, i. e. beget faith in any (nor consequently cut off any from it) unlesse ministerially, as  and , workers under, and with Christ, and so only by power drived from him, we pretend to do what in the censures is done toward it.
To Th. 5. Exter∣nae verò visibi∣lis{que} Ecclesiae consotes reddi∣mur ejusdem fidei professione ejusdemque do∣ctrinae approba∣tione, denique corundam sa∣cramentoum usurpatione; in quo tria haec insunt, in tan∣tisper dum ei insunt, inter membra externi fidelium coelus computatur, e∣tiamsi ad eter∣nam spiritus & mentis commu∣nionem non pertingat. the fifth Thesis, we answer that there is a mistake, for we are made consortes externae & visibilis Ecclesiae, Partakers of the ex∣ternal and visible Church, not onely by those three as they are the acts of the man who is so partaker, but to those three must be added a second notion of the third of these, which seems not here to be taken notice of, (though also the words are so set, that 'tis not excluded) and that is the act of the Church, first according to Christ's commission to the Apostles, in receiving them into the Church by Baptisme, and when for lapses and re∣turns into sin they are excommunicate, restoring them by ab∣solution, and at all fit times allowing them the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in charity supposing them (as long as they are in the Church) such members as ought not to be denied that priviledge, and if they be not unworthy, effectually sealing to them the benefits of Christianity. From whence 'tis clear that such the usurpatio Sacramentorum may be, (viz. if he receive the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper that is Though Sacramentorum usurpatio, in proper speaking, suppose Baptisme, which is one of those Sacraments; yet Sacramentorum participatio, Thes. 6. signifying only receiving the Lords Sup∣per, I have reason to suppose it may do so here too, and therefore I put in this. not baptized, or that is justly excommunicate) that 'twill be perfectly an usurpation, and not sufficient to give him right to be reckon'd inter membra externi fidelium coetus, among the members of a visible Church. Th. 6. Th. 6. Ergo qui ex Ecclesiae communione extern ejicitur (i. e. qui excommuni∣catur) vel ab omnibus hise tribus, vel à duobus, vel ab uno tantùm removetur, sed à duobus primis, nempe à confessione fidei, & à Christianae doctrinae appoba∣tione (sub qua volo verbi & doctrinae auditionem comprehendi) repelli nullus debet, quin potiùs hùc invitandi & qua∣vis ratione adducendi sunt omnes. Quocirca relinquitur, ut qui excommu∣nicatur, à solâ (ex tribus commemora∣tis) sacramentoum participatione pro∣hibeatur. Huic, utrùm inseparablter cohaereat privati commercii negatio, an separari possit, postea considerabitur. A∣lias poenas non pertinere ad substanti∣am excommunicationis hujus certum est▪ Etenim possit eadem etiam non excommunicat in∣fligi, & excommunicatis non infligi. In the first part there is need of a distinction: for the Confession of Faith, and approbation of Christian Doctrine may be 1. Either Cordial, or Hypo∣critical. 2. Either Private or Publike. If it be Cordial, then 1. it makes me partaker of the inward Communion with Christ and his members, and supposes a man to be in that state, in which he that is, ought not to be Excommunicate, and so 'tis not  it belongs not to this matter. If it be Hypocriti∣cal (as it will appear, if he that acknow∣ledges Christ, & approves his doctrine with his mouth, denies it with his actions) then is it fit to bring the censure upon him, which he most hates and fears, to cast him out of
the Church, which is onely his disguise and vizard, or turn him out of that hypocriticall confession of Christ, to display and lay open his hypocrisie, that he may be asham'd, and think good to reform, and to that end, to deny him the publick hearing of the Word, which it seems hath wrought so little good upon him, and to assure him that he shall not be accounted a Chri∣stian, unlesse his actions accord with his profession; All which you may mark is so far from deterring him from the cordiall Profession, that 'tis the most probable means to invite him to it. So again for private confession and approbation, (which belongs more to the internall communion again, then to the externall) we drive no man from that by Excommunicatio▪ but onely from publick performance of it in the Congregation (under which, and which only, the publick hearing of the Word read or preach'd is contained.) And by so doing we separate him from that vi∣sible Church on that charitable one purpose, that he may see how he hath abused that benefit, and timely learn to make bet∣ter use of it, though again we do not invite him to that bare empty oral publick or private confession, or that oral appro∣bation, which his hands, i. e. his actions confute, or that unprofit∣able hearing, which will onely heap judgement on him; yet on the other side are fr from deterring him from the real publick confession, &c. but by thus dealing with him we shew him the necessity of it, and so by beating him out of his false holds, which will do him no good, drive (which is more then invi∣ting) him to the true refuge or Sanctuary, the reall confession, the effectuall approbation, & profitable hearing. To which head I must add, that I much wonder why all this while in the number of the constitutives of external communion, publick prayer is not men∣tioned (not so much as reductively, as here hearing of the Word is:) This ought to have been added, and then I shall add of it, that though that be a duty that men would be invited to, as vehemently as to any, yet 'tis lawfull to exclude any from this benefit in publick, when that exclusion may be a means most probable to awake a lethargick sinner. By this it appears how groundlesse the last part of the sixt  Th. is, That excommunication is only excluding from the Sacrament; for 'tis also from prayer, and hearing, (viz. in publike) as well as
from the Sacrament: when that is thought expedient to reform any. Thus Tertul. mentions exclusion à communicatione orationis, & conventus, & omnis sancti commercii, Apol. c. 39. from partaking of Prayer and all sacred commerce: and generally the  an∣tiently was from all: (though the manner of receiving in peni∣tents being first by admitting them to hearing, and then to par∣taking in the prayers, which were before those that are joyn'd with the communion; and after, to those prayers also, and in time to the Communion it self) it was after thought fit that some of the censures should not be totall to the excluding from all, but only setting them inter audientes, or Catechumenos, which were not yet admitted to the Sacrament, of which only the practise which he sets himself against seems to be an imitation. What follows therefore in the conclusion of that Thesis, that, [quod aliae poenae non pertinent ad substantiam excommunicationis certum est. 'Tis certain that other penalties belong not to the substance of excom∣munication] is very false, and proceeds from an ignorance, or willingnesse to deceive, as if the word Excommunication denoted only the keeping from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (to which end, it now seems, it was, that the first Thesis was de∣signed, and against whatsoever it is argumentative 'twill not be against us) whereas it denotes the excision from all, or any de∣gree of Communion in sacris, and is a generical word, of which there be different species according to the several kinds of holy things (the Word, the Prayers, the Sacraments) from which one may be excommunicate; And that of exclusion from the Sacra∣ment is one degree of exclusion, and the exclusion from either or both of the other also is an addition to that, never inflicted upon any but those to whom the Sacrament was denied. So far from truth is that which is added, that those other punish∣ments possunt non excommunicatis infligi, may be inflicted upon those that are not excommunicate in his sense of excommunicatus, for one excluded from the Sacrament: for no man was denyed prayers and hearing, that was admitted to the Sacrament, (nor is it rationall that one should, for sure he that is thought wor∣thy of the highest dignity and benefit in a Church, must be wron∣ged i he be denied and thought uncapable of the lowest) though the other part upon this reason be confest to be true,
that these punishments of exclusion from prayers & hearing, may sometimes excommunicatis non infligi, be not inflicted upon them that are excommunicate; as he that is thought unworthy the Priests of∣fice, may yet be allowed to be one of the Nethinim or door-keep∣ers, as in the antient Church, he that was suspended from the sa∣cerdotal function was yet suffer'd to communicate, ut Laicus, as a Laick. By which the answer is clear to the Th. 7. Malè Pontificii propter hanc ex∣communicationem (quam ipsi minore ap∣pellârunt, ac solâ sacramentorum negati∣one rectè definierunt) aliam insuper addi∣derunt, quam majorem & anathema vo∣cârunt: at{que} contra apertam Scripturam interdictione templorum, privati, comercii, & actus cujusvis lici. i definierunt, quoni∣am Apostolus 1 Cor. 14. palàm ostendit ne{que} ethnicos, ne{que} alios quoslibet, à divini ver∣bi auditione, lectione, gratiarū actionibus, ac precibus Christianorū prohibites fuisse. next Thesis as far as  concerns the interdictio templorum, exclusion out of the Church (and for the other two, that of the private commerce, & actus cujus∣vis liciti, of doing any lawful act, we interpose not) i. e. from all the parts of the publick service, which that it was brought into the Church by the Pontificians, or that it is contra apertam Scripturam, against manifest Scripture, is certainly so very far from truth, that no man that hath read any part of antiquity, can doubt of this practise and usage, before the tyranny of Popery is affirm'd by any to have come into the world; and for the second, what that aperta Scriptura is, I shall not divine, but resolve that if it be that which is named in the end of the Thesis, 1 Cor. 14. there is nothing at all concuding from thence. The verse that seems to be referred to (for we are left to divine) is v. 23. or 24. where the speaking in the Church, praying or prophecying, &c. in an unknown tongue, is by St Paul pro∣ved to be improper, and not to tend to edification, because pro∣phesying, i. e. explaining of Scripture, praying, singing of Psalmes, &c. being designed for the use of the beleevers, and no others, are in any reason to be in a known tongue, that they may understand. and joyn in them, v. 16. the unknown tongues being designed, either only as a sign, v. 22. i. e. a miracle to convert unbeleevers to the faith, when they se illiterate men all Jews speak all kinds of languages, or as a means of preaching to men of every country in their own language, from whence, saith the Apostle, 'tis consequent that if unknown tongues were used in a congrega∣tion of beleevers, unlearned men that understand not those tongues, or unbelievers that have no reverence to the Congrega∣tion, & do not at all discern any miracle in their speaking with
divers tongues, but look only upon the ridiculousnesse of the action, as of a gabbling of that which no man understands, wil resolve that this is a direct madnesse thus to do. Whereas on the other side that of Prophesying, interpreting of the doctrine of Christ intelligibly, and the other parts of the Church-Service in a known language, will be apt to convince, or instruct those unbeleevers or ignorants; This, and no more but this, is the direct rationall importance of those verses; wherein though there be mention of unbeleevers coming in, yet that being only by way of supposition [if they come in, &c.] I might justly say, that that is no plain affirmation of Scripture, that heathens, & alii quilibet, any others that will, are not prohibited the hearing of Gods word, &c. For, 1. 'tis an old rule, that suppositio non ponit, the sup∣posing (if they do) doth not suppose they do, much lesse that lawfully they may: and 2. that text names only ethnicks and ignorants, and belongs not at all to the alii quivis, any other that will, as that contains the impenitent Christians, which are the only persons, to which our Excommunication belongs; and of them the Apostle is far from affirming or supposing, that they might not be so excluded, and if they should by way of reduction be forced into that verse, the Apostles reasons would be spoiled, for they being supposeable to understand that unknown tongue (as they may do for all their impenitence) at least to know what belongs to the gift of tongues, and to what use they were designed, would not think them mad presently that used it; which being said, I may further add, that those heathens coming into the Church, or the not prohibiting them to enter, is a very distinct thing from the admission of the impenitent Christians, when they are by Church censures prohibited, because the Apostle himself which prohibits Communion with the brother (that is, the Christian) which is a for∣nicator, doth yet not prohibit it with an heathen or fornicator of this world; and the end of Excommunication being only on design of charity, to make the Christian offender by that means ashamed, and reformable, would be utterly cast away upon an heathen, who would rather be made obdurate by that means; and indeed 'twere ridiculous to turn out them who are not so forward to come in, and are not by St Paul here supposed so, unlesse tanquam exploratores, to see how Christians behave
themselves there, and if they can finde any such madnesse a∣mongst them, as he there mentions, would be likely to charge it home upon them; though on the other side if they finde such a regular frame, and beauty of all things there, they may possi∣bly be convinced, and wrought on by that admirable order, & doctrine, as St Austin was by St Ambroses Sermon, though he came thither on a quite dstant arrant. And so sure all this while this is a feeble text to be relyed on, as the only argument to conclude Apostolicall practise to be contrary to the exclu∣ding of any à Verbi Divini auditione, &c. from prayer, or from hear∣ing the Word in publick, the place being quite extrinsecal to this matter, and saying nothing at all to it. That which hath been said, sufficiently arms us against the  concludency of that which Th. 8. Ex dictis liquet excommuni∣cationem nihil aliud esse, quàm publi∣cam & solennem sacramentorum, pae∣sertim coenae dominicae (quam privatim Apostolus communionem () appellat, ut de principio dictum fuit) interdictionem, praeeunte seniorem cognitione: quo peccantes resipiscant, rursusque ad sacramentorum percepti∣onem admittantur. Th. 8. is inferr'd from the premises, and therefore there is no need of saying more to it; save onely this, that in this Thesis there are some little mi∣stakes committed, which I shall only name, 1. (that which is to the matter in hand, and on which his conclusion stands, or falls, and had been mentioned and is by us answered be∣fore in the 1. Th.) that () 1 Cor. 10. signifies Communion, whereas, I say, it signifies indeed (from  communico) communicatio, and so belongs there (quite to another matter then that, to which it is here applyed) only to the affirming the wine, &c. in the Sacrament to be the communica∣tion, or the making us partakers of the bloud of Christ, not to our Communion one with another in sacris, which is the thing from which excommunication cuts us off, as is noted by that de∣finition of it, which Thes. 1. is by the author produced, that 'tis exclusio à societate & communione fidelium, an exclusion from the society of beleevers. A second mistake (besides that which is con∣sequent to the former, a new definition of it by only Sacra∣mentorum interdictio, Interdiction of, or exclusion from the Sacra∣ments, which should more unlimitedly have been Sacrorum, from holy things) that Sacramentorum is put in the plurall number, which must needs be either not like a Divine, or not like a Pro∣testant; for if it note Baptisme as well as the Lords Supper, then
'tis not like a Divine, for no Divine would say that Excommu∣nication is an Interdiction of Baptisme; for till they are once bapti∣zed, they are out of the Church, are not capable of Excommuni∣cation; and when they are once baptized, though they were not excommunicate, they should be baptized no more. But if by that plurall, he mean any other Sacraments besides these two, that is not like a Protestant, for such acknowledge no more. Having mention'd these two mistakes, I shall not add a third, that in this interdiction, the persons to whom this cognizance be∣longs, are not rightly named, because though it be true, that they are not, yet the men against whom he wrote were of that opinion; and I am a little perswaded, that if it had been an Episcopall audience, that should have had this cognizance, he had never written this book, nor been put upon those arts to eva∣cuate the Church-censures. One thing only I may have leasure to commend in that Thesis, that he defines Excommunication by publica & solennis interdictio, a publick solemne Interdiction, & prae∣eunte cognitione (I suppose he means legitimâ) with a legall cogni∣zance preceding it, and shall add, that they quite deform the Primitive Institution, who deny the Sacrament to whole Con∣gregations at once without any charge laid to all or any part of them, (save only that they are a mixt Congregation, wherein there are some evil men, which yet is not legally proved nei∣ther) and they also who deny it to particular men sufficiently catechised, without any publick cognizance of their crime, or processe of admonition first, and second, or that design that exclusion to any other end, then ut peccantes resipiscant, the reducing sinners to repentance: and therefore no small petty trifle is a sufficient matter for this, but contumacious continuing in some scanda∣lous sin after admonitions, from which when they return a∣gain by a sincere aproved repentance, they are to be absolved. Th. 9. Hìcjam oitus quaestio, urum aliquis propter commissum peccatum aut vitam impurè actam, siquidem usurpare Sacra∣menta cum caeeris Christianis cupiat, ab eorundem usu & perceptione sit rvendus? quaestio de o poponitur, qui candem fidem nobiscum profitetur, Ecclesiae per baptismum insertus est, at{que} doctrinà ab eadm non dissentit (ut in Th. 5. posuimus) sed in solâ itâ & moribus errat. Hoc ergo quaeritur, utrum in S. literis vel mandatum vel exemplū aliquod extet, quo tales jubeantur aut doceantur à Sacramentis submoveri? Th. 9. is the proposing of the question in the termes, wherein it is to be handled, wherein I shal only interpose for perspicui∣ty
sake, that the phrase [an removendus sit?] may have a little ambiguity in it, for perhaps it may (though lesse properly) be set to signifie this, Whether it be lawfull to remove such an one? (for if it be but so, then he that pretends to write against excommu∣nication, and to pretend it unlawfull, will be sufficiently conclu∣ded) and then I answer, that for any but for the Governor of the Church, to whom the cognizance of his ill life belongs, and who hath had a legal cognizance of it, and proceeded legally by the severall degrees of Ecclesiastical processe against him, it is not lawfull: but for the Bishop, or Praefect, or lawfull Governour suc∣ceeding to that power which Christ gave his Apostles with the Keyes of the Kingdome of heaven, it is lawfull, and by the commis∣sion of [Ego dabo] and afterwards [ego mitto] they are sufficient∣ly authorized to do this: and upon this issue, if this be it, we will joyn most willingly. But then secondly, the (An sit remo∣vendus) may perhaps (and to that the words more incline) de∣note a necessity of doing it, and then the question will be, whe∣ther he must be removed? To which I then answer, that there lies not any such necessity on this, as arises from any pollution that will accrue to others that communicate with him, if he be not prohibited, any further then the example of his sin, and the im∣punity may extend, and this the Fathers maintained against the Novaians. Nor thirdly, any necessity lying on the Minister that administers, for he having admonished (according to our Church Orders in our Liturgy) every such sinner to go home, and repent, and not to approach to that table, is in charity to believe (being not able to search the heart) that he, that after that so comes, is a true penitent. Only if in prudence he think it unlikely, and therefore out of care to a poor mans soul, and for the preventing of the sin of unworthy receiving, he think fit to admonish him more privately, or particularly to that end, or to do any thing else, which in prudence may contribute to it, this is but his duty to an erring brother, and when that is done, any farther emergent guilt lies upon the receiver, and he is not (in case of the mans unworthy receiving) partaker of that sin. All the necessity then that is in this matter, lies first upon the  receiver himself, that he be wary, that he come not till he be prepared (and that belongs not to our present consideraton)
and upon the Bishops, or Governours of the Church, that when cha∣rity to souls requires it of them, they fail not thus to proceed, that when mercy and friendly admonitions prevail not, they then take in severity, the Apostles rod in the season for a rod, in stead of his Spirit of mercy, and meeknesse, and to that end be watchfull over the flock, that they fall not into such dangers, and infections, by their neglect or mercifulnesse. As for the qualifying of the persons, of whom this question is ask'd, I shall not differ with the Proposer, but resolve, as anon we shall shew, that he that is thus, may (and ought in the sense that I mention) be thus dealt with, and we shall joyn issue with him for the precept and examples of Scripture com∣manding and teaching us to do so. And having now, as I conceive, so easie a task before me, and such an army of seconds on my side (the consent and practise of the whole Christian world for 1500 years) against one single combetant, walking in a melancholy posture by himself (till after so many years, the concurrence of some accidentall conceived conveniences have at last helpt him to some company) And him again not very much used to the weapon (I mean Di∣vinity) which he hath undertaken to trust to, and beside having an advantage against him, which he did not foresee, we of this Church being not the men against whom his reasons were fra∣med, and so not so like to be prest by them, (the arguments de∣signed against Beza and his Presbyterians being utterly uncon∣cludent against us) I must confesse my self to be under a tempta∣tion to make use of the present advantage, and to prosecute this triall to the uttermost; but I must in justice consider, what a chasme and rent it would make in this discourse, what an unweildy bulk it would swell it to, and therefore must reco∣ver so much constancy of minde, as not to be thus passionately hurried out of my resolution, but leave it, till I have a louder call to it, being ready to give any man an account of what I now say in this matter. It will be a more moderate excursion, and more reconcile∣able with my designed brevity, to mention one opinion or pre∣tension more in this matter,p. 369. that of another Gentleman, who though he strive not to take Excommunication out of the Church
any more then Baptisme, but moreover acknowledges also,p. 363. that it belongs to the future Pastors as well as to the then present Apostles; yet having first resolved,p. 357. that Ecclesia & civitas Christi∣anorum are all one, he then concludes that the cognizance, and judgment of any fault, whether it be such or no,p. 367. belongs to the Church in that notion of his, i. e. to the City or Common∣wealth, (which with him also signifies the civil Magistrate, or, as he saith, judicem summum, the supreme judge;) and that the power of binding and loosing (as that also of baptizing, which saith he,p. 369. is all one with it) is no farther in the Pastor, then that he eject those out of the Church, whom the Church in his notion hath condem∣ned; and receive into it, whom the Church judges worthy of abso∣lution. I shall not labour to multiply differences, but at this time make my exceptions onely to one part of this Scheme, viz. that the Church in his notion, i. e. the judex summus, the civil Magistrate, hath the power of judging who are to be excommuni∣cated, who absolved. The proofs that I can collect from him of that assertion, are only two; First, that Mat. 18. Christ bids,p. 367. in case the trespasser hear not the two or three, (i. e. saith he, either deny the fact, or confessing it deny it to be a trespasse) then dic Ecclesiae, that it should be told the Church; [Quare autem Ecclesiae, nisi ut ipsa judicet an peccatum sit, necne? Why should the Church be told it, but that that may judge whether that be a sin or no?] and if he obeyed not, then let him be to thee a Publican, &c. Non dicit, Dic Apostolis, It is not, saith he, Tell the Apostles, to note that the sentence or judgement, whether it be a sinne or no, belongs not to them, but to the Church; and conse∣quently that this power was no more, then to bind those whom the Church had before judged impenitent.p. 368. His second argument is from the practise and words of St Paul, who asks the Corinthians [Do you not judge them that are within?] yet himself pronounces the fornicator excommunicate. To the former of these, I shall answer only this one thing, that there are other reasons very prompt, & pertinent, why the matter should be told the Church, though the Church be taken in a notion wherein it is not supposed to judge of it: as either, 1. the [densare inculcationibus] in Tertullians phrase, the fortifying the former successlesse reprehensions with this addition of authority from the number, that as the two or three might be more likely to work upon the offender, then
the injur'd person alone, so now the  or the , the many, or the Church in the loosest notion of it, for any assembly or meeting of many Christians together, (supposing that it do not signifie the Governors of the Church, as the Antients yet say it doth, and is far more probable, and asserted on stronger grounds, then that it should signifie the Civitas or summus judex) might probably be more effectuall; or 2. The [pudefacere coram multis] formerly cited out of the Rabbins, the making the offen∣der ashamed when his fact is thus publisht, and to do that is by us acknowledged the end of the admonitions, and censures; or 3. If there be need, the using the multitude as a cloud of witnesses to convince him of the fact, or sinfulnesse of it, which the text refers to before, (that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established) and in all reason may be a commodious sense here also, this third being but the ascending to an higher, and more probable convincing course, when the former had miscarried. Either of these three, much more altogether, will be a sufficient ground of Telling it to the Church, and so from thence there is no necessity to conclude that the judgement is the act of the Church, or Civil Magistrate in that place. And indeed it will be hard to suppose that possible at that time, when 'tis clear the Civil Magistrate was not Christian, and therefore unfit not only for the title of the Church, but much more to be appealed to as the judge by Christians, who, 'tis certain, are bound by Christ to use all other means possible (and telling it to the Church in our notion is one of those possibles) to get satisfaction for trespasses, before they proceed to any heathen tribunal, to implead their fellow-Christian there. Nor will it, I conceive, be reasonable to reply, that Christs speech belongs to aftertimes, when the Ma∣gistrate should be Christian; For then, 1. he must acknowledge that till then, it was to be in the Church in our notion, and con∣sequently that the Ecclesiastical Governors were the Judge at that time, and then by his own doctrine (that data est potestas ligan∣di,p. 363. &c. futuris pastoribus eodem modo quo praesentibus Apostolis) it will still belong to the Ecclesiastical Superior. And 2. though it may very justly be extended to that future state, (as what was said to the Apostles was not personal, but belonged to their successors also) yet there will be no probable argument that
the Apostles then present should be themselves excluded. For, be∣sides that this must lie on him to prove, if he wil assert it against all antiquity, it will also be a little unreasonable to affirm; for that were for our Saviour to give all the power, and direct all the speech to the Successors, not to the Apostles, as a Prophesie on∣ly, or a prediction, no Evangelical instating on these to whom he spake. This I suppose a sufficient answer to this proof, with∣out proceeding to any deeper search or examination of that which in the argument is taken for granted, viz. that the Church signifies the Summus judex, which yet is as far from being for∣merly convincingly inferred, as it is from the sound of the words, or the notion, wherein all the antient Church have uni∣formly taken it, (which will, I hope, be considerable in this matter) for that Christ did not take upon him to be a Judge, or introduce any change in civil Government, as it is by us acknow∣ledged most true, so will it not belong to this of binding, &c. which is but a spiritual, not civil punishment, only a denying them that, which Christ brought into the world, and gave those Messengers of his the sole power of disposing it, and indow'd them with power from on high, particularly for the exercise of it. As for the second argument, 'tis certainly a mistake, if it be thought to conclude that the Apostle did but pronounce the judgement of the Church in that matter of the incestuous, or that the judgement of the civil state was preparative to his. For sure the Apostle had, (before the using of those words of [Do not you judge them that are within?1 Cor. 5.12.] in the end of that Chapt.) past his sentence defini∣tive on that incestuous in the beginning of it, ver. 3. For I have already (not ego autem, but  as absent in body, but present in spirit, judg'd him that hath thus done this thing , I have judg'd this evil doer: Judg'd, I say, and what is the sentence? Why, In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you and my spirit being met together (the Apostle and his Presbytery, or he in the face of the Church) with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one to Satan, &c. And this at a time when 'tis clear, the Church had not pass'd sentence on him, for v. 2. They were puft up, as he complains, and through an opinion of their own deeper wisdome (a leaven, v. 6. i. e. a doctrine either of the heathen philosophers, or of the Gnosticks among them) took it for
an indifferent thing, and did not mourn for him that had done it, The ceremony used by the Church, when any was to be excom∣municate, and notes that they should have so joyn'd together in mourning, in complaining to the Apostle, and prayer to Christ, that this censure might passe on such an one, but that they did not do it, nay, it seems proceeded not so far as to fraternal correption which was infallibly their duty toward him. As for the words cited, [Nonne vos judicatis?] they come in no another inciden∣tal occasion (not directly to this first matter) to make the di∣stinction betwixt the dealing with the Christian and heathen for∣nicators; the Apostle restraining his prescription of not conver∣sing with fornicators, v. 9. to the Christian fornicator, whom, saith he being within the Church, 'tis reasonable to conclude within the Churches censures, ▪ Do you not judge them that are within? not you emphatically or in opposition to the Apostle, but you  as a general title of Christians, who use not to judge any but Christians, all other being left to Gods judge∣ment, the Church having nothing to do with them. It is clear enough, that the context looketh wholly that wy, and conse∣quently there will be little reason to extend these words any farther then this, that the Church judgeth, Christian not heathens; and the Church in the notion only wherein 'tis opposed to God, not in which 'tis opposed to St Paul, but in which in any reason it includes the Apostle or Governor of it; For sure he may judge them that are , within the Church, (for so he doth, v. 3. and no part of the context of that Ch. seems to say any thing to the contrary) though them that are without he cannot; which is the only thing the Apostle had in hand to say at that time. Having briefly answered the reasons, I shall by way of com∣pounding the Controversie with this Gentleman, most willingly acknowledge, that somewhat the Church in his notion, or more clearly the supreme Magistrate, being supposed Christian, may have to do in this businesse of Censures, praecedaneous to the judgement of the Apostle, or before the Pastor or Ecclesiastical Go∣vernor proceed to them, As 1. in the choosing or nominating him to that office; 2. In the setting of rules, or laws by which he ought to proceed in hearing or judging: No question, this may and in Christian Common-wealths very reasonably ought to
belong to the Civil Magistrate; and truly this discouse doth not pretend to, or desire any unlimited, or arbitrary power in the Bi∣shop, but only that, the rules being prudently set by those to whom the power of making laws belongs in every Common-wealth, he should have the cognizance in such causes, as regu∣larly belong to his audience, and according to that rule, & not otherwise, give sentence on the offender▪ and that only thus far, that he shall be turn'd out of Christian society, or received into it again: (which, beside that this is, and hath alwayes been taken for an institution of Christs, which 'tis reasonable we should obey, and not dispute, is also in it self simply considered, far from any degree of unreasonable, no man in ordinary reason being more fit to judge who is fit to enjoy the privileges of the Church, who likely to be reformed by being deprived of them, then he that hath studied that great skill of winning souls, and is intrusted by Christ with the charge of them.) Again 3. it will be granted that the Church in the ordinary notion, as it signifies the whole diffusive Christian Society in any place, may so far be interessed in this matter, as that these only shall be liable to these Cen∣sures, who have offended others by their notorious sins, and are by the Proxyes, as it were of those others, I mean, by their chosen officers, or by the publick fame, the voyce again and interpreter of their sense, delated, or complain'd of to the Go∣vernours of the Church, as those that have wrong'd the Church, and defamed that Christian Profession, to which they had given up their names; and this is a kind of judging (in large or loose speaking, as to be infamous offenders signifies to be conceiv'd and judg'd such by the community among whom they live, for otherwise they are not infamous) but yet in strict propriety, is only a preparative to the sentence of the Judge, and an accusing or impleading rather, and is not, I suppose, the thing for which this Author doth pretend, or if it were, would not to us be matter of contention with him. The truth is, the power of binding, &c. which we contend for, as the office more then privilege of Bishops, (in the careful ex∣ercise of which they minister most charitably to the good of the souls intrusted to them) is another manner of thing, then what this Gentleman seems to have conceived it (both here, and espe∣cially
when of it he concludes, Ʋnusquisque si mentis compos sit obediat in omnibus simpliciter ei,p. 407. cujus arbitrio credit se salvandum aut damnandum esse.) God knows they pretend to no such arbitrium in the saving or damning of any man; It is only an engine of Christs invention to make a battery and an impression on the obdurate sinner to win him to himself to Act. 3.26.blesse, not to triumph over him, (which very thing he hath in one place excellently exprest, Finis hujus∣modi disciplinae erat ut destitu∣ti ad tempus gratiá & privi∣legiis Ecclesiae spiritualibus, humiliarentur ad salutem. p. 407. The end of this discipline, saith he, is by depriving men for a time of the favour and spiritual privileges of the Church, to humble them to salvation,) much lesse to invade any part of civil Judica∣ture, or loosen the bands thereof by these spiritual pretences, but to leave the Government of the world just in the posture that it was before Christs coming, or as it would be supposed to be, if he had never left any Keyes in his Church. And therefore, when in an Annotation affixt to his last Edition he was pleased to extend his observation of the Doctrinae quae∣dam quibus imbuti cives obedientiam civitati negari, & contra Prin∣cipes summos, summasque potestates pug∣nare, idque jure posse, imo opor∣tee arbitran∣tur. p. 101. Doctrines that might disturb Government, not only to that power which many attribute to the Pope of Rome in other mens dominions, and to the liberty usurpt by the ci∣ves infimi, under pretence of Religion, but also to that which alicu∣bi extra Ecclesiam Romanam Episcopi in civitate suâ sibi postulant, I must hope that it was a mistake, or which I rather think (being perswaded of the uprightness of his affections to our establisht Government) that his [alicubi] did not in any wise refer (as I was apt to fear it did) to the constitution of Episcopacy in this native Kingdome of his and mine. For that this, since it depar∣ted from the Roman Church, hath been perfectly free from any degree of that guilt, is that of which we are so far perswaded, that we neither fear, nor deprecate any Historians instance, nor can imagine what one particle of the doctrine, or constitution of our Church there is, on which a rational man can by any con∣sequence build such a Nam quod bellum civle in Obe Christi∣ano unquam extuit, quod ab  or∣tum atque ali∣tum non fue∣rit? p. 102. charge; Of which nothing can make Ʋs capable, but leaving the [non] out of it; and that makes me a little confident, that either [Episcopi] in that place signifies not in the known vulgar Christian sense, or that the [alicubi] lookt not on this Kingdome or Church of ours (as it hath long stood establisht by Law) which most cheerfully acknowledges the truth of his many other observations, (particularly that of Obedience due to the Moses's,p. 190. not Aarons chair, of Abithar the
High-priest being no way exempt from the command of Solomon,p. 192. p. 371 372. of his three axioms also concerning Excommunication, that neither the Common-wealth, nor the supreme Magistrate, nor all the per∣sons in any Common-wealth can be excommunicate) and resolves that no man shall ever deprive her of this glorying, that she is pure from the bloud of all men, hath entertain'd no one principle, or doctrine in any degree incompetible with the civil power, or peace in the utmost extent, in which the most loyal author hah design'd to establish it. And if it must be Arminianism (as one hath lately confuted it under that title) to teach Errant primò Arminian. qui Magistratus Politico Eccle∣siasticum regi∣men subjectum esse docebant. that the Ec∣clesiastical power is subjected to the Civil Magistrate, who in all causes over all persons is acknowledged by us supreme under Christ, we must be content to lye down under that envie, and not excuse or renounce that piece of Loyal Arminianism. I have thus far proceeded in this matter for the removing of  prejudices, and vindicating our proposition from three sorts of objecters: 'tis now time to advance a little toward the positive assertive part, and to that end (the knowledge of loosing depen∣ding wholly from the consideration of binding) I shall in the first place examine what images of binding we have in the Scripture, and those we shall refer to two heads: first, those that belong to the power, and practise Apostolical, (in the time and persons of the Apostles;) secondly, those that after the Apostles persons, (and ever since) were to continue in the Church, which we shall call Ecclesiastical Discipline (as distant from Apostolical) exer∣cised (the one, as the other) upon offenders either publick and scandalous, or whose crimes otherwise came unto their cogni∣zance, and consisting either in separating and removing to some distance, or in casting them totally out of the Church, or Congre∣gation of visible Professors here on earth; answerable unto which, [loosing] must consequently be a delivering from those censures, the absolving of him, who was formerly separated, or excommunicated, restoring him to the visible Church; or any part thereof (to the privileges of a Christian, and the comforts of the Word, and Services, and Sacraments) who was before legally cast ou of it, and deprived of them. For the understanding of which, and specially of the former, the Apostolical power and practise (or as it was discernable
among the Apostles) it will not be amisse to do these three things: 1. To give you a view of the several sorts of Excommu∣nication among the Jews, to which some phrases in the New Testament refer: (because I see there is some controversie rai∣sed concerning them.) 2. To mention some of those places in the New Testament, which seem to refer to these; And then 3. to observe the phrases in the New Testament, which are more purely Christian, i. e. which more distinctly and peculiarly respect the use of these Censures among Christians. For the first, I am sure, 'twill be no news to say that there were three degrees of Excommunication among the Jews; the first called  remotion or separation; the second,  Execration, a more solemn Excommunication (with curses out of Moses Law and execrations added to it, a  of which we have Act. 8.20.) inflicted on him who after the  first for 30 dayes, and then being allowed 30 dayes more (which is doubling of the ) still continued in that contumacy, for then, say the Jews , they anathematize him without defining any limited ime, as before in Niddui they did. The third is  a kind of Proscription and delivering to desola∣tion and destruction; or to the coming of the Lord in judge∣ment against him, noted by  (added to the anathema)  in the Oriental tongues signifying Dominus; whence in Etruria the Kings are called Murani, saith Servius in Aen. 12. and the Syrians now Maranitae, because they call Christ  our Lord Agreeable to which it is, that in Epiphanius, GOD is by the Gazari call'd Marnas, and by the Cretians their virgins , i. e  Ladies, as among the Spaniards the form hath been used, Sit anathema Marano, & excommunicatus, or  Let him be excommunicate from the hope of the Lord: (and though he that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ be not 1 Cor. 16.22. appointed to be excommunicated by that phrase, yet doth it referre to the use of the phrase among the Jews, though there it be by way of accommodation set to signifie another matter, that higher more direful sentence of (Go you cursed, &c.) Of these three species thus set down , I should not add much more, but that again I see two things re∣solved on by a fore-mentioned learned Author, contrary to what
hath been generally received in this matter, and the latter of them apt, if believed, to divest the Church of all kinde of di∣scipline, even of such as was instituted on no other design but to bring sinners to heaven, and which we desire should be used onely to that end. They are these, 1. That there are but two species of Excommunication among the Jews, Niddui and Cherem, and that Schammatha is all one with Niddui. 2. That these punishments among the Jews belonged not to exclusion from sacred, but only from civil society. For the first of these, that which I find produced to disprove  those three species, is, 1. The promiscuous use of Niddui and Schammatha among the Talmudical writings. Secondly, the de∣rivation of Schammatha from  which among them signifies no more then to separate and to abdicate: and thirdly, that Elias Levita, and David de Pomis, which are for these three species, were not Lawyers, but Grammarians, and so did oscitanter negli∣gently and drowsily make three species of Excommunication, when they should have made but two. To all which I answer, that those learned men which maintain the three species may very well do it for ought these objections enforce to the contrary. For it will not be necessary for us to affirm that the Talmu∣dists should use these several words constantly according to their distinct, proper, peculiar, critical importance; there is no∣thing more ordinary then for words that are used in foro to lose their native proper significations, and to be used , for somewhat else of affinity, and near signification with them; and therefore it will be worth observing, that as Schammatha in the Talmud is sometimes taken only for separation (which is the reason that they which are against the three species make Schammatha to be all one with Niddui, and to set down Niddui and Cherem for the two:) So in other places Niddui is set to de∣note Schammatha as a higher degree then Cherem,p. 2467. as will ap∣pear (to any that cannot otherwise passe judgement on it) by the places which Buxtorf hath produced in his Rabbinical Lexi∣con, which shew clearly that Schammatha is a heavier degree of Excommunication, and yet that Niddui is by them put for Scham∣matha, which indeed will be a proof that Niddui and Schamma∣tha are used promiscuously, & sine discrimine among those wri∣ters,
but not at all, that there are but two degrees or species, Nid∣dui and Cherem, but clearly the contrary, that Cherem is a mid∣dle species, beyond which there is Schamatha, (which they some∣times improperly cal Niddui) as wel as below it Niddui, which they sometimes call Schammatha; and therefore Jo. Coch which is cited to prove that Niddui & Schammatha are all one, saith withall, that  and , non tantum de leviori, sed & de gravi∣ori indifferenter usurpantur, ex. Gem. San. p. 146. both used for the greater, as well as both for the lighter Excommunication. To which I shall add, that the Hebr. writers are so far from speaking constantly, and exactly, & critically in this matter, that they sometimes put Cherem, or anathema lowest, and ad Schammatha to that, and then set Niddui as the last of the three, as in Jelam∣medenu sect.  speaking of the Samaritans▪ the species of Ex∣communication are thus enumerated,  and they anathematized, and schammatized and excommunicated him, by which it will appear, how promiscuously those words have been used among Hebr. writers, (to which purpose may be again remembred, what was even now produced of the phrase in Spain, Sit anathema marano, & excommunicatus, excom∣municatus after the highest anathema) but it will not be a proof of any validity, against the three species of Excommunication, or the order or difference of them, when they do speak exactly. For the second proof taken from the derivation of Scham∣matha from , which, saith he, signifies no more then to se∣parate or abdicate, I desire this may be noted, that there is no such ancient Hebrew word as  but only of later use among the Rabbins, and Talmudists, which to me is an argument con∣vincing that that verb may come from Schammatha, and not Schammatha from the verb; and therefore Buxtorf, when he meets with it, renders it Schammatizare, as a verbal from that noun, not willing to affix any other Interpretation to it, but this, that so he might leave it to signifie in the same latitude (as a verb) that belongs to schammatha, as a substanive, i. e som∣times to be taken properly and strictly to denote the third species, sometimes improperly, to be all one with Niddui, or the first species. For the confirming of what I now say, I shal premise what
suppose will be easily granted me, that every compound or deri∣vative Hebrew word, is to be reduced to some original Hebrew root or roots, from which it is derived, or of which compounded consequently that the same must be resolved of  which that it is not a derivative from  I conceive is sufficiently evinc'd, because  is no primitive Hebrew word to be found in the Bible, or other authentick Hebrew writing (which he that will not trust his own observation, but survey Schindler and Buxtorf, will acknowledge with me) but only among the Rab∣bins and Talmudists, and may rather be thought to come from  then Schammatha from that; this is not my conjecture, but the direct words of the learned Buxtorf, in his institution of Hebrew Epistles p. 58. in these words, Talmudiei ex nomine  verbum faciunt  prosribere, proscriptionis poenam in aliquem fere the Talmudists from the noun Schammatha make the verb Schammeth, to proscribe, &c. and though Buxtorf in his Rabbinical Lexicon place the verb before the noun, yet is that no argument of dis∣agreement between these two writings, but is only caused by a care of observing his wonted litteral method of setting the verb of the three letters before the noun of one letter more. If it be demanded of me from whence then the noun comes, (seeing I make the verb come from that) I answer that learned Jews have given it several originations, some bringing it from  Dominus venit, the Lord comes, making it all one with , 1 Cor. 16.22. (but the dagesh in  makes me that I cannot consent to that Etymology) others from  ibi mors, there is death; others from  desolatio erit, there shall be desolation. Of these two latter I know not which to choose, 1. having little objection aginst either of them, and 2. finding them both avowed in the Gemara Moed Katon, in these words, what is Schammatha? Rab answered  there is death, and Samuel said,  there shall be desolation, &c. and 3. finding the sense of both those originations to come to the same purpose of death, or desolation, or destruction, noting that kinde of offender to be by that censure given up to divine ven∣geance, which is generally the notion of that 3 degree of Ex∣communication, which makes it to be taken for the same with Maanatha in the Apostle, that God comes as a judge or avenger
to such an one. For let me add to this matter this one thing, that this third degree of censure among the Jews at Christs time, was proper to him, that under Moses Law had deserved death, but by reason that the power of capital punishments was taken from the Jews, could not by them be so punished, and therefore was by this way thus delivered up to Gods hands, to inflict vengeance upon him, which they say did very frequent∣ly befall them in a remarkable manner; and S. Austins observa∣tion is to this purpose, quaest. super Deu. l. 5. c. 38. Hoc nunc agit in Ecclesiâ excommunicatio, quod agebat tunc interfectio. Excommunica∣tion doth the same among Christians, that killing did among the Jews. As for the third proof of the objection, taken from the lessen∣ing of the authority of Elias Levita, and David de Pomis, it will be sufficient to say, 1. That to make that argumentative, it ought to have been (but is not) proved, that others which have call'd the three species in question, are of greater authority then these. 2. That Grammarians (if they be such indeed, as those have been allowed that reputation) are . Mosc. Criticks also, and so as fit to be hearkned unto in such a matter of ancient custome among the Jews, as if they had been Lawyers, they would have been; more, I am sure, then any other Lawyers, which had not been so good Grammarians; and yet that any Jewish Lawyer hath avowed the contrary opinion, is not, that I know of, as yet pretended: And 3. For the negligence or oscitance of these Grammarians, that hath not with any proof or confirmation been laid to their charge, and if it were, 'tis as possible that Jewish Lawyers might have been guilty of it as they, nay it were more reasonable to accuse them of oscitancy, that make but two, and them of double diligence that have discerned one species more then they. To this Topick ab authoritate I shall add only, that Aloysius (whom the Reader is by this Gentleman advised to turn to Sched. sacro prof. l. 7. c. 10.) doth affirm in these direct words, Sunt apud Hebraeos plures excommunicationis gradus, Niddui, Cherem, Schamatha; there are several degrees of excommmunication among the Hebrews, those three by name, though he inlarge not to explain the third, as he doth these two former: and so much for the first particular. Now for the second thing, that these species of excommunica∣tion  among the Jews were only to exclude from civil society, and
had nothing to do with sacred, I shal venture it to the judgment of intelligent indifferent men, who shall but examine what they meet with on this subject, if it be but at second hand in Instit. ep. he. p. 55. Buxtorf, &c. out of the Hebrew writers. It is his observation of Niddui the lowest species, that it is remotio ab aliorum congressu quàm sacro, quàm politico, & domestico, ad 4 passus; separation not onely from civil commerce, but from sacred also. Now that which I con∣ceive hath caused this mistake in this first kind (& from thence perhaps without any new cause extended it to the rest) is that such an one that was separated by Niddui, was allowed to come to the sacred meetings, to be present at Common-prayers, to teach others▪ and to be taught with others, as the same author affirms; but then this concludeth not against us, for the same Buxtorf still adds, sed semper sub dictâ lege remotionis, alwayes under the fore∣mentioned law of remotion, and distance. And so these two , it seems are reconcileable thus: Niddui is not a totall remo∣tion or separation neither from sacred, nor from civil society, (be∣ing you know but the first degree or species) but onely ad 4 passus, that none can come within the distance of foure paces of him that is under the censure; and this degree of separation being extended to sacred as well as civil assemblies, yet excluded him not either from praying with the Congregation, or learning, or (if he were a Doctor) teaching in it; onely a mark was set up∣on him, to discriminate him from others, which were under no censure; this is described in R. Eliezer, c. 17. King Solomon, saith he, when he built the house of the Sanctuary, made two gates, one for bridegrooms, another for mourners and excommunicate persons, by which they went into the Temple. And to these two gates and sorts of men the Apostle may seem  to allude Rom. 12.15. & 1 Cor. 7.30. when he speaks of weeping with them that weep, & rejoycing with them that rejoyce; and no que∣stion the  which we render bewayling, 1 Cor. 5.2. refers to that stile of mourners, and denotes the solemnity usual among the Jews of putting on mourning habit, and wailing over them that were excommunicate, according to that of the author of the Constitutions under Clements name, , l. 2. Let the incurable be put out of the Church with sorrow and wailing. These mourners, or excommuni∣cate
in that Rabbi were those under Niddui, who it seems were admitted to the temple, but appointed to come in at a doore peculiar to them, and with some such mark of discrimination, that they that saw them might pray for them in this form, Qui inhabitat domum hanc, consoletur te, indátque animo tuo ut obtemperes, &c. He that dwels in this house, comfort thee, and give thee a heart to obey; by which I am forced to confesse, that Niddui did not sepa∣rate from all society in sacris, but only remove to such a distance; and yet the Reader will be forced to confesse also, that this se∣paration or rather remotion belonged ad sacra, as well as ad po∣litica, and in the same degree that it restrain'd the one kind of society, it restrain'd the other also; and so saith Jo. Mich. Dilherr. Elector. l. 2. c. 10. having premised that Niddui est hominis ab alio∣rum conventu tam sacro, quam politico, & domestico, ad 4 usque cubitus sive passus per dies 30 remotio, &c. A remotion from sacred, civil, do∣mestick commerce, to the distance of foure paces for 30 dayes, a depri∣vation of the marriage bed, of shaving, and washing, and such other com∣modities, he adds that  he that is under this censure, may be present at sacred meetings, but so many paces off from the rest of the company. And therefore whereas this author affirmeth that by Niddui is not meant an ejection out of the Church, but only a depriva∣tion of that liberty of civil society within four paces, & applies to it that sense, wherein the Poet cals the Britains, toto divisos orbe, divided from the whol world, not that they are totally divi∣ded from the rest of the world, but to denote a peculiar situation of those Islands in the Ocean, I shal acknowledge the observation so far as it denies a totall separation, but not as it intimates a greater separation in civilibus, then in sacris, as the words [pecu∣liari illâ civilis inter suos consortii libertatis deprivation?] would seem to import, and as the intention of the writer is by himself de∣monstrated to be. The matter is sufficiently clear that Niddui is but a lighter censure, remotion or restraint for such a degree, but not a total separation either from sacred, or civil society, yet stil as much from sacred as from civil, in both limitedly 30 dayes, and for the distance of four Cubits. But then for Cherem the second degree, that is defin'd by Lexicon Rab. p. 827. Buxtorf, exclusion from the sacred assemblies, casting out of the Syna∣gogue
with all the curses of Deut. 28. (to which, say Dilherr. elect· l. 2. others, was added the Ceremony of putting out the Candles, to signifie him deprived of the light of heaven) and he hath proof for it out of Maimonides in Madda, c. 7. Muchram non docet néque discit cum aliis. He that is under the second censure, is excluded from hearing the law in publick; And, as Ep. Hebr. in∣stit. p. 56. Buxtorf elswhere adds, ò Synagogâ, conventi∣bus, negotiis, publicis, sacris, & politicis omnibus exclusus, donec resipi∣scat; which may further appear by the form of this anathema, which he brings out of an antient Hebr. manuscript. Sit in anathe∣mate sanctorum excelsorum, in anathemate, Seraphim, & Ophunnim, in anathemate totius Ecclesiae, &c. Now from this, the third species differs onely in this, that as that was a total separation, donec re∣sipiscat, til he repent, but reversible upon repentance, total for the present, but not irremissible, so this was both total and final too, & so undoubtedly (not remitting of the severity of the second but adding to it) extended to the separation in sacris also; and therefore whatsoever may be said of Schammatha in the wide Rabbinical acception of it, as it goes indifferently for Niddui, there wil be little doubt, but the Schammatha peculiarly so cal∣led, or that which is call'd  & , the Schammatha of the Lord, or of the God of Israel, is, as the lear∣ned define it, Ea quâ quis totaliter & finaliter ab Ecclesiâ (as that notes coetum sacrum, as well as civilem) segregatus, divino judicio sit devotus, & cum eâ mors & exitium; so Dilherr. l. 2. of Maranatha (which he supposes to be al one with it) Est proscriptio extrema, & absque spe veniae irrogata, quâ reus omnibus humanae societatis juri∣bus, legibus, & officiis exclusus, judicio divino committitur, & ad extre∣mam desolationem condemnatur. A perfect proscription, without hope of pardon, by which the offender is excluded from all privileges, and offices of humane society, and committed to the judgement of God, and condemned to extream desolation. I shal abstain from adding more to the proof of this truth in the several species, conceiving that I have sufficiently proved or vindicated in the lowest, & shewed the , the cause or the occasion of their mistake, who deny it; and then there will be little need to confirm it any further in the other two degrees, which do adde to that lowest, but cannot be thought to come short of it. And having thus clear'd the first thing which we proposed,
view'd the several sorts of Excommunication among the Jews, I proceed now to the second, to those places of the New Testa∣ment which seem to refer to them: In which matter I shall not be confident or dogmatical, but deliver my thoughts as for the present it seems to me, & shew you the grounds of my so seem∣ing. And 1. that place Luk. 6.22. doth appear to belong to Ex∣communication among the Jews, but whether to one only or more species of it, I am uncertain;  surely belongs to the first kind, that of Niddui, which cannot be more literally ren∣dred in Greek then by , separation, or remotion, 4 paces off, and perhaps that with  added to it, signifies to do it con∣tumeliously; But yet because 'tis possible, that  may have a greater force in it, and be a notation of cursing and execration, not only in this but in other places of the Gospel, therefore I conceive that word (set immediately after ) may denote the second degree, that of Cherem, & then to the same wil belong that third phrase also of  to cast out your name as evil, for an Hebraism there is in these words, which though a very learned man conceive to consist in this; 1. that  shall be all one with  (as indeed sometimes it is) 2. that as  is to bring up an evil report,  shal signifie the same thing; yet I shal take leave to interpose, 1. that the phrase used for bringing up an evil report, Num. 14.36. is,  not , but , nor , but , and in brief, that I canot find any where  or  in the transla∣tors of the old, or writers of the new Testament, for bringing up an evil report. 2. That , to cast out your name as evil; 1. [ yours] then [ as] added, wil be somewhat another kind of phrase then  or  as [to bring up an evil name or report] is in our language a very in∣telligible phrase for defaming, but [to bring up your name or report as evil] is not so; and therefore I shall venture to propose my conjecture, that the Hebraism is not in the word [] but in the [] & [:] so that 1.  shall signifie no more then your persons, or you (as Mat. 1.23. [] is no more then he (as , Act. 1.15. signifies persons of men) shall be (not he shall be named by that name) a God
with us, or God incarnate) and then  shall signifie [as scandalous] or offensive, or abominable, as  is by the 72. sometimes rendred  being ashamed (whence perhaps our English bashful and abash) sometimes , to abominate, sometimes  to be evil or wicked, Gen. 34.24. Esd. 4.12. and so [to cast out your names as evil] will clearly signifie to cast you out as wicked, shameful, abominable persons, a denotation of the  which was not onely separating or removing to a distance, but total casting out, and that with reproaches, curses, and execra∣tions, such as in Moses are denounced against greater male∣factors; whether these circumstances of this text do thus de∣note, I am not confident, and therefore have onely proposed a conjecture, but that the , and  do referre to the Niddui and Cherem I doubt not, nor if you marke it, doth H. Grotius who hath enlarged on that subject of Excommu∣nication, in his Annotations on that verse. No more do I find my self moved by the arguments of that  learned Gentleman to doubt, but that  to be turned out of the Synagogue, Joh. 9.22.12.42.16.2. refers to the second of these species among the Jewes, for that  and  do sometime signifie a civil Congregation or assembly, and not alwayes a sacred (as when the hypocrite is said to pray standing,  in places of publike concourse and corners of the streets, as the most visible places, Matth. 6.) I shall easily grant, & yet not think my self thereby concluded, or obliged to yeeld, but that it may also, at other times, note the holy assembly, or meeting for the performance of sacred duties, out of which it was sure no news for the Jews (after that capital judgements were taken away from them) to eject notorious ma∣lefactors, particularly hereticks, false prophets, or their sectators, and disciples, as these here for preaching of Christ, whom the Jews acknowledged not; in like manner as in the time of the Captivity, Esd. 10.8. the order is given, that whosover appears not upon summons , all his estate shall be (forfeited we render, the word is  noting the Cherem which we now speak of) devoted, anathematized, as an evidence of that kinde of Excommunication which followes in
the next words, , he shall be separated from the Church or Congregation of the captivity, not only from Civil, but Ecclesiastical society with them, for so Cherem was formerly demonstrated to signifie; nay, it may with some reason be conceived in that place from Ecclesiastical only, in case of Cherem or total ejection; for 'tis more probable, that the King under whom they were captive, allowing them some liberty for the exercise of their religion, but in civil matters keeping them as captives and servants, should permit them to punish one another by that way of casting out of their Ecclesi∣astical Assemblies, then by that other of civil interdict, especi∣ally if it be conceiv'd to extend to banishment, &c. which would intrench upon his Prerogative, and be a kind of turning the captive out of his captivity. That  belongs to this second species, and so to casting out of the society in sacris, is the distinct affirmation of the learned Instit. Ep. He. p. 56. Buxtorf in these words, Haec est illa excommunicatio (speaking of Cherem) de qua in Evangelio Iohannis, cap. 9.22.12.42. etsi ab eo tempore Rabbini quaedam ipsi adjecerint: and the intimation of Exc. Gem. Sanhedr. c. 1. p. 149. John Coch also in these words, Qui simpliciter excommunicatus est,  est ille quidem separatus à coetu, ita ut pro vero membro Ecclesiae non habeatur, non tamen videtur esse  quia doctrinae particeps est. From which words of that very learned man, I observe these two things contrary to what I see lately affirm'd. 1. That  doth not be∣long to Niddui, but to Cherem. 2. That it is an ejection not only ab Ecclesiâ, Synagogâ, as that notes rempublicam Judaicam, but from sacred Assemblies, noted by doctrinae particeps, accord∣ing to that rule in Maimonides. Devotus nec docet nee docetur, such an one is excluded from both, it seems, and so from those holy Assemblies, where that was wont to be done. To this phrase of [] is subjoyned Jo. 16.2. , &c. but (or yea) the hour cometh that every man that killeth you shall seem, or be thought to do God service, or to offer a sacrifice to him; whereon I shall interpose a conjecture, that those words may possibly denote the third degree, that of Schammatha, at least a consequent of it, for so saith Ep. Heb. insti. p. 58. Buxtorf
of that species, Mortem dicit, quia cujusvis manibus ejus vita exposita est, & euilibet eum interficiendi libera potestas: It is so call'd, be∣cause such a mans life is exposed to any ones hands, every one having a free power of killing him: & so to that he applies the Maranatha which is added to Anathema, 1 Cor. 16.22. a forme of extreme proscription, delivering up the sinner to divine re∣venge, in which case whosoever kill'd him, conceived him∣self to perform an act of execution of justice, and service to God. Some other places there are in the New Testament belong∣ing  to these Judaical censures, fit to be explained; but I have chosen to insist onely on those because, I lately find them otherwise rendred, but yet discern no reason to recede from what I have now delivered, that they do belong to those species of Excommunication not only from civil but from sa∣cred assemblies, though one in an higher degree then another. To which I shall onely adde, that they which have applied these places to Christian excommunication, any otherwise then only by way of accommodation, shall not be pleaded for by me, who acknowledge that they belong to the Jews, and to their usage of Christians, and not to some Christians dealing with others; but then sure there is as little reason on their side who will not allow that way of accommodation, which would not be at all unreasonable, though those phrases among the Jewes were supposed to belong only to civil commerce; It being ordinary for Christ to ordain some things in his Church, which were answerable to civil not sacred customes among the Jews (as the Lords Supper, sure an Eccle∣siastical rite among us, was to their post-coenium, which was not so, and many the like,) to transplant from their forum to our Church, and therefore no way unfit for the Apostles and following Church to appropriate those words to Ecclesiastical senses, though they were supposed to be among the Jewes of a greater latitude: Of which sort, because I formerly promised it, I shall now specifie in some instances. This may be discern'd in the word , which if
any man should prove to have no other sense among Christi∣ans, then that of a meeting together in a Town hall, upon no other way of probation, but that the Hebrew words an∣swerable to that, are by the Talmudists, yea even in the Scri∣pture of the Old Testament taken in this sense, this would be a little strange; the matter of fact being most evident to the contrary, and it being most prompt and proper, that words used either among the Greeks or Hebrewes in fo∣rinsecal senses, may be bent by Christian Writers to a sacred. So in like manner, the word , it is acknowledged, is answerable to the  among the Jewes, and that word denoted among them some offices, which if they may in any respect be counted Ecclesiastical, are yet very distant from the Christian use of it: such was that of the Messengers sent out to demand and bring in the dues to the Temple, which cannot without the helpe of accommodation be applyed to the Christian acception of the word; and such againe was the proxy in contracting or marrying two persons, for he was call'd  i. e. Apostolus also, an inter∣cessor or internunce betwixt them, which as a sponsor, under∣took for one to the other, the , such as Samson had Judg. 14.20. i. e. in Varinus his definition , of whom he saith that when the Bridegroome himselfe must not goe into the Fathers house, (viz. in a , Phavor. second marriage, such as that was of God with the Gentiles, who had before espoused the Jewes) , hee sends one of his friends: To which mtion of the word (according to one punctation of the place) the Apostle may seem to referre, 2 Cor. 11.2. when he expresses his Apostleship by , I have espoused you to one husband, according to that sense of  acknowledged by . 3. c.  Julius Pollux, , making the , or sponsor all one with , and  to signifie the interceding or mediating a marriage, all one with that word  there used by St. Paul, agreeable to which
the word  is by Pollux further extended to the mediators of any kinde of league, ;. 1. c. . and then according to that notion also, is the Apostles pacifick office, praying and beseeching us in Christs stead to be reconciled to God, all which are very con∣venient accommodations, but farre from requiring the Christian word to the very kinde of sense that the Hebrew  did import. So againe, , Bishops in the Christian Church, doe in  respect of their office, particularly that of imposition of hands, (peculiar to them above the Presbyters even in St. Jeromes confession) referre to the  the Princeps Synedrii, who im∣posed hands upon those that were elected into the Sanhe∣drim, but in respect of the name they referre to the use of the word  among the Jewes, and accordingly the very word  is both 1 Mac. 1.53. and in Josephus, set to signifie them that are set over any publike businesse, the  that set men a worke, and require an account of the perfor∣mance, and yet are by way of accommodation brought both in the New Testament, and in all Sacred Writers since, to signifie an office parallel to this, but purely Ecclesiastick. So the word , though in the Old Testament it belong properly to the Elders of the people either in a common notion, or as members of their Sanhedrim, not any body, or single persons peculiarly Ecclesiasticke, (though by the way 'tis most cleare, that the high Priests were not onely of that number, part of their Sanhedrim, or  or , but also the chiefe of them, and therefore in the New Testament the mention of the high Priests and Elders comes oft together in point of judi∣cature; and the businesse of that Court, being all kinde of affaires, Civil as well as Ecclesiasticke, it was most reasonable that some persons of both conditions should be intrusted with them, and there being so, no wonder that there was no other Court, or Tribunal meerly Ec∣clesiastical) yet doth it unquestionably belong, both in
many places of the New Testament, and in the constant ac∣ception of primitive and after-writers, to an order of Ec∣clesiasticks, as is most apparent both by Clemens, and Ignatius, and is confest by them, which assert the  of Bishops, and Presbyters: which makes it not very reasonable to con∣sent to the way of arguing, twice used by that learned Writer, who from the Talmudical writings of the Creation of the Jewish Elders, would conclude how little, or how nothing there is in the Creation of a Presbyter among Christians, more then of a Doctor of Law, &c. But this by the way. Lastly, so the  Deacons in the Christian Church are directly parallel to the  under the Synagogue, called by Epiphanius (by a light inflexion or change of the Hebrew) , the  or treasurers,  in Philo,  in Josephus) which I wonder a Rivet. Grot. disc. . pag. 475. learned man should carpe at, onely upon this exception, because it was not proved they were in synagogis praefecti, ut ministrarent mensis, when 'tis cleare that the  in the Acts, noting first the ministring to them in the , that common table for the poore and rich, doth in univer∣sum signifie [providing for the poore] and that is as clear∣ly parallel to the office of those treasurers among the Jewes, as if they had literally in the Synagogue served tables. I should now proceed to my third proposal, the phrases which are purely Christian, but that I conceive it not unfit to take notice of one difficulty (which wee have not yet mentioned, nor shall have occasion to mention among the phrases purely Christian) and to give some ac∣count of that in this place. And it is, to examine what was the condition, 1. Of Heathens. 2. Of Samaritans. 3. Of those that are called Sinners. 4. Of Publicans among the Jewes; being tempted to that (if it be an extravagance) by another Parenthesis in a learned Authour before mentio∣ned.
For Gentiles, they were of three sorts; either 1. Proselytes  of justice, who were circumcised, and undertook their whole law, and these were allowed to live among them, to enjoy all liberty and priviledges, that any Jew did, differing from them in nothing but their Gentile-birth. Secondly, Proselytes of the Gates, which were converted so far by them, as to receive the precepts of the sonnes of Adam and Noah, but not to be circum∣cised, &c. and these were also permitted to live freely among them in civii society, and to come to the temple (Gods house being a house of prayer to all people, i. e. to all such Gentle wor∣shippers, or godly men of the nation) but that with a marke of difference from the Jewes, and perfect Proselytes, there be∣ing a court provided on purpose for them, called the court of the Gentiles, divided from the court of the Jewes by a little partition called by the Apostle , by Jo∣sephus  or , on which was written , that no such Gentile proselyte might goe in i. e. beyond their owne, into the Jewes court; and so these though admitted to society in sacris, yet were so removed or separated by law, the whole body of them, that they were in a manner under the censure of niddui, or , separated from them for some small space, proportionable to that of foure paces, but this not by any act of excommvnication, but by a general law or tra∣dition, thus discriminating them from Jewes in this parti∣cular. Thirdly, there were the Gentiles continuing still utterly  unconverted in their Gentilisme, and with those they were not to have society at all (not onely in sacris, for there was no need of interdicting that, they would not joyne with them and for them to joyne in the Gentile sacrifices were down-right Idolatry) but to separate from them, for feare their company and conversation should infuse their Gentiles sinnes into them, wherein they were so strict, that they would not goe into the praetorium, where the band of Roman (i. e. such Gentile) souldiers were,
Joh. 18. ver. 28. counting it a Pollution, if they had so done. So you see what was the condition of the Gentiles among the Jewes, and all this by law or standing custome among them, without any interposition of any degree of excommu∣nication, as having nothing to do to judge them which are with∣out, i. e. the last kind of Gentiles, and having set rules for the other two. Then for the Samaritans, they are almost, if not quite, in the same case with the last sort of Gentiles, no conversation allowed between the Jewes and them, as you see Joh. 4. ver. 9. , the Jewes have not common com∣merce with the Samaritans, no not so farre, as that one should give the other meat or drinke in his want, or helpe him to it, as appeares by the former part of that verse, Doest thou being a Jew aske to drinke of me being a Samaritan? they might not , eat together, which was proportionable to the Niddui, (that being a separation, to the distance of foure paces, à congressu domestico,Buxt. Ep. Heb. instit. p. 55. as well as sacro & civili, and a prohibition of eating and drinking together promiseuously) and not onely so, but an interdicting of acts of common humanity, as helping to necessaries of life, like the proscription among the Romans; but this is not by way of excommunication againe, (but by standing law or custome) for the Samaritans used not the same place of worship with the Jewes, came not to Jerusalem, Joh. 4. ver. 20. and so could not be excommunica∣ted by them. Nay, Matth. 10. ver. 5. you shall see the Sama∣ritans and the Gentiles joyned together in opposition to the Jews, when the Apostles are commanded to go neither to the way of the Gentiles, nor to the City of Samaria, but onely to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; that is, first to them, before either Sama∣ritans or Gentiles were preacht to, which were all one in effect, the Samaritan being called  an aliene, Luke 17.16. In the next place, the word sinners is in the New Testament an equivocal word; for it may signifie either Gentiles, as Gal. 2.15. sinners of the Gentlles; or else scandalous offenders,
infamous persons, harlots, &c. these (it seems) it was unlawful to eat with, Mat. 9.11. If taken under the first notion, the case will be clear upon the same account, as before we gave you of the Heathens: but under the second notion, if sinners signifie notorious offenders, then are they considered either as men under the punishment of excommunication, or at least worthy to be under it, and that either under niddui or cherem, the lowest of which would make them uncapable of familiar conversation, and eating together with other Jews; and upon that ground, the Jewes might quarrel with Christ for eating with them, and S. Paul speaking of the incestuous person might refer to the Jewish custome, and thereupon command , not to eat with him, (that remotion in niddui for the distance of four cubits, being unreconcileable with familiar eating together) and so the Pharisee, when the , Luk. 7.37. came with her cruse of ointment, and a∣nointed and kist Christs feet, resolves that if Christ knew what she were, he would not admit of so neer a commerce with her, and concludes him no Prophet, that he did not know it. Lastly, for the Publicans, who were also thought unfit for  men to eat and drink with, I conceive that is not again from any of the Jewish censures past upon them, but only because either they were Gentiles, and so uncapable of that commerce, or else being Jews, yet being officers of the Romans, they were supposed to commerce ordinarily with Gentiles, and so to be polluted by that means, and by the law of legal pollution interdicted that familiar reception among the Jewes; not∣withstanding which, it appeares, the Publican, Luk. 18, 10. went up to the Temple to pray, as well as the Pharisee; and if the Parable be argumentative, it seems the Pharisee and the Publican were in the same Court of the Temple, (as maybe guest by the Pharisees pointing him out, This Publican) and so that the Publican enjoyed all the same priviledges of accesse that the other did, (though still he continued afar off, & that in a most humble posture, as if he he were ander niddui, that low∣est degree of excommunication) but because it may be subject to mistake, to argue from Parables, I shall not do so, but leave the
Publican joyned with the sinner, as one Heathen with another, both by the Jewish laws, forbidden to converse with, and not expelled by any censure of excommunication. These conjectures being thus obiter and in passage premised, only on purpose to discard some lesse pertinent places, which some others perhaps have taken liberty to make use of, and not out of design to make any special advantage of this explica∣tion of them, in order to my present purpose, or in opposi∣tion to any; I come now to the last thing proposed even now, to shew you the phrases more purely Christian: Such are, 1. To deliver unto Satan, , 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Tim. 1.20. answerable to Cherem among the Jews, so far as belonged to the society in sacris, a turning the blasphemer out of the Church of Christ. This was the frequent stile of excommunication, because it was the depriving the man of those every-day means which are in Christianity afforded, as ordinarily usefull to eject Satan and the power of his Kingdom out of the heart: Such are, 1. The Prayers of the Church. 2. The publick use of the Word or Do∣ctrine of Christianity: (for so he that is under Gherem, nec docet nec docetur, neither teacheth nor are taught, and in the ancient Christian Church it appears they were excluded from that, & upon repentance received for the first three years among the , or hearers in the porch, , saith Zo∣naras, which being the first degree of their return to communion, argues that before they were excluded from it) and thirdly, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in which respect scandalous sinners are by S. Jude call'd spots in their feasts, or agapae (which being annext to the Lords Supper denoted the whole action) i. e. un∣fit, as blemished sacrifices to be received there. The use of which means being in the oeconomy of the Gospel designed to so much advantage to the Soule, for the casting Satan out of it, conse∣quently the banishing from, or depriving of the use of those means is properly stiled the delivering to Satan, though in Gods gracious disposal of all things, that be dsigned by him also to the same gracious end, to cast Satan out of him, on whom no∣thing else can be able to work. But then secondly, it was so call'd, because in the Apostles times a sad consequent there was of this tradition or excommu∣nication,
proportionable to the dirae or execrations in the Jewish cherem, which, say they, rarò effectu carebant, seldome wanted the ef∣fect, to wit, corporal power and possession, and inflictions of Satan on those, who were delivered up to him, as to a lictor or carnifex (in like manner as we read befell Saul after his defe∣ction from God, when the evill spirit came upon him, 1 Sam. 16. vers. 14.) For it must be remembred, that about Christs time, and a lit∣tle  after, the devil was permitted to have such a ranging unli∣mited power, that he did ordinarily obtain leave to tyrannize over the bodies of mortal men, laying all kinds of diseases upon them, (as indeed there is scarce any kind of disease, but some resemblance of it you may finde in some or other of those de∣scribed in the Gospel) which is somtimes called , Satans buffeting, 2 Cor. 12.7. sometimes , racking or tormenting, as of the Paralytick, Mat. 8.6. grievously tormented, and so Mat. 4. v. 24. that condition of men is described by : we render it, taken with di∣vers diseases and torments, the word  (as ) is used ordinarily for those, that are possest with devils, and so here of those consequents of such possessions, and therefore follows, , and possest with devils. And sometimes , to bind, as Luk. 11.13. in the story of the woman which had the spirit of infirmity, vers. 11. (i. e. a devil or evil spirit that inflict∣ed a strange infirmity or disease upon her) 18. years, bowing her together, that she was not able to look up; 'Tis said of her, , that Satan had bound her, ver. 16. and the curing her is called loosing her from her infirmity, ver. 12. , from her bond, ver. 16. agreeable to the phrase of binding and loosing in this businesse, Mat. 16.19. & 18.10. Hence it is that the Apostles delivering to satan, is said to be , 1 Cor. 5.5. to the destruction of the flesh, i. e. by way of pain or disease, a speci∣all part of Apostolical discipline. Thus in Ignatius Epistle to the Romans, we have , the punishment of the devil, which I conceive in that place must belong onely to temporal infli∣ctions, because he wishes it were upon himself, , that he may by that means obtain or come to Christ, of which eternal would deprive him; and, perhaps S. Pauls wish extended no farther, Rom. 9. then to be thus
excommunicate from the Church of Christ, and to be under those temporal evils that attended it, which was an exube∣rance of love also to his brethren. The summe of what hath been spoken on this point, is, That as amongst the ancient heathen Romans there was banish∣ment, and interdictio ignis & aquae, offenders were interdicted the necessaries of life: and as in Iosephus, the Esseni [ &c. cast out from their congregation such as are taken in notorious offences, and they that are thus cast out, come many times to miserable deaths, consumed with hunger, &c. or as Heliodorus, 2 Mac. 3. in his sacrilegious enterprise was scourged by two Angels in the shape of young men, v. 26. and hardly came off with life. So the Apostolical Excommunication, or Anathema, was attended with these adversaries of life, diseases, pains, & grie∣vous torments, to lay a necessity on them of returning, or being reformed by that means. And this I conceive is the rod which the Apostle mentions, 1 Cor. 4.21. the power of inflicting death, as on Ananias; or diseases, blindnesse on Elymas, and the like; the Heb:  there rendred , rod, being Isa. 10.24. , a plague, all one with , Mar. 3.10. and so very capable in that place of this interpretation, & by the matter of the choice there proposed to the Corinthians most fitly applied to it. This have I said▪ (and might adde a great deal more) to il∣lustrate this one phrase of delivering to Satan, and in it that Apostolical censure of excommunication, and its attendant, cor∣poral inflictions of diseases and pains. To all which, methinks Cains condition described, Gen. 4. is very applyable, (by way of accommodation at least) ver. 14. Behold, thou hast driven me out from the face of the earth; answer∣able to v. 11. Thou art cursed from the earth, theor  Anathema to which the cursing there is answerable, being a species of ex∣communication higher then Niddui or , even a driving or casting out, the English of  before mentioned, Luk. 6.22. i. e. either from the Church (as anon you shall see  signifie) or which is all one, from that part of the earth, where Adam and his other children dwelt, as the sole Church then existent, and
thereupon immediatly it follows, and from thy face shal I be hid: Gods face typically noting the Church, where God had alwayes a peculiar presence, to which refers the  the bread of faces; or shewbread in the Temple, shewing or signifying the pre∣sence of God there, and I shal be a fugitive and vagabond; and then finally it shal come to passe, saith he, that every one that findeth me, shall stay me; there is the  or  death, ; excision, from which though God freed him, v. 15. yet the other he lay under, as appears by v. 16. Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, went out, i. e. was turned out (as , Mat. 25.46. is all one with , chap. 8.12.) of the presence of the Lord, i. e. out of the Church, or visible congregation of Gods ser∣vants, the place where God is pleased peculiarly to exhibite himself, i. e. out of Adams family or the place where he dwelt, for it follows, Cain dwelt in the land of Nod on the East of E∣den, but this onely as an image or accommodation. One thing I desire here to interpose as in a Parenthesis, which hath been touched on in other Of Consc. 8.34. Papers, but wil be here seasonably set down more at large, as peculiarly pertinent to the matter now in hand of delivering to Satan, and 'tis this, that this act of the Church in delivering up to Satan, is but an Image of Gods real dealing, who is wont upon occasion tradere Satanae, to deliver men unto Satan. The ground of this affirmation you may discern by compounding these Scripture Truths toge∣ther. 1. That Satan is our adversary before God, and therefore call'd Satan  which signifies so, and also  enemy, and  set against us, &c. Secondly, that one main act of his Satanship is exprest in accusing us before God, Rev. 12.11. and thence he is call'd peculiarly , i. e. an opposite, , in court of judicature, 1 Pet. 5.8. and that either 1. upon some false suggestion, no real crime, as particularly that of unsincerity (or serving God only as long as God used him wel, allowed him the ) in the case of Job, Chap. 1. vers. 9.11. in which respect he is peculiarly call'd  a calumniator; and 'tis observable that the 72. doe most what render  by that word, noting this act of calumniaing Gods servants to their Master, to be a special piece of his being our adversary; Or else, secondly, upon the real commission of some sin, which advantage he will be sure not to omit, when he
can take it, for sure he that will accuse falsly, will not spare to accuse when he hath true matter of accusation allowed him. To which purpose he is stiled observator calcanei, an observer of the heel, in the vulgar Latine, Gen. 3.15. (agreeable to the Septua∣gints , unless (which I easily believe) that be a fals print for ) an observer of the heel of Christ, i. e. of Christians, or one that goeth up and down, to and fro in the earth, Job 1.7. to finde out matter of accusation, and in this sense he is called , i. e. an accuser (as that differs critically from a  or calumniator) of the brethren, i. e. Christians, or belie∣vers, when they fal into a fault. An example of this, I conceive, we have in the case of S. Peter, Luk. 22.31. where Satans desiring to have Peter, seems to be founded upon some previous or prece∣dent accusation of him for some criminal commission, perhaps that of striving with the other Disciples for superiority, immediate∣ly preceding. v. 24. (as his successor at Rome hath done ever since) or for some other sin, which Satan saw, though we do not at this distance. And upon this putting in of accusations against any, fol∣lows in the third place, his expetivit ut cribraret, Luk. 22.31. his desiring to winnow, his solemne petition to God that he that hath so offended, may be delivered unto him; parallel to which our English Bibles make that other place , seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. which is there plainly attributed to him, as he is , a plaintiff or adversary in a Court, im∣pleading, or accusing, or delivering to the Judge, Matt. 5.25. that so he may deliver him back, again as to a tormentor; and then if this Satanical course or  prevaile, if this accusation be recei∣ved, this petition be granted, as it was (though with limita∣tion) Job 1.12. the result is, a man delivered up to Satan, to have as Job had, so many assayes of his malice practised upon him. To which purpose you may please to observe what Psellus hath given us in his Scholia on the Chaldean Oracles on that text [,Pag. 93. the devils have the power of binding men] . These puni∣tive envious devils do bind, and even strangle the soules of good and (as we say) regenerate men: and from thence it follows, saith he,
that we oft see , Many of pure and holy conversations falling into unexpected calamities: according to that of the Apostle, For this cause are many sick and weak among you, &c. And perhaps it may on this ground be farther observable, that when men are thus by God delivered up into Satans hand; and he by that per∣mission designs them any mischief, he is able to foretell it to his instruments, and so somtimes doth foretell such future events, to get a reputation in the world of fore-knowing all things. Now this being the condition of the Apostolical censure or de∣livering  to satan, that who were thus delivered, satan corporally tormented them, brought them to deaths doore, and sometimes killed them, it must follow on the other side. 1. That the Apo∣stles by the power of the Keys, must be enabled together, both to cast out devils, and to heal diseases, and so they were, Mat. 16.17. In my name they shall cast out devils, and 18. They shal lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall recover. 2. That whom the Apostles ab∣solve from the Censure of excommunication, they might and should also cure of diseases, the consequents of that censure then (though not alwayes now, and therefore perhaps only the first power belongs to the Governours of the Church now, to wit, that of absolving, not of curing) and so every where in the Go∣spel we read forgivenesse of sins, and healing of diseases, or casting out devils, joyned together, as Mat. 9.2. Christ saith to the sick of the palsie, Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, and then v. 6. Arise, take up thy bed and walk, (the stile and ceremony of Christs cure) and the curing of that disease, an argument in Christs own Logick convincing and demonstrative, that he had power to for∣give sins on earth, for though in Mat. and Luke it be , and so the  on earth either applyable to son of man, or to the power of the son of man on earth, as probably, as , to forgive sins, yet in the parallel place in Mar. 2.10. 'tis distinctly , to forgive sins on earth, wch is not subject to that ambiguity, i. e. to absolve in the Church, because those diseases being consequent to Gods delivering up to Satan, which is the Idea of the Churches binding, the sinner must be first loosed (i. e. his sin forgiven) before he could be cured, and therefore the phrase was critically exact and proper of
the woman with the spirit of infirmity, , to be loosed from her bond, to expresse the cure of that disease. So Jam. 5.15. (which if it strictly belong not, may yet commodiously be applied to this matter) you find together the () saving or recovering the sick, & [] remission of his sins also: yea and it is observable what S. Cyprian saith so many yeares after, that baptisme the seale of pardon of sin, freed those from evil spirits, that were before troubled with them; (Whence sure it was, that the Catechists that pre∣pared Converts for baptisme, are in the Canons of the Councils called , Exorcists) and if after baptisme they relapsed to sinning, the evil spirit returned again; by which 'tis manifest, saith he, that the Devil in baptisme is turn'd out by the faith of the believer, and his faith failing, returns again. I shall only adde two things to this matter, 1. That this may possibly be the original and occasion, if not the pime importance of that phrase, 1 Joh. 5.16. [] a sin unto death, (in which the faithful are not bound to pray for him that is guilty of it, or in which case there is no promise that their prayers shall be heard) i. e. a sin of such a nature, as to which the delivering up to Satan the  the  belongs, the committer of which (though he might in general be pray'd for, yet) as long as he continued impenitent & obdurate he was deprived of the prayers of the Church, at least was fit to be excluded out of the Church, where men prayed in common one for another, as many as were present; nay perhaps the Apo∣stles, having the power of discerning of spirits, might possibly discern some man impenetrably obstinate, and so irrecoverably gone, and so give over all praying or interceding for him, (as on the other side [] if any man without that spirit of discerning, see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask or pray, &c. nay on the contrary pray for his excision in some cases, as the after-Church judging, though with an humane (and so possibly fallible) judgment, of Julian the Apostate, banisht him out of their prayers, (and rather prayed for his cutting off) to which yet I make no doubt they would have given him a return, if they should have discerned any probability of his return unto the faith.
The second thing which I shal add hereby way of appendage, is, that from hence will appear, the meaning of anathema mara∣natha, 1 Cor. 16.22. which is as if it were  and , the second, and  (the Lord comes) the third sort of the Jewish censures) compacted or put together into one, per∣haps not to signifie in that place any peculiar kinde of censure among Christians instituted (as some would think) in these words against those that have committed the sin against the holy Ghost. For the [, loveth not] there, will not properly sig∣nifie that sin, nor indeed any other, of which the Church can have cognizance, (loving, or not loving being a secret of the heart, til it break out into some actual virtue or sin, & then it puts off that title of the affection, and is call'd by the name of the action) but by way of accommodation, to apply to the state of such a man the two last degrees of excommunication among the Jews, the one no∣ting total, the other final, irreversible excision; and by that terri∣ble representation, as by a clap and a flash of thunder and light∣ning together, to give a through sense of the danger of that state to set an amazing formidable mark or character upon those that love not the Lord Jesus: whether they be hypocrites, who what∣soever els they are, are certainly no lovers of Christ, at least not lovers , in sincerity, Ep. 6.24. or whether haters of him, as al vicious persons are, and then the [, let him be] is not al∣wayes a legal form of censure, but either a Prophetick or Apostoli∣cal denunciation, importing but this, that the hypocrite or hater of Jesus Christ shall undoubtedly be damned. By that which hath been said on occasion of this first phrase  (of delivering to Satan) wil appear distinctly, wherein this power of binding in the first branch of it, as peculiar to the Apostles from after ages, consists, peculiarly in the power of delivering up to corporal inflictions, diseases, &c. The other phrases will express the matter as it is common to the Apostles times with all after ages, the ecclesiasticall discipline, not as it differs from, but as 'tis al one with the Apostolical, devested only of that one con∣sequent among them, the corporal inflictions. In this rank is the  I will not spare, 2 Cor. 13.2. ex∣plained, v. 10. by , abscision, and , subli∣tion, taking away, or turning out of the Church; for I conceive
the ver. is thus to be paraphrased. These things I, now being absent, write to you, that when I come, I may not be forc'd to use acts of seve∣rity, according to the power which is given to me for edification (which I rather desire to make use of) and not according to the power which was given to me for destruction or excision.) So again, the  1 Cor. 5.9. the Apostles command of not communi∣cating or associating with such. It hath much troubled some scrupulous enquirers, where or when it was that S. Paul had thus written unto them, phansying it necessary to resolve that he had written some other Epistle to the Corinthians before this First. But sure the beginning of the Chapter will lay this scruple, for to that (and not to any other farther off) the [, i. e. , I have written in this Epistle that you should not com∣pany, &c.] doth belong, and that the [] I have now written, vers. 11. will enforce, for so in 3, 4 and 5. verses we read, I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already as though I were present, concerning him that hath done this deed; in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when you and my spirit are gathered together with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan, &c. The Apostle though absent, yet having an Apo∣stolick ruling power or jurisdiction over them, passeth censure (as formally, as if he had been amongst them) upon that fornica∣tor or incestuous person: and by that spirit or power of his, where∣by he was present in their Assemblies, doth therein pronounce this censure of excommunication or delivering up to Satan against him, that by this means he may reduce that notorious offen∣der (that is the importance of those 3. verses) and that others be not tainted by his example, verse 6. &c. And then verse 9. (having a little digrest, v. 7, 8.) he resumes his matter again, and saith it over briefly in another phrase, with an , i. e. this then was it I wrote to you in, or, by Epistle, (be∣cause I was not present) that you should not company with such. By which it appears that the delivering a man to Satan, and the commanding , are all one (or one but a light addition to, or variation from the other) all other men being so far concern'd in such a ones being so delivered, as not to com∣pany with him; yet that not so much (as men now a daies think) lest they should be polluted by him, (i. e. by that act of commu∣nion
with him, as under the Law by touching an unclean thing) as to help discipline him, that the insensate sinner may see himself left alone to no society but Satans (avoided, abandoned by all) and so be brought to a sense of his detestable dangerous condi∣tion, (and others kept from thinking his actions exemplary or fit to be imitated by them) And therefore though this disci∣pline be not used upon sinners cut of the Church, ver. 12. for they will not be wrought on by the Christians abandoning their company, yet saith St. Paul vers. 11. with a professor of Christiani∣ty, one that lives in the Church, and yet is guilty of this sin, or the like, , (for so I conceive the words must be joyned, all betwixt being in a Parenthesis) neither to company nor eat with him, in stead of which, 2 Thes. 3.14. 'tis  simply, onely with a  (which it seems is a preparative to it) set a mark, or brand upon him, and doe not company with him) which in either place whether it belong one∣ly to exclusion from communion in sacris, or be to be exten∣ded to interdiction of ordinary civil society, I professe my self not over-confident; For the former onely this may be said. 1 That although the sound of the words  (especially as we render it, no not to eat) seem to contain the latter also, yet perhaps the aequipollence of that other phrase [delivering to Sa∣tan] may restrain it to the former. 2. Because the interdiction of conversing or eating with Christian offenders might (now at least) make it necessary for a man to go out of the world, as wll as the interdict of heathen-fornicators company would have done then. 3. Because the phrase [] which in the close of the Chapter is set to expresse the former censure, is by the Canons of the Councels solemnly applyed to these Ec∣clesiasticall censures, suspension either from the Church or from office in it. And yet on the other side the Jews were so severe to some, as to deem it unlawfull either to eat or familiarly to converse with them, as Samaritans, Publicans, heathens and sinners (so call'd , i. e. notorious sinners) and a notable evidence and ex∣ample of that practice of theirs we have in the 3. book of Mac∣cabees, where speaking of the , deserters, or those that fell off to any notorious breach of their law, the au∣thor saith, ,
, they did expresse a detestation of them, judging them as enemies of the Nation, and denyed them the civility of common converse or good usage, al friendly entertainments, &c. and the same is called after in that place, , a separating from them, , (though it be read corruptly, and without sense, ) aversation, and exprest by , they appeared enemies to them: and even the Jewish nidui or first degree of excommunication, being a remotion ad 4. passus, not suffering any man to come within four paces of him that was so censured, was an interdiction of familiar conversation or eating with him. And therfore perhaps some of that their discipline may be here imi∣tated, and retained; but then again for the former opinion, Christ by his contrary practice seemed to dislike that custome of theirs, and though he brought excommunication into the Church or in sacris, 'tis not necessary he should continue that other that extended to civil commerce, and therefore still perhaps may not. The best decision perhaps wil be, that this censure ordinarily belongs only to society in Sacris; but yet sometimes the state of affairs so requiring, and when some other defect may be so sup∣plyed, The Governours may proceed to the second interdict, that no man shal talk familiarly, or entertain, or eat with them, that all men shall avoid their company, discountenance them, and not so much as say God speed, allow them ordinary Christian civility, by this means to besiege, and starve them up, and so, if possible, humble and reduce them. To which purpose it is ob∣servable what the learned and judicious Hugo Grotius  hath noted concerning this matter, that in a Christian Church where either through the recentnesse of their plantation com∣munes conventus non sunt, there are no constant common assemblies of the Christians in it, or wherupon the same occasion there is no settled Government in the hands of a Bishop and assistent Presbyters, or where the Church is torn asunder by Schismes, (as in Corinth, when this first Epistle was written, chap. 11.18. whence it fol∣lows, v. 31. That judgments or censures were neglected, and upon that neglect, diseases and deaths among them, (I would, I could not say among us also) whereas at the writing of the second E∣pistle, the discipline together with a quiet judicature was resto∣red,
2 Cor. 2.6.) there in stead of exclusion from communion in sa∣cris, that other interdict of private commerce, or avoyding of pri∣vate familiarity hath been thought useful by the Apostle; To this you may apply, Rom. 16.17. where the Apostle beseeches them, to mark and avoid such as cause divisions and offences among them, and so 2 Thessal. 3.14. just now mentioned, if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, &c. And if in this respect, Mat. 18.17. may be extended to this sense also, 'twill no way contradict or prejudice our present pretensions, it being very reasonable for private Christians to constrain themselves toward those who have exprest such a contradiction to all fraternal methods of charity, and by out∣ward behaviour to shew a dislike of their contumacie and obdura∣tion, especially when an Apostle at a distance shal pass that judg∣ment on any particular man, & the present state of the Church leaves no place for expectation of formal censures, the law of the heathen Charondas being not unreasonable in this case▪ , That no man converse with a wicked man or woman, or bring a reproach on himself, as if he were like him. Another phrase to expresse this censure is , Tit. 3.10. After a first and second admonition, avoid him; which that it belongs to the method directed to by Christ, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. 'tis clear at the first sight: but seeing there be three admonitions before censure, Mat. 18. the first of the injured person alone, the second of the two or three, the third of the Church the difficulty will be, which 2. of those 3. are the  first & second here? my opinion of it, with submission, is, that the first & second here are the very same with the first & second in S. Mat. 1. that of one alone, and then of that one, with one or two more with him. And if it be objected, that then the excommuni∣cation must not follow immediatly upon that second, I answer that those words, being spoken to Titus Bish. of Creet by S. Paul, telling him what he should do, must needs make a difference frō what it would be, if 'twere a private man; It appeared probable before that the admonition of the Church signified that of the rulers of the Church & therfore when they have admonished, there is no place for appeal to the Church, nor consequently for that third ad∣monition,
and therefore in this case, where the Governour (who is representatively the Church it self, a publique, no private person) after a first and second admonition (and the second with one or two, perhaps with some or all of the College of Presbyters joyned with him) comes to be despised, the  follows, or proceeding to censure without any third admonition interposing. Which will appear to be the practice, if you look 2 Cor. 13.2. where imme∣diately after the second admonition, in the , cha∣racterized v. 11. by [in the mouth of two or three, &c.] he tels the of∣fenders, , I will not spare, i. e. I will proceed to censure: and ver. 10. he tels them, that this admonition is; , that I may not proceed to excision, or cutting off, (for so , or , which we render sharpnesse, signifies) which is there called , taking away, in the end of the verse; the very word which is so ordinary in the ancient Canons, , tollatur, for the censure of excommunication. And the reason is there rendred, because you may know that such an one, that holds out against those admonitions of the Church or rulers thereof , is a perverse wilful sinner, , being self-condemned, i. e. I conceive by that non-submission to the Churches admonitions, he withdraweth and divideth himself from that commnion, and so inflicteth that pu∣nishment upon himself, which the censures of the Church are wont to do on malefactors, for that is , 2 Cor. 13.10. and , cuting off from the Church, which he being an heretick doth voluntarily without the judges sentence, his verv , heresie being a willing  or excision. So saith S. Jerome, whereas fornicators, &c. are turn'd out of the Church, the heretik inflicts this on himself, suo arbitrio ab ecclesiâ recedens, going of his own choice from the Church; which departing, propriae conscien∣tiae videtur esse damnatio, seems to be the censure of ones own consci∣ence: So in the Council of Laodicea, Can. 40. after an order that no Bishop shal disobey a citation, when he is called to a Conel, 'tis added , if he contemn, he shal be conceived to accse himself, which is the next degree to self-condemnation. So in the 22. Can. of the African Codex, (or in Justellus his Account, the 19.) the words are clear of a Bishop that being accused before a Council appears not,
, he shall be judged to have pronounced sentence of condemnation against himself, and so even in Philostratus. l. 7. c. 7. it is a saying of Apollonius,  he that shall de∣cline a judicature, how shall he avoid the being thought to have con∣demned himself? So in the 12. Tables, Praesenti litem addicito, i. e. that he that absents himself, be alwayes cast; and so the Franks have alwayes observed it, ut absens causâ caderet, ni Sonnia nuntiasset, that the absent should be alwayes condemned, unlesse he gave a just ex∣cuse of his absence. And the Regulae ab Abbate Floriacensi constitutae adde, Qui non comparuerit, tanquam convictus judicabitur, he that ap∣peareth not, shall be judged as convict, i. e. : If you would see this Interpretation more fully confirmed, I must re∣fer you to Marculsi formul. l. 1. c. 37. and Bignonius on them, to Stephan. Fornerius rerum quotid. l. 6. c. 21. and out of him, Justellus in the Notes on Cod. Ecclesiae universae, p. 38. But enough of this. I shall take in no more places to examine for this point  of the nature of this power, save only those in the Gospel (with which this discourse began) which, as we have once gone over in relation to the first enquiry, so we shall now again in order to the second. First, then, Mat. 16.19. , [I will give you the keys of the kingdome of heaven] where 'twil be no news to him that is vers'd in the New Testament, if I tell him that , the kingdome of heaven, signifies the Church of Christ here below Militant, being not a disparate body but a fellow-member of Christ, with the other triumphant in heaven. I could weary my Reader with places to this purpose, ready at every turn to justifie this interpretation, as when 'tis said of St. John the Baptist, Matt. 11.11. that though from the beginning there had not risen a greater then he, (a more then Pro∣phet in pointing out rather then prophesying of Christ, , Behold the Lamb of God) yet , he least in this new Church, (this —the age to come, as the Septuagint, Es. 9.6. cal it, & so Heb. 2.5  the world to come, and perhaps Heb. 6.5. , the powers of the age to come, i. e. of Christianity, &
the comming kingdom, as the phrase in S. Mark. 11.10. may I conceive, be rendred absolutly thus, , Blessed in the name of ehe Lord of our father David, be the comming kingdome; or Blessed in the name of the Lord be the comming kingdome of our father David; this Church or kingdome of Christ here on earth, not hereafter in heaven) the least believer, at least teacher of the Gospel here (not Saint there) is greater then he. So Mat. 8.11. upon the Centurions comming to Christ, and expressing so great measure of faith, that he professes not to have found the like in any Jew, he adds that Many shall come from the East and West, all parts of the heathen world, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, i. e. as that Centurion did, believe in Christ (and become one Church with the Jews, of whom Abraham the father of the faithful was the first) and the children of the kingdome (they that were till then the only Church, to wit, the rebellious unbelie∣ving Jews) should be cast out. So clearly Ch. 13.24. , the kingdome of heaven, the Church here below, not the kingdome above, is likened, &c. For sure there are no ene∣mies to sow, nor tares to be sown in heaven, which in this king∣dom are there said to be, ver. 15. (as Rev. 12.7. the war that is mentioned in heaven may be an argument that heaven in that place signifies the Church here below, which onely being Mili∣tant can be said to have war in it) and so in the other Parables in that Chapter. I have named enough for an hint to any to observe many more in this Gospel, Chap. 18.1, 3, 4. chap. 19.24, 25. chap. 20.1. chap. 21.43. and (which is a little nearer to the phrase in this place) chap. 23.13. the Pharisees shutting up the king∣dome of heaven before men, i. e. keeping men from entring the Church, from becomming Christians, and the like also in the other Gospels. If this notion of the kingdome of heaven do yet seem alien, or forced, or lesse proper for this place, then you may but please to observe, that a key refers to a lock, a lock to a door, or entrance to any place, and then the Church being sup∣posed the door or gate, the only way of passage to heaven, these keys of heaven it self must be the keys of the Church below, as of the door that leads thither, and then that will return to the same issue still.
So then, Peter, and in him the rest of the Apostles and successor-governors of the Church had the keyes of the Church given them, i. e. clearly a power of shutting out, or receiving in to the visible Militant Church, of removing the contumacious by censure of Excommunication, and receiving in the humble penitents by ab∣solution, and so of binding and loosing, (as it follows) , here below, upon the earth, answerable to that exception of the  (for the Church) premised, and just agreeable to the phrase, Mark. 2.10. , to forgive sins on earth, which (it appears by the mentioning of the keyes as the foundation of this power) signifies receiving men into the Church, disexcommunicating, and therefore the binding is there peculiarly the censure of Excommunication, and nothing else; , the thing we undertook to shew from hence. From whence by the way may be understood the meaning of  that place, Mat. 12.32. it shall not be forgiven him, (, impersonally) he shall not receive absolution, either in this world, i. e. in the Church from the Ecclesiastick censure, nor at the day of judgement, i. e. in the world to come, the phrase seeming to me to refer to that rule among the Jews mention'd before out of  r. de excom. Si quis juret in hunc modum, &c. If any man swear after this manner, [If this be not true, let me be excom∣municated in this world, and in the other] and be perjur'd, he cannot be absolv'd by any: and then how ridiculous are they that ground a Purgatory on this place? We shall not need to make any distinct survey of the second  place, chap. 18.18. because (as to the matter of this power, our present enquiry) it is verbatim (only the number and some little unimportant circumstances changed) the same with this former place, , binding and loosing in the earthly part of the Kingdome of Heaven, the Church below. One thing only it will not be amisse again to add as an appen∣dage common to these two places (though we mentioned it be∣fore) and it is this, that [the ] the mention of absoluti∣on is (in both) an attendant of the  or binding precedent, as indeed loosing generally presupposes a band, and therefore Act. 2.24. where we read, ) and render it, (loosed the pains of death) 'tis sufficiently clear, and confest that
are there taken for  or  (by the equivocalnesse of the Hebrew word  which signifies both, & is rendred by the 72. sometimes , a band, sometimes , a pang of tra∣vail) and so should be rendred in that place, bands of death, in re∣lation to which it follows, he could not be holden, &c. which inti∣mates absolution to be in universum, or absolutely necessary onely to those that have been bound, and so only after excommunication, the absolution proportion'd to the precedaneous censure, and that the onely thing that lyes upon any, necessitate praecepti here, or medii in any other respect, all other absolution without this pre∣cedent binding censure, being (though it may be allowed very useful & profitable for the comfort and satisfaction of the peni∣tent, yet) neither commanded, prescribed the Priest to give, nor the penitent to receive (at least by either of these two places.) As for the third place, Joh. 20.26. (which by some is thought to belong to somewhat else, rather then those censures of the Church, 1. Because the phrases are other,  and , re∣mitting and retaining, in stead of  and , binding and loo∣sing. 2. Because the , [remit] is before , [retain.] And 3. because this is deliver'd to all the Apostles together, whereas the two other were spoken, one personally to Peter, the other of the Church) I in humility conceive, that as before we shewed that this place in S. John belonged to the same persons to which the other two belonged, to wit, the Apostles and their succeeding rulers of the Church, so it is perfectly parallel to them also in respect of the matter of the Commission; and my rea∣sons are these: 1. Because the phrases, though (as the first rea∣son pretends) other in sound, are yet directly synonyma's with the former in Scripture-stile. I say that , to remit, is al one with , to loose, and , to retain, with , to bind. And therefore Theophylact uses together , power of remitting and binding, confounding the two places in S. John and S. Mat. together, and rendring , to retain, by , to bind; and , to loose, by , to remit, in Mat. 16.19. and so promiscuously in other Writers. If there be the least difference it is onely this, that  signifies to bind, and , to bind, and also to keep bound; in which respect  is more proper here in S. John, because the order is inverted, and , retaining,
put after , remitting, and so the word which signifies also [to keep bound] or to not-remit, is more perfectly & critically agreeable, then  to bind would have been; and yet when binding is mentioned first,  as exact as , as in the o∣ther places: But yet for all this light accidental difference, I shall not retract saying, the words are in use perfectly syno∣nymous; , remit, and , loose; especially as applyed to sin; both signifie forgiving of it; the first as sin is taken under the notion either of a debt, or a thraldom, (for  is in the N. Test. applyed to both, to the one in the Lords Prayer, to the other Luk. 4.18. and both directly opposed to ) the se∣cond, as of a band; so in the Septuagints Translation of the Old Testament, Gen. 4.12. (, perhaps false copied for , My sin is greater then can be forgiven) or more cleary, Exod. 32.21. , If thou wilt, (or, O that thou wouldst) forgive them that sin; and in di∣vers other places (, remit) taken for forgive, and so in like manner  to loose, Job 42.9. , (a Translation of the words which are in Hebrew  God accepted the person of Job praying for them) he forgave them that sin by Job, i. e. by his mediation. There  [to loose] is taken for [to forgive.] So also for , and , to bind, and to hold or retain, the  same Hebrew word  is rendred by the Septuagint, ) Jer. 33.1. and , Dan. 10.8. & 11.6. and so Act. 2.24. [] being holden, is set opposite to () loosing of bands, and so must signifie keeping bound, (and in almost all other places it signifies to hold fast, or take hold of, Mat. 18.28.21.46.26.4, &c. and is sometimes joyned with , as holding fast is precedaneous, and preparative to binding, Mat. 14.3. , laying hold on him, bound him, and Apoc. 20.2. , held and bound) and so , though rendred to retain, is taken for  to bind also, (or if there be any differ∣ence, tis this, that it signifies lesse then binding, rather then more, and so will not conclude any thing which the former places were not able to conclude.) And so you may observe in the Fathers, viz. S. Basil, speaking of the freedome of Christians in their bands, he saith they are , bound, but not capable of binding; and many the like.
Secondly, because the inverting of the order of words is too light and casual a thing to be argumentative, and therefore the second reason is of little force, being taken onely from that change, for which yet some reasonable account also may be given from the variety of the words, wch caused this inversion, and consequently no more argument will be deducible from this change of order, then from the change of words would be just to deduce: If the change of the words would argue ought, then I confess the inverting of the order, caused by that, would per modū accumulatiònis do so too; but that being once cleared to import no new thing, this which is onely attendant on that, cānot be thought to do so, & so there will be no need of farther answer to that, when the former hath bin sufficiently answer'd. Thirdly, because the third ground of scruple is as uncon∣vincing also, the other two being delivered to all the Apostles also, as well as this: the first to all in S. Peters person, (as 'tis ordinary for Donations made to Communities to be delivered to one of that number for the use of all) as is acknowledg'd by all but those, whose pretended interest in S. Peter hath bribed them to inflame his, and lessen the other Disciples prerogative, asmuch as they can. And the second in plain words with a pre∣face of , Verily I say to you, i. e. to the Disciples with whom the discourse had continued by way of mutual collo∣quie from the beginning of the Chap. This I am sure is the af∣firmation of the Greek Fathers, particularly Theophylact on Mat. 13. where he affirms that promise of the power of binding and loosing to be fulfilled in those words of Christ in S. John, Whose sins you do remit, &c. the place was formerly set down at large, and need not be repeated; and if you examine the word  throughout the N.T. you will have no temptation to doubt it. Having now declared out of the Scripture the foundation & progresse of this power, these censures, and occasionally inter∣weaved the interpretation of some places which I conceive to depend on this matter, it were now a fit season to proceed to the writings of the ancient Church, and draw down the history of this practice through the first & purer times: But that hath been so faithfully performed by many others,De rep. Eccl. l. 5. c. 7. & 9. particularly by Spa∣latensis, that it would be a great insolence to attempt to do it
better. Only it will be worth our rehearsing, (though we only refer you to that Magazin for all farther explication of it) that there were some nice differences observed in this matter between the binding which was a censure, and the other which was onely a punishment, the one conceived to bind in heaven, the other not. 2. Betwixt the binding of the refractory impenitent, and the humble confitent penitent: the first for the cure and removing the scandal of some notorious crime; the second on his voluntary con∣fessing his crime, and submitting himself to be bound by way of penance, that so by being loosed again, he might be the more sure of that pardon in heaven, which is promised to those which are absolved on earth, & so propter majorem cautelam, to satisfie the trembling conscience, and assure it that God hath forgiven him. These are excellent profitable subjects, in which I desire the Reader will satisfie himself out of those judicious Collections of that very learned unhappy man. And if it be now demanded of me, whether private absolution be not contained under the import∣ance of these places? I answer, that this last distinction hath in effect answered this question, and defined, that in case of private binding it doth come under it, and that that, though in some sense it be left ad libitum, or voluntary to the penitents will or choice, is yet necessary to every one whose conscience either is not able to perform & go through the work of inward repent∣ance with God alone, or is not able to satisfie it self with such performance without the Ministers assistance called in. To which purpose I shall desire that that may be considered  which is delivered by our Church in the second Exhortation be∣fore the Communion, in these words: Because it is requisite that no man should come to the holy Communion but with a full trust in Gods mercy, and with a quiet conscience; therefore if there be any among you, which by the means aforesaid (which were to examine their lives by the rule of Gods commandments, and wherein they shall perceive themselves to have offended, either by will, word, or deed, there to be∣waile their own sinful lives, and confesse themselves to Almighty God with full purpose of amendment; and if their offences be also against their neighbours, then to reconcile themselves to those, with readi∣nesse to make restitution and satisfaction for wrong done, and to forgive others that have offended them) cannot quiet his own consci∣ence,
but requireth farther comfort or counsel, then let him come to me, (i. e. his lawful Pastor) or some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods Word, and open his grief, that he may receive such ghostly counsel, advice, and comfort, as his conscience may be relieved, and that by the ministery of Gods Word he may receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution, to the quieting of his conscience, and avoiding all scruple and doubtfulnesse. All which being an exhortation of the Church belonging to a particular case, [when a man by the use of all helps which are within his own reach, cannot attain to quiet of con∣science, or be satisfied that he is fit to receive the holy Communion;] as they do imply that those foresaid meanes may happily serve the turn, without opening his case to the Minister, and conse∣quently without receiving absolution; so are they a fervent exhor∣tation to all, in case those means prove not successfull, to seek out, & make use of those auxiliaries, which whosoever in that case shall neglect, will be guilty of great unkindness to his own soul, and may well be thought to have betray'd it to great and needlesse danger. And it is worthy our noting from hence, that receiving of comfort, & the benefit of absolution are by our Church here conjoyned, to signifie this absolution to be beneficial to him that once wanted comfort, as a meanes of confirming that comfort which the Minister had now given him. To which end certainly 'tis very proper & seasonable: for when a discreet & learned Minister, having had the survey of my soul, (the cogni∣zance of my offence first, & then of my repentance) shall from the word of God give me assurance, that (if I am what to him I ap∣pear to be) my estate is good, & thereupon pronounce me absolved, as a true penitent, from all my sins; This will, 1. seal me a right of Gods promise of forgivenesse in heaven, as it were solemnly and in the Court; and 2. extremely quiet me, and confirm to me that comfort, i. e. that comfortable opinion of my good estate, and hope of my future happiness, which he had given me, when I see him who hath no reason to be partial to me, and whom I cannot suspect of ignorance, or passion in this particular, (both which perhaps I may upon enquiry discern in my self) and beside, who is set over me by Christ to this purpose, pronounce so clear a sentence of me, and that (as the precedent words are) by the ministery of Gods word, i. by applying peculiar parts of that
infallible truth to the present condition of my soul, and from thence pronouncing my absolution. And that this is the meaning of the absolution there, it is evident by that which is the second thing, which I thought worthy our observing from hence, viz. what is added in conclusion, as the ultimate end of that comfort and absolution, the quieting of conscience, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulnesse; which whether they be distinct, so that the quieting of conscience may be the completion of the comfort, and the avoid∣ing of all scruple and doubtfulnesse, the end intended in, and ob∣tained by absolution, or whether both together indiscretè belong to both together, the product will be still the same, that in case a man be not able to satisfie his own scruples and doubts concern∣ing himself, the Presbyter wil be able to stand him in good stead, by the Word of God applied to his case to give comfort, and by pronouncing absolution to him to seal that comfort, and perswade him to a greater confirmation of mind, that that comfort is not groundlesse, and so take away doubts and scruples concerning that matter which before molested him, and made him unfit for the Communion, which was the only occasion of the exhortation. Beside this, it is also true, that in case of sicknesse S. Jame's  advice (if not command) is punctual, that the Presbyters of the Church be call'd for, and that they shall anoint the sick (a ceremony used in those dayes by Christ and his Apostles in the curing of dis∣eases, and casting out devils, not so much as a viand toward our last great journey, as among the Romanists 'tis continued, but either as a sign of our Spiritual cure, or as a means sanctified by prayer to cure the sick, to deliver from the disease in the beginning of the verse)  and if he be that have committed sins, absolution shall be given him; for so that phrase will be most grammatically rendred, not [they shall be for∣given him] for then it would be , nor that [God shall forgive him] for then it would be , to agree with,  immediately precedent, the Lord shall raise him, but imperso∣nally remittetur ei, he shall have absolution. Of which absolution 1. There is little question, but that it is a very proper prepara∣tive to curing of his disease which is oft sent to awake some drowsie sinner, and is not removed til it have done the work in some measure, Ecclus. 38.9, 10. & therefore the ordinary preface
to Christs cures, is [Son thy sins are forgiven thee] as 2. Mac. 3. when Heliodorus had been so scourged for his sacrilegious enterprize, and the high Priest offered sacrifice for his recovery, verse 32. the Priest is said to have made an attonement, and thereupon God granted him his life, verse 33. and so Ecclus 2.11. before Gods de∣livering in time of tribulation, there is first his , remitting of sins, before releasing from the pressure; and secondly, that absolution, as it is the Ministers act peculiarly, and an act of benediction in him, contrary to the execration in the cherem, or anathema, may well be thought in common reason to have be∣nign influence on the Patient, as the curses of Parents are general∣ly believed to be fattal curses  in Orpheus, the curses of Parents are shrewd furies that haunt a man where ever he goes on the earth, have an inauspitious influence on all his earthly prosperities, devour and eat out his patrimony; and so also by the rule of contraries, the blessings of Parents, Eccl. 3.9. may availe toward the removing of temporal calamities, and so consequently, the prayers and blessings, and absolution of the Presbyter the spiritual father. Thirdly, there will be as little question who shal be the Minister of it, when 'tis considered that there is no supposition or presumption in that place of the pre∣sence of any, but onely of the , the Presby∣ters of the Church, and as little will there be of the fitnesse, and exceeding expedience, that the sins of which he is so peculiarly to receive absolution should be confessed, and bewailed before him, from whom the absolution is expected. One thing only the con∣text may perhaps farther import, that this Presbyterial absolution may not be (by force of that place) so absolutely necessary to all sick persons, but onely to the , to him that hath (formerly, & so as upon examination of himself, he may reaso∣nably impute his sicknesse to it) committed sins, either as the word  denotes greater sins, or as sins contrary to our duty to∣wards God, whose Minister the Presbyter is, or as  signifies to live indulgently in sin, and so as it is not reconcilable with a He that is born of God, , doth not commit sin, 1 Joh. 3.9. regenerate estate, as long as it continues. For 'tis worth observing what follows in that place, James 5.16. Confesse  your transgressions  to one another, one brother, i. e. Christian to another, the sick to them in health,
as , Be ye all subject to one another, 1 Pet. 5.5. i. e. all that are inferiours, to all superiours. Where, whether  signifie a trespasse peculiarly against our brethren, or whether (as 'tis resolved by Grammarians) lapses, or lighter sins, it seems to be here set in a distance from (if not opposite to) , the greater sins, or those against God; and then as the confession of them to the Presbyter, Gods officer, will in any rea∣son be most proper, to obtain comfort on safe grounds, and the benefit of absolution upon sincere repentance; so in those sins of an inferiour rank confession to the wronged brother, or to whatever fellow-Christian, may possibly be sufficient; and assu∣redly not unuseful or unnecessary, if it be but for the obtaining of the brothers united prayers, to help to remove the sicknesse, if that be inflicted (as oft sicknesses are) as a punishment for any such trespasses. In which case as the promise is there given of reco∣very to the sick upon those other mens prayers, and not otherwise, so there is little hope that God will accept thy private prayers for removing that punishment, till thou go and reconcile thy selfe unto thy brother, and desire and obtain his prayers for thee, (as Job's for his friends) when thy injuring of him had cryed to haven, and fetch't down that infliction on thee. Nay thirdly, there will be little matter of doubt, or contro∣versie, but that private, frequent, spiritual conference betwixt fellow-Christians, but especially (and in matters of high con∣cernment and difficulty) between the Presbyter and those of his charge, even in the time of health; and peculiarly, that part of it which is spent in the discussion of every mans special sins & infir∣mities, & inclinations, may prove very useful and advantageous (in order to spiritual directions, reproof and comfort) to the making the Man of God perfect. And to tel truth, if the pride and self-conceit of some, the wretchlesnes of others, the bashfulnes of a third sort, the nauseating, and instant satiety of any good in a fourth, the follies of men, and artifices of Satan had not put this practice quite out of fashion among us, there is no doubt, but more good might be done by Ministers this way, then is now done by any other means separated from the use of this, particularly then by that of publick preaching, (which yet need not be neglected the more when this is used) which hath now the fate to be cryed up, and
almost solely depended on, it being the likelier way, as Quintili∣an saith (comparing publick and private teaching of youth) to fill narrow-mouth'd bottles, (and such are the most of us) by ta∣king them single in the hand, and pouring in water into each, then by setting them altogether, and throwing never so many buckets of water on them. I conceive, I have now distinctly set down the ful importance of this power of binding & loosing, and how it belongs peculiarly to the publick censures of the Church, the binding by way of ex∣communication, or depriving of the common benefits of Christians, (together with that branch of corporal discipline, or inflictions on mens bodies, peculiar to the Apostles times and power) and the loosing, in restoring the excommunicate person upon repentance to the Assembly of the Saints. And by this perhaps may be received some satisfaction to that question agitated sometimes, Whether Absolution in the Church be onely declarative, or moreover mini∣sterially authoritative? which question wil not now have so much place, the matter being thus stated. For the Churches absolution being not the actual eternal pardon of sins in Heaven, (which is left to be Gods work, none but he justifyng sinners, except by way of consequent upon this promise of Gods) but peculiarly the free∣ing the penitent from Ecclesiastical censures here below, & from that other farther obligation that arose from the Churches bind∣ing, there will be no matter of doubt, but as the Governour of the Church authoritatively by commission from Christ, preacheth the Word, administreth Sacraments, and inflicts censures, so he may authoritatively too, absolve on earth, free from punishments in the Church inflicted on sinners, without any necessity of interposing or medling (save only indirectly, or as I said by way of conse∣quence) with that which is due from God to them in another world; to which purpose 'tis ordinarily observable in the Canons of the Councels, that à pace Ecclesiae arceri, being driven from the peace of the Church,Concil. Eli∣ber. Can. 61. Can. 47. is the expression of being excommunicated, and pacem dari, is to be received into communion again. In other places we find both together, communio pacis, communion of peace, all noting that, which excommunication deprived them of, to be the peace or favour, or pardon of the Church peculiarly, and not Gods peace, or pardon, or favour directly, but either by sup∣posing
the person fit to be so dealt with, to be formerly depri∣ved by God of that, or by way of consequence accidentally, more surely fastning him under Gods disfavour, if this wrought not on him the good desired effect of reformation. To all which, by way of Corollary I shall adde, that the bare  binding of the Church (abstracted from our contempt of, and per∣verse standing out against it) cannot damn any which is not otherwise (and if he were not thus bound) in a damnable estate that is, hath not any real influence on his damnation (save on∣ly to bind him farther to it, in case he doth not submit to it) distinct from that which proceeds from his sin, upon which he is bound, and from his refractarinesse continued in, in despight of this censure, (which no doubt may make his case more high∣ly dangerous, as the Word is the savour of death to them that be∣leeve not) but is rather a means tending, as it is designed, to the saving of him, as in the next Chapter shall appear. On the other side loosing on earth, or the absolution of the  Church shall not free any impenitent unreformed sinner, in foro coeli, i. e. obtain pardon for any that is not contrite, (much lesse turn attrition into contrition, as the Romanists, or a votum poeniten∣tiae, a wishing we were penitent into penitence, as others dream) but will rather be a means of damning him the deeper, of betray∣ing him to, and hardning him in an impenitent estate, who is ab∣solved, or freed from under that discipline before he be reform'd; which therefore the Church in pure Charity to the man is bound not to do, but to continue him under the punishment till it produce the reformation.
CAP. V. FOr the third enquiry, the end or use to which this binding is de∣signed, &c. there will not be so much occasion to enlarge; 'tis speedily stated by answering, that the whole end, aim, design in inflicting of publique Church-censures, may be reduced to these three heads; 1. , for reformation of the offender: 2. , the repairing, or making up the honour of the Church, which suffered by him: and 3. , that others may be warned by the example of his punishment, and not corrupted by ex∣ample of his sin, but especially to reform those by these sharper methods, which no other calmer means of admonitions will work on, to cut off that member that balsams will not cure, or keep from gangrening, according to that of the writer of the An∣swers Ad Orthodox: , when by long-suffering offenders are not reformed, then excision to them which are not corrigible, is more useful then clemencie. For both those distant wayes, 1. Of application of plaisters; and 2. Of excision, are the same Physitians methods of preserving the whole, and proportionably to them the ministration of the Word and Sacraments are the Churches first method, and when that fails to produce its effect, this other of censure is the se∣cond, (and upon the good working of that, Absolution) wherein the Governours of the Church are truly , or co-workers with Christ, to bring back sons unto God, as they are to beget them in the preaching of the Word. To which purpose you may see and observe what the Apostle constantly adds to his sentences of binding, or excommunication, or delivering up to Satan, , 1 Cor. 5.5. the de∣struction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved, &c. So of Hyme∣naeus and Alexander, 1 Tim. 1.20. I have delivered them up to Satan, , that they may be disciplined, instructed, taught not to blaspheme, or resist contumaciously; whence the word  (which we render taught) in a common notion, may per∣haps be more critically taken in a notion peculiar to this pur∣pose,
by way of reference to the punishments amongst the Jews. For of the four punishments put into Esdra's hand by Artaxerxes, Esd. 7.26. the second (rendred by us banishment, but in Heb. eradi∣cation, i. e. saith Schindler, casting out of his inheritance) is in the Septuagint , and so vulgarly  for discipline or punishment, but there peculiarly for distermination, and so the fitter to expresse this turning out of the Church, this Church-banishment, or distermination, So 2 Thes. 3.14. , the end of Excommunication is again, that he may be ashamed, that he may see himself alone, no company but the devil thought bad enough for him, and so be brought to sense and shame of his own vilenesse, which is the most necessary pre∣parative to reformation; and therefore to signifie it an act of mercy and charity, of all other the greatest, (though under the shew of severity and wrath) it follows in that place, v. 15 , Count him not an enemy, but ad∣monish him as a brother; and therefore Mat. 18.18. the doctrine of binding, &c. is used as a means of exemplifying that great Evangelical truth, vers. 11. that Christ came  to save, rescue, deliver, reduce that which was lost, i. e. impenitent sinners, or those, that the soft ministery of the Word would do no good on. For there being (among others) two principal meanes of  continuing men in sin. 1. In some an opinion; that Christian profession, or the bare being Christians (however qualified, or de∣meaning themselves) will stand them in stead, and prove suffici∣ent; or if not so, yet the creditablenesse of an unchristian impious life, so long as they may be allowed but the Christian name (mens generall design being to get the praise of men, not of God.) 2. In others a mistaking sorrow or attrition, or any the most slight wish that they were penitent, for that repentance which Christ cals for, and accepts and crowns: It follows hence, that unlesse men may be driven out of these falseholds, they will never set themselves aright in the way to that great work: and therefore proportionable to these two heads, are the two exercises of the power of the keyes designed; the first to turn the Christian professor, that will go on in sin, quite out of all society of Christianity, not allowing him the priviledges of his Christianity, the Word, the
Sacraments, &c. unlesse he will walk worthy of so honourable a vocation, the second to set him his task of repentance, to prescribe him some  & probations, by which he shall be discerned whether he be in earnest contrite and willing to make his peace with Heaven, to take any the most laborious course to approve himself to Christ. The former of these in the act of excommu∣nication, the latter in imposing the penance, upon which he shall be received again, & both together to bring sinners to repentance. When sinners by obstinacy provoke God, 'tis his manner to withdraw his grace, to deliver them up to themselves, (a worse kind of devil or Satan) that by this means they may see their former forlorne condition, their vilenesse first, and then their danger; & so he uses to bring the secure, proud sinner to humility, to the use of prayer, & wrestling with God, to caise him out of this sad estate. And so the Church in like manner by Christs di∣rection withdraws the benefits and priviledges of Christians, from those whom it judges contumacious, delivers them up to plain barbarousnesse and heathenisme, deals with them as God did with Nebuchad-nezzar, driving him from the Court into the Wildernesse, transforming him into the shape of a very beast; & all to this end, that his understanding might by that means re∣turn to him, the field teach him lessons of piety, whom the palace could not. Agreeable to which is that of Pletho upon Zoroaster, . The revengefull devils or furies do gripe men to bring them off from sin, and set them on vertue. And then as afflictions are one of Gods engines and stratagems to besiege, enter, and take the soul, (when he flew them, they sought him, saith the Psalmist) So among the Apostles were those corpo∣ral inflictions, diseases, &c. superadded on purpose to make the impression more violent, and to work more effectually on their hearts. The effectualnesse of which we may discern in one of the de∣grees of penitents in the ancient Church, namely , whom we find weeping and howling in the Church-porch, not per∣mitted to come in, lying without, for them that enter'd to tread on in their passage, which was certainly a means to make them prize those benefits more dearly, which they saw
themselves interdicted, and others partakers of, and withal to read them a Lecture of their own unworthinesse, seeing them∣selves of the number of those dogs, and evil workers that are without. The second end which I named, was the repairing the honour  and dignity of the Church, which consisting in the purity of the lives of Christian professors, is necessarily lost both in the opi∣nion of God, and men (especially those which are without) by the impieties and unchristian actions of any which are called by Christs Name, which is therefore by the Apostle said to be blas∣phemed or evil spoken of, when Christians fall into any notori∣ous sins, and then there is no way to recover the reputation of the Church, and even of the Christian Religion, and in a kinde, of Christ himself, but by expressing the wrath and displeasure of the Church against those who walk ths inordinately, and so proclaiming unto all, that Christianity is not a Doctrine (as Zozimus, and Celsus, and Julian mistook it) of security or im∣punity to any sort of impenitents, but of strict, precise, exact purity, though some ungracious persons walk contrary to those prescriptions: This is the only tabula post naufragium, plank or means of relief, when the same and good name of the Church is thus ship-wrackt, and so fit to be designed in the second place. A third gain and profit designed by these censures is the warn∣ing  and admonishing of others; not lest they should be polluted by presence among the profane, as they that toucht the unclean thing were polluted under the Law, (any farther then by the spreading, leprous quality of their example) which is the comon errour of the proud fastidious Pharisees of all ages, and is clearly confuted by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5.10. where the  is not extended to heathen fornicators, which sure would be able to pollute by society, as much as Christian sinners) and by Clemens or that ancient Author under his name, Constit. Ap. l. 2. c. 14. who hath a notable place to fortifie against this mistake, speaking of those which () unmercifully affirm that men ought not to pollute them∣selves by accompanying with sinners, nor converse with them, (
) For such reaso∣nings savour of men that know not God and his providence, of unrea∣sonable judges, and untamed beasts. For they observe not that the communion with sinners that must be avoided, is not that of conver∣sing with, but imitating of them, not speaking, but doing with them. But the design is to set a brand upon such sins, which other∣wise might haply be thought imitable, and insensibly grow into fashion, and so infect, and pollute, were not men thus told of their uglinesse, shew'd their deformity, and fore-warn'd of their danger, which is sure another act of mercy to all easie, seducible spectators, to the Church it selfe, and to him whose scandalous sins are by this means hindred from being damners of other men. And as the censures themselves, so the inexorablenesse, or at least, difficulty of some Ages, (of Canons, of Councils, and practice of Churches) in granting of absolution to penitents, that also hath been designed out of pure charity to help multiply their fruits of repentance, to set a value on Gods Ordinances, to quicken their zeal, to demonstrate their sincerity both to others, and to their own souls, each of which might perhaps be missing, if absolution were over-easily obtainable. All which the more it is weighed, (how this institution of Christs, (besides that, as 'tis so, it ought not to be neglected) is an act of special Christian charity in not suffering sin upon thy neighbour, but in any wise rebuking him, Lev. 19.17.) the more re∣proachful wil it be to this age of ours, the more bitter Pasquin, and lasting , when it shall be told in Gath and Askalon, that for some years the arts of some uncharitable men have so prevailed, that all exercise of this institution of Christ hath been cast and kept out of this Church of ours; the first, I think, that is recorded since Christs time to have continued any considerable space without liberty of using that power of the keyes in excom∣munication, left unto the Church by Christ. The Lord be merciful to us in this matter. As for them who either look upon this in others (or use it themselves) as a matter of secular advantage, or accruement ei∣ther of power or gain to the rulers of the Church, and so as a car∣nal design or engine disguised in the shape of a spiritual institu∣tion,
and on that ground either are willing by their calumnies to help rend it out of the hands of the Church, or being them∣selves in place, either by passion, or mistake, or sloth betray it to the odium & censure of other men (whose shortnes of discourse cannot separate the order from the person, or the abuse from the institution) I shall suppose they will change their minds, & their practices, when I shal have given them one advertisment, which I may hope to do more effectually, not onely by putting them in mind of S. Chrysostoms judgment, who in this very matter ha∣ving resolv'd , &c. that the sacerdotal dignity in pardoning and retaining of sins is very great, expresses that presently by this only way of probation, that a Priest if he live never so well himself, if he be not accurately careful of other mens lives, , he bears those wicked men (which he reform'd not) company to hell; and often when he is not betrayed by his own, he perishes by others mens sins, if he have not done all things rightly, which may tend to their recovery, and in that, founds all the respect and obedience that St. Paul requires to be paid to the , But also, and especi∣ally if I present it to them in a breif paraphrase of one place of Scripture, which by mistake and rash judgement, is wont to be produced against all exercise of power in Church-men, but being rightly weighed, as it doth not take away the power which we onely plead for, that of exercising charity, of disciplining, reform∣ing, i. e. doing the greatest good to those that are placed under us so will it teach every man (to whom that power is entrusted to learn nothing but meeknesse and diligence, and all kinde of Christian temper from the condition and peculiarity of this ho∣nour, and authority of his. The place is that known Text Mat. 20. I shal deduce it from  the beginning of the sense, & lay it plain before you. V. 21. The mother of Zebedees children (having heard by her sons of the pro∣mise made to the Disciples by Christ, Mat. 19.28. that they should have the dignity of so many , which among the Jews, was a dignity next unto the Regal) petitions Christ in the be∣half of her two sons, whom she conceived favoured by him a∣bove all the rest, judging it by the expressions to them two, & S. Peter; and her petition was this; That (seeing in the equality of
that dignity promised to all, there might be yet, nay if (it were according to the old Jewish pattern, where the  belong∣ed to Judah and Joseph) must be some kinde of inequality, at least a precedence of some before others) her Sons that he had shewed such a speciall kindnesse to, might have that favour by  him confer'd on them. Jesus represses her demand by telling her, she is mistaken in the kinde of dignity, that should be instated upon his disciples, 'twas not such a one as in any worldly re∣spects would prove very desirable, but as a place of great burthen, so subject to great persecutions, and even death it self, of which  indeed her sons should undoubtedly taste, as Histories testifie they did. If this would not satisfie her, then let her know her importunity should gain nothing; for . It is not mine to give, save to whom it is pre∣pared, &c. the disposing of any such honours, was to be according as God the Father had de∣termined it, and although all power were conferred upon the Son by the Father, yet there was smal hope that the Son should thwart God he Fathers destination in any such act of dignify∣ing any. This was fully satisfactory to the woman, and there∣fore she (nor her sons) reply not; But the rest of the Disciples  upon advertisement what had past, begin to mock the two bre∣thren, and so there is another tempest raised which Christ must  also calm; and therefore to this indignation of the Disciples (not now to the ambitious request of the mother, or brethren) he accom∣modates an answer; that they need not be offended at the am∣bition of those brethren, for if they had had their desires, they had been but smal gainers by i; for in Christs Kingdome preemi∣nence signified (or brought along with it) no great secular fe∣licity, (such as was to be among Heathen Emperours (the great ones) and Princes, that being under them, and over others, were served and benefited by their subjects, which is meant by  v. 28. used their power in order to their own profits and pleasures, and pride, , behaving themselves as lords and masters over so many servants, like those Nehem. 5.15. where the following word  is used) but quite con∣trary,  an office of burthen, and pains, and humility, and doing of service, (as S. Mark reads it more clearly, not , but , chap. 10.43. shall be your Minister) and he that will have that pre∣eminence, must provide himself for that task, by the qualifica∣tions
which are most agreeable to that, and count of that way both of acquiring and enjoying it, for otherwise it will not be had; (and upon these terms you need not envy them it) as you may guesse by Christ himself, whose kingdome in this world was of this nature, not administred in that way as might bring in splendour or profit to himself, but in acts of charity, ministring of all kinds of grace, enduring, and serving, and dying for his people, and not requiring that service, those offices from them, as o∣ther Kings have done. This excludes not Disciples of Christ from power, (for he  regulates them by his own example, and no farther, and he, we know, was not onely as God, King of kings and Lord of lords, but as , had all power given unto him in heaven and in earth, and in this his state of condescension here, he was a Master over his Disciples; and when he was called Good master, although he asked, why he called him good? yet the title of Master he disclaims not, nay tels them clearly that they did well, who called him Master, and , Lord, Joh. 13.13.) but shews the lot that was like to befal them, the same it did him, whose greatnes was ex∣prest in humility, and charity, and patience, and offices of servitude; and so the greater any of them should be, the greater portion of these should be expected from them, as the appendage of their greatnesse; which consideration fully makes up the , or rational importance of the place, which was to be an∣swer satisfactory, 1. to the ambition of the two brethren, by dis∣abusing them; 2. to the envy or indignation of the rest, by shew∣ing, that preeminence was no fit object for any ones envy, but pity rather. As for the use of , 'twil be best rendred to lord it, to play the lord, and the importance of that, discerned by the word  that follows v. 28. or if you wil by comparing it with 1 Pet. 5. v. 3. where 'tis explained by that which pre∣cedes in the same sense, ver. 2. by feeding, or governing, (for so  signifies) , by force or violence,  to make gain, filthy, unlawful gain, of the flock, which is all one with , (as in the Gospel, heathen Kings did over their people) and contrary to that, is ruling them by perswasion, , and , making them willing and ready to do, what
they ought, and that by his own exemplary obedience, set∣ting them patterns to transcribe, which certainly is the Clergy mans duty, (and best way of ruling, if it may possible prevaile) , who must be no striker, no co∣vetous person, Titus 1.17. and to the same purpose, 1 Tim. 3.3, 4, 5. and so sure 2 Cor. 1.24.  signifies imperious be∣haviour in any kinde, as there over mens faith, very contrary to meek, gentle perswasion, the method that S. Paul and all follow∣ers of him ought to use, and I shall never excuse them if they doe not. All which I suppose not impertinent (as to justifie the autho∣rity so) to limit and regulate the use of that, and determine it to that one Christian spiritual end, the reforming and win∣ning, and saving of soules; a thing of all other, the most con∣trary to oppressing or violating, invading or tyrannizing over them, in brief (to them which have need of it) the onely seasonable Mercy and Charity in the World, thus in any wise to reprove, and not hate or suffer sin upon my bro∣ther. For the other part of the 2. enquiry, who are the objects of these censures, subjected to the power of the keyes by Christ, I answer, 1. Negatively, that the supream Magistrate in every Kingdome is exempted from it, and not onely à posteriori, because the offe∣ring him up to shame and contumely (which is the work of ex∣communication) would be a certain means to expose him to the contempt of his subjects, and so be in danger to dissolve & shake the peace and setled Government of a Kingdom, (which I sup∣pose to have been the design of that pestilent Romish Heildebran∣dine or Gregorian Doctrine, that the Subjects of an excommuni∣cate Prince were discharged from their allegiance, which was but a smal encreas of the former doctrin (if that were supposed true) of Christs placing a power in the hands of the Church to excommunicate Princes; for from the concession of that, the other would generally follow of its own accord, and need no new doctrin to help it forward, the universal distemper of mens pas∣sions being a sufficient encouragement to the many, to cast off allegiance to those persons wch they conceive themselves taught by Christ, and so by Christianity appointed to despise;) but also à
priori, because Christ found the world disposed by his Father, in a regular subjection of all men to the powers placed over them (and those higher powers at the time of Christs birth, as far as stories will help us to discern, were all Regal or Monarchical through the whole world) and was so far from changing that course by any new law of his, that he laboured by all means possible, to settle and confirm it on that basis, and not so much as to accept, when it was offered him, the exercise of any Seclar or civil power, but to submit himself, and consequently all his, and so all that can plead or pretend any title from him, (, &c. say the Fathers) to the , the supream power in any Kingdom. For the practice & opinion of the Church to this matter, through all times, infi∣nite testimonies might be alleadged. I shall refer the reader to David Blondel in this book, de formulâ Regnante Christo,P. 187, 188, 189, &c. and not endeavour a further disroving of that Doctrine which he thought more worthy of an exclamation in the language of Saint Athanasius, ad Epist ; Who ever in the Church or among Christians, heard or taught, or learnt that Gregorian Doctrine? What an hell was it which vomited it out? I shall adde no more to the nega∣tive part, which being supposed, and to be remembred in that which follows. I answer, In the second place, positively, That the objects of this  Church-charity or Church-censures are, Every open, notorious offen∣der, (whose crimes come to our cognizance, whether by com∣plaint of others, by notoriety of the action, or by his own confes∣sion) that lives, and indulges himself in any grievous crime, any wilfull sin; Every such I say is to be bound by the Church, when after admonition first lesse, then more publique, he continues refra∣ctory, unreformed, and not till then. The more shame for the easie denouncers of that censure, that either inflict it on every trivial commission, without consideration whether repented of or no; or that use this soveraign recipe, this generosm medicamen∣tum, (that, say artists, must not be cast away, either on the wanton or the desperate patient, but onely on those whom we see to
want it, and hope it may doe some good on) this strong physick, this last and most generous medicament so Hence Avi∣tus Alcimus, Ep. 61. to Constantius the Bishop, Illud monere praesumo ne propter leves causas, & non ad Deum, sed saeculum pertinentes, ne Laici quidem, non dicam Clerici, sanctâ communione priventur, quia nescit cujus dignitatis sit ipsa communio, qui non eam omni animositate sepositâ & cum magno dolore suspendit, & cum maximâ festinatione restituit. vid. Can. 2. Concil. Aurel. 5. & Leon. magn. Ep. 89. taxing Hilary for that fault. unadvisedly and un∣charitably, so for any other end, rather then reforming of pro∣phane men. Then for loosing, who is capable of that, is agreed in general, the greatest sinners, upon approbation of their repentance: As for Novatus who denyed absolution to the Lapsi, he himself was cen∣sur'd and punished for that severity, as you may see in the 8. Can. of the Nic. Council, on which saith Zonaras , he was cast out and anathematiz'd in a council at Rome, Corneli∣us being Pope, and Decius Emperour, , Though he offended not in matter of faith, yet for his want of compassion and kindnesse to the brethren. But then, what degree of approbation will serve turn, what time of humiliation, what fruits and evidences of repentance may be thought sufficient to give capacity of this loosing; the judgement of Councils and Churches have much varied in that particular, the Vid. Gro. in Heb. p. 820. Roman being anciently milder then any o∣ther Churches; and how much these latter ages have been more favourable to the guiltiest sons of the Church, then the most mercifull of the first ages had learned to be, even those very Councils that condemn'd the severity of Novatus and the Ca∣thari, are able to testifie; I will give you but an hint or two out of the Canons of the Council of Nice, (before quoted against Novatus) Can. 11. the Council speaking of them that fell in the time of Licinius his Tyranny,  without any violence, or plundring, or danger of either, the censure is upon true and unfained repentance, , Three years shall they continue among the Audients (i. e. saith Zonaras, ) stand without the Church in the Porch so long, and onely partake in hearing the holy Scriptures. Then
(i. e. saith Zonaras, , &c.) for the space of seven years more they have leave to be admitted within the Church, but to be behind a pillar, near the doore, and go out with the Catechumeni. Ten years already, you see, and yet farther, , Two years shall they joyn in prayer with the people, but without the oblation: i. e. saith Zonaras, they shall not yet be vouchsafed the participation of the holy things, till these two years be over. This appro∣bation of their repentance cost them, it seems, no lesse then 12. years. But then the same Council speaking of others, that having  made some profession of Christian valour, like dogs returned to their vomit again, Can 12. resolves, , Afer the three years in the porch among the audients, they must be ten years at the pillar; the seven years it seems are improved into ten, and tis probable the two years of communicating  still behinde, and so the probation fifteen years long. Oney the Bishop had power left him of the remitting of this  severity, if he saw them (, by humility and tears, and patience, and almsdees, demonstrate their conversion to be sincere, not fained. And so Alcimus to Victorius the Bishop, Authoritatis ve∣strae est, errantium compunctione perspectâ severitatis ordinem tempo∣rare; 'Tis the part of your authority, when you perceive the compun∣ction of those that have sinned, to temper the order of severity, i. e. to receive him earlier into the Church, Epist. 16. That which might be added in this point out of the ancient  Canons, would be endlesse to relate, he that would see a particu∣lar description of the several degrees of these penitents, may have it very clearly set down in Zozomens History, l. 7. c. 17. and I shall not so much as enquire what grounds our latter ages have had to remit so much of the ancient discipline, till at length it be crumbled and moultred away into a nothing, or a meer formality: what is amisse in it, I beseech God may be reform'd. I shall only add to this Chapter, that there have beeen in the  practice of the Church, (I say not grounded in those Texts of the Gospel) two sorts of binding; One temporary or penitential
when the person confesses himself penitent, and desires the Ab∣solution of the Church, at least when there is hope of repentance, in which case the custome hath been to impose for some set time the , such works as are agreeable to that re∣pentance, and proportioned to the former sin, & not to absolve til what is imposed be performed. This the Nicene Fathers ex∣presse by this style, [] for whose penance the time is defined, and the season set, Zonaras by () the space determi∣ned for the penance of those that had faln: And Alcimus by propositis observationibus interim ab Ecclesiâ sequestrari, to be appointed some observances, and in the mean time to be sequestred from the Church: & notae excommunicationis indictio donec publicâ poenitentiae professione desuescant, setting a mark (answerable to the  in Saint Paul) of excommunication upon him, till by publique profession of re∣pentance he disuse his former course, a kinde of Niddui, or tempo∣rary remotion; The second absolute, & sine praefinito tempore, without any certain definition of time. When men are refractory, and give no hope of amendment, and that is a kind of Schamma∣tha, Alcimus's irrevocable anathema, the binding over for ever, perennis excommunicatio, Turon. Concil. 2. c. 20. Paris. Conc. 3. can. 5. or usque ad reformationem, for ever if they reform not. The for∣mer of these is sometimes, but not alwayes, an exclusion, or ab∣scission from the Church, (but somtimes on the other side a com∣mand to frequent the prayers of the Church, or the Sacrament, every Lords day for such a space, hath been the penance or disci∣pline) nor consequently is it a binding that man so, that his sin is not yet pardoned on earth, but tis designed for other uses, for satisfaction to the Churches edification, &c. But they of the se∣cond sort are truly under that band, and cut off from the com∣munion of the Church and by no means admitted to the services of it.
CAP. VI. THere is but one enquiry now behind, i. e. what is the real  effect of binding and loosing, or what conjunction it hath with binding and loosing in heaven. Which though it be the weightiest consideration of all the four, yet shall I have occasi∣on to say least to it, and indeed only this, That a censure of the Church is a venerable thing, not only casting a Christian out of the Church, wherein he is appointed to seek salvation, and of which as long as he is thought unworthy, he is uncapable of heaven; but withall a superaddition to the band in heaven, by which that sin is made indissoluble before God, til it be absolved on earth, or that absolution duly sought from the Church; Christ having affirmed of him, that in this case his sins shall not be pardoned there; as on the other side, that being by repentance re∣turn'd to that capacity, heaven shall return again to be his por∣tion, and that pardon by the promise of Christ become due to him. The plain reason of it is, The denunciation is irreversible, and  indispensably universal, [Except you repent you shall all perish] and the promise as infallible and immutable [He that confesseth and forsaketh, shall have mercy.] Now the binding, if it be as it should be (clave non errante) supposeth the man impenitent and refractory, and so to continue till he use means to return to the peace of the Church again; and then without controversie, who∣soever is so bound on earth, (cast out of the Church for an impeni∣tent and refractorie, and continuing so) is bound in heaven, cast out from all title to that by God also. To which purpose is that known ancient passage in Tertullians Apol. speaking of these censures. Judicatur cum magno pondere ut apud certos de Dei con∣spectu. Summumque futuri judicii praejudicium est, si quis ita delique∣rit, ut à communicatione orationis & conventus, & omnis sancti com∣mercii relegetur. c. 39. The judgements of the Church are exercised with great weight, as being among them that are certainly resolved that they are in the sight of God. And it is but a preparative pro∣nouncing or passing of the future judgement, if any man offend so high∣ly, that he be banish't from communication or partaking of prayer, of
Church-meetings, and all holy commerce. But on the other side, he that upon his repentance, and appro∣bation of that to be sincere, is (clave non errante, still) let into the Church again, is ipso facto supposed to have right, (and by his absolution that right sealed to him visibly, and Christs promise par∣ticular for it) to heaven. Now if it be demanded, Whether a true repentant sinner once bound by the Church be not presently loosed in heaven, i. e. pardo∣ned and forgiven at the first minute of his repentance, without (or before he receive) absolution from the Church? I answer, that in case of publique or scandalous crimes, the reformation must be publique and notorious also. And to that purpose confession and satisfaction before the congregation, and him that bound, i. e. the Governour of the Church (to repair the injury done to the former by the ill example, and to testifie the sincerity of the re∣pentance to the latter) is necessarily requir'd to the approving of this repentance even to God, without which non remittetur peccatum, there is no more possibility of loosing in Heaven, then hope of absolution on earth. But on the sincere performance of this, as there is no doubt but God will have mercy, will loose in Heaven, will justifie and pardon that (such a) penitent sinner; so is the Church-ruler on earth bound to loose him here below, to restore him to the Church also, as soon as by his submission to his penance he approves himselfe to him to be such; and though 'tis possible he may be sincerely penitent in Gods sight, before he appear so to the Church, yet is he obliged to seek thus to approve himself to the Church, if his case have come under her cogni∣zance, or in case he desire to have any of that assurance which is to be had from the Church, or by title to the promise in those texts. And yet this exercise of the keyes is not to be conceived so absolutely necessary, that none can be damned without that seal of damnation, or binding, or non-forgivenesse, nor again that none can be saved, or forgiven without the seal of remission; For sure the neglect of the Bishop in the first case, his not-performing his office of excision, is no way able to rescue the impenitent from the eternal guilt and punishment of his sins, but rather a means to leave him remedilesse unto it (his binding being indeed such a
remedy, if it be made use of) and the bare want of the remission or absolution, so it be joyned with readiness to perform all that is preparative to it, and an hearty desire to be partaker of it, is in the merciful, gracious court of Gods audience sure to be ac∣cepted, when there is no space or room for more. For the words of Christ (whatsoever you shall bind, &c.) though they be universal, binding all in Heaven that are bound on earth, yet are they not exclusive, so as none shall be bound in Heaven, but such as are bound on Earth, or in the Church below. Nor on the other side, [whatsoever you shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.] 'Tis [Whatsoever ye, that I] but not [Whatsoever not ye, that I] and consequently, this double affirmation of Christ may be per∣fectly true; Whosoever stands bound here, stands bound there, and whosoever are absolved here, are absolved there; and yet for all that, are many bound in Heaven which are not bound in the Church, & loosed in Heaven which are not absolved by the Church. And if the phrase used in Saint John, [whatsoever ye retained, it is retained] seem to any to have an exclusive sense, thus, that what we absolve not here, we do retain; and consequently, that whom we absolve not, God will not absolve. I answer, that this is a mistake, arising from the equivocalnesse of the word [retain] which in the Greek  (as we shewed) signifies no more in this place then , or binding in the other Gospels; in which, because that intimates not any exclusive power, neither will it be reasonable that this shall. And so much for the fourth par∣ticular also. To which, before we part from it, it will not perhaps be unseasonable (though I hope I shall not be obliged to justifie the truth of the relations) to annex a passage or two out of the latter stories of the Greek Church, (believed generally by them, & mentioned on affirmation of particular knowledge by some which have come from them to this place, & lived amongst us) which will acquaint us with the awe, and signifie the opinion which it seems they have of the real efficacie of these censures of the Church. It is related (saith Crucius in Turco-graecia) in the Constantinopolitan histories, that the Sultan Mahomet among other things concerning the Christian Religion, asked the Patri∣arch Maxims,  concerning Excommunica∣tion
of which he had heard , That if the high Priests, and Priests of the Christians should excommunicate any person upon just cause, the body of that man dissolves not into the earth, but remains en∣tire and whole; and when the sepulchre of any such is opened, they appear like drums or timbrels, and black, i. e. the body swell'd, but whole, and withal much discoloured: And that upon absolution the body is dissolved to dust. In the truth of which tradition the Sultan desi∣red to be confirmed by the Patriarch, who upon search made, found (saith he) that a certain loose woman having defamed a former Patriarch, Genadius Scholarius, was by him excommunicate, and so dyed. Her Sepulchre Maximus caused to be opened, and (, O the wonders of God, saith he) , She was found as she was at the time of her buriall, only swella and black. This (saith he) was certified to the Sultan, who sent some of his Nobles to view it, which they did with admiration, and caused the corps to be sealed up in a Coffin with the Imperial Seal, and returned at a set day Then the Patriarch opened it, and , officiated and read the prayer of absolution: Whereupon the joynts of her hands and feet were immediately loosed. They sealed it up again, and returning after three dayes found all turn'd to dust. This they reported to the Sultan, who wondred, and was a∣stonished, and said, , That this Religion and faith of the Christians was wonderful and true. This same story is related again at large, l. 2. Turco Gr. §. 32. In the Pa∣triarchial History of Emanuel Malaxus in vulgar Greek. A like example there is also of one Arsenius, who dyed excommunicate, l. 2. §. 43. p. 151. and also of Johannicius, a Pseudo-patriarch, l. 2. p. 156. of whom, saith he,  the excommunicate was found hard and swelled as a drum or timbrel. The truth of the passages, I hope it will not be expected of me to as∣sert or confirm (nor can I any further then the fore-mentioned authority will bear) I shal rather give the reader y conjecture how this perswasion became so general, & these stories so con∣fidntly reported among them. It was, I suppose, from the ob∣serving, but not understanding in the Gospel the phrases of binding
and loosing, which not knowing to what they belong'd (for the modern Graecians are far from being very learned) they may have applied them to the dissolving, or not dissolving of mens bodies in the earth, which they there expresse by , & , and , the word of the Evangelist. If this be not it, I have no more to say of it, but that it was a . And now having taken this licence a little to expatiate, I shal  enlarge y teather a little wider; and having said thus much of this custome of excommunication among Jews and Christians, pro∣ceed yet farther, ex abundanti, and by way of appendix, shew the consent of others, even of Heathen people in this matter, by that means (if not to confirm, as by an instance, that ancient truth of Clemens so oft repeated by him, , The Gre∣cians knowledge and solemn practices are generally stoln from the Jews, yet) to shew the opinion of other men, imbued with other principles of Theologie, by which the design of this former Trea∣tise may with a rational man, who is not a Divine, be somewhat established, I shall instance but in two particulars (because it is but , or as ex abundanti, that I say any thing of it.) The first, of the ancient Grecians, as I find it mentioned by Diod. Siu∣lus. Bibl. 16. in the discourse of the ,Edit. Rhodo∣man p. 425. the sacred War betwixt the Phocenses and Lacedaemonians on one side, and the Thebans, &c. on the other; of which there is mention in Thucydides,L. 1. p. 73. p. 425. but a full narration in Diodorus Siculus in the place fore-cited. From that one Author in one Page these few things may be learnt by way of story. 1. That on occasion of sacriledge or invasion of the rights of their gods, () as the plowing up a peice of sacred ground call'd Cirrhaea (which was the crime of the Phocenses) or the taking in War, and seizing on the like place call'd Cadmea (which was the Lacedemonians fault) the Senate of the Amphictyones upon complaint of the  or recorders of holy things, did devote or Anathe∣matize even a whole Country or Region at once, as that of the Lacedemonians, and that other of the Phocenses. 2. That what was thus done, was confirm'd by the Grecians generally, , &c. 3. That though Sacriledge was the occasion of this devoting, yet was it not the im∣mediate cause or crime wherein it was founded, but their not
submitting to some former punishments, not paying the mulcts which had been inflicted on them by the same Judges for that crime. The punishments of those first crimes are there mention∣ed to have been great summes of money laid on the offenders, () and upon the not paying of that, this devoting follows. 4. The nature of this punishment consisted, 1. In the shame that it brought upon the offenders, such as Philomelus tels his Phocen∣ses, , 'tis the part of unmanly persons not to lay it to heart, or consider it. 2. In the consequents of it, in that it would , bring danger and subversion to all their lives, & that in two respects. 1. In respect of God, to whose vengeance they were thus devoted, (answerable to the  forementioned, added to the ) in which respect it is, in order to the Phocenses, called there , be∣ing consecrated or devoted. 2. In respect of men, to whose mis∣chief also they were exposed, (parallel to what we read of Cain when he was cast out of Gods presence; Any man, saith he, that meets me, will kill me) and therefore in order to the Spartans, it is call'd there , an exposing them to the common hatred of all men. 5. That for them that were under any such sentence, there was no way, but to obey the mulct that was formerly in∣flicted on them, i. e. to reform their contumacie, which they that were not able to do, or not willing, and therefore pretend they were not able () have no way left, but endeavour to nul the sentence, by proving it unjust, () by shewing that it was no fault, on which the former punishment, (to which their contumacie had been exprest) was inflicted. And to make good this plea, their best & indeed only way was that of force, viz. to make Philomelus their General, & to provide him an Army, which was accord∣ingly done, and after some three or four prosperous sights on that side, the conclusion was, that at last agreeably to the cause, in the sight of his prosperous impiety he was routed and slain.Pag. 432. And so you have a brief of the first passage. The other is that known one of the Druids among the ancient Galls, mentioned by Caesar de Bell. Gal. l. 6. the summe of it is this. Among the
Galls two onely sorts of men there are, saith he, qui in aliquo sunt numero & honore, which are of account and honour among them, The Druids, and the Equites, or Noblemen, all the rest being pe∣zants and slaves. The former of these are thus described, by their offices or imployments, Illi rebus divinis intersunt, sacrificia publica & privata procurant, religiones interpretantur, ad hos magnus adolescentium numerus disciplinae causâ concurrit, magnóque ii sunt apud eos honore; nam ferè de omnibus controversiis publicis privatis{que} constituunt, & si quid est admissum facinus, si caedes facta, de haeredi∣tate, de finibus controversia est, iidem decernunt, praemia poenas{que} con∣stituunt: Si quis aut privatus, aut populus, eorum decreto non steterit, sacrificiis interdicunt. Haec poena apud eos est gravissima; Quibus ita est interdictum, ii numero impiorum ac sceleratorum habentur, ab iis omnes decedunt, aditum eorum sermonem{que} defugiunt, ne quid ex con∣tagione incommodi accipiant, neque iis petentibus jus redditur, neque ullus honos communicatur. His omnibus Druidibus praeest unus, &c. They are the men employed in all the service of God, perform the pub∣like and private sacrifices, instruct the youth, and are honoured by them, are the Judges in wel-nigh all both publique and private controversies; if any outrage or murder be committed, any difficulty about bounds or inheritance, they decree and determine both rewards and punishments; If any private person or people stand not to their decrees, they forbid him their sacrifices. This is of all other the most grievous punishment, they that are under this interdict, are accounted as impious and enor∣mous persons, all men refuse their company, come not neer them, nor discourse with them, lest the contagion hurt them; they receive no ad∣vantage by the Lawes of the Kingdom, nor are capable of any honour in it. Of all these Druids there is one Prefect or President, &c. And it seems this custome and institution among them was conceived to have had its original from Britain. Disciplina in Britanniâ reperta, atque inde in Galliam translata esse existimatur, & nunc qui diligentiùs eam rem cognoscere volunt, plerun{que} illò discendi causâ proficiscuntur. This discipline was found in Britain, and thence brought unto the Galls, and they that are willing to have any exact knowledge of it, do now ordinarily go thither to learn it. The story being in it self thus clear and full, will have little need of my comment or observation on it; all that I meant to do was to shew you the consent of other Religions, & Nations, and by that to
conclude, that the heathens thought not that unreasonable, which now Christ hath by standing law establisht in his Church, and many that are called Christians, are so willing to cast out of it. And so much so this  also. CAP. VII. ANd now by way of conclusion of this whole discourse, I shall add somewhat of the utility of this peice of discipline, if with another preparatory to it, it might by the Governours of every Church be carefully exercised: That other preparative which I mean, is that, if not Apostolical, yet Ecclesiastical institution of Confirmation. The intention of which, and design of our Church in it, every man sufficiently knows (although it have been much and with very ill consequence of late neglected) and therefore I shall not here insist on it; and besides it hath been set down at large in Vindic. of Lit. another Discourse. This whole office of Confirmation, and the necessary preparatives of it, that of the Ministers Cate∣chising (and throughly instructing all the youth of both sexes, and of all sorts within his cure, and explaining to the under∣standing of each, and laying home to his heart all the duties un∣dertaken in his Baptisme) being solemnly premised, according to the rules and intention of our Church, and all duties per∣form'd and observed by the Curate, the Child, and the Bishop (and none permitted to come to the Lords Table that hath not laud∣ably past through this course) would (in the opinion of a goldy and learned man, who did much study the wayes of ad∣vancing piety and learning) tend most probably to the keeping men at least within bounds of Christian civility, from falling into enormous sins, which they had in their own persons so so∣lemnly  against. And therefore the use of that discipline, were extreamly to be wish't for, that it were revived in each Christian Common-wealth: And if it should be objected, that having been so long neglected in this, it cannot now possibly be recovered again, because of the vast number of those that have been either not at all, or else but formally, and perfunctorily, or without precedent preparation confirm'd: I answer, that that argument proves not the impossibility,
but only difficulty of doing it, or if the difficulty be so great, as to advance into a kinde of moral impossibility, yet ought it not therefore to be left unattempted, (we are required to endeavour the doing of things which appear morally impossible to be done; because God may enable us to do that, which, till we try, we conceive impossible; and though the not performing may not be damning, yet the not endeavouring may) or if still the difficul∣ty of an universal reformation in this kind, discourage even from attempting it, yet may it be reasonable and feacible for every Pastour, now to begin with all the youth of his Parish, which have not yet come to the Lords Supper, and keep them to this probation; and so for ever hereafter constantly to continue; and then, though the elder sort of this present age come not under this method, nor consequently this means of reformation; yet per∣haps the example of, and instructions bestowed on those un∣der them, may work somewhat on them: and howsoever the stock of the succeeding age will now be wrought on, and so Posterity be mended, though the present age cannot, which to every good Christian will be worth considering. This course being thus taken for the planting, and rooting all good re∣solutions, and obtaining the blessing of God, upon the young and tender, (by the prayers of the Church, and the pur∣port of Christs promise of habenti dabitur) together with the use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and attention to reading, and preaching of the Word, might very probably hope to be successefull; but then because possibly it may not, (some Christians will be perjur'd and impudent, rather then be chaste and conscientious, after all this) therefore comes in the use and utility of the censures of the Church, as a Tabula post nau∣fragium, a means of bringing him to repentance, that by the former means could not be kept innocent; of reducing him by the rod, that the crook could not keep from straying. And if 'twere thus used, if every one that fel after confirmation, were first admonisht by one, then if it served not, by two or three, and then upon refractarinesse, or indulgence in sin, delivered up to Sathan, turn'd out of all Christian Communion without any partiality, or respect of persons, this would be as propable a means as
the wit of man could invent, either by the fear and expectation of this censure to deter them, and prevent those enormities that are now so ordinary among Christians, or else by shame, and other consequent inconveniences, as by Causticks to work the cure. For it cannot but be observed, what force shame, and cre∣dit have on the minds of men. A sin that is gotten into some countenance or reputation, though it be destitute of all other lovelinesse or ability to tempt any, doth yet carry all before it without resistance; the fear of shame makes men vicious, that otherwise are not inclined to it, and certainly the same means would be able to commend virtue to us: there is not that infi∣nite natural aversation against all goodnes in the minds of men (unlesse as that word signifies the passions, or carnal affections) as that men would be very wicked to lose by it; afflictio dabit intellectum, and such afflictions as these that fall upon the fame, are not the most easily supportable, and therefore may possibly help even a sensual man to some understanding; and though the certain truth of this observation cannot otherwise be proved, but by our resolution to make experience of it; yet seems it to me to have the Authority and Testimony of Saint Paul himself in these words, (though usually, by those that are led by the sound of them, otherwise applyed) 2 Cor. 10.4. the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, (or to God, or (by an hebraisme very ordinary) very or exceeding mighty) to the pulling down of strong holds, &c. which words that they belong to the point in hand, will 1. be probable by the Context, where the Apostle speaks of proceeding against offenders, which he cals , being bold towards them, v. 1.2. and , to revenge or punish disobedience, v. 6. and this according to the  or authority which the Lord had given him for edification or instruction, and not for destruction (which before I shewed you belong'd unto the power of censure) & then he adds a caution to remove a prejudice, that unreformed sinners had against him, his letters were severe, and so he, when he was absent; but far from all such severity, when he came amongst them, ; vile or tame, or unconsiderable, when he was among them, i. e. that he threatned to excommunicate, but when
he came would not do it, which he cals , terrifying by letters, v. 9. and , weighty or powerful letters, v. 10. i. e. severe and terrifying, which yet he threatens shall be equalled by his actions, when he comes among them, ver. 11. and so all along you see the businesse is about censures. And then 2. this sense of the words will be more then probable, by weighing the words themselves, wherein  signifies confestly the Apostles Ministery, as it doth so in the onely other place, where 'tis used in the New Testament, 1 Tim. 1.18. That thou mightest war a good warfare, i. e. discharge the duty of thy Ministery, as thou oughtest, according to the importance of the Hebrew , which is sometimes rendred , warfare, sometimes  Ministery [then , the weapons of that warfare] are the means to discharge that duty in the Ministery, of which nature though there be many more, preaching, catechizing, administration of Sacraments confirmation, &c. yet the context, or antecedents, and consequents of this place belonging, as was shew'd to the businesse of cen∣sures, will restrain it in this place peculiarly to those. Then, that these are not [, carnal] signifies that they are not weak, for so  at every turn in these Epistles signifies weak∣nesse, (and from thence oftentimes the law, because it was so weak, so unable to give strength to any disciple of Moses to per∣form it, as in the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians 'tis insist∣ed on) and so to omit more places of Testimony, in the next pre∣cedent verse, though we walk in the flesh, i. e. though we are weak, as men, and have no power over you, yet as Ministers, we are not, our Ministery is with power, and therefore it follows, as a explication of [, not carnal] but , mighty, or powerful, through, or to God, or exceeding powerful. And wherein doth this mightinesse or power expresse it self? Why, , we render it, pulling down of strong holds, & so it may literally be rendred, as the end of excommuni∣cation, pulling down of all fortresses, that maintain or secure a man in sin; but more critically, the word  signifies excom∣munication it self, both ver. 8. and Chap. 13.10. and generally in the Canons of the Councils, and then , strong holds, may
signifie all impenitent obdurate sinners, that will not otherwise be wrought upon, and are called, ver. 15. Every high thing, that ex∣alteth it self against the knowledge of God, i. e. against piety or Chri∣stianity; and so the words being thus interpreted in the retaile, and then put together again in the grosse, will run thus: [The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds:] i. e. the censures of the Church are ex∣ceeding powerful, and that power consists in excommunicating pertinacious offenders. The truth of which observation, if not in∣terpretation, will be undoubted to him that doth but remem∣ber, what this discourse hath so oft inculcated, that excommu∣nication was delivering a man to Satan, and a consequent of that in those first times, corporal inflictions, diseases, (and sometime death it self) which, if any humane thing, would most proba∣bly work upon one. Onely it may be objected, that that conse∣quent was peculiar to the Apostles times, and is not now in use, and consequently that a great part of the power of Ecclesiastical censures is now lost, and so now the weapons of our warfare may be carnal, our censures unsufficient to perform their task, to re∣duce impenitents, though theirs were not. To which I answer, by confessing the objection, that indeed it is so; and very rea∣sonable it should, Christian Princes having now taken the tui∣tion of the Church into their hands, and so those keen wea∣pons in the spiritual hand not so necessary; as you know the Manna ceased to be rain'd from heaven, when the people were come into the promised land, flowing with milk and honey. Onely I shall then reply, that therefore it is more then fit, that some means should be used, in case of any discernable defect, to in∣terpose by way of supply, and adde the more then moral per∣swasive power of some other fit engine beside that of the cen∣sures of the Church, especially in cases of enormous, infamous crimes, which may be done by the Secular arm, in such cases (when the Ecclesiastical censures perswade not) the impression of inflicting penalties, severe enough, as may be found expe∣dient, usque ad reformationem, untill they make themselves capa∣ble (by testimonies of amendment) to receive release both from God and man; that so by that means, as God supplyed the
want of humane aid, by his extraordinary from heaven; and when the Secular Magistrates discharged not their duty, exerci∣sed not the power given them to the purging of the Church from rotten, vicious, prophane, incorrigible members, God gave this power to the Apostles of inflicting diseases on Male∣factors; so now that extraordinary power being withdrawn from the Church, the Magistrate should think himself most strict∣ly obliged to perform his duty, for which if it should be required, that we produce the expresse commands or directions of Christ and his Apostles, or Primitive presidents; I answer, That will be unjust to require of us, 1. Because in Scripture times, there were other means to supply that want, the Devils corporal inflictions on them that were delivered to him, and so any other might be spared: 2. Because this duty naturally belongs to the Magistrate, who alone hath ordinarily , compulsive jurisdiction, which as it was practi∣sed by the Kings in the Old Testament, so was it not interdicted by Christ in the New, but all left in that matter by him as he found it; which being granted, it may be said, that as Christ or the Apostles give no directions for this, so they needed not to give any. 3. Because both then, and in the Primitive Church, the Secular power was not Christian, and therefore the assi∣stance could not be expected from them, which now most rea∣sonably may, to awake, and hazen, and drive those that will not be allured and drawn, that so even in this world, there may be no peace, quiet rest, tranquility; or security to the wicked. Isa. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. Wash yee, make you clean, &c. THE END.
