M2665 12326893 59570
THE LIFE AND DOCTRINE OF OVR SAVIOVR IESVS CHRIST. With short reflections for the help of such as desire to vse MENTALL PRAYER. THE FIRST PART. Also 24. Intertaynments of our Blessed Saviour in the most BLESSED SACRAMENT. With certaine Aspirations tending to the encrease of the LOVE OF GOD. By. H. M. of the SOCIETIE OF IESVS. IHS GANT by MAXIMILIAEN GRAET of the signe of the Angel 1656. Permissu Superiorum,
The Life and Doctrine of our Saviour JESVS CHRIST, VVith short notes for the help of those who desire to bee directed in the way of Meditation. The first Part. TO THE READER. THe Life and Doctrin of our Saviour Iesus Christ set forth some few yeares past with short reflections in latin, by way of Meditation, could not well be translated into our language as it was ther digested (though desired by di∣vers) because in greate part it was compi∣led of loose sayings of holy fathers, which, besides the concise expressions of the latin tongue, would have made the translation fall short both in substance and methode; that manner of expression and methode sorting better with such as are learned, and experienced in the way of contemplation, and an English translation being rather to be fitted to the vulgar and vnexperienced. I thought best therfore my self at covenient times to take it in hand, presuming I might have the more freedome to follow, or to alter the methode, as I should find cause,
and also to ad what might occur to be supplied in places which might seeme otherwise bare. As for the worke it self, I have little to say; Only in regard the ground of it is the holy Text of the Evangelists, the Reader may be advertised out of S. John Chrisos∣tome,Chrysoft. hom. 18. in Gees. that the holy Scripture vttereth no∣thing rashly, or by chance, and at adven∣ture, but every syllable, and every little tittle of it contaynes a hidden treasure, and consequently in few words thou maist find much sayed, and a great deale of mat∣ter in a little compas, and mayst be su∣re ther is stil more and more to be found, because (as the same saint advertizeth) they are the words of the holy Ghost,hom 15. who∣se infinite wisdome comprizeth much more in one word, then the wit of man can arrive to dive into. Ponder therfore diligently, not only what is culled out to thy hand, but much more the ground it∣self: for as the spouse sayth in the Canticles Thy breasts are better then wine, and have the savour of most precious oyntments:Cant. Of which I whish thee from my hart abundance, and rest in Christ esus. Thy well wissher and Servant H. M.
Introduction to the Meditations of the Comming and Childhood of our Saviour. I. PART. I. HOcscientes tempus. The time which wee li∣ve in this World is but time, not Eternitie! shorte,Rom. . vncertaine, momentarie; Wee are not assured of the next minute. The long day of  followes: Day, if wee pas this moment Wel and vertuously; Night eternalle, if we pas it wickedly, and doe not repent in time. Therfore the Apostle with reason admonisheth vs that it is high time to awake and rise from sleepe. Hora estjam; perhaps this is the last hore, and the last cal;Hora est ja nos de somno sur gere. perhaps now or never shal wee have time! let vs therfore not only awake, but rise from sleepe, and loth, and not delaye our amendment: for many awake and see their danger, and for sloth or plea∣sure ly til it be too late. And no our salvati∣on is neerer then when wee did first beleeve.He enim proprior est ostra salus qucum cre∣didimus. For the longer wee live, the greater is the mercy of God towards vs in expecting vs; and wee are neerer our end, which, if we wil, is salvation; and neerer then wee can easily beleeve; for few beleeve they shall de, til they be almost past feeling death. II. How much are we beholding to God that we we∣re not borne and bed in the night of infidelitie, or Tur∣cisme or the like,Nox preslit, dies autem ap∣proqinquavit. But in the day light of the Gospel of Christ wher we come with ease to know nor only the true God but the true way of worshipping him, and hane means by the Sacraments, and other helps to performe i, vt∣terly reiecting and detesting the worckes of darknes,Abijciamus ergo opera tnebrarum, & indua∣mur arma lucis, sicu in die hestè a∣bulemus. and practising the centrary vertues: for as they are not only li∣ke a comely garment unto vs, such as we may with honour appeare in before the whole world, but they are armour of offence and defence against our Ghostly enimies, and we grow by the practise of them dayly stronger. and stronger. III. Consider that the more we know of our Savi∣our, and the longer we have been in his service, the
more shame it were for vs if we should not follow his doc∣trin and his steps. And we should be as much ashamed of it as to go naked, after we have come to the vse of reason; for whatever is not according to our Saviours doctrin is but filth and nastines. Be clothed therfore with Iesus Christ.Induimini Dominum Iesum Christum. That is, because you cannot doe this of your∣self, beg incessantly his grace and help, and doe not on∣ly not hinder him by your perversnes or sloth and idle humour, but concur with your indeavour that you may be clothed, and remayne so in perfection, and better and better, by increase of vertue and vertuous practise; to∣ward which the consideratiō of the misteries and passages of our Saviours life will conduce as they begin now of new to be represented vnto vs by the holy Church this holy time of Advent. Introduction to the coming of our Saviour. II. PART. I. THe greate incitement to welcome our Saviour into this world,Hoc lentite in vobis quod in Christo Iesu, qui in forma Dei esset. &c. Philip. 2▪ 5 and to reioyce at his coming, and the memorie of it, is that he is God, not vndertaking it of necessitie, but freely and Charitably for our redemption, releefe, instruction, example. As he is God, he is infinitely happy with in himself, and Was so from all Eternitie, equall in all things with his father, one God. one essence, one substance with him, one in power, knowledge, honour. wisdome; and, af∣ter the Creation, equall in respect due, and done vnto him by all Creatues. Aboue all need of any thing, and be∣yoynd all possibility of Wanting. II. Consequently consider the distance which was betwixt him and man; which distance, if Angell and man had well observed and kept, the first had not faln, nor the second needed redemption. They did trench vpon that which was due vnto God, and was his only right, and therfore, as committing rapin vpon an others goods were deseruedly punished; Not so the secōd person in the Blessed Trinity, the only sonne of God, but it was his rig to bee equal and no way inferiour: but what he did in this kind was voluntary;Non rapinam arbi∣tratus est esse se aequalem Deo. he as it were emptyed himself,
concealing what he was, and taking vpon him that na∣ture,Ph. 2. 7. which in comparison to the divine Nature and glo∣rie was nothing. III. O infinite humiliation! And wherfore? To the end that in the nature of man, he might suffer for man, sa∣tisfie for mā, sactifie mā, instruct mā by word and exāple, incourage man to suffer for him and for his law, finally crowne mā with part of the glory due to himself, and ma∣ke him partaker of himself, that is, bring him into the true way of being like to God, to which he was falsly temp∣ted at the first Creation. This true way is imitation of his humilitie and obediēce, persevering in it vnto death and bearing our Cosses,Matth. 16▪ 24. as himself teacheth▪ Saying He that wil come after me to heaven, or be my disciple on e∣arth▪ let him denie himself, the contentments, in which the world placeth its happines,Hoc Sentite. Phil. 2. 5 and take vp his Crosse, and follow me. Let this minde be in you, let these be your thou∣ghts, and endevour to finde favour and contentment in this as Christ Iesus did. IV. He humbled himself to the conjunction with hu∣mane Nature; to the prison of nine months; to the command of his inferiour; to the stable and manger; to poore clouts, and straw; to the inconveniences of an infāt, to the cōpanie of shepheards; to be circumcised as if he had been guylty of syn; to be presented as subject to the law; to be redeemed after the rate of the poorer sort; to yeald to Herods wrath, as if he had been the weaker; to fly, as if he had need to feare: to wan∣der, as if he had not been lord of the world; to ly hid∣den, as a man of no account; to be set at naught, as son∣ne to a Carpenter; to live in silence, as a man of no parts, to be obedient, as if truly subject. If I make more of myself, behold thou standest vp against me. Th. Kemp. . 3. c. 8.
The Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour▪ I. PART. I. THe Angell Gabriel was sent from God. O lessed Angel:Missus st Angelus Gabriel  Deo. Luc. 1. 20. I reioyce with thee that this imploy∣ment of so greate importance and of so high a nature, hath falen to thy lot. Blessed art thou among those heavenly spirits who assist with thee in the prese∣ce of God, and blessed is the message, which thou brin∣gest; Assist me I beseech thee to conceave rightly of it, and to benefit my self by it, as is intended. II He was sent to a citty of Galilie the name wherof was Nazareth to a Virgen, espowsed to a man, whose name was Io∣seph, of the howse of David, and the Virgins name was Marie. Galilae and Nazareth. Both Countrie and Cittie were among the Iewes contemptible; Ioseph a Carpener by trade: by which we vnderstand that however to fulfil the promise and prophecie, our Saviour would descend from the blood royal of David; ye he would doe it in the humblest, and cōcealedest manner that could be; to teach vs, not to glorie, or place any happines in that kind of honour which is so much blazed among men, but to shun it.Galilaee, Volubiliie: Ioseph, increase Nazareth, floride Marie, exalted. Yet by the names of Galilaee, Nazareth, Io∣seph, and Marie we may iustly gather that he would be∣token the spiritual change of the world to the better and more florishing estate; the Increase of Gods graces particu∣larly to S. Ioseph, and to vs; and that the Virgen Marie in nature of Mother of God was to be exalted aboue all creatures, as Lady and Misteres of them al. III. And the Angel being entred in sayed vnto her. Hayle, ful of grace, our lord is with thee; Blessed arte thou among woemen. Placing thy self in presence of the Blessed Virgen, say with the Angel, and imitate the inward and outward re∣verence which he bears her: then inlarge thyself consi∣dering with how greate reason se is tearmed ful of grace, being so from her conception and forward, fuller then the Angels themselves (setting a side the cleere vision which they inioyed) by how much she was exalted to a bet∣ter name;Hebr. 1. 4. shee to be Mother, they alwaies servants. Our Lord is with thee: now more specially; greeting thee, and in∣viting
thee to accept of this dignitie, and putting this greate busines of the saluation of the world by this means, into thy hand and choyce: O Blessed Virgen▪ choose this, for nothing can be better for thee, or for vs; for therby we shall bee blessed among all creatures; above the Angels that fel, and above many of those that stand. Blessed arte thou among woemen, by whom we shall all be blessed: blessed in thy self by the favours receaved: Blessed in him who designes to be thy sonne: Blessed in the ho∣nour due to thee in regard of it, and the prerogatives which by it thou shalt injoy Ave gratia plena, Dominus tecum. Beg by her intercession Grace that the vnsettlednes of thy soule being cured, thou maiest bring forth, not only flowers of good desires and purposes, but fruits of good workes; and increase so in strength of mind that thou maiest be maister over thy disordered appetites and passions. Amen. The Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour. II. PART. I. VVHo when she heard him, she was trobled at his saying.Quae , udisset. Prudently comparing the commendation given with what she found within herself, and how far it was aboue what se conceaved of herself, neuer having heard the like salu∣tation made to any of those persons, men or woemen, to whome, it was recorded, that Angels had appeared; wher∣vpon being pensive The Angel sayed vnto her: feare not Marie, for thou hast found particularly grace and favour with God. Behold thou shalt conceave in thy wombe and shalt bring forth a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Iesus. here in a spiri∣tual sense we may reflect who is bid not to feare, but the humble. And who shall find further grace, but they who cooperate with the former, and doe therby their indea∣vour to increase it. Who shall conceave in their minds and bring forth a Iesus, but they whose conversation is with the Angels by praier and by good offices. By the inter∣cession of the Blessed Virgen. Beg and purpose according∣ly.
II. He shal be greate, though he must pas to it through many lessenings; and through the whole world he shal e caled and acknowledged the sonne of the highest. And the Lord God shal give him the eate of his father David: who from a keeper of sheepe was made Prince of his people: and he shal reigne for ever in he howse of Iacob, who sup∣planted his Elder brother, that is, sense (which is elder in vs then Reason) but the elder must serve the yonger, that of his kingdome here in vs there may be no end,Rom. 9. 12. and we may reigne with him with out end. III. Come Lord Iesus, and take poSsession of thy kindome in my hart; Come thou that oughtest to pos∣ses it:S. Bern. Hom. 4. super Missus. for Avarice comes and offers to take place. Pride and vanitie presents it self and would have the command. Pleasure and pastime are wayting to come in, and over rule. Veni Domine & nolitardare & revoca dispersos in teram suam. That all which is in me may acknowledge and obey thee; Come, and establish thy kingdome for ever in me. men. Vles be obedient o thy ommand, be I never so greate I shal be little, yee worse then nothing; by obeying thee, be I never so contemptible otherwise, I shal be greate; and shal have a seate at the right hand of the heavenly father, and reigne for ever. However meanly borne heere, I shal be the sonne of the highest: O Grace in∣estimable! Come holy Ghost and worke this greate wonder in thy servant. The Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour. III. PART. I. HOw shall this be done because I know not man?Quomodo fiet istud. By this, first it is evident that she had made a vow of perpetuall Virginitie, to which her husband had consented, otherwise her question had been sensles. Secondly: she did not doubt of the truth of what the Angel sayed, or demur vpō it, vpon the ground which Zacharie had done; whose question was. Howe shal I knowe this? for I am old. But vpon a resolution not to ac∣cept of the greatest honour or dignitie that could be ima∣gined, with breach of her vow and offence to God. En∣courage
thyself to the like resolution in thy good pur∣poses. II. The Angel answering sayed to her, The holy Ghost shall come vpon thee, and the power of the highest shall over shaddow thee, that is. Thou shalt not need to feare any breach betwixt God and thee, for it shal be done by his only power and Omnipotency, with out any blemish to thee. Therfore also that which shal be borne of thee, Holy, shal be caled the sonne of God. Bles the Holy of Holies who would vouchsase the Virgen and vs this benefit and beg of her that thou by the grace of the holy Ghost mayst be one of her spiritual Children, and by holynes of life and conversation be reckoned among the Children of God. III. And behold Elizabeth thy Cosen, she also hath conceaved a sonne in her old age, because ther shal not be impossible with God any word. One miracle is confirmed by an other (sayth S. Bernard) that one ioy may be heaped vpon an other,S. Ber supr. and that the Mother of God should not seeme to be made a stranger to the councels of God. Noe word is impossible with God: because it is as easye for God to doe as to spea∣ke▪ O Virgen and lady, speake that word, which heaven and earth and those vnder earth doe exspect: from thy mouth doth depend the comfort of those, that are in mise∣rie, the redemption of those that are in captivitie. Veni sancte spiritus &c. Sine tuo numine nihil est in homi∣ne. &c. The Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour. IV. PART. I. BEhold the andmayde of our Lord. Behold humili∣tie in the highest degree. She Stiles herself hand mayde,Ecce ancilla Domini. S. Ambr▪ who is chosen to be Mother, nor is she puffed vp with the vnexpected promise. Behold her devo∣tion and respect to the will of God delivered by the An∣gel. Be it done to me according to thy word. Practie accor∣dingly humilitie amidst the greatest honours, and obe∣dience wher it is due, taking as from God the messages delivered.
II. Behold the infinite Mecy, the infinite humiliti of the sonne of God coming at this consent to vnit himself to humane nature in the wombe of the Virgen. Adore him, and think not much to stoope to whatsoe∣ver seemes low, irkesome, or sounding restraynt, seeing he, who was not as other infants, voyde of reason and vnderstanding, contayned himself so long in this inclosure. III. Behold how the Blessed Virgen in her interiour did welcome this blessed infant, conceaved of her sub∣stance; with what admiration, Devotion and reverence▪ and how ever after she held herself so much the more bound to shew herself grateful for so greate a benefit and dignitie, and would not for al the world displease in the least so greate a Gheste; but doe ll things what ever with intent to please him, and comply with his holy inspirations. IV. Behold with what reverence the Angels of hea∣ven did admire, and adoe this mysterie, and invisibly ioyne themselves to the Archangel Gabriel, (as after∣wards in the nativitie) singing prayses to God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, reioycing in the Coun∣cel of God, who had exalted an inferiour Creature aboue them, and acknowledging with due obeysance their dutie to the Blessed Virgen. Behold also the Archan∣gel how he tooke leave other, and returned with ioy to his place in heaven, to assist with greater honour be∣fore the throne of God; wher postrate I wil beseech him againe to assist me, and bles God with him in this his first entrance into this world. The visiting of S. Elizabeth. I. PART. I. OUr blessed Lady rising from her devotions,Exurgen, Maria. Luc. 1. 39. and from receaving the greatest Gheste that could have come vnto her, went with him, not out of meere curesie, much lesse for curiositie, but obeying his inspirations vnto the mount anous countrey, where Zacha∣tie dwelt, and entring the howse saluted her Cosen Elezabeth.
She that was superiour (sayth S. Ambrose) came to her inferiour to assist her,S. Ambr▪ she made hast to humble and cha∣ritable actions. Rise (o my soule) shake of loth and delay; thou haste a mountaine to climbe (thou knowest not whatto morrow will breed. Thinke of the super∣al citty, hasten thither by the help of the Uirgen, and sweete Iesus. Enter the howse of thy hart, Visit, and search into thy infirmities, which are thy neerest kindred. and stick fastest to thee; Begassistance of the Virgen. II. For when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mariae, the infant did leape in her wombe, and Elizabeth was repleni∣shed with the holy Ghost, and she cryed out with a lowd voyce▪ Blessed art thou among woemen, and blessed is the fruit of thy wombe. Happy were that soule that could receave a visit, ād salutation from the Blessed Uirgen; salute her that thou maiest be saluted; in her presence reioyce with the infant and hope to be sanctified, rejoyce in Innocency, and in silence, and in being hidden from the world, and in obscurity, as the world tearmes it; and think it the grea∣test happines, if thou couldst be released out of the pri∣son of this world, to injoy her and her Sonne face to face, with out this veyle of faith. Gal vpon her with lowd voyce. III. In the meane time imitate hers, and S. Elizabeths fayth and expressions. Whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord doth come to me, and my Lord himself. He that is nothingh cannot think whence, but from God alone: And yet God comes to this nothing. Behold with what reverē∣ce, admiration, fayth, gratitude, and with what profie he is to be receaved and intertayned. Wher is the humi∣litie of the Virgen? The integrity of the Mother? The di∣ligence of the handmayde? The indeavour of Marie? That those many thinges may be perited in thee, which have been sayed unto thee by our lord.Ps. 44. v. Heare (soule) and consider and incline thy eare and forget all worldly busines at the time in wich thou art to intertayne such a Gheste: doth not thy hart leape for joye, at the newes of his coming? What more welcome newes can be expected? O most sweete, ô most loving Iesus, how much reverence and thanksgiving is due to thee with perpetuall praise; for the receaving of hy blessed body. Th. Kem. . 4. . 2. n. 2.
The Visitation of S. Elizabeth, II. PART. I. THe blessed Uirgen retiring her thoughts from her owne praises turnes her hart to God,Magnii∣cat. lessening what ever may seeme to relate to her∣self, and magnifing the worke of God in her, as every one ought to doe. And she Magnifies him with her whole soule and strength, cleerly discerning what was due to him and what to herself. And as S. John leaped for joy in his and her presense, and at the benefit receaved, soe did she exult in the glorie which God receaved by her sonne and Saviour, ād that he vouch safed to vse her as handmayd in this greate my sterie: for which she was not only to be eternally in heaven,Ex hoc beatā me dicent &c. but successively heere on earth pro∣claymed Blessed through all the generations and Countries of the world. II. As she acknowledged that God by his sole power and mercy had wrought great things in her, for which she sanctified and blessed his name; so consider with in thy∣self from time to time what greate things God hath done for thee in soule and body above thosands,Fecit mihi mag. vpon whom he hath not cast so favorable an eye. And that his Mercyes may last vpon thee, feare him, reverence him, serve him, love him the more. III. Admire his iudgements, who with a strong hand punished the Angelical spirits for their pride of minde, and threw them downe from the high preferments which they might have inioyed, if humble and obedient,Deposuit potentes  Sede &c. and tooke copassion of this worme of the earth, Man, subiect to hung and thirst and a thowsand miseries. Thirst thou after iustice; for those that neglecting it, ma∣ke themselfs, or account themselfs rich towards the world, will be found pore and mptie in the sight of God. IV. Apply thyself to receave thy God, who for thy sake hath made himself a Child, meerly of his mercy,Suscepit Israel pueum sum. thou deserving never to be looked on: see how punctual God is in his promises, and neglect not what hath once passed from thy hart to thy mouth to promise him. Be
ercyful that thou mayst find mercy, and receave the ewards which are promised. Amen. The Nativitie of S. Iohn Baptist. I. PART. I. ELizabeths full time was come to be delivered,Elizabeth impletum est &c. Luc. . 57. S. Ambr▪ and she bare a jonne And her neighbours and kinsfolk heard that our Lord had magnified his mercies with her, and did congratulate her. The life of the iust hath fulnes (sayth S. Ambrose) the dayes of the wicked are emptie. They shew themselves full of spiritual graces who bring forth olid fruit of vertuous actions; with thes the Angels doe congratulate and the whole companie of the faithful servants of God, with whome alone we are to accom∣panie and converse as neighbours and kinsmen. For from synners far is saluation.Psal. 118. 155. Though even from these the works of God doe drawe prayse and commendation, and they are to be holpen towards him. II. And when they came the eight day to circumcise the Child, they called him by his fathers name, Zacharie. His Mother answering sayed, not so▪ but he shall be called And they sayed vnto her ther is none in thy kindred that is called by that name. And they made signe to his father, and demanding a table booke he wrot, Ihon is his name, and they mervailed. As we are borne sonnes of wrath so ordinarily by the word we are putt into courses,Eph. 2. 3. which send to wrath, vnles the Mother of Grace and Mercy prevent vs. If thy neighbours and kindred cal vpon thee, to follow their les iustifica∣ble, or less vpright courses▪ as vsually, because others doe so, answer resoluedly with S. Elizabeth▪ Not so, but Grace shall prevaile. Turne thy self to thy heavenly father, and yeald thy self as a cleane table-booke that he may write in thee what he pleaseth; and let whosoever will marvyale at thee, so God be more and more glori∣fied. III. Forthwith the mouth of Zacharie was opened and he sword blessing God: and eare came vpon all the neighbours and all these things were bruited over all the countrey. And all that hear, layed them vp in their hart, saying, what an one, trow yee,
this Child be; for the hand of our Lord was with him. Behold the effects of an heroicall Acte: All doe admire it, their mouths aropen to the prayse of God in it: those that are otherwise affected, are afrayd to moue against it, seing the resolution; they reverence him that persevers in such acts; the sweete odor of it spreads itself through the whole howse and countrey; the good are preferred before the evill, as over opping them, however greate they seeme; The good example sticks in the minds of the beholders, and they ar encouraged to doe wel, and to think of the eternal reward. What an one doe yee think this man wil pro∣ve? This, who is so contemptible in his owne eyes: This whose life wee esteemed madnes &c. But the hand of our Lord is with him &c. Againe, what an one doe you think this man would prove, if the hand of od were not conti∣nually with him &c. Gratia tua nos quesumus Domine sem∣per preveniat & sequatur a bonis operibus iugiter presuet intentos. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. The Nativitie of S. Iohn Baptist. II. PART. I. AS we can never conceave highly enough of the Mysterie and benefit of the Incarnation of our Saviour,Benedictus Dominus &c. nor admire it sufficiently, so we can never bles and thank God for it to the ful: Le vs therfore ioyne with holy Zacharie (now ful of the holy Ghost) and saye. Blessed be our Lord God of Israel, be∣cause he hath visited, and wrought the redemption of his people. And now not of thos only who for a time, and for ou better instruction, were his chosen people, but the re∣demption of the whole world, wherof I having been made partaker, have the more obligation ever to bles him, and for protecting and defending me from my Ghosthy enimies. II. Secondly vpon his wonderfull perfourmance of his promises by his holy prophets from time to time,Sicut locutus et per os sancto &c. I must rayse my confidence in him, not only for the eternall rewards, which he hath promised to those who live ac∣cording to his law, but for al which belongeth to∣wards
the helping of me to the atayning of those rewards as the continuance of his graces towards me in this life (though he seemes for a time to leave me) if I continue in my commanded duety and in the performance of wha other helps I have by his holy inspiration vndertaken: and chiefly that when ever I returne vnto him with hary sorrow he will not reject me. III. And if he hath called vs to a more retired life,V sine timore  manu inimicorum liberati▪ where with lesse iust feare of our Ghostly enimies then worldlings have, we may serve him in sanctity and iustice in his sight all our dayes, we have the more reason to blesse God for it, and to indeavour to be gratefull by making vse of those particular means to which he hath directed vs, not neglecting so good an occasion of his service and of our ovvne saluation. IV. Pray vnto S. Iohn that as he was chosen to discover first this great light to the world,Illumina his qui &c. so he will now assiste vs, not to shut our eyes vnto it, and obtaine for vs the remission of our synnes. Per viscera miseriordie Dei nostri &c. For if he had been man, man could not have been delivered as S. Augustin speaketh:S. August▪ if from above Light doth not shine vpon vs we shall remayne for ever in darknes and goe astray. The office of S. Ihon as Precursor. I. THere was a man snt from God whose name was Ihon.Fuit ho mo Missu 2 Do. Io. 1. 6. And for such he acknoledged himself when afterwards the Pharisees examining him asked who art thou? A man, and consequently a weake vessell for the purpose intended and indeed for all things, but that we must have confidence in God, who made vs, who sends vs, who makes vse of vs as he pleaseth, and good reason we should conforme, and concurre with him to our poore povver, havinge our eye chiefly vpon his Grace, and indeavouring chiefly to mayntaine his Grace in vs. II. He came to give testimonie of the light that all might beleeve through him. Light needs noe testimonie. How great was our darkenes since we needed so much help! When shall I come to discover him face to face with
out this rule of fayth? But since he hath thought it most Proportionall to our state, and therfore vouchsafed to veyle himself with our flesh, lett vs stoope to his pleasure and be content and glad to see him as he giues leave, and beg that all may see him, and at least by example of life conformable to his, law bring as many to him as we can. III. The true light was that which inlightens every man that cometh into this world. How many false lights be ther in this world. Honour would take vpon it to be light: Riches would be light; knowledge would be light; many prin∣ciples which the world advanceth, would be light. The true light is Christ Jesus and his doctrine only: This only brings vs to the light verlasting; This is the only pure light without blemish. By this we may have light and heate, and the flames of eternall love. I inlighteneth every man that acknoweledgeth himself as man to need it; every one that guydeth himself by reason, not by passion or preiudicate opinions. Every one that is inlightened receaves his light from hence, and with out it all were darkenes. Giue thankes for this light; begg that it may increase in thee and bring thee to that, which is with out so much restraynt▪ &c. IV. The direct way to come to this light is to have recourse to those who are sent from God, and to follow thier directions: God doth not immediatly by himself direct vs in all things, neither can we be ever so con∣fident vpon our owne persuasion as we may iustly be vpon those who God hath placed in his Church over vs:Matth 23. 2. Vpon: he Chayer of Moyses have sitten Scribes and Pharises▪ heare them notwithstanding▪ (sayth our Saviour) and doe not easily censure them. S. Ioseph is certified by the Angel con∣cerning the Incarnation. I. WHen Marie the Mother of Iesus was espoused vnto Io∣seph (before they came togeather) she was found to be with Child by the holy Ghost. And Ioseph her hubnd being just, and not willing to make her a publike example, was minded to dismisse her secretly. Admire t Blessed Virgin
silence in what did so much concerne her: she concea∣led it from S. Elizabeth till the Child proclaymed it: It not being now possible to conceale it, she committs herself to the protection of God, often having recourse to him, and to the blessed infant within her, and to the Angel; Consider the severall thoughts which she and S. Ioseph might have.S. Ambr▪ Learn (sayth S. Ambrose) wha a iust man ought to doe when he spieth anothers falt) He doth not blaze it, he excuseth it, he thinks and speaks the best, he compassionats it, he committs it to God to iudge. II. As he was thus thinking, behold the Angel of our Lord appeared vnto him in sleepe, saying, Ioseph Sonne of David, feare not to take Mary thy wife, for that which is born in her is of the holy Ghost. And she shall bring fort a sonne; and thou shalt call his name Iesus, for he shal save his people from their synnes.Psal. 9. 10. Deservedly doth the psalmist sing. Our Lord is become a refuge vnto the poore, a helper in occsions and in troble. They who know his name will hope in him; because he doth not for sake those who seeke him. Both these ervants of his found it so to both thier comforts. Congratulate both the one and the other: she might have brought many arguments for herself, but the testimonie of the Angel was more propper, and vpon it, behold with what reverence and espect everafter S. Ioseph caryed himself tovvards the Virgen; with what comfort he thought of the child▪ with what eagernes he desired and expected the Sa∣viour and salvation promised. III. For sayth the holy Text, Ioseph rising from his sleepe did as the Angel of our Lord had commanded him, and tooke vnto him his wife, and knew her not till she brought forth her first born sonne, and called his name Iesus. Rise thou also from seepe, after so many good inspirations which thou hast had, and doe as thou art willed, either secretly in thy soule, or openly by those who are to direct thee. Betake thyselfe to the Blessed Virgens help and protectiō, and of S. Joseph, and the Angels, and hope for assistance of the Child by their means and intercession. He is the first bor of the heavenly father, and as he had no other sonnes but adoptive, so the Blessed Virgen. Give her the ioy of this, and of all her other children, among whom endeavour thou to be one.
A preparative for the receaving of our Saviour. I. PART. I. THe first step tovvard the receiving of our Sa∣viour must be an humble acknovvledgment of our ovvne weakenes,Vox clamantis in deserto. Luc. 3. 4. wickednes, and want of of light: life, and redemptiō; and naturall forces not being able to reach either to know God, and to serve him as we ought, or to make our peace with him after we have of∣fended; but we are like people in a desert, helplesse and wādering we know not whether; this the greatest wits that ever were among men are forced to confesse; not being able to dive into the mysteries of God, nor the future re∣wards, or resurrection &c. at the mention wherof (as we read in the Acts) they wondred, and laughed at S. Paul,Act. 17. 32. and every thing did seeme strange vnto them: But how ever foolish these things seeme to worldlings, we must stoop vnto them, and humble our ovvne conceite, seeme it never so high: in proclayming this our weaknes and want our voyce must be continually imployed. II. The second step is hope and desire of his mercyes who offers himself to relieve vs,Omnis vallis im∣plebitur. S. Leo. because (as S. Leo tells vs) As he findeth no body free from guilt so he comes with intention to free every body: let no body therfore despayre, no body out of pusillanimitie conceive he may not receive plentie of his grace.Omnis mons & collis hu∣miliabi∣tur. As all hills and hillocks must be humbled, so all valleyes shall be filled, that will not put a stop to the current of his grace. III. The third is a right intention, desiring and im∣bracing his coming and his wayes,Erunt prava in directa. not for temporall comforts or respects, nor delaying our amendment for any such considerations▪ And if we can rayse our thoughts and affections to seeke him purely for his ovvne goodnes and deservings, he will come the more welcome to vs. IV. The firth is, resolution to breake with the wayes of the world, and of people worldly given,Et aspera i vias planas▪ seeme they never so pleasing to sense, and to furnish ourselves with confidence that by the help and example of our Saviour
the way which he takes ād teacheth shall be easy though seeming at first never so hard. A preparative for the coming of our Saviour. II. PART. I. COnsider him who is expected as he is God.In principio erat vrbum. In the beginning (that is before any thing, from all Eternitie) was the word; that only word which eternally spoken by his Father contaynes all things in a word; and the word was with God, in the bosome of his Fa∣ther, in equall happines and glorie with him; and God was the word, one God, one Essence, one substance, one all things with him. This was in the beginning with God; thus was the case, this was the state, the glorie, the happines from all Eternitie, and for all Eternitie of him that is expected. And more over all thinges were made by him, and with out him was not any thing made. Which not only signi∣fies vnto vs his povver, and that not the least thing that is can be with out him, but also that he comes voluntarily vnto vs, not constrayned, not ou of any necessitie on his part, but freely, liberally, gratiously offering himself vnto it, not overavved by his Father, but willingly accepting his, and doing his ovvne pleasure in it. Offer thy self to him, sory that nt from the beginning. II. That which was made, in him was life, as in the foun∣taine from whence all that is came; with out him nothing lives, nothing moves, nothing is. Vnles we direct our∣selves to him, vnles we follow his commands, our life is no life, but a wandering to eternall death, we are not living but continually dying. In him all things bring life, our infirmities, our sufferings, our wrongs born for him are life. III. This life was the true light of men; it is the proper∣tie of light to expell darknes: see that thy darknes be not so great as to resist it; open thy eyes, hope in him, wellco∣me him, intertayne him; without him we can doe nothing; but also many things there be which with out vs he will not doe.
A preparative for the coming of our Saviour. III. PART. I. HE was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world did not know him.In mundo erat & mundus per ipsum factus est. O miserie! O in∣gratitude! what greater miserie then not to know so great a frend, so nere vs, so ready still to doe vs more good, and still doing good vnto vs? What greater ingratitude then not to acknowledg him from whom we have all that which we have? He came into his owne and his owne did not receave him. Stir vp thy self to receave him, and see thou be such as he may owne thee. II. As many as receaved him, to them he gave power to be∣come sonnes of God, to such as beleeve in his name. He refuseth none that are but willing to receave him: Be they slaves, be they freemen (sayth S. Ihon Chisostome) be they wise,. Ihon Chryso∣stome. or vnwise, noble or ignoble, rich or poore, princes or pri∣vate, publicans or south sayers, lame, blind, crooked; he dis∣dayneth not to adopt them his children. O bounty vn∣onceivable! and nothing can deprive vs of this power but our selves. III. Who not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, not of the will of man, but of God are born. As who should say, nobilitie of blood, and descent according to the world doe not heere avayle▪ nor to have been the lineal sonnes of Abraham o David &c. not to have invented a religion voluntarie; but faith in Christ, and to beleeve in his name, is the en∣trāce into this new pedigree, and the means to become the sonnes of God. Againe, after we are adopted, we must be carefull not to give way to flesh and blood, ād to our owne crooked will; but we must earnestly indeavour by puritie of life to mayntayne this right and priviledge which God, by our redeemer expected, doth offer vs. This I saye vnto youbrethren, that flesh and blood cannot possesse the kingdome of God. 11. Cor. 15. 50. A preparative for the coming of our Saviour IV. PART. I. Consider to how many errors we are subiect in our vnderstanding against faith,O  quae ex ore  as among Infidels and hereticks: and how far wide we are by
our naturall strēgth from the truth, either cōcerning God, the Persons of the Blessed Trinitie, the Resurrectiō, and ac¦count to be givē of our actions and thoughts, and the true end why man was created; how various and vnsettled mens minds have been, and are in point of religion, when left to themselves, and yett a thing so highly concerning vs as an Eternitie of payne or blesse: How much we needed an Infallible Guide, and how much bound to God for sen∣ding vs one who is truth itself, the Eternall wisdome pro∣ceeding from his owne mouth, and the selfsame God with him, to shew vs from end to end this life happily. II. Consider the weaknes of our will,O Adona Domine. prone to as many follyes as our vnderstanding: to errors, and even leading vs against our vnderstanding and knowledge, to that which we know to be naught; and consequently as much necessitie there is in it of a guide, who with a strong hand should bring vs through the desert of this world, and the many difficulties we find in it, and inflame vs by his example to the love of the land which is promised vs. This our Blessed saviour, the sonne of God is doing. &c. Thank him for it, deliver thyself as a poore blind or ignorant pilgrim to be dircted and incouraged by him. III. Consider to how many passions,O Radi essae. and changes in them we ae subject, and the troble which comes by them, besides the offence of God and man: Now angry, now pleased vpon a trifle; now sad▪ now iocund, now full of feares and frights, now as foolish and fond in our hopes, in so much that we make ourselves oftims a laugh∣ing stock to othes, and are a hell to ourselves. Our Sa∣viour comes to shew vs a way how to rule these passions which most commonly overrule vs. Beg of him that he will lend vs his helping hand in it, and resolve to helpt yself by his help. The Iournie of Iesus Marie, and Ioseph towards Bethleem. . IN those dayes ther came forth an Edict from Cesar,Exiit Edictum. that the whole world should bee enroled; and all went to bee enroled every one in his owne citty. Thus most men
order thier busines, for other ends then those which God hath ordayned, who reacheth from end to end strongly, and disposeth all things sweetely, and brings them at last to his bent. Admire,Sap. 8. 1. Adore, love his providence, and disposall, and be not slovver in obediēce to the All governing God, then men to men: Whose ambition and pride is not a little also to be admired, glorying in so short, so vncertaine, so tickle a fortune, as is of all great men, and not acknovv∣ledging from whom they have it, and on whom it chiefly depends.Psal. 94. 4. In the hands of God alone are all the bounds of the earth.Heb. 13. 14. We are pilgrims, and cannot say we have here a citty permanent; though if we take the whole world for our habitation, as it shall please our soveraign lord God, who is everywhere, we may be permanent in him, doing his will here, and inioying him ever herafter in heaven. II. And Ioseph went vp from Galilaee, out of the citty of Na∣zareth, into Iewry, to the citty of David called Bethleem; because e was of the house and familie of David, to be eroled with Ma∣rie his espoused Wife, who was with child. Reverence the obe∣dience of Ioseph and Marie, but cheefly the little infant, Lord of the World, who by this Act traced out vnto vs a law of obedience to those who are in command (as S. Isi∣dore reflecteth) though commanding for sinister ends, so nothing be commanded contrarie to the obedience we ow to God; and not vpon pretence of povertie to decline the paying dutyes, much lesse to be in any thing refracto∣rie, because we will not part with our accommoda∣tions, or vndergoe some little troble more then ordina∣rie. III. And when they came there was noe place for them in the Inn. For whome? And perhaps neither vpon the way as they came; or they had not those accommodations which people in iournyes desire, or stand in need of, being cold, weary, infirme. How often doth God seeke and find noe place? Free thyself from all troblesome Guests, from all that may be a hinderance to him: who, or what is there that can challenge place before him? Rid thyself of all vnnecessarie busines, of busines not belonging to thee, not beseeming thy calling. Converse often with the blessed Virgen, with S. Ioseph, and with such com∣pany as they affect. Salute the little infant in his mothers
wombe; prepare thy soule, and thy armes for him; see they be such as he may not refuse. The birth of our Saviour. I. ANd it came to passe when they were there,Et factum est cm essent ibi. her dayes were fully come that she should be delivered, and she brought forth her first begotten Sonne. Where, after all this, came it that she should be delivered? Be∣hold the place; Consider the hovre of the night, the sea∣son of the yeare; the solitude of the Mother; dive into the inward thoughts of the Virgen, and S. Ioseph. He was born in iourney, to bring vs travellers with out er∣rour to our iournyes end: He was born in the night▪ to be to vs the light of truth. Adore with the Angels the first begotten of the heavenly father, and of the Virgen Mo∣ther, of whom it is sayed let all the Angels of God dore him.Hebr. 1. 6. II. And she swathed him in Clouts.Esuriente implevi boni. How much honour was here done to Povertie? With how few things is na∣ture content? How much are the incommodities, and wants which some times we suffer sweetened by this example? In what height is humilitie placed? Consider with how many good thinghs the Blessed Virgen was fil∣led (according to her ovvne prophecie) which the emptie riches of this world doe not affoard, nor rich men relish? Reverence, and kisse those blessed clouts, and see thou contemne not those who are but, poorely cladd. III. And she layed him in a manger. This throne, this palace the God of heave chose and preferred it before the golden seates, and Ivorie beds of Salomon, that is, of those who are wise to this world. Prepare for him the manger of thy hart; begge of the Blessed Virgen the furniture of severall vertues to adorne it, the foote cloch of humilitie, and obedience to his com∣mands; the Violet of hope in his mercyes; the Crim∣son of love and charitie: the purple of sorrow and contrition; visit all the hovses of thy heavenly frends▪ and find out by them with what thou mayest best
furnish this one roome of thyne, to the end he may wil∣lingly take vp his lodging in thee. O that I had that beautifull varietie with which the heavens are adorned, the knowledg of the Cherubims, the Fervour of the Se∣raphims, the Strength of the Vertues, the Promptnes of the Angels: the Zeale of the Apostles, the Constancie of the Martyrs, &c. The Angel brings ioyfull tidings to the shepheards. I. ANd there were in the same Countrey shepheards,Pastores erant in regione eadem. watching, and keeping the night watches over their flock. And behold an Angel of our Lord stood by them, and the brightnes of God did shine round about them, and they were greatly afrayd. Blessed shepheards in regard they were in the same countrey so neere thier saviour; more blessed be∣cause they were watchfull, first over themselves, then over thier flock and did not slacken by reason of the incom∣moditie of the night, and winter season. Such receave comfort from our Lord, are made partakers of his myste∣ries, and of his companie, and are bid not to feare. For what should they feare from the world, which they comtemne, and all that is in it? Or from heaven which they love and desire? II. And the Angel sayed vnto them: feare not, for behold I bring you tidings of great ioy, which shall be to all people: becaus this day is born to you a Saviour, which is Christ our Lord, in the citty of David. What greater ioy if we rightly appre∣hend our wants and our miserie? VVhat tidings happyer? A Saviour to all, and to me as much as to all; and this day. if I will;Hbr. 13. 8. for Christ is equally a Saviour then, and now, and to the worlds end; and this Day particularly inclined to dis∣pose of his heavenly creatures and guifts as on the day of his birth solemnized in heaven and earth. III. And this shall be a signe to you: you shall find th infant swathed in clouts, and layed in the mager? This shall be a signe to you that are humble (sayth S.S. Bern. Bernard) to you who are obedient, to you who are not high min∣ded, to you who watch, and meditate vpon the law of
God day and night, in the light of knovvledge, and in the obscuritic of faith; in the interchange of comfort and desolation, and are not curious searchers, but readyly veyle to what ever signe God is pleased to give of his blessed will and presence. You shall find the eterall God become an infant, and swathed in clouts &c. And of what can this be a signe but of pardon, of grace of peace &c. Apply thyself to this infant;Psal. 32. 9. 10. 1. He sayed the word and all things were made. He commanded and they were created. All things were made by him &c. That which was made in him was life &c. The shepheards make hast to find our Saviour. I.Et subito facta est cum An∣gelo. ANd suddenly there was with the Angell a multitude of the heavenly Hoast praysing God and saying, Glorie in the highest to God, and peace in earth to men of good will. Joyne thyself to this multitude, and sing prayses to God for so greate a benefitt, and make vse of it while it is fresh, seeing it is putt into the hands of they will. This life is a warfare, and a tearme of Temptation, we may not therfore hope for glorie with out victorie, nor victorie with out strife, by which we purchase even heere vpon earth peace with God, with our neighbours, and with our∣selves. II. And when the Angels parted from them into heaven, the shepheards speake to one an other; lett vs goe over to Bethleem, and see this word which is done, which our Lord hath shewed to vs. As if they would have taught vs to say, lett vs passe from darkenes to light, from death to life, from our old customes to a newnes of conversa∣tion, to Bethleem, the hovvse of breade, the true sustinance of our soues, and dive into this word made flesh for our sakes, and discover more and more the greatenes of this benefitt which God hath bestovved vpon vs. And they came with speed, and they found Mari, and Ioseph, and the infant layd in the manger. Imitate thier speed: Cast of all cold demurrs, which the holy Ghost
doth not relish, the infant dislikes, impatient of delay because burning with love. And what a treasure did they find? Marie, and Ioseph, and the infant, layed out of love in the manger. They found humilitie in the infant, cha∣stitie in the Virgen, justice in S. Ioseph. III. And seeing, they vnderstood of the word which had been spoken to them concerning this Child; And all that heard did marvell concerning those thinges which were told them by the hepherds, but Marie kept all those words conferring them in her hart. How long and how often shall we see, and not vnderstand! Imitate the Blessed Virgen in conserving those things in thy hart, and the shepherds in spea∣king of them; And cease not to admire that which can be never sufficiently admired, glorified, praysed, loved, imitated, &c. The Circumcision of our Lord Iesus Christ. I.Postquam consumati sunt die octo. Coloss. 3. 9 AFter eight dayes were expired that the child should be circumcised his name was called Iesus, which was called by the Angel before he was conceived in the womb. With the old yeare let vs put of (as S. Paul exhorteth) the old man with his actions, and put on the new, which is created according to God, in justice, and true sanctitie, or holynes of life. O povverfull hand of God, worke this happy change in me. II. Dayes doe expire; the houre, which doth passe by moments, is not to be recalled; what if this day were to be my last? VVith what disposition, with what feeling should I heare God say, thy dayes are expi∣red? III. When the dayes were expired, this child did not as∣pire after rest and ease, did not hang after humane and worldly comfort, the favour and prayse of men, libertie, freedome, or priviledge, but attended his cir∣cūcisiō: wherfore doest thou favour thyself? At what art thou proude?ccl. 18. 6. As for the wonderouse works of God, nothing can be taken from them, nothing can be added to thē, neither can
the depth of them be found: when a man hath done, then he beghinneth. IV. He that was above the law, and not bound vn∣to it, keepeth and obeyeth the law, not without shed∣ding of his blood: He began the yeare, not fayntly lan∣guishing, but fighting valiantly: The kingdome of hea∣ven which he comes to bestow vpon vs, will be gayned by force.S. Bernar It is a good circumcision (sayeth S. Bernard) which we vndergoe by voluntarie Povertie, by peniten∣tiall labours, by religious observances. These are the ar∣mes with which we must fight, that we may overcome, and begin that happy yeare which never will have end. Of the name of Iesus. I.Et vocat est nomen ejus Iesus, HIs name was called Iesus to witt, first called so by his heavenly Father, who only fully knew the nature, and desert, and office of this child. If thou werte to be named according to they natu∣re, desert, and manner of performance of they duty; by what name should God, or man deservedly call thee? II. VVhat betokeneth this connexion of circumcisi∣on and the name of Iesus?S. Bernard Acknowledge in it (sayth S. Bernard) the mediatour betvvixt God and man, coupling divine and humane, high and low things togeather. Cir∣cumcision is a testimonie of the truth of his humanitie; his name doth signifie the povver of his divinitie. For he and noe other can save vs from synne, and yet not with∣out vs, and our cooperation. Hovv often doe we seeke freedome from siknes, and bodily troble more them from synne? Bodily health more eagerly, then the health of the sovle? Content oft times to be synners, but not to be called so; ashamed to doe penance, not asha∣med to synne; apt to receive wounds, bashfull in seeking remedy. III. The Angel, the Blessed Virgen, and S. Ioseph were the first worshipers, and proclaymers of this holy name of Iesus: Jt is an honour to be thier partner in it,Act; 9, 10 and with S. Paul, who was chosen to cary this
name through the world, and taught vs that at the name of Ie∣sus every knee should bow,Phil. 2 10 of thinges in heaven, in earth, and vnder the earth, and that every tongue should confesse, that our Lord Iesus Christ is in the glorie of God the Father. IV. If thou doest acknowledg esus, if thou doest honour him as thy Lord, be not ashamed of his liverie, lett thy hand agree with thy mouth, and not the voyce be of Iacob, and the hand the Esau. He was called Iesus be∣fore he was conceaved,Gen. 27. 22. before thy works renew thy in∣tention. Of the starre which appeared in the East. I. VVHen Iesus was born in Bethleem Iuda,Cum na∣tus esset Iesus in Bethleem Iudae in the dayes of king Herode behold there  sages from the East, to Hierusalem, saying, where is he that is born king of tho Iewes? For we have seene his starre in the East, and are come to adore him. How great benefitt is it to be called to the sayth and service of Christ, wheras thousāds are left behind? How greate to be stirred vp to reforme our conversation, to be called to Religion, to converse with God in prayer, by sweete and fficatious means, from our tender yeares, or from the turmoile of earthly trobles? Who is Author of all the thig but this infant?S. August. Who on earth is carryed in his mothers ar∣mes and commandeth the heavens to wayte on him. II. How greate a favour is it to receave dayly new illustrations from heaven, or to have our ancient frvour conserved and confirmed? with what thankfulnes ouht we to correspond? We saw his starre and we came instantly with out delay: overcoming all difficulties which might be objected at home, or abroad. We came from our home commodities, into a strange country, fom freads, to those who might proue vpon the matter enimies; vpon no absolute evidence, but greatest likely hood. Walke while you have light,Ih. 12. 15. that darkenes overtake you not. He that walketh in darkenes, knowes not whether he goeth. III. Where is he that is born king? As if they should have sayed:S. Chris. why is the king of the Jewes layed in the man∣get, and no: seated in the temple? Wherfore doth he not glitter it purpse, but Iyes svvathed in clouts: And
by thier asking these questions of those who are, or should be knowing, they rebuke thier negligence, they cheek thier sloth, they blame the Servant that he doth not goe to meete his master &c. He is br king of heaven and earth: The heavens acknowledge him and wayte vpon him. O dulnes of my earthly ha that is so little dutifull, so little respectfull, as not to take notice where he is? Or not to affoard him a place more befitting him! How Herode was trobled at the newes. I.Audien Herode turbatu est. KIng Herode hearing this, was trobled, and all Hie∣rusalem with him and assembling togeather all the chiefe Priests and Scribes of the people, he inqi∣red of them where Christ should be born. They are trobled who had most cause to rejoyce: Beware of ingratitud, least benefitts receaved turne to thy prejudice. Beware of passion, and prejudicate opinions, which blind vs from seeing, or detayne vs from acknovvledging that which we cannot but see. Bevvare of dissembling: For ther  no counsell against our Lord, sayth the Prophetr.Pr. 21. 0▪ II. And they sayed, in Bethleem Iuda for so it is written by the Prophett; And thou Bethleem land of Iuda art not the least among the Princes of Iuda, for out of thee shall come forth the Captaine, that shall rule my people of Israell. How readyly could they point out the place of his birth, and yett not stirre to looke after him? But if Bethleem be es∣teemed greate, because in it our Saviour was once bor how greate may we be, in whom he is, as it were day∣ly born in the holy Sacrament? Follovv this Cap∣taine, and esteeme thyself happy to be ruled by him, and to be one of his people.P: 5 n.  O Lord I am thy servant. III. Then Herode secretly calling the sages, learned diligent∣ly of them the time of the starre, which appeared to them. And snding them to Bethleem, sayd, Goe, and aske diligently after the child, and when you shall have found him, make report to me, that I also coming may adore him. O blessed Child VVho would not diligently aske after thee? VVho would not carefully informe himself of thee, that he might from day to day vnderstand more and more, that thou art,
as the Prophett stiles thee,Esay. 9. 6. admirable, God, strong, Prin∣ce of peace, Father of the future world, Aske earnestly of him what thou wantest; he will bestow his gifts as a Father, as a Prince, as God. As a Child: Inquire of those who know him best, that knovving him more perfectly, thou mayest adore him more reverently, and serve him more diligently. The Sages find, and adore our Saviour. I. VVHen they had heard the king,Quicum audissent regem. they departed; and behold the starre, which they had seen in the East, went before them, till it came and stood over, where the child was. VVhile ordinary means doe last, God affoardes not extraordinarie; when ordi∣narie faile, he supplies by wayes best knowne to himself. Behold the reward of constancy, and of resolution in overcoming difficulties, in contemning humane respects, and judgments, and feares, in continuing the good courses, which vpon due consideration we have vnder∣taken for God. II. And seeing the starre, they rejoyced with exceeding greate joy; and going into the house, they found the Child, with Marie his Mother. Rejoycing exceedingly at the light of the starre, how much more did they rejoyce at the light of the Child! And what Child! in what hovse Behold where thy king is born, where this Child is to be found with his Mother; whether Iesus is to be follo∣wed, with the faithfull Kings, and shepheards; And fal∣ling downe, they adored him: notvvithstanding his sal re∣tinue his poore furniture, the small appearance of kingly presence. Sonne suffer me to doe with thee what I wil, I knovv what is good for thee. &c. III And opening thier treasures they offered vnto him gifts,Th. à Kep.  3. c. 17. Gold, frankincense and Myrrhe; and hoving received an answer in sleepe, that they should not returne by Herode, they went back into thier country another way.S. Fulgen. Observe what they of∣fered, and acknovvledge what they did beleeve; by these three, his divinitie, his royaltie, his mortalitie are infinuared,S. Ambro. Open thy hart, and see what treasure thou there hast layed vp to offer. Is thy treasure▪
Advisednes?S. Greg. Is thy treasure Chastitie? Is thy treasure a de∣sire aud inclination to pray, to overcome thy passions, to mortifie thy sensualitie? Offer at least thy art and soule, to receave what he shall please to bestovv on thee, or to take from thee what may be displeasing to him. If thou hast no gold, offer the bitternes of thy teares, and in all thy distresses and doubts have re∣course to God, that thou may est be directed and streng∣thened in the right way to thy heavenly Country. How many dangers hast thou escaped by his suggesti∣on? Into how many good wayes hast thou been put. &c. Returne not by the wayes of the wicked world, least they be occasion that this child be taken from thee or misu∣sed. The Purification of the Blessed Virgen. I. AFter the dayes of her purification were fully ended;Postquam impleti sunt dies purgationis eius. according to the law of Myses, they caryed him vp to Hierusalem to present him to our Lord, as it is written in the law of our Lord: Every male &c. Here be no excuses, no supposalls of exemption, no de∣clining the law, though novv dravving to an end, but the time,Sap. 2. 11. and houte being come, they obey, though she à Virgen, and he aboue the law: Let our strength ther∣fore be (according to the counsell of the Wise man) the law of Iustice, that is, to fullfill it, not to endeavour to make it voyde, or to decline it. II. Consider what a Kind of present this was from the hands of the Blessed Virgen, and her Sonne, to God his Father. How worthy? How gratefull? How compleate. Then, as to ourselves, how greedily should we attend, how cheerefully welcome, and make vse of the houte in which we might present ourselves to God in prayer? Enter into the Interiour of the Blessed Vir∣gen, S. Ioseph, and the Child Iesus and behold with what disposition they present themselves, and him. It is a hap∣py law vvhich ordereth every thing so, as we may secure∣ly expect till the day, and houre, and moment come about, wherin we are to apply ourselves to this or that service pleasing to God.
III. All the dayes of this life are dayes of purgation: As we wash our hands, our face our garment, so must we our soule, that it may appeare before our Lord an acceptable present. Now present thyself to the Child, and to the Virgin, that thou mayst find favour when he shall come as Iudge:Apoc. 2. 27. For nothing that is polluted shall enter into the heavenly Hierusalem, nothing hat is not purified, by innocency of life by pennance, or by the purging fire. The law of Purisication. I. EVery male that openeth the womb, shall be called holy to our Lord.Omne masculinum. Consider vpon how many titles thou art Gods, and oughtest to be holy to him, and wholly his: He created thee of nothing, to his Image, and likenes, for a holy, and sublime end, to wit, to ser∣ve him with body and soule, and eternally to inioy him: Thou hast been redeemed with blood most holy, that in holynes, and iustice thou shouldst serve him all the dayes of thy life:Luc, 1. 75. Thou hast been called into a Holy Church, perhaps to holy vovves, and to be an instrument to ma∣ke others holy, fed with the holy bread of Angels, bred vp to a holy course of life, with holy documents, and inspirations, in conversation with holy persons. How omes it to passe that my beloved in my house doth (if not manyHietemiae . 15. things which are naught) so few holy things? Put on a manly courage in the way of vertue that thou mayst be∣come truly holy to our Lord. II. And to offer Sacrifice, according as it is sayed in the law of our Lord, a payre of turtle doves, or two young pigeons. Consider the Indulgency of God towards vs; He requi∣reth nothing above our strength; Give according to the law: Keepe the commandments; keepe thy rule: this is a most gratefull sacrifice; doe not pretend that that is above thy strength which he appoints: Noe man is so poore, or weake as to be excused from conforming himself to his blessed will. III. A payer of turtles &c. A double offering, for the Mother and for the Sonne: Thy soule, and thy body:
thy vnderstanding, and thy will, thy interiour, and thy exteriour cariage; thy intention, and thy workes; both of them sincere, and innocent, not inconstant and leeting, not hanging after worldly contentments.Ecol. 2, 2 I esteemed laugh∣ter deceit (sayth the wiseman) and to ioy I sayed, wherfore dost thou in vayne let thyself be deceived. The coming of old Simeon to meete our Saviour. I. ANd behold there was a man in Hierusalem namedEt  homo era in Hieru∣salem. Simeon, and this man was iust, and religions, ex∣pecting the consolation of Israel, and the holy Ghost was in him. How few of this kind of men are now to be found and even in Hierusalem (that is, the most sacred place) how few? The word Simeon signifieth one that giveth eare; how few give eare to the Best things? Who so doth, is in a way of Iustice, and religion, and atten∣deth not the vaine, and emptie comforts of this world, which passe as in a blast, but the inward comfort of the holy Ghost, and of the presence of God, and of our Sa∣viour. II. And he hath received answer from the holy Ghost, that he should not see death, till he first saw the Christ of our Lord. See how many commandments, rules, or direc∣tions thou hast received from God in thy state of life, for so many answers hast thou receaved from him, that thou shalt not see death if thou keepe them: so our Sa∣viour sayed answering the yong man.Luc. 10. 28. Doe this, and thou shalt live; and the Wiseman: Feare God, and keepe his commandments,Eccl. 12. 13. for this is the whole man; as much as to say, in this is all the happines of man: with what confi∣dence shall we looke vpon à temporall death, and avoide the eternall if we be thus armed? III. Simeon was expecting the consolation of Israel. Fol∣low thou his example, and the advise of the Royal Prophet,Ps. 26.  Expect our Lord, and be of good courage, whether thou be by him often, or seldome spiritually visited,
whether busines succeed to thy mind, or otherwise, in what ever imployment he doth ingage thee. This dis∣position is a signe of Iustice, and Religion and of the Holy Ghost dvvelling in vs; A signe that we have the true spi∣rit of wisdome, and vnderstanding, and of counsell, and of fortitude, and of Pietie, and of the feare of God, and of his love. not wedded to our owne wayes &c. Simeon takes the Child Iesus into his armes. I. ANd he came in spirit into the Temple.Et venit in Spiritu in templum. Reflect with what spirit, how fervently, with how much thirst and eagernes; or cōtrarivvise how coldly, and dully thou appearest in the Temple, at prayer, or at the holy Sacrifice of Masse, (where the Angels assist with reverence) or at other pious exercices; and see what successe thou mayst hope for. If by a customarie performance of thy devotious thou be fallen to a feeble∣nes in them, rouse vp thy spirits, renew vvhat is de∣cayed: Cant. 2. Rise, make hast, my beloved (sayth the bridgroome) and come. II. And when his parents brought in the Child Iesus, to doe according to the custome of the law for him, He also tooke him into his armes, and Blessed God, and sayed, now thou mayst dismisse thy servant, ô Lord, according to thy word, in peace. VVhata blessing is it to receave our Saviour in our breast? To have him in our hands? And as it were in our possession? VVho can sufficiently esteeme that in∣stant in which we may say with Jacob. Now I will not dis∣misse thee vnles thou bles m.Gen. 32. 26. VVhat may we not hope to obtaine having our God as it were in our povver? Begge peace, saluation, light, comfort in tribulation, and in expec∣ting the time of comfort, and what ever may be wan∣ting to thee towards thy owne, or thy neighbours assis∣tance. III. My eyes have seene thy saluation which thou hast pre∣pared before the face of all people &c. Blesse God for sending this saluation to all, and that thou in particular hast been made partaker of it: Begge increase of this light &c.
And his Father and Mother were marveling at these things which were spoken of him. And not with out reason shall we detaine ourselves in admiring, and adoring his good∣nes, his willingnes to impart himself vnto vs, and in∣finite other thinghs which we may find in this Child, who gives himself into our armes incomprehensible in himself, but framing himself according to humane natu∣re, by love, and imitation of his vertues to be compre∣hended by vs. Simeon his Prophecie. I. ANd Simeon blessed them,Et benedixi illis Simeon. and sayed to Marie his Mother. Behold this Child is set to the ruine, and resur∣rection of many in Israel, and for a signe which shall be contradicted. God mingleth sorrow vvith ioy and glad∣nes; which in this life is not only the common case of every body, but also a blessing. And therfore when adverse things doe not befall vs, we shal doe well to forthinke them, least we be ingulfed in too much libertie and li∣centiousnes, or overtaken with pride and haughtines. Be mind full of Povertie in time of abundance,Eccli. 6▪ 25. 27. sayth the Wiseman; and againe, an advised man doth allwayes feare, and in the dayes of synne will beware of carelessnes. II. If of this child it could be sayed he was to be the occasion of ruine, and rising to many, what may be thought of vs?S. Paulinus. Let every one say with S. Paulinus, would to God Christ may be to me ruine, and resurrection that synne may be ruined in me, and he rise who fell when synne be∣gan to rise. And againe; whatever be likely to be the event of future thinghs, it is our dutie diligently, sincer∣ly, and with out all anxietie to performe that good which we have in hand, and commit the event to God. It is an idle thing to repose our confidence in man,Thom.  Kemp. i. . c. 7. or in any creature: finally he that doth not expect to be contradic∣ted, or goeth not armed for it, doth in vayne presume he shal have peace in this life, or be accounted a true follovver of Christ. III. And thy soule a sword shall pearce, that the thoughts of many hartes may come to light. What did she deserve who
brought forth her child without paine,S. Berdar. but bred him not without griefe? Make account, (sayth S. Bernard) that nothing happens to any which may not happen to thee; and doe not say in what have I deserved it? How many thoughts of men will come to light when this child shall come to indge them? What different iudge∣ment will men make of themselves, and of all things be∣longing to this world, from that which heeretofore thy indged, not taking the doctrine and inspirations of this child in thier way? Pearce thy owne soule now with griefe for thy synnes, that then the iudge of the iust may be re∣vealed to thee. &c. Anne the Prophetesse. I. ANd there was Anne  Prophetesse, daughter to Pha∣nuel, of the tribe of Aser, she was farre stricken in dayes, and had lived with her husband seaven yeares from her Virginitie, and she was iddow ntill eighty and foure yeares.Et erat Anna Prophetis∣sa. By her name learne how deserving she was, and in what degree thou must be that thou mayst de∣servedly meete our Lord. Anne signifieth, gratious, mer∣cifull, giving, reposing; Phanuel, one that seeth God, or walketh in his sight: Aser, blessednes: for a soule thus qualified may deservedly be tearmed blessed: she was farre stricken in yeares, she did not goe backward (sayeth S. Peeter Chrysologus) but dayly increased inChrysolo∣gus. vertue a signe, and advancement to this, followeth II. And she departed not from the temple, by fastings and prayers serving day and night.Origen. Deservedly sayeth Origen) did this holy woman receive the spirit of prophecie, being by constant chastitie, and continued fasting, mounted to this height and we,S, Cypri, (according to the Counsels of S. Cy∣prian) who are allwayes in light, because in Christ, must not cease even in the night from prayer, darknes and pro∣found silence are no little helps to compunction. And she at the same time coming in, praysed our Lord, and spake of him to all those who expected the redemption of Israel. An ample subiect of prayse and thanksgiving, God man, and become an infant for our sake. Confitemini Domine quo∣niam bonus; quoniam in saculum miserieordia ejus.
III. And when thy had done all things according to the law of our Lord. they returned into Galilee, to thier Cittie Nazareth. And were not any thing puffed vp with so much prayse, and commendation: but returned to thier wonted humble exercises, and meane place of aboade. And the child grew, and waxed strong, full of wisedome, and the grace of God was in him.Thom  Kemp. 1. 3. c. 7. Sonne, it is more profitable, and more safe for thee to hide the grace of devotion, and not to thinke, or speake much of it, but rather to humble thyself, and esteeme thyself vnworthy of it. &c. Thus we may grow in strength and wisdome and grace in the sight of God,Prov. 3. 3. and have God dwelling in vs; for with the hum∣ble is his conversation. The flight into Aegypt. I. BEhold an Angel of our Lord appeared in sleepe to Ioseph, saying; rise and take the child, and his Mother, and fly into Egypt. He appeared to S. Ioseph, and not to our Blessed ady,Ecce An gelus dui apparuit in sown is Ioseph. Matt. 2. 13. to give vs in her an example, of humilitie and obedience, and in him both a patterne of constant faith in seeming contradictions, and resig∣nation to what ever God shall dispose, submitting our seeming wise thoughts to his vnsearchable wisdome, and putting no bound to our submission. And be there till I shall tell thee. II. For it will come to passe that Herode will seeke the child to destroy him. Not knowing before hand what will happen, it is fitting we should ever have tecourse to whom all things lye open, and there repose our doubt∣full thought; so Herode with all his povver and craft will not be able to annoy vs; for as when God flyeth man, it is not out of feare, but for some hid∣den mysterie; so when he putteth vs in case of flying, it is for our good, and for some ends of his towards it. Herode sought the child to destroy it. Seeke thou his enimies, that is, synfull dispositions to destroy them, and maintaine him who is thy true life Christ Ie∣sus. III. Who rising tooke the child, and his mother in the night, and
retyred into Egypt, and was there till the death of Herode. Re∣flect how poore a life it is likely they did lead in Egypt: Thier best riches was obedience; thier accommodation patience; thier comfort prayer, and devotion; with drawing thier thoughts from all but the will of God. Feare not (sayed old Tobie to his Sonne) it is a poore lifeTob. 4. 23. which we lead, but we shall have many good things, if we feare God, and depart from all synne, and doe well. See that Christ flying finds intertaynment for himselfe, and those whome he vouchsafeth to style his little ones. He and his Mo∣ther were posted away at an vnseasonable houre in the nigat, to teach vs that all houres are to be accounted sea∣sonable when God calls, or his service; and they retyred into Egypt, where thier forefathers had been oppressed, yet God protected them. &c. The slaughter of the little children. I. THen Herode perceiving that he was deluded by theTunc He∣rodes vi∣dens quod illusus esset à ma∣gis &c. Sages, was exceeding angry; and sending, slew all the male children that were in Bethleem, and in all the borders therof, from two yeares old and vnder, according to the time which he had diligntly inquired of the Sages. Then he saw he was deluded, when his malitious disposition deserving it, God permitted him to perceive it, and not before. And as wicked people and such as are imper∣fect, doe not see God working all things, and disposing all according to his divine pleasure; so Herode; but like angry and foolish doggs, he followed the stone, not minding who did cast it at him. How late doe those who are wordly wise, and given to worldly courses, see thier errour? And say when it is too late,Sap. 5. 4. we fooles, accounted the life of the iust to be madnes, and thier end to be with out ho∣nour. &c. II. In the meane time, the children were happy▪ whome (as S. Augustin speaketh of them) life everla∣stingS. August. S. Fulg. met in the very davvning of thier dayes He slew all, but missed of him, whom he sought above all; neither did he hurt those whom he found) sayth S. Fulgentius.S. Leo. And out of it S. Leo gives this lesson; that we beware
of ourselves, for our Ghostly enimie strives to slaie in vs a kind of tender infancie of our faith and ver∣tue. &c. III. Then that was fulfilled which was spoken by Hie∣remiè the Prophet, A voyce in Rama was heard, much erying and wayling, Rachel hewayling her children, and would not be comforted, because they are not. Thus We often grieve where we have cause of ioy, and will not receive com∣fort, because we conceive that to be which is not, and doe not thinke of that which is most important. I will not have you ignorant of those that sleepe (sayth S. Paul) that1. Thess. 4 13. you may not be sad, as other folk who have noe hope. The wicked are truly to be bewayled. For it were better for them they were not, if thy doe not repent; the losse of our soule by fynne deserves much wayling; other los∣ses are never comfortlesse, to those that vnderstand what true comfort is. See that crying for thy offenses be from thy hart, and not a voyce only from the teeth out∣ward. Thier returne out of Egypt. I. BVt when Herode was dead,Defunct autem Herode. behold an Angel of our lord appeared in sleepe to Ioseph in Egypt, saying. Ri∣se, and take the child, and his mother, and go into the land of Israel; for they are dead that sought the life of the child, who rising tooke the child, and his Mother and came into the land of Israel. What is become of He∣rode and of all his povver? He is dead, but that is not all: And to the like end will all those come who either doe not seeke Iesus, or not where he is, in the Catholicke Church: VVe must all dye, but taking the child Iesus, and his Mother with vs, we shall arrive at the true land of I srael, the land of promise, flowing vvith that which is better then milk and honie with out com∣parison,Thom. 2 Kemp. 1. 1. c. 11. n. 3. if wee were to ourselves perfectly dead. Consider also in the persons of the Angel, the Blessed Virgen, and S. Joseph what may occurre.
II, But hearing that Archelaus did reigne in Iury for his Father Herode, he feard to goe thither, and being war∣ned in sleepe retired into the quarters of Galilee. Againe by feare the fayth, and patience of the Elect is exercised; observe their vsuall recourse to God by prayer, from which they received, these frequent directions; yet oftimes God leaves some thing to prudent considera∣tion, defitous of our cooperation with his Illustrati∣ons. III. And coming he dwelt in a citty called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was sayed by the prophet, that he shall be called a Nazarean. The Prophets fore told it, because it was to be so, God foreseeing all things▪ and bringing to passe what he hath foreseen, and determi∣ned; which obligeth vs the more to have recourse vnto him in all things gaeate and little, that we may be con∣formable to him, and not seeme to resiste that which cannot be resisted; and esteeme nothing so little as not to need his help and direction in it, for even the geatest things are little to him. The word Nazareth signifierh, sanctifyed, or set a parte, o preserved, and florid: So was our Saviour, so must we indeavour to preserve the flower of innocencie, and set a par some constant time to attend to the service of God, by prayer, that we may attayne that degree of sanctification which he desires in vs, and florish with those vertues, and the sweete odour of them, which may preserve vs to an Eternitie of happines. Amen. Christ remayneth in the Tem∣ple at twelue yeares of age. I. ANd his parents went every yeare to Hierusale;tibant Parentes ejus. &c. nc. 2, 41. at the solemne day of the pasover. And did not for feare omit their devotions; as S. Augstin advertiseth: the way also to our heavenly Hierusalem is, to be constant in the service of God, and obser∣vance
of his commandments. And when he was twelu yeares old, they going vp to Hierusalem according to the cus∣tome of the festivall day, and having ended the dayes; when thy returned the child Iesns remayned in Hierusalem, and his parents knew it not. How happy à thig is it to begin to serve God from tender yeares? Whether they live long, or dye soone, thy shall find great benefit. Little Iesus invites vs to begin, and to perserver with him, that we may ascend the easyer to the spirituall Hierusa∣lem, perseverwith more facilitie by good custome, and end our dayes full of good works. II. And thinking that he was in thcompanie, they came a dayes journey, and sought him among th kinsfolke and acquaintance. But he who of set purpose had left his good parents, would not remaine among his kindred, to teach vs not to set our affections vpon trifles, when we have set at naught farre greater matters, nor to stick at lesse, when we have vndergone greater burdens: yet in the meane, behold with how heavy harts they went from place to place inqiring after him, And returning t Hierusalem seeking him. III. And it came to passe after three dayes, they found him in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctours, hearing them, and asking them; and all that heard him astvnished at his wisedome, and answers. Who is able to conceive, what passed in the child Iesvs his hart and conversation those three dayes and nights; for it is likely he remayned in the temple the whole time▪ concealing himself, and appearing in the sight of others, as he thought good. As he is fod sitting in the midst of the Doctours hearing them &c. Sit thou doune at his eete; his doctrine and answers being more admirable then any thing that can fall from man as man: Sit doune at the feete of those that hold his place in the Church, heare them, and aske them, and not others, The three dayes after which he is to be fond are, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, ac∣cording to S. Bernard:S. Bern and yet to the finding of him in these he hath a chiefe hand, without which he cannot be found: begge of him that thou mayst find him.
Jesus his Answer to his Mother. ANd his Mother sayed vnto him: sonne,Et dixit Mater e∣jus ad e∣um. S. Bernard why hast thou done so by us? Behold thy father, and I forrowing did seeke thee. This little one (sayth S. Bernard) did not blanch at his being publickly before the doctours owned by his poore Mother, by Ioseph a trads man, and to be as it were found falt with▪ But with how much more reason may he, and his Blessed Mo∣ther say to vs, sonne, why hast thou dealt with vs thus, and thus? Behold thy eternall father and I, have done these and these things for thee. &c. Ponder With what hu∣militie the Blessed Virgen names Ioseph first, and styles him Father. Say to the child Iesus with devout Thomas a Kempis.Th: a Ke: 13 c 2 n 5 Let others seeke for themselves what they please, nothing doth, or shall give me contentment but thou my God, my hope, and my eternall Welfare. II. And he sayed vnto them: what is it that you sought me? Did you not know that I must be about those things which are my Fathers? He would ot be so thought to be thier Sonne (sayth S. Augstin) as not to be vnder∣stoodS August. to be the Sonne of God Therfore also he would be found in the Temple (as S,S Bede Bede reflecteth, to the end that whose Majestie and glorie was one and the same, the same house and seate should contayne them.) Make thyself his Temple: keepe thyself in the Church of Christ; wherfore doe you seeke him in vayne in the companie of the vnfaithfull.Eucherius Sayth Eucherius. III. And they vnderstood not the word which he spake to them. For God vseth to reveile his mysteries to his frends by parts therfore that we may vnderstand them, they are continually to be ruminated. Our spirituall generati∣on, and hope of eternall inheritance is to be allwayes before our eyes, That we are Sonnes of God, that he is many wayes our Father; how much it doth importe vs to be about those things which cōcerne vs in the other world, to be diligent in observing his commands, to behave
ourselves like dutifull and loving children tovvards him: what difference there is betvvixt toyling in the world and for the world, and taking paines for the service of God; how different a revvard belongs vnto it, This if we did rightly vnderstand we should be the mo∣re diligent. &c. The Life of Christ till he was thirty. I. ANd he went downe with them, and came to Naza∣reth.Et desce dit cum¦eis &c. He went dovvne with them, and stoo∣ped to the lovvnes of thier manner of living. He began to be in the things which were thieas, till ha∣ving passed Maste of humility, the time came wherin he was to be acknowledged to be above all Creatures Descend thou also from thy high flovven thoughts, from self conceite, and pride, and ambition, and contention and come to Nazareth. Wher thou may be little or no∣thing regarded: what doest thou in court, in the earthly citty of Hierusalem?Esaye 25; 20 Enter into thy closet, shut thy dore v∣pon thee, lye closse for a while till the wrach of God passe. The highest God descended, how low? II. And he was subject to them.Eucherius Let subjects give are to thi. and not disdayne to be subject: let superiours heare, and observe that oftimes subjects deserve better then superiours: and S. Bernard.S Bernard VVh will not blush to stand obstinately to his owne opinion, seeing the eternall wisedome to yeald from his. God doth subject, and trust himself to mortalls, and will any body still abide to walke his onne wayes: And he was subject. VVho▪ To whom? III. And his Mother kept all these things in her hare and Iesus proceeded in wisdome, and age, and grace, with God and men. How odoriferous a poesie can we thinke these things were in the breast of the Blessed Virgen▪ how little was she cloyed with often reflecting vpon them▪ Materiall flovvers need to be fed with water to preserve them from decay, these flovvers also must be watered from the fountaines of our eyes, and warmed with the rayes of devout reflections, that they may continue to
refresh vs: so shall we proceed, and increase with Iesus, in spirituall, and other wisedome also, and be in favour &c. Sit vnder the shade of thees trees Iesus, Maria, Io∣seph, and thou wilt gather fruits which will be pleasing. Amen. A Meditation by way of introduction to those of the Passion of our Saviour. HArkening to that which our Savior sayed to his Apostles.Ecce asce∣dimus Hie rosolyma: Behold we goe up to Hierusa∣lem, and the sonne of man shall be delivered to the Princes,Mat: 20. 18 to be mocked, and schovrged, and Crucified, begge of him grace to vnderstand the intent of this hard vsage, that thou mayst behave thy self according∣ly. And first. It Consider that wheras the chefe intent of the suf∣ferings of our Saviour, was to satisfie for the Synnes of the world and to blot them out of our soules, and also to give vs example of vertue, and incouragement to it, we ought to dispose ourselves to a perfect hatred of synne, as the cause of this greate evill which happened to our Saviour, weighing who it is that suffers, and for what: for as the greater the person is to whome an affront is offered, the affront is also the greater and more detesta∣ble; none being comparable to God in greatnes, no∣thing can be more detestable then synne against him, to which if we adde the goodnes of our Saviour tovvards vs as man, the hatred of synne must be the greater, as of an object the most injurious that can be both to God and man: which is the reason why the Apostle puts vs in mind to consider well the person of him that suffereth for vs.Recogitate um &c. Recogitate eum qu talem sustinuit a peccatoribns adversus smetipsum contradictionem. II.Hebr. 12. 3. The second consideration is that which follow∣eth in the Apostle, That you be not wearyed fainting in your mind, for you have not as yet resisted vnto blood, stri∣ving against sinne. As if he should have sayed in the haed of synne, in striving against temptations, in overcoming nd bridling out passions, in denying and mor∣tifying
our desires, in obeying Gods commādments and councells, and in the practise of all kind of verue, (with out which the hatred of synne cannot be perfect) many difficulties doe occur, particularly in the beginning of our couversion to God; we have the more need ther∣fore to set this example of our Saviour the more lively before our eyes that we may not faint, or fayle conside∣ring how much more he hath done, and suffred for vs▪ then can happen to vs in this conflict. III. And thirdly; by his example also we must incou∣rage ourselves to patients, and constant suffering, and going through with what ever may happen vnto vs o∣therwise; because as it behoved him to suffer,Luc. 24. 6. and so to enter into his glorie, so we by suffering▪and persevering with patience, ad resolution, in the fight shall be also crow¦ned: Heb. 12. 2. looking therfore vpon the Authour of this our Faith, and finisher Iesus, who having joy proposed to him, sustayned the Crosse, contemning the shame, and sitreth at the righe hand the seate of God, say vnto him, sweet Saviour as thou didst voluntarily offer thyself to thy heavenly Father with ar∣mes spread vpon the crosse, and thy body naked; so doe I willingly offer myself to thee, and purpose by thy grace and example rather to dye then offend thee; rather to suffer any worldly inconvenience then to part from thy counsels and commandments. &c. A meditation of the Councell of the Je∣wes against our Saviour. REmembring the excessive labour and paynes which our Saviour tooke day and night for our sake, journiig, and preachig, and offering his help to every body; begge of him knovvledg, how thou mayest be gratefull to him for it, and a will to put i practise what thou knowest. And First. I. Consider that as the Jevves,Tunc gregati sunt Prin∣cipes Sa∣cerdtum▪ Mat. 26. out of envie and e∣mulation against our Saviour, were the more mad a∣gainst him the more good he did, and the more won∣ders he wrought, and they met in councell, and studied ow they might apprehend him by som raft, and lay
hands on him, and kill him: so we contrarievvise, conside∣ring he hath done so much for vs, and is still doing, must with all diligence study how we may serve him with a sincere hart, often begging, and often offering it to God, now specially when we see before our eyes in his passion so maniest, and so vnquestionable signes of his sincere, and constant, and vnchangeable love towards vs. II. Consider secondly that as the Jewes, though thier malice were greate, yet feared the people, and sought therfore privately by craft to circumvent our Saviour; so we in the service of God must not be afrayd what pe∣ople will thinke, or say of vs; but banishing all humane respects, and worldly reasons, go on with that which we know to be good, and acceptable to God, with Cou∣rage and resolution, in the face of the world, for the grearer glorie of God, as much, as provident reason will allow. III. Consider thirdly. As the divell entred into Iudas, as a fit instrument for the Iewes towards thier maliti∣ous intents, and he of his ovvne accord went, and offe∣red himself for mony to find means to betray our Saviour; so detesting his treacherous and covetous minde, begge earnestly of the holy Ghost, that he will vouchsafe to take possession of thy hart, and soule, and body, and of all that thou hast, to vse it as a means, and an instru∣ment for his glorie, and with a noble resolution offer thyself voluntatily to doe whatever lyes in thee for the honour of God; and seeke convenient occasions to advance it, though it be with pauning thyself, and all that thou hast to redeeme him, and his blessed sonne our Saviour from disgrace. &c IV. And againe consider 4thly. As the Ievves we∣e gladd of this offer of Judas, and accepted it, and con∣cluded the bargain with him, and he watched vpon th occasion of betraying our Saviour without tumult; so out whole joy must be to happen vpon any special means, or occasion of serving our Saviour; to accept of  when it is offered; and to enter covenant betvvixt God and our∣selves, to performe it, and to bethinke ourselves how and by what means, and when we may best effect it.
without noyse, in regard of discretion and humilitie: and yet though it be with noyse, in regard of good exam∣ple, and the hinderances with which oft times we must be forced to breake, or els othing will be done. Prayer. To our Saviour; offering to him, as is a foresaid, chiefly a sincere hart, voyde of humane respects, coura∣gious, resolute, and watchfull, by all convenient means to doe him service. See the prayer of the sunday with in the Octave of the Ascension. A meditation of the Paschall Lambe. Matth. 26. Luke 22. I. THe first day of the feast of vnlevened bread,Primo di Azymo∣rum &c. the disci∣ples came to Iesus, and sayed, where wilt thou that we prepare for the to eate the Passover? VVherin we may reflect, that we must not allvvayes expect to be bid∣den, but prevent rather the time in things belonging to order, and approved custome, and shew therin our esteeme of the service done to our Saviour, and be constant in it; and though the benefit therof redound also to ourselves, yet our intention and desire must be chiefly fixed in him for himself, and hovv to prepare a place in our soules which he may thinke worthy of him. II. And Iesus sayed; goe into the citty, and there will a man meete you baring a pitcher of water follow him, and say to the master to the house, our master sayth, my time is at hand; with thee I make my Passover. O welcome nevves come ô Lord, and doe not delay: doe not decline this poore habitation: Lord, I am not worthy; yet come, and with thy grace pre∣pare my soule; give me the water of sorrovv, teares of true compunction, grace to follovv thy commands, bea∣ring the crosse which thou shalt lay vpon me, for thou doest follovv with the revvard of thy companie those who doe thus follovv thee. VVhen shall I come into that where I shall meete with the fountaine it self of living which here I beare but in an earthen pitcher. subiect to be broken by infinite chances, and doe bee
it with labour, and difficultie, but there is case and secu∣ritie. III. And he will shew you a large roome, furnished; there make ready. Hovv readily should we at all times, and all occasions, welcome our Saviour, and those whom he accounteth his, though they be poore and in distresse, and then most of all? Enlarge thy hart tovvards his service, and furnish it with thoughts and deeds befitting him, and see that it be allvvayes furnished for him, for we knovv not the time which he hath chosen; see that it be not ta∣ken vp by others. Our Saviour and his Apostles had no certaine accommodation, yet God provided: Consider thier punctualitie in observing the lavv though it were but a figure of that which thou receiest. O blessed lamb of God slayne fot our sakes, and broyled vpon the crosse, be thou my everlasting food, both in this dangerous passage, and for all Eternitie. Amen. A meditation of our Saviours washing his disciples feete. 10. 13. Preamble. Beholding our Saviour with a bason of water in his hand, and a tovvel, ready girt, and vpon his knees, begge of him that thou mayest profit by this ad∣mirable action of his. And first. I. COnsider that our Saviour knowing that his houre was come that he should psse out of this world to his father,Sciens Ie∣sus quia venit ho∣ra eius. 10. 13. when he had loved his who were in the world, he loved them to the end: and to shew his love the more, he applied himself to this humble and necessarie action. We that knovv not at what houre we shall passe out of this world, but may every moment be taken avvay, have the more need to cleanse our soules, and wash them by humble confession, and harty con∣rition; hovv ls shal we shevv that we love ourselves to the end for which we should? Or how shall we shevv that we love God, and our Saviour as we should? Specially seeing our Saviour sayd to S. Peeter. Vnless I wash th
hou shalt not have parte with me. Amplius lava me a ini∣quitate mea. &c. II. Consider secondly. That hovvsoever we may find repugnance in laying open our soules to our Ghost∣ly Father, either by reason of the troble of searching into ourselves or the foulenes of our offenses, or the frequency of our negligences, or for bashfulnes, or other respects, yet if we consider well that all things lye open to God, and that which we ourselves disco∣ver, God doth wash and cover, the ease of our mind for the present, the satisfaction of our ovvne soules at the houre of death, the necessitie of it at one time or other, we shall say with S. Peeter. Lord not my feet only, but my hands, and my head. That is, not only that in which I have lately transgressed, but whatsoever I have done, good or badd, from the beginning to the ending I will willingly lay open, that I may have full re∣mission and direction. III. Consider thirdly. That comfortable, and with all fearefull saying of our Saviour. He that is washed, needeth only that his feete be washed, but is all cleane, and you are cleane; but not all for he knew who it was that would betray him. That is, he that is once washed by a good confession, and performeth accordingly that which he there purposeth, to wit, the keeping of the commandments for the time to come, needeth only that his feete be washed, that is, those lesser offenses▪ which cleave like dust to our feete, and no man is able to avoyde them more or lesse who travelleth in this world, but yet to the end that through the benefit of being cleansed by confession, we should not grow into Pri∣de, and presumption, or neglect for the time to co∣me▪ we must remember that though by the grace of God we are cleansed, he only knovveth who shal per∣sever. IV. Consider fourthly. And admire at large the hu∣militie of our blessed Saviour, in regard wherof S. Peeter sayd, Lord doest thou wash my feete? Thou? My feete And learne hovv grateful it will be to our Saviour, that thou by his example stoope to humble and charitable of∣ices tovvard thy neighbour, that is tovvards him in them.
And also hovv we ought to conceale, to excuse, to dimi∣nish, and wash avvay as much as we can, the faults and imperfections which we see or heare of in others, to pre∣serve thier good name, to help them out of them, to compassionate them &c. Prayer. To our Saviour according to the present subiect and affection. A meditation of the parting of Iudas from the rest of the Apostles. Ihon 13. I. OVr Saviour having washed his Apostles feete,Cum  dixisset, turbatus est spiritu. and among them Judas which is particularly to be reflected on, and gave them wholsome in∣structions hovv they should imitate him, the servant not being greater then his Lord, and againe did infinuate that all were not yet cleere, though outvvardly washed, to the end that Iudas might take notice that he knevv what he was going about, and repent: but seeing he did not: H was robled in spirit, and protested, and sayed more playnly, Amen, Amen that is, in verye truth, I say vnto you, that one of you will betray me. A heavy saying, and no wonder that every one of the disciples looked one on the other doubting of whom he spoke, and were much contristated, and every one asked him (the rest with feare and trembling, but Iudas boldly and impudently) Am I the max II. Our Saviour declining the direct ansvver, and leaving every one to examine his ovvne conscience, and to looke vpon that more then vpon one another, vpon intreatie of S. Peter sayed vnto S. Jhon (wo leaned vpon our Saviours breast) He it is to whom I shall give the bread dipped, and when he had dipped it, he gave it to ludas: who probably did not heare what our Saviour had sayed t S. Jhon, having had warning enough before, neither did the rest of the Apostles vnderstand the mysterie; but Ju∣das being ready to receive any courtesie from our Sa∣viour, the more to dissemble his wicked intent, tooke the bread, and after the morsell stan entred him, & bitter orsell▪ not novv bread to sustaine life, but by malice of
the receiver turned into deadly poyson. Our Saviour probably with the bread gave him an invvard hint again that he knevv what he was going about, but his obstina∣cie refusing such gentle and charitable admonitions, ten∣ding to the concealing of the falt and preserving of his good name, if he would repent, Satan tooke full possession of him. III. Andour Saviour sayed vnto him, that which thou doest, doe it quickly; for I am as ready to suffer, as thou, or thy master to put an affront vpon me: And immediatly h went out, and it was night. Darke night indeed to him, and cause if vtter perdition See what it is to part with our Sa∣viour, and with devout companie.Ioan. 12. 35. He that walketh in dar∣kenes, knoweth not wheter he goth But by severing the bad from the good our light grovves the cleerer; therfore when he was gone, forth, our Saviour sayed, now the sonne of man is glorified, and God is glorified in him: For there can be no greater glorie to God by any humane action, then was that which rose from our Saviours vertue and suffe∣rings: Endeavour by imitating him in occasions to in∣crease his glorie;Coloss.  24. and as S. Paul speakes, accomplish those things that want of the passions of Christ in our flesh. A meditation of the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament. Preamble. Beholding our blessed Saviour distributing his blessed bodie and blood among his disciples vnder the shapes of bread and wine,Desiderio desideravi hoc Pa∣scha man∣ducare vobscum &c. begge of him that thou mayst with true and due affection receave this heavenly gift. And. I.Luc. 22. 15. COonsider first. That the worthynes of this blessed Mysterie was partly the cause why our Saviour a little before so humbly washed his disciples feete, who were to receive him: to give vs to vnderstand with what acknovvledgment of our ovvne vnvvhorthines, and with what puritie of soule and affection, and also of bodie we ought to approach to this heavenly banque. Therfore also in the Catholick Church all things about the Altar
are so neate and costly, because nothing spirituall or tem∣porall can be precious or curious enough to bestow in the intertainment of so divine a guest: If thou know him, if thou esteeme him as thou oughtest, and as he deser∣veth. Bestow all the care thou canst in cleansing the roo∣mes of thy soule, and dressing vp the Altar of thy hart to receive him. II. Consider secondly. That by this heavenly myste∣rie it is manifest how much Christ our Saviour doth love vs, seeing out of love he desireth allwayes to be with vs; and being to go out of the world, would by this admi∣rable Invention stay still among vs as if he could not be without vs: To the end we should dayly increase in the love of him, and vnderstanding that really we cannot be without him, we might desire the more earnestly his blessed companie and conversation, by all the means which are possible for vs. O my love! whether doe I wander from thee? III. Consider thirdly that this miraculous act of love is the more to be valued and admired because when he was going about it (as some doe hold) there was at board one that would betray him, divers certayne that would forsake him, and he foresavv thousands and thou∣sands that would negligently, vnreverently vnvvorthily misuse his blessed presence: labour thou to be none of these. IV. Consider fourthly. How our Saviour giving out∣vvardly this blessed bread of life, did invvardly in∣lighten the harts of his Apostles, and tach them that this was the bread which he had promised before; bread in outvvard shape, but really his bodie and blood: And hovv they, according to thier weake capacitie as then ap∣pchending and beleeving it, were filled with admiration, and love, and thanksgiving, which are the acts which we must exercise; begging that he will strengthen our faith, establish our hope, and take possession of our soule and bodie, and make vs wholy his, transforming vs into him∣self by love, and perfect vnion with him.
A meditation of our Saviours Prayer in the Garden. Matth. 26. Preamble. Beholding our Saviour sadd, and heavy, and full of feare and agonie, and the blood trickling dovvne his forehead while he was earnest at his prayers, begg of him that thou mayest profit by this dolfull sight. I. COnsider first if thou didst truly love thy Sa∣viour,Caepit contrista∣ri & moe∣stus ess &c. how thou wouldst compassionate him, seing him so sadd, so pale▪ so pensive, with tea∣res in his eyes beginning to trickle dovvne his cheeks; novv hanging dovvne his head, novv looking vp to heavē sighing, and scarce able to bring forth three words to∣geather, yet at last breaking forth into this mournefull note; my soule is sorrowfull vnto death. And with this he suddenly leaves his disciples; and having gone but a sto∣nes cast, he falls dovvne vpon his knees, and vpon his face, and prayes a long houre. Father if it be possible, let this Chalice Passe from me: but not my will, but thyn b done. II. Consider secondly. That it is God who suffers this Agony to come vpon him for thy sake; to teach thee hovv thou oughtest to take the Crosses which thou fore∣eest▪ or feelest. For condescending to our infirmitie, he shevveth that we may earnestly begge of God to be de∣livered from them. In which respect thou oughtest greately to love him, and thank him for his compassion over thee. And on the other side hovv we must begge with Resignation to his holy will, in regard that these Crosses may be many wayes beneficiall to ourselves and much for the glorie of God: And it is reason we should leave ourselves in his hands it being a fearefull thing to be out of them at our ovvne choyse: and say often from our hart that which we say dayly in our Pater noster thy will be done. III. Consider thirdly. That at the end of his first prayer he comes againe to his disciples, as it were o re∣fresh himself, and also to instructe them, and ebuks S. Peeter for sleeping, when he should have prayed:
so couldst thou not watch one houre with me? And retur∣nes againe to his wonted prayer, and so againe the second time: To shevv vs that he is willing we should take comfort by the help of creatures, though our chiefest comfort must still be in God: For creatures of themselves have it not in them, though we imagin they have it, and oftimes they breed more affliction insteed of comfort, as it could not be but some afflic∣tion to our Saviour, to see his beloved Apostles in steed of helping him and arming themselves by prayer, to sleepe, and as it were forget both him and themsel∣ves. IV. Consider fourthly Hovv at his last returne he fell more earnestly to his prayers, and out of meere anguish, and agonie svveating blood, that it fell in greate dropes vpon the ground, an Angell came and comforted him; with which he went couragiously on to death. Shevving vs that in our afflictions we must never leese our courage and our hope: For when crosses are in thier height, and we in our greatest agonie, then comes the Angell of comfort, and the spirit of God, and either blovves all over, if it be expedient for his Glorie. and our good; or puts nevv courage into our harts, and makes vs bold to looke death, and disgrace, and losse of frends, and fortunes, in the face, and rise, and goe forvvards to meete them. Prayer. To our blessed Saviour that he will vouchsafe, by the merit of this blessed action of his, to give me courage both in my prayer, to persever with constancie till the end, and in all other occasions of difficultie and distast to conforme my self to his blessed will. A meditation. How our Saviour was be∣trayed and apprehended. Preamble. Reflecting hovv busy Iudas and the J∣vves were about thier mischievous intentions, while our Saviour savv all at his prayer, begge of our Sa∣viour grace to profit by his behaviour in this ac∣tion.
I. COnsider first with what peace and quiet of mind our Saviour after his last prayer came to his dis∣ciples,Dormite ia ex re∣quiescite: Surgite eamus &c. and sayd vnto them, sleepe now and rest: with what courage he attended the blow, and when he savv the offices dravv nigh, sayd againe to his Apostles. Rise let vs go. He doth not say let vs fly, but go, and meete, and confront our adversaries. Behold hovv vndauntedly he went and met them, and asked them whom seeke yee▪ and told them, I am he. Admire all, and in all the povver of the grace of God, and of a good resolution settled vpon that sole povverfull grace; for of ourselves we are weake, but let vs (to our povver) ply God, as our Saviour did and we shall have his grace. II. Consider secondly. Hovv little malice can prevayle against good, but when God sees time and permits it: I sat by you dayly (sayth our Saviour) teaching in the Temple, and you held me not, but this is your houre, and the power of darkenes. We must therfore neither be wrath, nor over fearefull, but discreetely confident in the povver, and providence of God for his glorie, and we shall see his wonders, and multitudes of Good spirits to defend vs. III. Consider thirdly. Hovv vsuall a thing it is for vs to be accounted-and spoken of, and handled as ma∣le-factours: But this is our glorie that doing well,1. Pet. 2. 12. people should detract of vs (as S. Peeter sayth) as of malefatours. You have come (sayth our Saviour) as to a theee, with swords and clus to apprehend me. Let vs not leee our patience, but remember for whom, and like to whom we suffer: vn∣discreete defending of ourselves by words or ac∣tions makes the matter worse, as S. Peters stri∣king. IV. Consider fourthly. Hovv the Traytour kisseth, the officers apprehend, and binde, and hale thy lord avvay, with shoutes ad cryes, and taunts, and a thou∣sand iniuries. And all this for thy synns: O what have my synns deserved! He on the other side, like a lamb suffers himself to be bound, and led as they please; he speaketh mildly to Judas: Frend wherfore comest thou? He healeth the eare of Malchus; appeaseth Pecrs vntimely wrath; offers himself to drinke the chalice of his pas∣sion.
though he could have had thovvsands of Angell to defend him. Indeavour to benefitt thyself by all. The Prayer. O my love! Draw me after thee, and we will runne O how doe I hang back in all things!Can. 2. 3. Draw me after thee, my love, in what bands thou wilt, for the love of thyne, which I doe honour, and doe reverence and kisse, and esteeme above gold, and precious stone. I bind myself to follovv thee, Ô blessed labe. I have sworne and resolved (sayth the Prophet) to keepe the judge∣mets of thy justice.P. 118. 106. A Meditation of what passed in the night in which our Saviour was taken. Mat. 26. 10. 18. Preamble. Desirous to knovv what passed, begge of our Saviour grace to profit by his example. I. Consider hovv they brought our Saviour first to Annas,Adduxe. runt eum ad Annum primum 10. 18. one of the chief priests, to boast and to shevv hovv they had compassed thier intent. And Annas began to question him about his doctrine. Whervnto our Saviour ansvvering what he thought fit∣ting, one of the Servants, or officers, stroock him on the face, or cheeke, reproachfully saying, doest thou answer: he chiefe Priest so? And our Saviour replyed mildly, if I have spoken ill, beare witnes of the Evill, but if well, why doe you strike me? See hovv every one applauded the bold fellovv, and laughed at our Saviour, and insulted o∣ver him. Take heed of rashly passing thy censure v∣pon any man, much more of proceeding further to words or actions before thou hast well wieghed the desers of every mans cause; If thoube censured, and abused, in word or Acton, remember our Saviours mildnes here and every were. Beware of Passion, for such occasions be the fewell which sets it on fire; when there is no pregnant occasion a body may easily thinke he is fre from passion, when it is but a sleepe.
II. Consider secondly. How from hence they carie him presently to Cayphas the high Priest; at whose house the whole councell of the Iewes was met: And because they had no true crime to charge him with, they sought false witnes: but they agreed not in their charge, though many came in against him. And our Saviour held his peace. Hovv loth are we that any false things should be bruited of vs! Hovv little are we able to hold our peace in it, as our Saviour did? Hovv doth it free vs? Hovv many discourses doe we intertaine in our thoughts and with ourfrendes, and others? That we ought not to put it vp; that to be silent were to acknovv∣ledge ourselves guiltie; that such people are not to be borne with for example sake, &c. Oftimes though the thing be in part, or wholly true, we storme the mo∣re: Consider well hovv much better it is in very many occasions to be silent, and arme thyself with patience to dissemble them. III. Consider thirdly. Hovv Cayphas when nothing would take, rose vp, and adiured our Saviour to tell him whether he were Christ the Sonne of God! And our Sa∣viour ansvvered plainly, I am and more over, that thy should see the Sonne of man sitting at the right hand of God, and coming in the Clouds of heaven. Whervpon Cayphas tore his owne garment, as it were admiring at the indig∣nitie of his ansvver, and sayd he blasphemed; what need we more wines? And all pronounced him guiltie of death. Note our Saviours sinceritie, and playnes in that which was the principall of his doctrine, though he knevv he was to die for it. And hovv nothing can be done, or sayd so just, or true in true in this world, but it is sub∣ject to be construed quite contrarie by Some or o∣ther. But we must rest satisfied in that which is truly vpright, and expect our revvard in an other world, where the just judge at the right hand of his Father will doe every body right. Feare the judgmēts of God evē whe∣re thou seest no greare cause to feare in the greatest time of prosperous successe. As our Saviour was to be Iudge, though here he were condemned, so oftimes that which we commend will in another world be iudged. Con∣temne no bodie, though to the eye he be poore and
contemptible: perhaps in the world to come he may fit in a throne with the ludge, or at least be cleered, when I shall be condemned. Observe hovv patiently out Saviour bare the pride of Cayphas the slander of blasphemie, the rude clamours of all that he was guiltie of death, thier vniust sentence &c. Prayer. To our Saviour for patience in adversities, and reproches, proposing to ourselves something of his ver∣tues to imitate in our dayly Actions. A meditation of that which passed in the night in which our Saviour was taken. II. PART. reamble as in the former. And I. COnsider first. Hovv Cayphas having passed sentēce vpon our Saviour the Counsell brake vp for that time.Tune ex∣puerun n faciem ius &c. And the Officers and servants, that were left in Charge with our Saviour, played thier part vpon him all the night till morning: some spt in his face; others boxed him about the eares, others covered his eyes, and bad him prophecie, who it was that struck him, and spake many others blasphemies, tvvyting and reproaching him with one thing or other. Place thy self vpon thy knees by our Sa∣viour and reflect, hovv they misuse him, whom thou sayest thou lovests; think what thou has been wont to say, or hink if any bodie hath been at any time so bold or forget full as to rub vpon thee in any of these manners, though but very farr of: Hovv thou wilt carry thyself hereafter n occasions of contempt, or want of respect, or punc∣uall observance and the like. O what is all the beauty of this world compared with our Saviours, but a corner to pit in? Specially if we add what we have deserved by ynne: I have dserved all these skornes and mockerie too too much by my synnes, to hinke that I do any
greate matter if I beare themit is not a thousand part of which I deserve. II. Consider secondly. Hovv our Saviour sits patient∣ly with his eyes looking dovvne to the ground, silent, forsaken of all his disciples, and acquaintance, no body looks after him. Petr followed him first a farr of, as if he would not be seen to belong to him: then he sat in the roome with him a farr of, but would not be knovvn to be of his acquaintance. Aftervvards being vrged by the Mayd, and the men, he denied him once, tvvice, thrice. and protested, and cursed, and sware that he knew him not. All this our Saviour heard, and turning towards him: and Pe∣ter remembring the words of our Lord went forth and wept bit∣terly. O eyes of mercy! looke vpon me, who have so of∣ten turned my back to thee. III. Consider thirdly, that this denyall of S. Peter was no small corrsive, and affront to our Saviour, but much more the consideration of the vnrepentance of so many millions in the world both Iewes and Gentills, notvvithstanding these his sufferings and examples, and his former doctrine. To whom Judas was novv leading the way by his treacherie first, then by despayre, and will∣full murther of himself: A figure of what the wicked Courses of the world lead men vnto at last, willfully casting avvay thier soules with out repentance for a little drosse of which they are so greedy. O svveete Saviour preserve me! O Infinite goodne have mercy on me poore synner. &c. A meditation how our Saviour was accu∣sed before Pilate. Pramble. Beholding our Saviour tovvards morning. expecting what would become of him, begge of him that thou mayest accompani him with the affections which are due to this blessed mysterie. I. COnsider first, that prsntly in the morning the whole Councill of the Iws met againe, and called our Saviour before them in that
plight as thou mayst imagine he was by this night watching,Vt∣factus st dies confestim convene∣runt seni∣ores plebis &c. and the servants outrages against him; and in fine our Saviour confessing againe that he was the Sonne of God, they all rose, and exclayming a∣gainst him, caryed him bound to Pilate. Reflect with what patience our Saviour bare thier Captiousnes, thier fury, thier outcries, the hast which they made to ruine him; How hard ourselves are to beleeve when our Saviour, or good people in his name tell vs that which we are not willing to heare or practise: How if he aske vs we are not able to answer him one for a thousand,ob 9. 3: wher∣with he may charge vs &c. How we storme when no∣thing but truth is told vs. II. Consider secondly, that when he came before Pilate, the hings which they layed to his charge were, that he perverted the people, and rysed seditions, that he forbad tribute to Caesar, that he sayd he was Christ, and tht king whom they expected: In fine, if he were not a malefactour they would not have brought him thither. Pon∣der how oftimes it happeneth so with vs; we seeke to doe good, and it is construed quite contrarie; we seeke peace, and are accounted turbulent; we professe allea∣geance, and are esteemed rebells; finally we are cryed dovvne for malefactours, and what not, and every bodies word must be taken, and we cannot be heard speake. III. consider thirdly; that our Saviour in publick, amidst those clamours, ansvvered nothing at all, but stood as if he heard them not, in so much that ilate wondred very much. But in private he answered Pilate, that he was king, that his kingdome was not of this world, that if it were of this world his subjects would strive that he should not be delivered to the Iewes, that he came into the world to speake the truth; that every one that is of the truth would heare his voyce. Ponder all these particulars and turne them againe and againe in thy mind and draw out that which may be for thy profit and instructi∣on. IV. Consider fourthly and principally that saying of our Saviour. My kingdome is not of this world: For if
we beare this deeply printed in our minde and me∣morie, it will be a comfort to vs in all our afflicti∣ons in all our mortifications and contradictions, in all our trobles of minde or bodie, in fine in all things in which we have not our will, or contentment, or fancie in this world; and finally ponder hovv we ought to strive that Christ have his right, and be delivered out of the wrough of synne and synners. The Prayer. To our Saviour, to this effect offering ourselves▪ to advance his kingdome in ourselves, and others, to shew ourselves to be his subjects, by charitie, pea∣ce, patience, longanimitie, and imitation of all the vertues which he teacheth, and will have vs practise. A Meditation how our Saviour was sent to Herode. Preamble. Tendering the good and glorie of ou Saviour wayte vpon him to see what passeth. I. COnsider first, That Pilate finding no cause to proceed against our Saviour and being desirous to ridd his hands of him, tooke occasion to send him to king Herode, because they sayd he was of Galilee: Herode on the otherside was of a long time desirous to see our s∣viour, because he had heard much of him, and hoped to see him worke some strange thing. Doubtlesse in the com∣passe of the three yeares which our Saviour preached in the Cittie▪ and country▪Pilatus audien Galilae misit  ad Hero∣dem. Luc.  Herode might have seen our Saviour i he would have bt stirred out of do∣res for it; but we soe both by Pilate, and by Hero∣de, how wordly cares, and pleasure overvvhelme s, and give vs o respit to doe even the good which we oftimes desire to do, or at least pretend and say we desire it: How worldly ends soever svvay v, and hinder vs for standing for justice, or from shevv∣ing ourselves in the service of God Hovv much better is it to breake with the world to the
end we may attend to that which we knovv is good, and to the more serious consideration, and practise of the lavv of God? II. Consider secondly. VVhen our Saviour was come before Herode, Herode asked him many curious questions, but our Saviour gave him not one sole word; whervpon Hero∣de, and his retinew skorned him, and in mockerie put a whit garment vpon him, and so sent him backe to Pilate: and Herode and Pilate were made frends vpon it Observe in this passage. That our desire of knovvledge of matters of spirit must tend to practise, or els our Saviour will say vnto vs. Nescio vos. I knovv yee not; and when we shall say to him Lord, Lord, he will not ansvver vs. Hovv easily oftimes we passe our Censure without diving into the bottome:Lu. 13. 26. Hovv much, and hovv easyly the world is mistakē, taking wisdome for folly, and folly for wisdome: Hovv much doth our Saviours silence incite vs to spare words in tvventie occasions. III. Consider thirdly. In the white garment, our Sa∣viours Innocency, and hovv that which the vvorld in∣tends for our disgrace, God ordaynes it for our greater honour: Hovv we may imitate our Saviour by not being over curious in our apparell though the fashion be other∣wise; but content ourselves with reason, and glorie, if doing that which is reason, we be neglected, or laughed at. IV. And fourthly Follovv our Saviour in his iourny to and fro, see what intertaynment he meets with in the streets from men, woemen, and Children; heare hovv diversly they speake of him, and learne to beare contempt in word or action. And among the rest forget not to cast thy eyes vpon his blessed Mother, S. Marie Magdalen, S. hon, and some others, and conforme thyself o thier ffections. Prayer. To our blessed Lady, to give thee part of that which she felt at that time, and which she practised ever in imitation of her sonne, offering to him by her hands some practicall purpose in honour of this blessed myste∣ic.
A meditation how the Iewes refused our Saviour and chose that Barabbas should be rather releesed then he. Preamble. Restlesse till thou seest what becomes of thy Saviour, stand by the people and by our blessed Ladie expecting. I. Consider first That Pilate finding more and more that there was no cause to proceed a∣gainst our Saviour,Est autem vobis con∣ sought divers wayes to de∣liver him out of the hands of the Jevves,suetudo v vnum di∣mittam Luc. 23. who meerely out of envie had brought him before him. Therfore he thought to make vse of an ancient custome, Which they had among them, to set some one malefactour free, about the time of easter, and made choyce of Barabbas (Who was a notable seditious fellow, and at theefe, and had in a sedi∣tion committed murther) to propose to them, which our Saviour, which of them they would have set free, Barabbas, or Iesus, who is called Christ▪ And they cryed out, not this man, but Barabbas, take this man away, and deliver to us Barabbas. And When Pilate asked againe what then shall I doe with Iesus? They all cryed, Crucifie him, Crucifie him; why? what hath he doone? Sayth Pilate, I find no cause to proceed against him. And they cryed more violently, Crucifie him. Heate thier hamefull outcries; see thier rude behaviour, observe hovv busie the chiefe of the Ievves are to buzze in the peoples eares, and stirre them against our Saviour against him whom they had so much follovved before, and who had deserved so much at all thier hands, by so many wayes; and admire at all; compassionate our Saviour, pitie our Saviour, pittie our blessed Ladies deseste the peoples Wic∣ked choyce, and inconstancie, and weepe bitterly thyself, reflecting hovv often thou hast passionately, and with as much inconstancie, turned thy back to our Saviour, and imbraced synne. I. Consider secondly, that this custome of delive∣ring one at easter was good, and grevv out of gratitude, and thankfullnes for thier deliverie, about that time of the yeare, out of the bondage, and servitude of Egypt▪ and was a figure of the delivrie of the whole world, full
of synne, and theft, and sedition against God, by means of the selfsame God that delivered them out of Egypt: But they through thier malice and envie tovvards our Saviour turned good to evill: wherby we may well learne hovv deadly a thing passion is, that makes vse of the best things for mischeevous intents, and turnes all to poyson looke back vpon they self, Whether in great or little, thou hast not been misledd by it, and let others be a war∣ning to thee. III. Consider thirdly, hovv the chiefe of the Ievves fell into this extremitie of hatred against ou Saviour▪ they, I say, that should have had more vnderstanding▪ more temper, more circumpection &c. Having recei∣ved greater gifts. They fell not into¦vpon the suddaine, as the people did, that were inveigled by them, but out of thier pride, and selfconceite; and worldly humours they misliked novv one thing, novv another, and so grevv in distast; and novv they carped at his povertie, and then as his povver, and fed themselves so long in these rath censures, that at last they could dreame of no∣thing but hovv to ruine him, and be revenged, and fol∣lovved it as headlongly when they thought they had the occasion. Thus if we take not heed to the begin∣nings, we grovv into extremities against others, and thinke them intollerable, not that they are so indeed, but by giving way to our passions, and conceits, we make ourselves so tetchy that every little thing seemes intolle∣rable in those parties, thongh we can beare with others, vpon every moving of a finger we grovv into more pas∣sion, and murmur, and frame iudgements of them, that they are this, and that, and scarce worthy to live a∣mong men, and will not heare, nor be persuaded the contrarie. The Prayer. To our Blessed Saviour, and our blessed Ladie, bevvayling in thier presence thy miseries, with Shame, and confusion, and a world of good purposes, which through thier assistance be confident to performe
A meditation of the whipping of our Saviour. Preamble, Pilate fayling of his former proiect, gave order that our Saviour should be whipped at a pillar; which only word were sufficient to melt a loving hart; yet begge of our Saviour more feeling of it. I. COnsider first, hovv vpon this order given,Tunc er∣go appre∣hendit P∣latus Iesum & flagella∣vit. a companie of rude souldierlike fellovves tooke our Saviour, and stripped him naked, and bound him to a pillar. O virginall flesh! O my Saviour, and my God? Let thy bashfulnes satisfie for all my disor∣ders: And give me leave to lie kissing the ground on which thou standest, I will never more lift vp my eyes to esteeme of any creature, but thou shalt be the everla∣sting obiect of my thoughts, and invvard sences: Blo out I beseech thee, by the sacred presence, all other fan∣cies, or take me out of this world, that I may see thy glo∣rie, and not make vse of my sight to my eternall shame. Thou hast wounded my hart with this one sight of thy∣self; let it ever be a barre to keepe out all other things that may distast thee and dravv my hart from thee. II. Consider secondly, or rather harken what a fearfull noyse the rude blovves make vpon thy Sviours render skin, and doe lay the very bone naked, the blood spirting out on every side and running dovvne in whole streames by thee, as thou kneelest. And the souldiers in the meane time have oe more compassion in thres∣shing vpon our Saviour, then thou hast in offending him, with all kinds of syns, as with so many lasshes, and several kinds of whips: O spare him, if thou meane to be spared, speake to thyself, speake to others spare him; hold thy hands and thiers from offending as much as thou canst; step in betvvixt, and offer thy shoulders to save him from further mischiefe: say with king Da∣vid It is I that have synned.1. Paral. 2 7. It is I that have done wrong, this innocent lambe what hath he done? This wrath must rather fall vpon me. Thank thy
Saviour for taking vpon himself the heavyest punish∣ments, and begge of him to accept of that little which thy little hart affordeth. III. Consider thirdly, hovv patiently, hovv silently, hovv vnmoveably our Saviour standeth, as long as he can stand, and beareth the loade, the smart, the disgrace, the payne of this torment, till the souldiers being desi∣rous to make themselves more sport with him. vntyed, him. See novv in what a pittifull case he is, all galled, and gore blood, with holes in his flesh that a body may lay his finger in them, and read in these red litters what thy synns have deserved, and what they have done: Canst thou thinke of them with patience? And yet he hath pa∣tience with thee, and doth not punish thee as thou deser∣vest, that thou mayst repent, and punish thy self with sor∣rovv at least, and something more then ordinarie watch∣fullnes over thy self to amend, and reforme what is a∣inisse. The Prayer. Poure out thy hart to our Saviour, and give teares at least for blood, and among thy many mise∣ries bevvayle that thou canst not bevvayle nough his sufferings and thy offenses. A meditation of the Crowne of thornes. Preamble, Not forgetting in what case thou left thy Saviour vntyed from the pillar, begge of him grace to profit by that which follovved. I COnsider first.Milites plectentes coronam de spinis imposue∣runt capi∣ti eis. 10. 19. when the souldiers ad vntyed our Saviour from the pillar, and laughed thier fill at his nakedness, and feeblenes, and the plight in which they had put him; he had scarce got his clooths about him, when they tooke him into the court∣yard, and setting him vpon some stone or other, pulled of his apparell againe, and put a ragge of purple vpon his na∣ked shoulders, and making a wreath of thornes, pressedit dovvne vpon his head, instead of a Crovvne, and gave him a reed to hold in his hand insteed of a scepter: what soule can hold from admiring this habit of the king of
glorie? He sayd well of himself his kingdome was not of this world; but it seemes this is the way to the king∣dome of the other world, not by glorie and prompe, but by contempte of all earthly glorie, and by suffering pa∣tiently what people in thier mad and foolish humours are apt to put vpon vs, taking away our goods, giving vs short and hard measure, putting vs still to more paine, and griefe, and troble, and not carng what they lay vpon vs, so they have thier ends, and make themselves merry. And consequently. II. Consider secondly that the souldiers were not content to put this affront vpon our Saviour, but in words also and vnseemly gestures mocked him, and lau∣ghed him to skorne, and kneeling downe before him vpon one knee they saluted him Hayle king of the Iewes; as who should say, a proper king indeed, and they spet v∣pon him, and beate the reed which he held in his hand about his ead, and boxed him. Thinke what hath ever happened to thee comparable to any of this, that thou shouldest be impatient, or stomackfull; and re∣solve to be more conformable to our Saviours suffe∣rings. III. Consider thirdly▪. As servants and retayners in this world thinke it an honour to go in the liverie which thier master gives, and much more to be in the fashion which they see their king and master weares i so the true servants of our Saviour should be so farre from being ashamed to be put to shame, that they should in thier herts reioyce in it; and the way to bring our na∣ture to it, thought it be never so much repugnant, is to watch vpon the occasions when a word or an accident falls out that is crosse, and to take it v as a peece of the purple garment which our Saviour wore, to kisse it, to imbrace it, and to- offer it vp vnto him as a speciall act of our service with which he is pleased to honour vs. The Prayer. To out Saviour as he sits in this pittifull plight, begging earnestly of him to help our infirmi∣tie, and to strengthen vs in the occasions of disgrace, that by bearing it we may have more plentie of his grace,
one glance wherof is farre to be preferred before all the favours which the world can afford vs. And with all, bevvayle thy ovvne rechlesnes in behaving thyself often in his blessed presence, as if thou didst not beleeve that he were king indeed,10. 4. 23. but in mockerie; and leane to adore him allvvayes in spiritt and truth A meditation of the Ecce homo, 10. 19. Preamble. Beholding Pilate going forth to the Ievves againe, and our Saviour follovving him, in the skorne∣full habit of a king of clours, begge of him that thou mayest profit by this spectacle. I. Consider first, the speech which Pilate made to the Iewes when he brought out Saviour this time to them,Ecea∣▪ duco em for as v ognosctis∣nullam invenio in o cau∣fam 10. 19. which was this: Behold I bring him forth vnto you, that you may know that I find no cause in him, that is, no cause to condemne him. And againe. Lo the man. As who should say, this is the man. Runne over this saying againe and againe, and ponder every tittle of it for it is full of my∣sterie. Behold; O what a spectacle is this! Pilate in pompe and glorie, our Saviour made a laughing stock. what eye can behold attentively our Saviour in this case, and not wish never to have vse of sight more to offend him. I bring him forth; whom? Our Saviour cus, the worker of miracles, the curer of all diseases, the rayser of the dead, the blessed onne of David, the king of the Ievves. Thou doest well & Pilate, to say, Lo the man, for no man living would have taken him to be the man. And I bring him to you. To put him to your mercilesse mercies; who I knovv delivered him to me out of envie. I find no cause in him, and I bring him to let you knovv it, and yet I have thus punished him. O sense∣lesse pilate! O iudge without Iudgement! Lo the man. O endlesse obiect of beholding the man that is God, and man, The man, in whose hand all men are
reeds, in whose sight all purple is but raggs, all gold is thornes, all worldly wealth. and happines is a mocerie, to the glorie and wealth and happines wherof he is everlastingly possessed, and yet behold here he stands at the stake for thee, that thou mayest knovv there is no cause in him of all this, but in thee, and in thy offen∣ses. II. Consider secondly, that Pilate had no sooner ended his speech, but the Ievves cryed, Crucifie him, Crucifie him, take him away, and Crucifi him; not being able to abide the sight of him that was thier Sa∣viour: Tremble at this blindnes, and hardnes of hart, and bevvare of the least shaddovv of the beginnings of it, ire∣membring that saying of our Saviour.Math. 25, 40. That which you ha∣ve done to one of my little ones you have done to me. Ponder againe these words: take him away, and Cruci∣fie him. And begge that he may never be taken from thee, but thou rather Crucified, and thy synfull appetites rooted out, and abolished. III. Consider thirdly. That Pilate overcome with the clamours and threats of the Iewes▪ that if he quitted Iesus, he should not be a frend to casar, adiudged him to be crucified, according to thier desire, though in testimonie that he thought him Innocent, he cal∣led for water, and openly before them all washed his hands, saying, I am Innocent of the blood of this iust man, looke you to it: and the Ievves ansvvered his blood be vpon vs, and our Children. See hovv the world, and passion blinds vs, and leads vs to things against our conscience; and though we see we have reason to think ourselves guiltie before God, we smother it with some colourable reason to satisfie the world, and after à sort to satisfie ourselves for a time; but when the passion is over, the sting breakes out, and galls vs. See therfore whose frend thou wilt be Cae∣sars or Gods, and for whom thou wilt stand in oc∣casions of apposition and difficultie. Pilate washeed his hands and sayd. I am Innocent of the blood &c. A poore bath to wash avvay such an offense. Seeke rather (in a contrarie sense to the Jevves) that the blood
the blood of this Innocent lambe may be vpon thee, and vpon all thy works to wath thee, and to perfect them, for with out it nothing is avayable: Abhorre synne, and abstaine from offending him, and thou shalt have his blood vpon thee, and be Innocent. A meditation of the Carrying of the Crosse. Preamble. Beholding our Saviour with a heavy peece of tymber vpon his shoulder, in forme of a Crosse, begge grace to profit by this Mysterie. I. Consider first.Suscepe runt ergo em, & eduxe runt rucifige  ren. That so soone as sentence was given, they proceeded to the Execution, and at the gates of the Palace they layed a heavy Crosse vpon our Saviours shoulders, to shevv to all the tovvne as he went, that he was to be crucified vpon it: see what a dint it made in his tender flesh; hovv it stray∣ned his backe, being weake of himself, and much more weakened by his nights watching, his hurrying from place to place about the tovvne, and the losse of so much blood▪ and being also fasting: In so much that he fell dovvne vnder it thrice in the way, having a long mile to go, though they tooke one by the way, and compelled him to go along with him, and to help him to carrie it. O my soule! what a sea of compassion hadst thou need to have to equall the griefe which thy Saviour felt in this passage! looke, and see againe, and againe everie circum∣stance, and follovv him step by step, for he cannot go ft, though they hasten him, and beate him on. Marke the different humours of them that follovv him, and them that go before him, and them that compasse him round about to see the man in this case, whom they had seen not long before farre othervvise attended. Reflect a∣mong other things hovv thou mayest ase our Saviour of his burthen, either by disburdening thy soule of synne, or by corcuring to disburden others both of synns and afflctions, orbytaking some pennance vpon thy self for satisfactiō of thyne ovne, and others synns, and to
pevent them, or by bearing whatsoever Crosse, not as it were by compulsion, but willingly for his sake; for it is some ase in sorrovv to have a companion in our sor∣rowes. II. Consider secondly, rhat wheras many people fol∣lowed him, and many women lamented his case, he tur∣ned to them, and speake in this sorte. Daughteres of Hieru∣salem, doe not weepe vpon me, but weepe vpon yourselves, and vpon your Children. Because behold the dayes will come in which they will say, blessed are the barren, and the wombs which have not borne, and the paps which have not given suck. Then shall they begin te say to the mountayns, fall vpon vs, and so the hills, Cover vs; for if in the green wood they doe these things, in the drie what shall be done? Harken with what a Majestie he speakes these words, and with compassion of them that little deserved it; Ponder every tittle of them, and see what svveetnes thou mayest gather to the benefit, and instruction of thy soule out of them. III. Consider thirdly, That when he had gone about halfe way on his journey, a devout matrone met him, and taking compassion of him, profered him a handkerchief, to wipe of the blood and the svveate of his brovves; he accepted it,Meehdi: us apud Baroniu and wiping his face with it, left the Ima∣ge of his visage in the handkerchief, and returned it to the woman. Thou mayst easily imagin with what joy She received it, and with what reverence She kept it; and hovv well she thought herself payed for her charitable commiseration. Such are the returnes which our Saviour makes of courtesies done to himself in his service, or in his Servants; he leaves the print of himself, and of his love more deepely in thier harts, which Surpasseth all treasures, and makes vs the speedier to be in tertayned in his heavenly Court. The Prayer. To our Saviour offering our service to him according to the present circumstances and affecti∣ons.
A Meditation of the Crucifying of our Saviour. Preamble. Having gotten a place somewhere vpon the hill, as neere as thou canst to our blessed Lady, and S. Ihon, attend with all diligence, and desire to see the end. I. COnsider. That our Saviour being with much difficult ie gotten vp the hill,Et vene  runtn locum qui dicitur Calvariae locus,& dabant ei bibere Myrrhatu ̄ vinum sum felle▪ mixtum &c. the first com∣fort he receives is a cup of wine mingled with Myrrhe and Gall, to stint his bleeding, and that he might not suddenly faint avvay; he teasted it but would not drink it. Then thy vnmercifully pulled of his clothes, renevv∣ing most of his wounds, and he at thier appointment, layeth himself downe, and spreadeth himself as well as he can vpon the Crosse, to be nayled to it. Here every cir∣cumstance is so full of compassion; that it must be a hart of stone that doth not relent, and much more greeve at the cause, which are my synnes. These were the GALL min∣gled with all his comforts, and he had them too lively presented before his eyes to accept of more them a tast of the bitternes of them, which is so greate that all bitternes of the vvorld is rather to be svvallovved, then to svval∣lovv the least of synnes wittingly; what then of so many▪ II. Renevv not his wounds hy thy harshnes tovvards thy neighbous, who are the living members of his mysti∣call body, and are oft wounded sufficiently by othe occa∣fions deserving compassion: see hovv willingly for God he layeth himself dovvne vpon his Crosse, and imitate him. But imitate not the vnmercifulnes of them, that Strike the nayles into his hands and feete, and so much as lyeth in them, by thier obstinancie and often repeated of∣fenseso are perpetually nayling him: But nayle thyself, by dayly and hourely purposes, never to part from the will, and appointment and commandment of God, though it hath bitternes some times, and a Crosse annexed. III. Our Saviour being thus nayled vpon the Crosse as it lay vpon the ground, with ropes and other in∣struments they reare it vpon one end, and let it fall
with a jumpe into a deepe hole, where it was to stand. Reflect what payne this bred to our Saviour in all his lims, and at his very hart: see hovv our blessed Lady wee∣pes and is ready to faint with griefe; Heare the outcryes of the people, blaspheming him, shaking their heads at him, and saying, he saved others, let him save himself. If he be Crist, if he be king of the Iewes; if he be sonne of God, let him now come downe, and we will beleeve him. This is the man that would destroy the Temple, and buyld it againe in three dayes. The Prayer. Fixing thy eyes, and thy thoughts, vpon our Saviour Crucified, never satisfi thyself with viev∣ing all circumstances, with such acts of devotion, and such devout petitions as the nature of the mysterie requi∣res, and the grace of God affords. A Medation of the words which our Savi∣our spake vpon tho Crosse. 1. PART. Preamble as in the former. I. COnsider that in all this griefe, and disgrace, the first word which our Saviour spake vpon the Crosse,Pater, di∣mitte is, non nim sciunt quitd faci∣un. Luc. 23. was, Father, forgive them, because they know not what they doe. O endlesse mercy and meekenes! He doth not crave revenge. He doth not say, o righteous judge, but Father, no Revenge, but forgive, and forgive them, whom? But those that are even novv blespheming me, and are not satisfied till they see me dead. This is the greatest and truest triall of charitie,S. Gregor if we love him that is contrarie to vs (sayth S. Gregore.) II. They know not what they doe: who can be slovv to excuse, or hard to accept of an excuse of an others falt hearing our Saviour excuse so apparent malice? Also (sayth S. Augustin) no man must despayre of remission seeing it offered to them that were auctors of our Saviours death.S▪ August. No man must be sullen when he is offended, and thinke himself charitable enough if he sayes nothing, or remits his quarell to God, but remember they are sonnes of one Father, and put on the bovvels of a brother, and not be as strangets one to another,
III. Father, forgive O. in hovv many things doe we all offend, and dayly and hourely need forgivene! Hovv much doth it import to forgive, seeing our Saviour hath so often inculcated it vnto vs, and put it in our dayly peti∣tion, and absolutely told vs we shall have no mercy, vn∣lesse we forgive our brethren from our harts?Matth. i8. 37. Make vse of thy weake vnderstanding in spirituall things, or apprehension of thy danger to pleade before him for thyself, who is so willing to excuse; and say; Lord, I did not knovv what I did, when I did offend thee; be a Father vnto me. and forgive me;Luc. i5. 24. say with the prodigall Child. Father, I have synned against heaven and thee and am net worthy to call thee Father, but seeing thou lovest that tiile, ac∣knowledge me for thy Sonne, though vngratefull, and forgive me: Father &c. Of the words of our Saviour. II. PART. Preamble. As in the former. I. NExt after our Saviour had besought his Father to pard on his persecutours,Vnus autē de his quipen debat atron∣bus &c. he pardoned the theefe vpon the Crosse, and promised, him the kingdome of heaven, for his fervent confession for wheras there were tvvo crucified with him, one on the right hand, the other on the left, and our Saviour in the middle, one of them blasphemed our Saviour with the Ie∣wes, the other defended him, acknovvledging his ovvne offenses and deserts, and proclayming our Savi∣ours Innocencie, and begged that he would remember him when he came into his kingdom. Ponder first the disgrace put vpon our Saviour to be as it were the principall male∣factour of the three crucified: wherin, notvvithstanding holy Fathes doe discover tvvo greate Mysteries;▪ the one, that he lovingly presented himself both to Ievv, and Gen∣till, if the one should refuse, and thirst his Innocent blood to thier ruine, the other might make benefit of it to eter∣nall welfare; endeavour to be among them that make benefit,
and thirst after his sacred blood with love and ve∣neration: The other Mysterie is, that in the very manner of thier crucifying thy represent that which in the latter day will happen,S. Leo. when thse on the right hand shall be revvarded, and those on the left cast of into eternall pu∣nishment. II. Consider secondly. The noblenes of this act of the good theefe, standing for our Saviour when all the world allmost forsoke him; see also what it is to be pa∣tient in affliction, and humbly to acknovvledge that we have deserned it: On the other side hovv little it did ad∣vantage the other theefe (through his owne perversenes) to be so neere our Saviour, and reflect on the Judgments of God, and that as no man must presume, so none must despayre. III. And Iesus sayed vnto him. Veryly I say unto the, this day thou shalt be with me in paradise. Ponder every word; who, to whome, and with what assurednes. This day, with me, in Paradise. O blessed day and more bles∣sed companie! See hovv the peniteut, and the innocent, are associated, and learne to contemne no body, to jud∣ge, or flight no body, This day thou shalt be with me: O let this day never end, it is Paradise enough to be with thee, blessed is he who vuderstandeth what it is to love Iesus, &c. Tho. a Kemp. l. . c. 1. Of the words of our Saviour vpon the Crosse. III. PART. Preamble as before. I. THere stood beside the Crosse of Iesus,Staban juxta Crucem Iesu  ejus, 10. 9▪ his Mother, ond his Mothers sister, Marie of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalen. And the beloved deciple S. Ihon, as appeares by that which follovveth. But consider first, with what constancie, and resolution they all remayned there; looke into the breast of every one, of them, one by one, and thier affections of love, and sorrow, and
faith, and resignation; see with wha teares of compas∣sion and love they lifted vp thier eyes to the crucifyed, and then cast them dovvne vpon themselves; hovv some of them embraced the Crosse and kissed the staynes of blood remayning vpon it: Hovv they Harkened to every tittle that he spake. Stand with them, and harken; for he speakes not to those rhat passe by: be not ashamed, be not afrayed, stand by his Mother, cast thyself vpon thy knees with the Magdalen, bevvayle thy ovvne offenses &c. He that persevereth may justly expect a word of comfort. II. When Iesus had seen his Mother, and the disciple standing, whom he loved, he sayed to his Mother, wo∣man, behold thy Sonne, and to the disciple, behold thy Mother. Consider what impression this speach made in the harts of both, in regard of the thing itself, and of the manner so vnexpected, and at such an exigent, ponder hovv in diffe∣rent senses, these words might worke different affections in our blessed Lady. Woman. See hovv all looked vp, but his eye was directed to his Mother: Behold thy sonne. Which Sonne? Him vpon the Crosse? Or by the Crosse? Hovv ever what a change is here; and yet what love, and care doth my Sonne shevv concerning me. &c. And to S. Jhon. Behold thy Mother. What an honour was this vnto him, and in him to vs all, making vs adoptive Children to our Blessed Lady, brothers to our Saviour; so greate a good is it to stand hy the Cresse sayth Theophilact; so greate a good to suck wisdome from our Saviours breast,Theophil. S. Ambr. say S. Ambrose. III. And from that houre the disciple tooke her to his owne. Into his ovvne charge (sayth S. Augustine) to have care of her,S. August. and to attend her. Conider with what respect, and dutifulnes, and veneration he ever beheld her, and provided for her, remembring ever whose Mother she was. Imitate this loving and beloved disciple; and begge of her also novv that shee wil take the into her protecti∣on, that by her means thou mayst obtayne according to those Mysteries, forgivenes of thy synnes, the kingdome of thy Saviour here, and in the other world, the compa∣nie and love of his saincts, constancie in adversities, and never to part from svveete Iesus whatever befall thee.
Of the words of our Saviour. IV. PART. Preamble. Behold the sunne suddenly eclypsed and the heavens darkened at noone day, and begge that this vnvvonted accident may stirre in thee some vnvvonted good affection. And I. First to take heed that in middest of the graces of Allmightie God,Deus, De us meus, vt quid dereli∣quisti me▪ which shine vpon thee, as the sunne at noone day, darknes doe not sud∣denly, through thy falt, come vpon thee, by the with∣dravving of his heavenly beames; and vpon every change that thou findet, bevvare. Then open the eares of thy soule, and harken hovv our Saviour cryes out with a lowd voyce, O my God, my God, wherfore hast thou forsaken me? Dive into the anguish of his soule, from the beginning of his passion to the end, he being as a man forsaken not only of men. but of God, that is, left comfortles to beare the burthen of all these griefes, with out any refre∣shing from the divine person, with which his humane nature was conjoyned, without diverting his thoughts, or his imagination from it by other means. When did the like ever happen to man? Say with him; O my God, my God, wherfore this, but for me, to satisfie for my vaine worldly comforts. To teach me to want them. and to conteme them; to teach me courage in occasions of di∣stast, and derelictions, and not to complayne, seeing he would not have complayned neither first of his sorrovv vnto deah, nor novv of being forsaken, but to persuade me of this truth, that he suffered as a man indeed forsaken. O my God, forsake me not, though I cannot say but that I have deserved to be forsaken. II. Some that stood by, and heard him, sayed; this man calleth vpon Elias, let vs see whether Elias comes to deliver him. As if he had need or expected help. Hovv ordinarie it is for people to mistake, or misconstrue words and actions▪ and agayne thinke with what kind of cōtempt they sayed, this man; and, les vs see, whether any comes to save him, or to take him downe, Prepare thyself for the like incoun∣ters,
and call vpon him in the dayes of this tribulation; call with a lowd voyce, that is with fervour of affection, and acknovvledgement of thy necessities. III. Consider also the goodnes of God, who in our extremities of corporall paine, or spirituall derelictions, doth not forbid vs to aske why, though we cannot but knovv that we have deserved it, if we knovv ourselves and God. But the question must be as our Saviours, with a loving respect and submission, with resignation to the very last: Heare him speaking to thee: Sonne I came dovvne from heaven to save thee &c. as in Thom. Kemp. l. 3. c. 18. And ansvvèr him as there. Of the words of out Saviour vpon the Crosse. V. PART. Preamble as in the former. I. IEsus knovving that all things were novv consum∣mated that the Scripture might be fullfilled he sayed I trist.Post hae sciens Iesus qia omnia consum∣mata sunt. And certainly naturally he had greate thirst, for the toyle of his journies to and fro might procure it, his watching, his sadnes, the effusion of so much blood his attention to what was sayed, ad done by others, and what was to be done or sayed by himself, and it is fitting that we should compassionate him in it, and animate our∣selves to suffer that which may hapsen to vs in that Kind. Yet if we reflect how once he begged water of the Sama∣ritan,▪ 4. and sayed to his Apostles my food is to doe my Fathers will, we shall find there was another cause of thirst, to wit, he thirsted to accomplish his Fathers will, to accomplish the Prophecies which were of him, that not one tittle, mightremayne vnfulfilled. He thirsted the salvation of thy soule, and that all might be patakers of the living waters of his merits and grace. He did thirst after thee, that thou mightest learne to thirst after him, and his hea∣venly gift, without which all is drougth and bit∣ternes.
II. A vesseltherfore of vineger stood there full of vineger, and they putting a spunge full about hissope offered it to his mouth, reaching it to him with a reed. This the tormentours did to prolōg his life in payne, that he might not faynt avvay, as before they offered him the mingled wine; which we have reason to lament, but much more the hardnes of hat even of beleeving Christians, who for the vpshot of all the sorrovves which our Saviour hath suffered, either continue in thier wonted synns, or offer him vineger to drinke, that is, Actions as sovver as vineger, lukevvarme, without life, or vigour, halfe dead with tepiditie, and dulnes, and niggardnes tovvards him: And like spunges drink vp worldly contentment, which soone turne sour, and are as hard as flint in respect of that which is spiri∣tuall, or like reeds wavering, and changeable and weake. Take heede that this manner of proceeding dry not the fountaine of his graces, and bring the life of thy soule to a bitter end. III. O Iesu give me the wholsome thirst of which thy prophet speakes saying.Psal. 62. My God, eary doe I awake, to thee; my soule hath thirsted after thee and my flesh very many wayes, that neither soule, nor body may desire any thing but thee, and the accomplishing of thy bles∣sed will in both; that hating the thirst which hithert I have laboured in vayne to satisfie in the world; I may taste thy living waters. &c. Of the words of our Saviour vpon the Crosse and of his death. VI. PART. I. VVHen therfore Iesus had taken the vineger he sayed it is consummated and again crying out with a lowde voyce,Cum ergo accepisse Iesus ace∣tum, he sayd. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and saying so, bowing downe his head he gave vp the Ghost. Novv indeed the Sunne is ecclypsed at noone day, our Saviour being taken avvay by a cruell death, in the prime of his yeares, and middle of the vsual course of men in this
world. He would notwithstanding see all things before fullfilled, that he might justly say to every one of vs, what could you expect I should doe more for you? I have given myself, body and soule, for you, and all the labours and paynes that I have taken in them: Consummatum e st. See what you will doe for me. II. O loving Father, into what better hands can I commend both body and soule, then after thy sonnes ex∣ample into thyne? To thee I doe bow downe my head ac∣knovvledging thy soveraignitie over me, and over all things created; Thou art lord of life and death; accordig to thy will, and best knovvledge dispose of me. Thy hands did frame me, into them I render myself, to be ordered as thou pleasest: I confesse some times my spirit doth rise against that which doth not suite with it but it is when I doe not cōsider rightly that all cometh from thee to whom all ought to be subject; In manus tuas commendo spiritum eum. III. With hovv different a note doe those cry out at the latter houre who are overtaken with death, before they have done all that they ought to doe tovvards God, and thier neighbour, the good and the bad, the diligent and the flouthfull?Eec. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand can doe, doe it in∣stantly, for neither worke, nor counsell, nor wisdoms, nor know∣ledge is after death, whether thou hastenes. Sayth the Wi∣seman. Begg of our Saviour that he will assiste thee, li∣ving and dying, that having passed this life, and vale of miserie, thou mayest enjoy him the more perfectly in the other world. Of the things which happened after our Saviours death. I. ANd behold the vayle of the temple was ent into two parts from the top to the bottome,Et ecce∣velum Templi scissum est id duas partes. and the earth did quake, and the rocks were split; and the saints that had stept, vose. Behold these Alterations, not without contentment, that novv the hidden mysteries of the old testament should be revealed, and the holy of holy∣es be knovvne publiely to all: The very rockes, and
dull earth testifying the feeling which we ought to have of the indignities offered to our Saviour, and that the hardest harts, and people dead and buryed in synne, and oblivion, should reape benefit, if they would, by out Saviours death and passion. Open thyself to thy Saviour divide thy hart into love, and grief, think of thy life past from the top to the bottome; breake through the rockes of difficulties; cleanse the sepulchre of thy hart from all cor∣ruption. II. Imitate the Centurion who seeing what passed cryed out, truly this man was just: certaynly this man was the Sonne of God. And multitudes of them that ere present returned knocking thier breast. These are the affections which thou must endeavour to rayse in thy soule, and ma∣ny more which thou mayst learne of our blessed Lady, and S. Jhon, and S. Marie Magdalen, reflect vpon the behavi∣our of every one of them, and dive into thier invvard thoughts, while they were expecting what would be further done to the dead body of our Saviour. III. The Iewes besought Pilate that thier bodyes might not remayne so vpon thier Saboth, but that thier thighes might be broken, and so taken downe; and the soldiers broke the thighes of the oe, and the other thoefe: In what anguish may we imagin were the devout soules, fearing that that cruelric might be done vpon our Savoiur also, not knovving per∣haps certaynly that he was dead, or though they knevv it. But the providence of God prevented their malice: for coming to our Saviour, and finding him dead, they did not breake his thighes, but one of the soldiers with a lance opened his side, and instantly water and blood issued. This speare went also to the hart of the Blessed Virgon, and of the rest; yet finding that he was dead before, they applyed themselves more to the gathering vp of that Sacred blood and admired the my sterie of the vvo different liquors, which S. Augustine explicareth in these tearmes.S. August▪ The E∣vgelist made vse of a very significant word when he say∣ed, He opened, to shevv that there in a manner the gate of life was set open, from whence the Sacraments of the Church have flovved, with out which no man enters into that life which is truly life.
IV. Open thy hart to our blessed Saviour, and if i payne thee,Cant. 4. 9. here thou hast a lenitive: Thou hast wounded my hart in one of thy eyes. Sayth the spouse. Hovv many darts are here, by which thou mayest receive the like loving wounds? Cast vp thy eyes frequently; me∣ditate continually of these mysteries, enter into his sacred side &c. say with the Prophct. This is my res∣ting place for ever,Ps. 131. 14. here I will dwell, because I have cho∣sen it. Of the taking downe from the Crosse and buryall. I. IN the evening Ioseph,Cum au∣tem sero factum es∣set venit Ioseph &c: a rich man of Arimathea, and noble decurion, iust, and expecting the kingdome of God, disciple of our Saviour in private, came, and boldly went to Pilate, and demanded the body of Iesus, and Pilate gave it him? He is deservedly reported to be rich (sayth S. Ambrose) having received the body of Christ.S. Ambr. But see the preparations to receive it; he was just, valu∣ing the kingdome of God more then his wealth; and hovvever private before, novv he boldly professeth it; de∣votion overcame feare and humane respects. Asteeme of this gift above all gifts, and think hovv and where thou wilt reserve it. II. Ioseph having bought a syndon (or rich winding sheete) and taking him downe, wrapped him in it; Nico∣demus came also (who first came by night to our Saviour) and brought a composition of myrrhe, and aloes, about one handred pounds; and they bound up the body with them. If the Apostles had buried him the Ievves would have sayed the had not been buryed,S. Ambr. as they sayed he was stolen: But the iust man is he that wrappeth our Saviours body in white linnen; the Innocent man in∣balmes him; doe thou the like offices, bring one hun∣dred pounds, a compleate quantitie of faith, and good works. III. And there was in the place where he was cruified garden, and in the garden a new Monument, in which
not any had as yet been layed, cut out in a rock, There ther∣fore, because it was night, they layed Iesus, and rolled a greate stone to the entrance,S. August: or dore of the monument. To the body of our Saviour Sanctitie and Virginitie is ever due, a wombe vntouched conceived him,S. Ambr▪ a nevv sepulchre received him. And deservedly is it cut out in a firme faith, and a stone rolled to it, because whoever shall have buried our Saviour in his breast, must be ca∣refull that he leese him not. See also that thy hart be a garden well kept, not a wildernes, or full of weeds, and neere to the Crosse, that thou mayst be the surer to have him lodged in it. IV. Forget not in the meane time the duties which our Blessed Lady, and S. Ihon, and the Magdalen did vnto him, when he was taken dovvne; hovv every one strived to imbrace him, and reverently to kisse his feete, and hands, and side, and could hardly be brought to re∣linquish him, but that the time of day, and precept of keeping the sabboth called vpon them, which they duti∣fully obeyed, retayning him still in thier thoughts and in thier pous discourses. An Excercise in honour of the precious wounds of our blessed Saviour. I. IT is likely that those devout persons who were actours in taking our Saviours body dovvne from the Crosse did severally thier respects to his sacred wounds, all proceeding from love, and mingled with it, yet diversly according to the severall dispositions of thier minds, and the occasions which they had to attend our Saviour in his life time. S. Ihon betooke himself to the right foote, and as more beloved then the rest expressed his gratitude in affections of love, and thanksgiving for the particular favours receaved; leaning his head vpon that foote, as before vpon our Saviours breast, and pou∣ring forth abundance of teares for the absence of so lo∣ving a master: He remembred the request of his Mother, that he might sit at the right hand,Math. 20. or at the left of our Sa∣viour
in his kingdome; but novv he resolved to drink per∣petually this chalice; This should be his cup and his comfort till that other kingdome came to be revealed af∣ter this life, miserable with out this releefe. O svveete cup.Psalm. 22. &c. Dominus regit me, & nihil mihi deerit. II. The Magdalen was at the left foote, where thou must begge of her to give thee a little roome, to wash that foote with teares of sorrovv for thy severall offenses; she is loth to yeald an inch of place, or minute of time, because she knovves all is too little for her ovvne expres∣sions: Importunitie and compassion will overcome her: therfore settle thyself to it,ierem. 9. and say, who will give me as fountayne, a flood of teares that I may bowayle the Sonne of God, thus slayne for my synns? O cruell synne that thus killest tvvo at once, me and my Saviour; and as for me, I am worthy of a thousand deaths, and will die a thou∣sand times before I offend againe: But he, what hath he deserved?Luc. 7. 45. The Magdalen did not, ceafe to kisse, but I must not cease to weepe, that I may wash avvay that which hath thus stayned my Saviour. O blessed Magda∣len have compassion on me. III. Joseph of Arimathia held the riht hand;Math. 27. 9. and as he offered his ovvne nevv sepulchre to our Saviour for his buryal, and the winding sheete, and other necessaries, so he poured forth his harth liberally to him, offering himself to whatever future service to him, or his; sory that his sepulchre was not more rich, and the sheete more white, and costly, to wrapp so greate a treasure. No pretious stone could have been equall to his desert, no gold or sylver enough to garnish it; ô that my hart were not too hard, or too base, to lay thee in it! whatever it is, take possession of it,Psalm. 72. 26. and of all that belongs to it; Tho, art God of my hart, and my portion God for ever. IV. At the left hand. Nicodemus stood, not having alltogeather shaken of his feares; therfore he brought a mixture of myrrhe and aloes,Io, 19. 39. about (perhaps not full) a hundred pownd weight. For so long as we are yet li∣ving, we cannot be alltogether without feare to be cast of to the left hand; and a moderate feare is profitable to∣vvards the buryall of our Saviour in our soules; because we are earth,Prov. 3. 32. and with the humble is his conversation. Min∣mingle
this holy feare with thy love; it will serve to bind vp the spices with the body, that they be not sattered abroad with vayne complacencie in thy selfe, or in this very actiō to the preiudice of charyty tovvards thy selfe and of thy neighbour, who is an other receptacle for our Saviour. V. Our blessed Lady having the sacred body in her lap, had the wound of his side perpetually in her eye, and her thoughts occupied in conteplation, hovv he was God and man, immortall and yet dead, extreamely deserving love, and yet thus vsed, Behold the teares silent∣ly trickling dovvne her cheekes, some times sighing; so∣me times lifting vp her eyes, and repeating our Saviours words my God my God,Matth. 4. 26. wherfore didst thou thus forsake him; father forgive them. O my sonne! Other motherly ex∣pressions were not wanting, which she tempered with her wonted vertue, and with her sonnes command. Weepe not vpon me. She applyed herself to the duties of his bu∣ryall, and had her thoughrs vpon his resurrection. &c. Of the Passion of our Saviourby way of repetition. I. PART. I. PLace thyself in a corner of the Counsell Chamber wher Cayphas, and the rest are met; and first wondering with the Psalmist,Psalm. 2. why they should be so fierce against a man from whom every body recei∣ved so much good and they might if they would, and acknovvledging that, doe what they can, God will at last turne thier counsels vpon themselves: Qui babita in coelis irridebit cos &c. Turne thou also Cayphas his ver∣dict vpon thyself, and acknovvledge thy ovvne blind∣nes, and backvvardnes tovvards thy ovvne good: Vos neseitis quicquam. For wheras it is the generall document of all spirituall men, and experience teacheth, that every one hath some principall bad inclination, or vice, to which he is most prone, and which dravves vs after it in∣to many inconveniences, either we doe not search after it, or knovving it, we doe not prosecute the rooting of
it out, as it were fitting. Expedit vt vnus moriatur homo (in∣fectus) & non tota gens pereat. II. Transferre thyself from thence to the Chamber where our Saviour made his last supper, and reioy cing to be rather in that companie, heare our Saviour foretelling his Apostles of thier weaknes in forsaking him, and in being scandalized, and be not presumptuous, as Perer was at that time, but acknovvledge rather the contrarie, that though all should stand yet I have cause to feare a fall, and by experience doe find many reasons for it, taking myself in so many occasions not follovving him as I ought, but (a longe) a farre of, God wot, even where there is no such matter of difficultie to be striven with, but doe take easy denyalls for good excuses. III. Beholding him washing his disciples feete, begge of him, that by the example and merit of this humble ac∣tion, he will give thee more strength and wash avvay what ever may cleave to thee offensive, or disturbing his service. Amplus lava me ab iniquitate mea. More, deare lord, and more, for I never cease to soyle myself. Fall dovvne at his feete, and wash them with reares, as the Magdalen, and doe not cease to kisse them. If thou hast any thing superfluous (sayth S. Augustine) give it to the poore,. August. and thou hast wipd our Saviours feete: To thee it is superfluous our Saviours feete have need of it. If thou hast any quarell with any body, give it into our Saviours hands to be washed avvay; for if it be not washed: thou shalt not have part with him for ever. hou knovvest not what thou doest if thou doest not forgive; thou wilt aftervvard knovv it to thy cost. Lord, not this only, but if I were a thousand times hore offended, I doe intirely offer i into thy hands, and freely doe forgive, as I desire to be forgiven, for I cannot answer one for a thousand, that thou art able to lay against me.
Repitition of the mysteries of the passion of our Saviour. II. PART. I. VVAlking in the Garden of Gethsemanie cast thy eyes vpon our Saviours sor∣rovvfull hart, and knocking thy breast, say, ô hart of myne, that hast been cause of this griefe! O that it were a fountaine of water, breaking forth at my eyes, to bevvayle the synnes which he bevvayleth! sorrowfull is my soule, that it is not full of sorrovves. O dullnes, and drovvsines. Is this a time when thou be∣holdest thy Saviour svveating dropps of blood, betrayed, apprehended, bound, haled, outraged like a rogue and a miscreant? VVhere be thy resolutions to suffer prison∣ment, and death for him? VVhy doest thou not imprison thy wandering thoughts, and confine them to this dol∣full spectacle? VVhy doest thou not die to thy desires of esteeme and case, seeing him so affronted and misused? II. And they brought him bound to Annas first. VVhe∣re consider that though he receive the boxe on the eare, thou deservedst it, and by right the fellovv might have sayed to thee. Sic respondes Pontifici? Is this the gratitude which thou shevvest to the Priest of the nevv Testament, who shedding his ovvne blood for thee hath redeemed thee? Ponder who thou art, who he is, and hovv thou doest ansvver the benefitts received of him (besids thy redemption) naturall and supernaturall, sic? So dully, so coldly, so scarcely, so contrarily? If he hath sayed, and done well for thee, why doest thou stricke him? VVhy doest thou offend him? II. At the Cousell before Cayphas he was pronun∣ced guiltie of death; but it was because thou wert guilty, for whom he had ingaged himself, there being no need of seeking false witnes against thee; being guiltie of more them thou wouldest willingly have knovvne to the world: He was truly the Sonne of God; hovv often hast thou desired, or indeavoured to be thought so when thou wert farre from being so, at least
in that degree as thou oughtest, and hast had means to be: for which if people had spet in thy face, and given thee the lie, with a boxe on the care, it would have been but what thou didst deserve: Cast thyself at his feete, and begge pardon of these thy transgressions, and a favorable aspect from him, for even thus outraged he is mercifull, and will not the death of a synner,Eze. 33. . but that he be converted, and savd by the meritts of this his bit∣ter passion. Amen. Repetition of the mysteries of the passion of our Saviour. III. PART. I. IN his iournies to Pilate, and Herode, and back againe, accompanying him, consider the furie with which he was haled and hurried vp and dovv∣ne all the morning; what taunts by the way, what ga∣zing, and censuring, much more freely then before, when they durst not speake openly of him for feare of princes, or of people; but novv thier thoughts and tonges were let loosse, and they thought, and spake thier pleasure, and proceeded as if he had been a malefactour, and sedu∣cer indeed: If he were not so we would not have delivered him over to thee, sayed the Jevves to Pilate. Admire his silence. And yet in his thoughts he sayed, I have given myself for those that are malefactours indeed. and am content to be reputed so. Hovv much more ought I be content who really am so, if not in one thing,Psal. 18. 13. in an other? A occultis meis munda me Domi∣ne, & ab alinis parce servo tuo. And it will not be ill for me, if by suffering in one kind, though perhaps not so iustly. I may by it satisie for my other offen∣ses. II. Pilate offered to deliver Barabbas, to be executed insteed of our Saviour, and to spare him; but they hated our Saviour worse of the tvvo, and cryed a mayne, deliver not this man from death, bnt Barabbas rather: what are these clamours but my synnes, and my passions,
which right or wrong must be satisfied? These doe stirre vp all my spirits, as the princes did the people, rather to aske Barrabas, a theese, a seditious follovv, a murderer▪ these stop my eares not to heare of any thing, but what rends to the satisfying of them; they stop my eyes so that though I see what is better I choose the worse, because the better is not so agreable to my humour: Curbe them before they grovv too strōng: for neither was the hatred of the Princes tovvards our Saviour at first so greate, but gi∣ving way novv to one censure of him, novv to another, and not looking into thier ovvne harts with a mind to mend, have grovvn to that height, that novv nothing but vtter destructîon, and death could conrent them. Ex∣amine well thy hart, and see in what measure, or degree it standeth. III. When Pilate savv that all this world of disgraces would not quench thier passion; he resolved to dravv blood, and caused him to be scourged to the purpose: the soldiers stripped him, tyed him to a pillar, and be∣labourned him with severall sorts of whips, that from the top to the bottome he was all gore blood.Psalm . Supra dor∣sm meum sabicaverunt peccatores (sayth the Psalme) pro∣longaverunt iniquitatem suam. First, they that presuming of his mercy differr thier conversion, continuing in synne. Secondly, such as considering what our Saviour suffered for them, be slovv in doing pennance themselves for which, if God out of his mercy do continue his gra∣ces, yet they will be aftervvards the longer in satisfying, and the longer deprived of his blessed sight; to say no∣thing of the hereiks of these times, who think that be∣cause our Saviour hath suffered abundantly, they need doe nothing, but beleeve, and trust in him. Fall dovvne at his feere with shame and repentance; for continuing thy syns, thou doest as much as is in thee continue his stripes, O svveere Jesus give me rhe spirit of mortificati∣on, and repentance, that I may case thy paynes, and wi∣pe avvay the scarres which have light vpon thee. Ego peccavi I am he that hath offended, what hath this man deserved
Repetition of the Mysteries of the Passion of our Saviour. IV. PART. I. THe soldiers beyond thier order, after they had cruelly scourged him, tooke him from the pil∣lar, and setting him vpon some stone in the Courte yard, cast a rag of purple about his shoulders, make a Crovvne of hard thornes, and presse it dovvne vpon his bare head, and put a reed into his hand, and having mocked him thus to scorne, kneeling dovvne ri∣diculously before him, and saluting him, king, and shevv him in this guise to the people, saying, Eece homo, behold the man you are afrayde of; the man whom you hate and envie; see what he is come to; Behold a prop∣per, and likely king: what say you▪ O my God! What shall I say? My eyes should speake, and not my mouth, and gush out teares of blood, beholding my God, my king, my Saviour, my love, my all things, in this plight: behold the worker of miracles; for this is rhe miracle of miracle, that he would be not only man, but such a man, for such a man, as I am Behold. For I cannot be satisfyed with beholding, because I cannot sufficiently admire thy mercy, thy justice, thy goodnes thy example; for it is to give me example, hovv not to skorne to be skorned, but rather love it, because I say I love thee. O puple! O thornes! O reed! Such is all worldly honour, a rag a thor∣ne, a reed. O God and man! Give me grace ever to es∣teeme them so and not to behold them in the false light of this world, but in thee, who art the true light; that J may not be misled. II. The Jewes not satisfyed, cry Crucifie him, Crucifie him. And Pilate yealdeth; And he loaded with a heavy Crosse, goeth forth of the Palace into the streets, and high way, scarce able to stand on his legs with wearynes, and losse of blood, and yet turneth to the daughters of Hie∣rusalem aud biddeth them weepe for themselves and not for him: for my self indeed, but why not for thee? Or why nor more for thee, then for myself? For though I should
suffer all the torments that hell can devise, I may deserve them; the least of what thou hast suffered, is more vn∣worthy then can be imagined. I must not indeed bevvayle thee alone, for what will it avayle, vnlesse I bevvayle myself also, and my synnes, and bevvayle them so as not to fall againe? Hovvever, it is resolved I must weepe; what will then become of me, whose eyes are so dryed vp with hardnes of hart, that there is no apparance. I will at least help to cary his Crosse, and take of from him so much of the burden, by amendment of my life, and declare myself to be one of those that doe follovv him with love, and esteeme and respect, and not as the multi∣tude of vnbeleevers and synners. III. And forget not that not only thou must not be loaded with synne, if thou pretend to follovv our Sa∣viour, but that it is also vp the hill, against the streame, oftimes with much difficultie; and that it is vp Mount Calvarie, where the sight, and contemplation of a deaths head will avayle thee more, then the sight of all the beauties of the world; and that all must end with death, whatever the world can afford, or doth esteeme. By the contemplation wherof we come to overcome the bitternes of death, and make that svveete and desirefull which othervvise is so abhorred. Repetition of the mysteries of the Passion of our Saviour. V. PART. I. VPon the mount, the Sunne, the Moone, the earth, the rocks, the dead mens graves teach vs what to think and doe: That it is God that doth suffer, his povver not being diminished tovvards the preserving of every thing in its wonted course, but his incomprechensible proceedings astonishing them: They are ready to revenge his iniuries, he is holding his hands fast nayled to the Crosse, and com∣manding them to forbeare: Father forgive them for they know not what they doe. The Cratures, other∣wise
insensible, protest themselves sensible of these in∣dignities, and those who have sense and reason doe not resent them. The sunne in effect sayth, why should I give light, seeing the fountayne of light ecclypsed? And the moone, where should I borrovve it, the sunne of jus∣tice being thus obscured? The earth trombleth at the hid∣jousnes of these offenses, among which myne are not the least, and I doe not tremble with it; Memento mei Domine, othervvise I cannot escape vtter ruine; I acknovvledge that I deserve to be svvallovved vp, and that in it I should be but justly punished, Nam digna factis reciperem. But here thy mercies exceed thy justice Memento mei; but I am not worthy to be thought on:Ps. 131. Memento Domine Da∣vid & omnis mansuetudinis ejus. Looke also vpon thy bles∣sed Mother, to whom in thy beloved disciple thou hast commended me, and doe not forsake me. II. He is in the seate of mercy, and beggeth forgive∣nes for vs, and yet is doing justice vpon them that by thier ovvne concurrence doe not apply the meritts of his bitter Passion t themselves in particular; for of the tvvo malefactours crucified with him, he saveth but one, and him that by confessing of his synnes to this high priest craves pardon, acknovvledgeth his deserts, and beggeth admission into his kingdome, In ipsa patibuli specie, (sayth S. Leo)S. Leo. monstratur, illa qu in judicio omnis homini st facionda discretio; what can we expect at the later day, if in this there be such rigour. III. Pater in manus tuas commendo spiritum meum. I joyne with thy blessed Sonne, and say father; for seeing he hath vouchsafed often to rearme himself my brother, I may with the more confidence call thee Father; and with him, that doth not envy thy mercyes, as the elder brother to the prodigall childe, but even craves them for me, and cra∣ves them with bleeding eyes▪Heb. 5, 7. cum clamore vido & la∣chrimis, with him I commend my soule also into thy mer∣cifull hands, and doe commend it novv with the more humble suyte, because it cannot be but that thou wile grant what ever cometh novv commended by him pro su reverontia, for the respect which thou bearest him, and which he ever, and at this instant did beare tovvards thee, O havenly Fther, looke vpon the bleeding hands
of thy beloved Sonne▪ there thou wilt find me also writ∣ten with letters of love, though farre vndeserving, through these I commed my poore soule vnto thee, for I have not hands of my ovvne that dare appeare before thee, to of∣fer any thing in them. Manus, manus sunt Esau, hands of vndeserving Esau,Gen 7▪ that hath so often sold his birthright for a Messe of portage, but the fragrancie of the merits of this they Sonne, joyned with his Mothers interces∣sion will obtayne an abundant blessing for me. Amen. Of the Solitude of the Blessed Lady. I. THe evening, and the Sabboth coming on, the companie was forced to leave the sepulchre, and retire every one to his home S. Ihon accompa∣nics our blessed Lady, bt still her thoughts were vpon her Sonne, some times looking back tovvards mount Cal∣varie, some times tovvards the garden, and sepulchre not farre of, then saying to herself, and to S. Ihon; here he turned to the daughters of Hierusalem, and wished them not to weepe; here he faynted; lo yonder is the palace of Pilate, where he was whipped, and crovvned with thor∣nes. O cruell people that could misuse him so; what hart can think of it, and not melt into teares? O hovv hath he been cryed vp in these streets, and novv to be this vil∣fied. One that was made of so much goodnes that he was ever obliging people with his admirable worth, and even at last prayed for those that did most cruelly butcher him. Father forgive them, they know not what they doe. O that they had knovvne so much as I, they would never have fallen into such extremities. O my Sonne▪ My Sonne! But why doe I say my Sonne! Sonne of the living God, his naturall, and only, and eternall Sonne! Why wert thou thus forsaken? VVhy didst thou thus abandone thyself? thou hadst povver at will, thou sayedst to Pilate. Tho shouldest not have any power at all against me vnlesse it had been given thee from above. And why given? VVas there no other means but this to save man kind? O Blessed Sonne▪
II. S. Jhon to give her some comfort in this her sad∣nes peradventure sayed, there is nothing indeed more to be admired then that his Father would choose, and he yeald to this means only, he foretold vs of it oftimes and not many dayes past, but we could not believe it, even whē he pointed vs out the Traytour. O wicked Traytour but when I accompaned him into the garden of Gethse∣mani, and savv him fall extraordinarily to his prayers, and call vpon vs to pray, and that he had even svveat blood with anguish, and earnestnes, crying out alovvde that we could heare him at a distance. Father not my will, but thyne be done, not as I will, but as thou, and still repeating it, I began to feare the worst. And it is novv my only comfort to think that it was his, and his Fathers will it should be so; and certaynly it gave him strength▪ and courage to in∣dure what he indured; for even in the garden after his prayer he was another man, then when we went in. Then he was sorrovvfull, as he sayed, vnto death, and it appeared in his very countenance, and cariage; but novv he was couragious, and ready to meete his enimies, and in all the affronts and indignities which were offered him, either at Cayphas, or Herods, or Pilats palace he did not blanche. III. Yet it could not but be very irksome and payn∣full to him; and with whar a Crosse did they load him, when he was scarce able to stand, and hovv cruelly did they rend of his garments from his bleeding shoulders, and streach him, and vnmercifully nayle him? This is the sword of which old Simeon told me so many yeares since; it cannot but pearce my very hart, and soule with griefe: and though he sayed he would rise againe the third day, and I veryly beleeve it will be so; yet what hart can think of these things, and not even burst with sorrovv? It will be night with me till that day comes which he hath pro∣mised. O light of my yes, when shal I see thee? Me thinks I still heare him crying with a lovvde voyce. Fa∣ther into thy hands I commend my spiritt. O Father re∣turne this happy soule so commended; returne it againe with glorie, that we may see his face, as in mount Tha∣bour, which mount Calvarie hath so defaced. I ommend my soule into thy hands. O hands of pitty; Thou hast done
justice enough vpon thy Sonne; restore him, that we may joy togeather; in the meane time I shall expect with sorrovv, yet resigned to thy will as he hath taught me. Not my will hut thyne be done. Amen. Introduction to the Mysteries of the Re∣surrection of our Saviour. I. THe Mysteries of the Resurrection of our Saviour being full of ioyful Communica∣tion with him, who is in himself the foun∣taine of all happines, and to vs hath been, and is the source and conduit of all goodnes, the affec∣tions which are properly to be raysed, and somēed by the consideration of them, be those of love, and ioy, and Congratulation, Admiration also and prayse of his lo∣ving goodnes, desire of his presence in this world, and in the next, horrour of being separated from him, detesta∣tion of the least beginning of a gap or distance be∣tvvixt our soules and him: And in these and in the like our time is more to be bestormed, then in discourse: every action and word indeavouring to fall vpon some such short reflection as may indle in ou hart these fla∣mes of love. II. The chiefe ground wherof the Apostle doth re∣present vnto vs, and placeth in that God who is rich in mercy,Eph. 2. 4. his exceeding Charitie wherwith he loved vs, even when we were dead by synns, quickned vs togeather with Christ, and raysed vs up with him, and made vs sit with him in the Celestiales. Chiefly therfore we are to ponder from what, and to what we are raysed: where we lay, and where we might justly have been layed by our offenses, and where he offers to seate vs, if we concurre with his grace and love: Hovv Rich he hath been tovvards vs; in what infinite proportion his Charitie hath exceeded and doth exceed When we were dead he gave vs life; when we were buryed in synns he raysed vs, and hath made him∣self our Harbinger going before to prepare a place for vs, at the right hand as his father with him. III. O Iesu! is it possible that I should  Compa∣nion
to thee in Glorie, who hast been so farre from con∣sorting with thee in thy will and commandment? O vn∣speakable love! ô vnconceivable Goodnes! I wretched syn∣ner, not worthy, to lift vp my eyes to heaven, with thee in the heavenly places! ô Charitie exceeding all thought! ô Mercy with out bound or measure! What can I say of myself, but that I am worthy of all confusion; and thou preparest Glorie for me? I have nothing to say for my∣self, but that I have synned; Blessed be thy infinite Mer∣cyes towards me, and blessed be thou with the Father & holy Ghost for ever and ever. Amen. Our Saviours going downe to limbus Patrum. I. NO sooner had our Saviour given vp his blessed Ghost,Descendit ad Infe∣ros. but troopes of Angels who wayted a∣gainst that houre, attended him (as after his vic∣torie in the desert) and accōpanied his glorious soule to∣wards limbus Patrū, with songs and hymnes, farre more full of lubilee then that which they sung at his nativitie: The infernall fiends hovvled, and roared at the arrivall of his forerunners, commanding them to avoyde; but much more at his glorious, and triumphant presnce, shining brighter then the sunne at noone day, and more resplen∣dent then all the heavenly hoast togeather: Here they were forced to adore his glorified soule, who had refused due homage at first to thier Creatour, when themsel∣ves might have been in glorie by one act of humble dutie▪ what a corrasive was this to them? VVhat a docu∣ment to vs? VVhat comfort to the iust that had been confined so long to darknes, novv to see so much light approching. II. But he appearing in the midst of them, and salu∣ting them with the like salutation as aftervvards his A∣postles, Pax vobis, what exultation? VVhat Jubilee was there? VVhat wellcomes on all sides? VVhat congratula∣tions tovvards him, in regard of his victorie? Tovvards themselves in regard of thier speedy releasement? And if he appeared vnto them with his glorious body also (as
many affirme) what admiration? VVhat acts of compas∣sion? VVhat wondering that he would retaine the marks of his wounds?Zachari 13. 6. What are these wounds in the midst of thy hands? (sayd Zacharie the Propht) and he ansvvered, these I received in the house of them that loved me. And David remembred,Psal. 21 1. that prophecying he had sayed, they have digged into my hands, and feete and have numbred all my bones. S. Ihon Baptist, most ioyfull of any, repeated his wonted saying.Io. . 29. Behold the lambe of God, behold who ta∣keth away the synne of the world, and hath born the smart of it vpon his ovvne shoulders. And all generally from Adam to the good thiefe extolled his mercies, and novv not only vnderstood of what they had beē a figure, but gave him the ioy of having fullfilled all to his grea∣ter glorie. III. Our Saviour also tooke particular content to see them all at once, who had been subservient to the mysteries which he had accomplished, and congratula∣ted the iust for concurring with his graces tovvards the preserving of thier iustice; and with the penitent for having recourse to his mercyes; with those who had suf∣fered persecution, torments and death for his love and lavv, for thier fidelitie and constancie giving them all novv with more feeling to vnderstand hovv wei besto∣vved was all that which they had done, or suffered in the world, and hovv greate mercy it was that they persevered to the end, among so many millions who fayled, and that they were not overvvhelmed in the deluge of synne but preserved in that of his sacred blood. And in that one late example of the good thiefe, and the bad, see to wha different end cometh the service of God, and the slave∣rie of synne; behold them both, and with humilitie fall dovvne before our Saviour, begging of him to visit, and preserve thee among the just▪ choosing ten thousand ti∣mes to be his captive in all things. IV. Probably he lead all, or many of those ancient Patriarchs to Purgatorie also, giving them who were there detayned a plenarie releasement from thier paynes in that greate day of Jubilee, and ioyning them to those who were at rest before; where at there was greate ioy on all sides, and greate glorie redounded to
the merits and passion of our Saviour, which thou hast reason to magnifie, and begge what graces of him thou findest most need of. The Resurrection of our Saviour, and his appearing to his blessed Mother. I. THe Ievves did not bury thier malice with our Saviours death, but informed Pilare that he had sayed in his life time,Convene∣runt prin∣cipes sa∣cerdorum ad Pila∣tum dicen∣tes; Domi∣ne, recor∣dati su∣mus &c. Math. 27. 62. that the third day he should rise againe, therfore they besought him to appoint a guarde to watch vpon the sepulchre, that his disciples might not come, and take his body, and bruite that he was risen; he appointed a watch and they sealed vp the stone, or se∣pulchre. And this turned to our Saviours greater glorie and more assured proofe of his resurrection; in so much that they were aftervvards forced to bribe the soldiers to make good thier slander; for he with out forcing the stone avvay, or breaking thier seale, came forth by vertue of his glorified body, as aftervvards he came into his disciples the doores of the roome being shut. Extoll the povver of God which is able so to change the natu∣res of his Creatures, and give lumpish earth spirituall qualities; Begge of him that by force of his blessed spirit, thou mayest passe without difficultie through those things which to nature are difficult; Call to mind in particular what doth most weigh the dovvne, or seeme ardest, and present it vnto him to be facilitated by his grace, and the merit of his resurrection. II. The blessed Virgen ever since friday in the eve∣ning was retired, ruminating with griefe what had pas∣sed, and expecting the comfortable houre, when she should heare, or see him risen; when suddenly, the mor∣ning appeares vnto her more bright then ordinarie, and her eyes beginning to dazle with the increase of the glorious light, beheld her Sonne in the roome. Here we must not expect many words; for shee falling on her knees, adored, and kissed his sacred feete, wondering at the wounds there, and in his hands, and side, and percei∣ving instantly the mysterie, burst forth into teares of ioy▪
O my Sonne▪ and no more; the rest must passe in thought, in what comfortable expressions our Saviour delivered himself to her, assuring her more and more, that novv all payne, and troble, and danger was eternally past; that he was for some dayes still to appeare vpon earth, to confirme his resurrection, and instruct his Apostles; that she was to remaine some yeares for the increase of her merits, and comfort of his Church, and all for the glo∣rie of his heavenly Father, for which he was to make that day other visits. III. A happy houre, but short, and if it had been dayes they would have been short, and yet the parting had no dash of griefe, the comfortable and ioyfull coun∣tenance of our Saviour, which he left printed in her thoughts, and eyes, had not only wiped avvay all re∣maynder of sorrovv, but drovvned it in thoughts of con∣tent, and satisfaction that he was eternally happy; and to it conduced the congratulations which she received from the blessed soules that accompanied him, those in particular which bare her in figure,Gen. 3. 20. as Eve, in that she was the Mother of all the living: Iahle, by whom the general of the Enimies armie was struck in the head;Iud. 4 21. Esther,Esther c. 7. by whose intercession the people of God were delivered from a generall massacre. IudithIudich c. 13. by whom Holofernes was slayne, and divers others. All concluding in the sense of the Angell that once sa∣luted her. Blessed art thou among women;Luc. 28. and with S. Elizabeth, who in likelyhood was also present: Blessed is the fruite of thy womb,Luc. 1. 42. Iesus, Amen. Indea∣vour when thou receivest the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar to intertayne our blessed Lord with some such reflections as our blessed Lady had in these circumstan∣ces, and make it a joyfull houre of meeting, as in realitic it ought to be.
The resurrection of our Saviour. II. PART. I VVHen the sabboth was past, Marie Magdalon, and Marie of ames, and Salome, bought spi∣ces,Cum transisset sabba thum. Marci 16. that coming they might annoint Iesus: and very early the first of the sabboth they come to the Mo∣nument▪ the sunne being now risen, and they sayed one to another who shall roll the stone for us from the doore of the Monument? They were not satisfid with the duties done by Joseph, and Nicodemus, and thought no∣thing enough to be bestovved vpon thier beloved ma∣ster; others good deeds must not satisfie vs: Time passeth, we must be diligent in them. VVhat is it to annoint Jesus, but to solace our neighbour in time of spirituall, or cor∣porall distresse! His glorious body needeth not, yet is honoured with our services; his mysticall body hath need of comfort. And very early, the first: after our corporall rest, we must furnish ourselves with good thoughts that in the processe of the day we be not found emptie: The penitent, the supplant, or practiser or mortification, and the peaceable, or contemplative, all ayme at one end, the glorie of God, and of our Saviour: They are all three, Ma∣ries, that is, greatly exalted in the sight of God, and must be so esteemed in the sight of one another. II. And they sayed, who shall roll the stone for vs from the doore of the monument? In the beginning of all our our actions it is necessarie to humble ourselves, acknovv∣ledging our ovvne forces to be too weake to doe any good thing, that we may have the more fervent recourse to God, and be the more confident of his help, and assi∣stance in it. And this will be an effectuall means that we shall not be overvvhelmed with apprehension of difficul∣ties, more then we shal find by Gods grace vpon triall: If they had given way at first to this apprehension, they would not have bought the spices, or set forth, and so should have missed of the happines which befell them in the sight of the Angel, and of our Saviour. III. Though they set early forth, the Sunne was risen before they came to the monument. This might have gi∣ven them an other apprehension, that they came too
late, and in likely hood they blamed themselves, as it is itting whe should doe in the best of our actions; for we are oft defective when we think we are not; and that very thought is a greate defect; for wee cannot but be short of what God deserves of vs: yet they persevered; the only way to supply our defects; and perceiving from a farre of the stone to be removed, we may easily imagin hovv they mended thier pace; and not easy to say whether the penitēt, or the attender to mortification, or the contemplative ranne fastest.1. Cor. 9. 24. In fine every one is to runne so as he may compre∣hend, as the Apostle tells vs; but hovv soone, or in what measure we shall comprehend, that is to be left to our Saviour; and as these holy women, the neerer they came, and the more hope they had by the removing of the stone, the more they were inflamed in thier desire, and indeavour to wayte vpon him, and to serve him, so must we dayly increase, till we come to the perfection which he hath designed. Amen. The Resurrection of our Saviour. III. PART. I. ANd looking, they saw the stone rolled back, and it was a very greate one;Et res∣picientes vitlerunt revolu∣tum lapi∣dem &c. Marci 16. for there had been a greate earthquake, because the Angel of our Lord descended from heaven, and coming rolled back the stone, and sat vpon it. By perseverance we deserve increase of the grace of God, by which, difficulties, othervvise seeming vnsuperable, are not only easily overcome, but turne to our greater comfort, and case, and satisfaction. The earth quake was also greate; yet the holy women did not perceive it, nor were terrified; for it is no wonder to pious soules if sence be troubled at that which reason, and God doth suggest, and they passe on thier way nothvvithstanding: would to God (sayth S. Peter Chrysologus) the Angel of God would even novv descend,Serm. 75. and plough vp the who∣le hardnes of my hart, break open the seales which sense hath put vpon my eyes, and eares, and testifie by it, that Christ hath risen in the midst of vs.
II. His countenance was like lightening,Matth. 28. and hi garment as snowe and for feare of him▪ the watchmen were frighted,S. Eern. and became as dead. He in whom Christ hath risen is in his countenance more cheerfull, in his aspect more gracefull, in his speech and words more innocent in his gate more composed, more prompte and lively in all spi∣rituall duties. Endeavour to be thus qualified by the me∣rits and example of the resurrection, and intercession of thy good Angel; reverence him both glorious in heaven, and carefull in assisting thee; and neglect not his holy admonitions: His presence is dreadfull to our invisible enimies▪ comfortable to vs Bevvare of wayting vpon our Saviours holy body in the blessed Sacrament, or o∣thervvise attending vpon him, for other respects then for his love and service; all such actions are as if they were dead, and may iustly feare the Angel of god, and the sub∣straction of his graces. III. In the generall day of Judgement the like will happen; for by our Saviours glorious presence the just will be exceedingly joyed, and the wicked will be ex∣treamly terrified, and wish they were dead body and soule, and be notvvithstanding a greate testimonie both of his mercyes, and of his Justice; but his very mercyes will then be a terrour, and a corrasive to them, because ne∣glected when time was to make vse of them. Let therfore nothing hire thereto doe evill, no pleasure, no profit, no feare; let thy countenance be free from dissembling (for all will be there discovered) thy actions pure, thy con∣versation as from heaven, so shalt thou enjoy the blessed companie of the Angles, and of thy beloved Redeemer. Amen. The Angel declares to the women that our Saviour is risen. I. THe Angel sayed to the women, feare not you, for I know that you seeke Iesus of Nazareth, crucified; he is not here, for he is risen, as he sayed; come and see the place where our Lord was layed. A comforta∣ble salutation to them that truly-seeke Jesus, and
him crucified: All desire to rejoyce with him, fevv will suffer any thing for him; frame thy affections so that God and his Angels may say, I know that you seeke Iesus. See that thy conscience be not able to contradict thy out∣ward comportment, and tell thee, he is not here;S. Chrsor He is wherever he pleaseth, and wherever thou art that seekest him thou art in him whom thou seekest. II. Come, and see the place where our Lord was Layed. If with this we transferre our eyes to behold the soules which by synfull thought or action have lost the grace which once they had received, what a lamentable specta∣cle is it? If to a soule which hath worthily received our blessed Saviour in the Sacrament, hovv comfortable a sight? Joy in rhis behalfe with the blessed Virgin, and say with holy Church, Beata Viscera Mariae Virginis qu portaverunt aeterni Patris Filium. Reverence the very Se∣pulchre, and the resemblance of it, the holy Altar, and all that belongs to the Altar; See with what reverence the Angel pronounceth, our Lord: esteeme one receiving of him aboue all creatures imaginable: looke often into the place into which he is to be received, that nothing be out of order in it. I am a lover of puritie. &c. III. And going quickly tell the disciples, and Peeter,Thom. 2 Kemp. l. 4: c. 12. that he is risen: and they went forth quickly out of the monu∣ment, with feare and greate joy, running to tell the disciples. Observe with hovv many severall affections they entred and visited the monument. Hovv loth they were to go avvay quickly, and yet hovv fearefull to stay: hovv willing to impart the good nevves to others, hovv vn∣willing to be mistaken: love made them greatly to re∣joyce; feare cooled thier joy; the Angel pressing them to be gone, They runne to tell the disciples, more joyfull that they did not find him, then if they had found, and inbalmed his body only, that would have continued their griefe, this did wipe away all that which was past, leaving only a desire novv to see him glorions, whom they lately savv in torment, and hoping our Saviour might have pre∣vented them, and evved himself to his disciples first; that with them they might be happy in the sight of him, They runne, not to fayle of meeting him, Happy desires which will not fayle to be fullfilled. Amen.
Peter and Ihon runne, to the Se∣pulchre. I. MArie Magdalen ranne,Cucrrit Maria Magdale∣na & venit ad Simo∣nem Io. 2p. and came to Simon Pee∣ter, and to the other disciple, whom Iesus lo∣ved; and sayed to them, they have taken our Loed, out of the monument, and we know not where thy have put him. She ranne before the rest who loved more then the rest, and she came to those, tovvards whom her Lord had ever shevved particular respect: neither did she decline him that had thrice denyed; she knevv he was pe∣nitent, and the Angel had avovved so much: see with hovv greate reason the penitent synner, and the perseve∣ring just man are coupled togeather. But hovv stands so much incredulitie, and so much love togeather? She hath not given credit even to the Angel that he was risen: They have taken away our Lord: who? The Angels? And we know not where they have layed him. Looke into thy hatt; where doth he venture to lay himself? It was the greatnes of her love which made her feare where there was no cause of feare.Serm. 79. But S. Chrysologus tells vs, that we have no cause to , if she or the rest were slow of beliefe, since we find ourselves to this day so slovv, having had farre more testimonies of the truth of these Mysteries: Begge that thou mayest have true feeling of them. II. They two therfore ranne togeather, But Ihon ca∣me first to the Monument, and did not enter; Poeter follow∣ing entred, and saw the linnen cloths lying, and the napkin which had been vpon his head lying a part wrapped vp. Then eired the other disciple also. The Virgin by puritie of bo∣dy and mind is in a higher degree then the penitent, but nby humilitie she must esteeme herself last, othervvise she cannot enter. Not allvvayes those that seeme to runne slovvest arrive latest. It behoveth every body to runne and not to slaken. If evil habits hang vpon vs, and hin∣der our speed, let vs not be discouraged, for the very striving with them is running, and he that fighteth most valiantly shall have the most glorious crovvne. That the linnen did not ly at randsome, but handsomly folded,
was a testimonie that our Saviours body was not stolen; and that the Angels had done that respect to him; which we must imitate in neatenes about things belon∣ging to the Altar, but chiefly in oursoules. These two savv no Angel, having other ufficient testimonie of the truth. III. When they had vievved the monument,Lue. 24. they went homewards, but Peeter went wondering within him∣self, at that which had happened. It seems John ranne as fast back as he came; But Peeter tooke leasure to com∣pare what had happened vpon Mount Calvarie, and in the other passages of his passion, with that which here he savv, and found testified by the women, and had been foretold by his master; and in these thoughts our Saviour appeared to him: For before evening the disciples were found saying our Lord is truly risen,Ibid. 24. and hath appeared to Simon. Hovv comfortable a mee∣ting whas this to Peeter? Hovv humbly did he prostrate himself, and aske pardon, confounded within him∣self considering his ovvne falt, and the goodnes of his master? Here is a large field of affection which thou must imitate. Our Saviour appears to Marie Magdalen. I. PART. I. MAria Magdalen returning to the monument with the tvvo Apostles,Maria au∣tem stabat ad monu∣mentum foris plo∣rans. &c. Io. 20. 11. when they ranne back stood without weeping, ad stooping downe, and loo∣king into the monument, she saw two Angels in white sitting, one at the head, and one at the feete, where the body of Iesus had been layed. This posture of hers was a token of the disposition of her mind: She stood without; she did not beleeve what had been told her; yet because she stood, bevvayling with teares her ovvne miserie, or misfortune in this case, and was inclinable to goodnes, she savv first the Angels; then our Saviour. Hovv deservedly are those to be bevvayled with reares who keepe with our, and doe not stoope to the doctrine of Christ, either in fayth, or practie? The Angels
sitting at the head and feete of our Saviour, doe betoken (as S. GregorieS. Gregor. tells vs) that he is to be attended vpon in prayer, and practise, who is God from all eternitie, and man in time appointed. And moreover hovv carefully, and how reverently, not only the Body of our Saviour, but the place wherever it is layed, or to be layed, is to be attended, coming to receive him with due preparati∣on, and wayting at leasure vpon him after receiving, with angelicall puritie and expressions of joy. II. The Angels say to her, Woman, why weepest thou she sayth to them; because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have put him. This is our mi∣serie in this world, that our Lord is oft taken from vs, and we know not where, or when he may be found a∣gaine. The more falt we have in it, the more cause we have to weepe: yet he is often also neerer vs then we doc ima∣gine. The more wayes we have to leese him, the more reason we have to bevvayle it. One mayne cause why we leese him is, because when we have him, we knovv not, or we doe not take much notice hovv, or where we lay him: we lay the falt of not attending him vpon others, or vpon busines calling vs avvay, when there might be ti∣me for all: Infine we are inconstant, or think that wee∣ping alone will remedie all. III. But the Magdalen turned backe, and saw Iesus standing, and did not know that it was Iesus. We must in this case turne our thoughts back and examnin all our ac∣tion, that we may find what hath beē the cause that Iesus hath been taken from vs, and the wonted peace of our hart; he will not fayle to instruct vs, however for a time he delayes the fulnes of our joy. How often doe we see, or heare Jesus standing, and will not beleeve it is he:Ap. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the doore, and doe Knock. If any will open to me, I will come in vnto him, and sup with him, and he with me.
Our Saviour appeares to Marie Magdalen. II. PART. I. IEsus sayed vnto her; Woman,Dice, di Iesus lier. why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou? She thinking he was the gardiner sayed, syr, if you have carried him hence, tell me where you have layed him, and I will take him away. In∣to what shape and posture doth not our Lord Jesus fa∣shion himself to assiste vs? Yet deservedly requires we should ourselves reflect what it is we complayne of; we shall find the cause of our discomfort to be in ourselves; for that either we doe not sufficiētly beleeve, or confide in him, or are wedded to our ovvne apprehensions, and doe not ourselves know what we would have. It was better he should live, and rise according as he had foretold▪ then that she should find him yet dead, and doe her best respects towards him as such; what therfore doest thou seeke? Wherfore doest thou weepe, for that which is worse then that which God hath provided for thee? Thou are ready to lay the blame on the gatdiner or on the next thou meetest, and it is thyself that are to be bla∣med. II. Thou wilt take him wherever he is layed, and doest not reflect that thou thyself hast bereaved thyself of him, by imagining him another then he is. He is indeed to be taken wherever he layed, in the Cribb, or vpon the Crosse, in the desert, or among the multitude, compas∣sionating and assisting them in thier infirmities, preach∣ing and praying; derided and glorified; beaten and bevvay∣led; carying his Crosse, and the glorious ensignes of his resurrection: See thou make thy word god, and be ready to taken him whersoever. If we suffer with him,Rom. 8. 17 we shall be glorifed with him, if we follow him helping others, and suffering, we shall find his helpe at hand, and com∣forte. III. So did the Magdalen; And Iesus sayed vnto her Marie, she turning, sayth, Master; and as it seemes, fell dovvne at his feete, a place where she was well ac∣quainted,
for Iesus sayed to her doe not touch me, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; not shall so soone departe, but go to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Fa∣ther, and you Father▪ my God and your God. He did not forbid her absolutely to touch him, for it was the best respect she could do to him, but not to intertayne her∣self so long in that comfortable posture, as to be a hind∣rance to the next good action which was to be done; there will be apportunitie at another time I am not yet gone. She went, and told she disciples that she had seen our Lord, and that these things he had spoken to her. We may imagine hovv full her hart was of joy; hovv ready to runne, our Saviour being disappeared; how she was com∣forted in rehearsing what had happened, and that he had styled them his Brethren, and called her by her name, hovv she condemned, or laughed at herself for taking him to be the gardiner, and for not beleeving, or forgetting what he had formerly sayed of his resurrection; hovv she went to her brother Lazarus, and to her syster Martha, and gave them the good nevves as an eye witnes, and what confortable discourses there passed betvvixt them concer∣ning it. Tune thyself to him, fall at his feere, and remayne there till he bid thee rise, and poure forth thy whole hart vnto him, for he is thy Father▪ and thy God, loving, and omnipotent willing and povverfull. Our Saviour appeares to the women. I. MArie Magdalen rann to,Atilla execuntes sugerunt de monu∣ment to Marci 17. 7. and fro; to, and with the disciples, and had the happines to see our Saviour, as S. Mark relateth: The other VVomen going forth, fled from the monument (for feare and trembling had invaded them, and they sayed nothing to any body, for they were afrayed: Perhaps they rann also to the disciples, but sayed nothing by the way to any body els; or, if not at all to any body, we may reflect hovv often we fly, and avoyde those things which we should rather love and imbrace, hovv oft we feare where there is no cause offeare, and doe not feare where there is cause: Hovv silent we are in things of
which we should speake, and ready to speake of things which we should conceale. Fly synne, do not fly the thought or memorie of death: feare to offend, and thou shalt not need to feare the later account.Proverb. 22. 13. The slothfull sayth there is lion abroad, I shall be slayne in the midst of the streetes. II. When they had delivered thier message, and perhaps met with other women of their acquaintance, and told them what had happened, they were returning to the monument, though not so fast as the Magdalen; and behold, Iesus meets them, saying, Hayle; and they came neere, and tooke hold of his feete, and adored him. If he had not spoken first to them he might have passed by vnknovven, but he would revvard the good desires of seeing him, or any thing belonging to him, which him∣self had kindled in them; for no man knovves Iesus, vn∣lesse he be first saluted by Iesus, from whom is all salva∣tion: It is our part to make vse of his favours, and coe neere: Hovv oft doe we rather breake of first, and turne to other thoughts? we touch, but doe not take hold of his feete. Approch to God, and he will approch to you. III. Then Iesus sayed to them:Iacob, 4. . feare not, go tell my brethren, that they go into Galilee; there they shall see me. A happy houre when Iesus shall bid vs not feare: In this life we cannot be absolutely without it. O happy day when it shall be not only alayed with love, but wholy turned into love, and ioy! in the meane time we must exhort ourselves and others, to passe thither in thought, and expectation, and leese the sight of him here as little as we can. Hold thyself by Iesus living and dying. Thom▪ à Kemp. lib. 2. c. 7. . 2. Our Saviour appeares to the two disciples travelling. I. PART. I. TWo of the disciples went the same day towards Emaus, and while they were reasoning of the things which had happened, Iesus approching, wēt with thē, but thier
eyes were helf that they should not know him,Et ecce duo ex il∣lis ibant ipsa die. Luc. 24 and he sayed vnto them, what are these discourses which you hold with one ano∣ther, walking, and are sad? O Jesus! Whether doe I wander insteed of staying for thee? And what are my discour∣ses when! should think of thee? How can I expect that thou shouldst approch to me, I flying from thee; Approch vnto God,, and he will approch to thee, are the words of thy Apostle, but thou seest my weakenes, and I appeale to thy goodnes;Ps. 6. 3. Have mercy on me, because I am weake; heale me o Lord, because my very bones are out of order, and my soule is much trobled, even for this reason that my eyes are withheld from seeing thee; How many things, alas, doe withhold me? How many things doe blind me? I acknovvledge thy just hand vpon me, but be thou mercifull that I stay not from thee. II. One of them sayed vnto him; Art thou the only stranger in Ierusalem, and hast not knowne of the things which have hap∣pened there these dayes? To whom he sayed, what things? And they told him of Iesus of Nazareth, who was a Prophet, powerfull in worke and word, in the sight of God, and of all the people; and how the chiefe Priests and Princes delivered him to be condemned to death, and crucified him. But we hoped it had been he who was to redeeme Israel; and now to day is the third day, since the things were done. And certayne Women of ours made vs afrayd &c. O Iesu! Hovv patiently doest thou give ear to my poore discourse, though full of imperfection, fea∣ring where I should not feare, and doubting where I should not doubt? It is a griefe, and a greate confusion to me, that I am so greate a stranger in those things which have happened to thee for my sake; I heare them, and as it were see them acted before my eyes, but hovv little impression doe they make in me? O my Jesus! po∣werfull in worke and word, worke thy word and will in me, that I may be acceptable in thy sight, and not of∣fensive in the sight of men. Thou after thou hast done, and suffered all, and more then was needfull to be done, or suffered for me, (because the least of thy actionor sufferings had been abundant satisfaction and example) doest aske what things! As reckoning all little for the love thou bearest; and what doe I? III. O foolish and sow of hart to beleeve? Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and so enter into his glorie? This was thy ansvver; and too much true in me: but vpon thee, what was it that could impose this ne∣cessitie, of suffering, but thy sole goodness? t was inded an incomparable act to condescend vnto it for my greate benefit and more pressing example; and many rare con∣gruties may be found in it, but that it ought to be so, ca∣ine from thy voluntarie acceptance and vnconceivable obedience to thy heavenly father. O that I had never offended, rather then such indignities should be offered thee! O give me grace that I may never offend thee! for to offend thee is yet a greater indignitie. Sonnes of men how long,Psalm 4 3. and to what end heavy harted. Wherfore doe yee love vanitie, and seeke after that which will deceive yee? Here is matter of love, worth your longing, and truth worth your seeking; Christ suffering, and so entring into his glorie. Our Saviour appeares to the two disci∣ples travelling. II. PART. I. ANd they drew nigh to the towne whether they went, and he made as though he would have gone further, and they constrayned him, saying, stay with vs, because it is towards evening, and the day is farre spent: And he went in with them. They were courteous, and charitable as to a stranger. He is no stran∣ger to thee, see with what affection thou wilt invite him. Consider thy necessitie, hovv neere the nighr thou travel∣lest, and how neere thy end. He deserves, he expect to be invited, and in a manner forced by our earnestnes, that we may grovv in esteeme of him, and thevv it. O hovv many wayes doe we rather give him occasion not to come in to vs! O slovvnes and dulnes, that cannot compasse so happy companie vnles he stay for vs! Man mobiscum Domine. II. And while he sat at table with them, he tooks bread, and blessed, and brake it, and did reach it to them;
and thier eyes  opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of  sight. See the effect of Christ his staying with vs, and of devoutly communicating with due thanks giving, and blessing of God for his so greate benefit, and consideration of the passion of our Saviour: Be not hasty to depart when thou hast received him; stay and ponder his greatnes, his goodnes, his familiarnes with vs, his wisdome, his povver &c. This is the way to have thy eyes more and more opened, and to increase in his knovvledge, and love. This vayle of mortalitie, and the Sacramentall shapes will not afford thee a cleere sight, but fayth and submission must supply, and love proportio∣nable: It is better to sit in a corner with him then with multitudes of those to whom nature doth more incline vs. III. And they sayed one to the other, was not our hart burning in vs while he spake to vs in the way, and opened to vs the Scriptures? And rising the same howre, they re∣turned to Hierusalem, and told the things that were done in the way and how they knew him in the breaking of bread. The means to become fervant is meditation, and pious discourse; often also to reflect vpon our former courses, hovv we have gone atray, and to be punctuall in obser∣ving our times, and hovvers, of reading, and hearing spi∣rituall things, and of other devout practises, with hovv little fervour, alas! Doe I think or speake of these things, after so much handling of them? Hovv cold is my hart even at the times when it hath cause of most heate? Our repiditie and negligence is much to be lamented and commiserated that we come to our Saviour with no more affection &c. Th. à Kemp. lib. 4. cap. 1. n. 2. Our Saviour appeares to his disciples when they were together. I. VVHen it was Late that day,Cr ser esset die illo &c. Io. 20. and the doores were shut, where the disciples were gathered, together, for feare of the Iewes, Iesus came, and stood in the midst, and sayth to them; Peace be
to you, and shewed: them his hands, and side. The disciples ther∣fore were glad when they saw our lord. It seemes alwayes late when Iesus delayes his coming: Yet we ought not to des∣payre, specially if we forgo not our recollection, and doe intertayne ourselves in holy desires of seeing him. Veni Domine, & noli tardare. Come to forgive, come to comfort; the closest secrets of my hart shall be allvvayes open to thee, and allvvayes ready; no feare shall shut the doorevpō thee; take thy standing in the midst, and full pos∣session of me, for thou bringest peace, and complete ioy: O blessed hands, and side pearced for my sake! what ob∣iect can be compared with this? VVhere can I dvvell with more content? II. He sayed to them againe. Peace be to you, as my Father sent me I also send you; then he breathed vpon them, and sayed,Chryso 8. 8. receive the holy Ghost; whose synns you shall forgive they are forgiven, and whose you shall retayne, they are retayned. VVhat doth this repetition of peace betoken, but that as he had with his presence quieted thier minds, so did he commend quiet; and peace among themselves; to the end that while some did rejoyce that they had beleeved, others lament that they had fayled; one should not im∣moderately extoll himself above the other, or think of himself the beer. Secondly; that the peace which he did give them did not consist in an idle rest, or present quie from troble and payne, but as his Father sent him to suf∣fer, and take paynes, and with the like love to them, as his Father had, notwithstanding his sufferings, to him. Where we must not forget to prepare ourselves with a pure conscience that we may act, and suffer with merit of the revvard promised; and to that end make vse of the po∣wer given to the Apostles, and thier successours, for the remission of our synnes, that they be no hinderance to ourselves, nor to the good intended by our good God. III. They yet not beleeving and marvelling for ioy▪ he sayed have you here any thing to be eaten? and they offerd him a peace of fish broyled, and a hony combe; and when he had eaten before them, taking the remaynder he gave it them. His eating was not for need of it,S. Bede. but by that which he could doe, to confirme his resurrection: besides that the
sh broyled signified our Saviour himself, who ought to be our continuall food: He vouchsafed to hide himself in the sorrovves of mankind and be caught in the net of death, broyled vpon the crosse; but he that was thus broy∣led in his passion, became a hony combe in his resurrec∣tion; and ioyned these tvvo together in his refection, be∣cause he receiveth those into his mysticall body in eter∣nall rest, who suffering here for God, find svveetnes in it, in regard of the love which they beare him. Thou hast this food in the blessed Sacrament; feed on it with svveet∣nes of hart and love,. 16. 20. for it contayneth all sort of delight. He appeareth againe to his disciples Tho∣mas being present. I. THomas,Thomas autem vnus ex duode∣cim non erat cum illis. one of the twelve, wae not with them, when Iesus came; the other disciples sayed to him, we have seen our Lord: But he sayed vnlesse I see in his hands the dint of the nayles, and put my finger into the place of the nayles, and put my hand into his side, I will not beleeve. S. Jhon Chrisostome.S. Iohn Chrysost. As to be easy of beleefe is a signe of weaknes, so to be over curious in searching is dulnes, and stubbornes. Yet God of his goodnes (as S. Gregorie reflecteth) permitted this acci∣dent, S. Greg. that the incredulous disciple while he handleth the wounds in his masters flesh, should cure in our hartes the wound of Infidelitie. Prayse God allmightie his goodnes towards thee, and beware of the falt discovered in the disciple; reflect how vnreasonable it was for one to stand against so many, and the more the longer that humour stuck by him: Specially our Saviour having foretold he should rise againe. Hovv many means doth God vse to prevent, and to salve wounds, and yet we will not be cu∣red? ierem▪ . Behold thy wayes (sayth the Propher) reflect what thou hast done; and thou sayedst, I will not; I have loved stran∣gers, and after them I will walke. Hovv much better is it to keepe good companie and follovv it? II. After eight dayes againe; his disciples were with in, and Thomas as with them: Iesus cometh, the doores being ut and stood in the midst, and sayed. Peace be to you.
Then he sayeth to Thomas, put in thy finger hither, and see my hands, and bring hither thy hand; and put it into my side, and be not incredulous, but faithfull. Slovv∣nes in beleefe deserved slovvnes in the cure: Yet S. Jhon ChrysostomeS. Ihon Chrysost. puts vs in mind of our Sa∣viours mercyes and goodnes who for one soule doth willingly shevv his wounds, and cometh to save one, and doth not expect till he begge it: He reiterates the same signes againe, coming the doores being shut, and suddenly appearing in the midst of them, and his wonted, and knovvne salutation, to styrre vs vp the ea∣syer to beleeve and love him: So he doth dayly in the course of nature, and grace;Iob 38. 2. for who is the father of the rayne, and who hath begotten the drops of dewe? But he, that is continually renevving his works for vs. Here thou mayest touch his omnipotencie, and his goodnes, and thrust thy whole hand into his treasures of mercyes and benefits, and overcome all incredulitie, and hardnes of hart, and vnfaythfull serving of him; and doe not con∣tent thyself with once, or slightly touching vpon him; stretch forth thy thoughts often to reach further and further into him. III. Thomas answered, my Lord and my God; expres∣sing both his acknovvledgement and his love, confoun∣ded for his not beleeving, and at our Saviours mildnes tovvards him; beleeving novv not only that really it was his master, but that he was truly God, and God who to me in particular, to me so vnderserving would vouchsafe to shevv himself so loving. And where shall we improve these affections better then by touching the sacred wounds of our Saviour, and entring by his side into his everloving hart? where we may see, and beleeve; and yet, not being overcurious to see, be partakers of that other blessing contayned in the ansvver of our Saviour, because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast beleeved; bles∣sed are they who have not seen, and have beleeved. For wherfore should any man say; I would I had lived in those times to have seen our Saviour working miracles &c.2. Pet. ▪ 19. we have the word of prophecie more sure, which you doe well ttending vnto as to a light shining in a darke place.
The causes why our Saviour kept the marks of his wounds in his hands, feete, and side. I. HE shewed them his hands, and side, and the disciples were joyed seeing our Lord.Oendit is manus & latus. Io. 20. Not only at his presēce, as thier frend, thier maister, their Redeemer, novv freed from so much affliction in which they had la∣tely seen  but for the glorie also and good which was to come  and to themselves and particularly they wondred to see the markes of his wounds remayne in his side, fecre, and hands, and could not sufficiently admire them diving to the reasons wherfore; some reflect that they were signes of the love which he had borne vs, and manifested in his life and sufferings for vs: for as S. BernardS. Bernard discourseth; the secrets of his hart doe appeare through the overtures in his body, his bovvels of mercy are dis∣covered. II. Others beheld them as inciements to love him the more, and to venture thy more for him; so S. ThomasS. Thom. reasoneth; He shevved his hands to incourage vs to fight for him; his side to inflame vs in his love; his feete to eg∣ge vs on to runne in the path of his commandments, His whole body to move vs to compassion. O fountaine of love! what shall I say of thee, who hast vouchsafed to be so mindfull of me.Th. a Ke. l. 3. . 1. n. 2. III. S. AmbroseS. Ambr. tells vs that they strenghen our fayth and confidence in him; they set an edge vpon our devo∣tion, considering that he would retayne these markes to represent them to his heavenly Father as pledges of our Redemption, and pleaders for vs. Here the sparovv finds a house, and the turtle dove a nest (sayth S. Bernard)S. Bernard In these the dove doth shelrer herself, and without feare be∣holdeth the hauke flying aboute. Say then with S. Augu∣stin:S. Augu. Behold I beseech thee, ô Lord, the wounds in thy hands; for lo in thy hands thou hast writtn me; read thy ovvne hand-vvriting, and save me. IV. They incourage vs to suffer fot him; for he that entreth into his wounds, will not be so sensible of his ovvne.S. Bernard And finally as they are a comfort to the good▪
they will be a corrasive to the wicked, when in the latter day it shall be sayed to them. See the man whom thou hast crucified;S. Augu. see the wounds thou hast made; see the side which thou hast pearced: By thee and for thee it was opened, and yet thou wouldest not enter. O blessed wounds, give me leave that I may with reverence behold yee, lovingly kisse yee, humbly enter, and constantly imbrace yee; that neither life, not death, not any chance whatever may sever me from yee; but that my love stronger then death may be eternally tovvards thee, sweete Jesus, who barest them for me. Our Saviour appeareth to some of his dis∣ciples while they were fishing. I. PART. I. THere were togeather Simon Peeter,Erant si∣mul Si∣mon Pe∣trus & Thomas. Io. 21. and Thomas, and Nathanael, and the Sonnes of Zebedee, and two others. Simon Peeter sayed to them I goe to fish; they sayed we also come with thee; they went into the boate, and that night they tooke nothing. Thomas had learned not to part with good companie, and they joyntly mingled com∣petent worke with thier retirement; and vpon the con∣fidence which our Saviours presence vpon earth had given them, they durst novv go forth of thier houses without eare of the Jewes; but yet they tooke nothing that night, not because it was night, but to shew that all did not lye in thier industrie and labour, besides that the ill successe of thier fishing was to serve to the more cleere manifestati∣on of Christs glorie and resurrection, III. In the morning Iesus stood on the shore, yet they know not that it was Iesus. He sayed to them, Children, ha∣ve you any meate; They answered him, no: He sayed to them cast the net on the right side of the boate, and you shall find: they did so; and now they were not able to draw the net, for the multitude of fishes? It is very profitable (sayth S. Pros∣per)S. Prospr for a man to obey the commandment of God, though he vnderstands not the reason of the cōmand; because God
by commanding makes whatever he commands to be profitable. And we have the more reason to submit with our examining, because we are of ourselves Children, and consequently ignorant, and we are his Children, and if passion doe any thing sway, that makes night, which othervvise would not hinder. VVhen this night is over, and the light of reason hath scope to appeare, then we discover on which side to cast our net, and that before we were wrong; obeying brings abundance both of me∣t and successe. III The dsciple therfore whom Iesus loved, sayed to Peeter, it is our Lord, Simon Peeter hearing that it is our Lord, girded his coate vnto him and cast himself into the sea; but the other disciples came in the boate, drawing the net of fishes. The elder some times may learne by the yonger: The tendernes also of his love might make him rflect the soo∣ner; yet Peetr as more fervent ventured further, and cast himself among the waves; which (as signifying the world) he was to governe; and hevved that novv he nei∣ther feared, nor refused any troble for his Saviour Th others came, dragging their net, to shew (as S. Bernard dis∣courseth) tht even the Elect come not without difficul∣tie out of the depth, to heavnly illustrations. Inlighen me svveete Jesus with the clearnes of internall light, ad drive all darknes from the closet of my hart. Th. a Kemp. l. 3. c. 23. n. 8. Our Saviour appeareth to some of his Dis∣ciples while they were fishing. II. PART. I. VVHen they came on land, they saw colo of fire lying, and fish layed vpon them, and bread. Iefus sayed to them bing of the fishes which you have now caught: Simon Peeter went a board, and drew the net to lnd, full of greate fishes, one hundred fiftie and three; and though they were so many, the net was not broken. God of little things as wil as of greate makes vse, to shevv his povver
and it is hard to say in which he is more to be admired: His bountie and goodnes tovvards vs in them is no lesse; we need the little as much as the greate; and here w may reflect, that in this his happy state he not only kept com∣panie with people of mean condition, as before, but ac∣cōmodated himself to their kind of fare not of necessitie, but for example and incouragement; besides that the My, sterie of Christs passion is againe represented in the fish vpon the coles; though with this difference, that the A∣postles presented him hony with it, and he them with bread; because in this life we must more seeke solide ver∣tue, as our chiefe sustnance, then comfort even in our most spirituall actions. There also the fish was allready broyled, as signifiing his passion that was past; here it is vpon the coles because here we must expect to suf∣fer. II. Therfore also he bids them bring of the fishes which they had then caught, to wit, to be added to the fih all∣ready vpon the coles, to make vp their meale; to signifie that we must not think because our Saviour hath suffered for vs, therfore we need not suffer; but ours must be added to his; ours of themselves are not sufficient, as fish ot dressed is not meate for man, but qualified by the suf∣ferings of our Saviout, and vnited with his, they are a gratefull Sacrifice to him, and to vs very meritorious. Therfore Peeter went joyfully and readyly a board▪ to drav the net, and though it were full loaded, it was not broken: because od adds strength to a willing mind, though weake of itself, and not able of itself to go through. II. Iesus sayed to them; come, dine, and nene of them durst aske him, who art thou? knowing that it was our Lord; and Iesus came and tooke bread, and gave it them, and fih in like manner. Here we may see the vncertainty with which in this life we must be content; to wit to knovv and not to knovv many things which doe very neely concerne our saluation, or our progresse in vertue &c. and satisfie ourselves in some things with beleefe, in others with probabilities, and not be over curious in in∣quiring, but reverence that which we cannot or ought not dive into. This humble dispositiō doth invite our Sa∣viour
to come the more familiarly, and to give vs that which we dare not aske; bread of solide comfort, and strength together with what ever affliction we suffer for him or as for him.S. Greg. S. Gregorie more over doth put vs in mind by occasion of this meale with his seven disciples, that they only are admitted to the eternall refection, who here are replenished with the seven gifts of the holy Ghost Begge them by the intercession of these seven dis∣ciples. My Lord my God I am thy poorest servant, and contemptible worme of the earth, much poorer and more contemptible then I knovv, or dare say. Th Kemp. l. 3. c. 3. n. 6. Our Saviours question to S. Peeter thrice repeated. I. VVHen they had dined,Cum erg praudis∣sent 10. 2 15. Iesus sayed to Simon Peeter, simon lovest thou me, more then these He sayth to him, yea Lord; thou knowest that I love thee; he sayth to him, feed my lambs. He sayth to him againe: Simon lovest thou met He sayth to him yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He sayth to him, feed my lambs. He sayth to him the third time; Simon lovest hou mt eeter was grieved because he sayed to him the third time, lovest thou me? And sayed to him; Lord thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love thee. He sayed to him feed my sheepe. A triple confession is re∣quired for his triple deniall,S. August. that his tongue might not be lesse pliable to love, then it had been to feare, or immi∣nent death have forced from him more expressions then life novv present.S. Ihon Chrysoft. And reflect with S. Ihon Chrysostome that he doth no so much as mention his deniall, or any way touch vpon it, much lesse cast it in his dish, but puts him in mind what is chiefly required of those who pretēd to follow our Saviour neerest, to wit, love of God, and of our neighbour in no ordinarie degree; for hovv can it be ordinarie (specially in those who are to governe) if it must be more then that of the rest of the Apostles, S. Ihon not excepted? That which most of all doth gaine vs the love of God, is the love of our neighbour, and to
lay dovvne our life for one another which we offer some∣times with S. Peeter to lay dovvne for our Saviour. II. Beare no grudge; feed greate and little, that is, be obsequious to them, go to them, and doe not expect that they should come to thee.. 10. 3. 14. He that sayth he is in light, and hateth his brother, is yet in darknes. We know that we are transferred, from death to life, because we love our brethren; he that loveth not, remaynes in death. And the colder our love is, the more signes of death. He layed downe his lif for vs, and we must lay downe our lives for our brethren. He fedd vs with his whole life, by example, by word, by labour, by day, and by night; feede my lambs, with ten∣der love; feede my sheepe, with solid love; feede every one to the proportion of his necessitie, but with no small pro∣portion of love. III. Peeter was grieved because he was asked the third time, but the asking shevves the necessitie of our inqui∣rie, and searching into our breasts, whether there doe not lurke something that doth gaynesay our affirming; and as for the comparative, we must allvvayes avoyde it with S. Peeter here, novv learneder then at the last supper when he sayed.Matt. 2. 33. Though all be scandalized in thee, yet not I. Lord thou knowest all things, the secrets of my hart are secret from myself; hovv oft have I been deceived in myself, and hovv apt to be still deceived? Yet I can∣not but say I doe love thee; and if I doe not, I wil love thee; I desire to love thee more and more. Love all for Iesus; love Iesus for himself: Iesus Christ alone is singularly to be loved. Thomas a Kempis lib. 3. cap. 8. num. 4. Our Saviour foretelleth S. Peeter of his death. I. VErily, Verily, I say to thee,Amen dico tibi¦cum esset iconies. when thou wert yonger, thou didst gird thyself, and walk where thou wouldest; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and lead thee where thou will not. This he sayed, signifying by what death he should glorifie God; and when he had sayed this, he sayed
him, follow me. It is a kind of death also by which God is greately glorified, when for the love and service of our neighbour we let him gird vs, that is, restrayne vs from that to which of ourselves we have a mind, and doe yeald to anothers weakenes in that which is no offense to God, or beare patiently even with offenses. VVe may also learne here, that the elder we grow the more we shall see that it is wisdome to suffer ourselves, to be gui∣ded by others, and not wed ourselves to our ovvne dicta∣mens and desires, specially if we reflect what hath been oftimes the result of follovving ourselves. Confine thy∣self to the Tenets of the Church to the commandments of God, and of his Church, and to the will of thy supe∣riour in that in which thou art subiect. II. He say to Peeter, follow me; perhaps parting from the rest he intended to instruct Peeter more particularly concerning his Church, and the government of it, and de∣sired that the rest should vnderstand it so; but by occasi∣on of it we may reflect hovv greate a dignitie it is to follovv Christ; greater then whatever promotion, and that those who have charge of others, or pretend to the loe of Christ more then others, must follovv closer imi∣tating his vertues, and suffring for him. Peeter turning saw the disciple whom Iesus loved following, and sayed, Lord, and this man what? Not thinking much that he followed also, though not spoken to, but for the love and cour∣esie which was betvvixt them, he was desirous to knovv what was to become of him as well as of him∣self. III. Iesus sayed to him, so I will have him remayne till I come, what is it to thee? As if he should have sayed, attend to thyself, and thy ovvne busines; leave the dispo∣sition of this matter to me; when it shall be time I will manifest my will concerning him. Follow thou me. A do∣cument not to be inquisitive concerning others, and also to beare willingly a reprehension in things which we do or say with good zeale and intention. Begge incessantly and labour to remayne with our Saviour to the end, as the thing which most importeth, vndervaluing whatever els in comparison of this. O that I could remayne with him so, that is, beloved as the disciples, worthy to be ad∣mitted
to leae vpon his breast, so pure, so illuminated, or rather so, that is, with that patience, and love as our Sa∣viour is content to remayne with vs in the blessed Sacra∣ment, and in our neglected, if not synfull soules. Dive not too farre into future things, which are ever vncer∣taine. Harken to our Saviour speaking; sonne suffer me to doe what I will with thee, I knovv what is good for thee. Them. à Kemp. l. 3. c. 17. He appeareth to the Apostles while they were at table. I. LAstly he appeared to the eleven as they sat at table,Novissi∣me autem recum∣bentibus illis. Marci 16 and checked them for thier incredulitie, and hardnes of hart, because they did not beleeve those that had seen him risen againe. Lament thy ovvne slovvnes or slen∣dernes in beleefe, and hardnes of hart, and observe hovv strictly he requires that we beleeve others, and that we be not obstinate, though we ourselves doe not see the grounds, and depth of that which is raught vs Here he condescends to thier weakes, because they were the first that were to teach others, and presented himself to all, because some had doubted; but by this reprehension he gives them to vnderstand that thier doubts were not all∣wayes to de satisfied that way. II. And he sayed vnto them: Going into the whole world, preach the Ghospell to every creature (neither Ievv nor Gen∣til excepted) he that shall beleeve, and be baptized shall be saved, but he that shall not beleeve shall be condemne. Re∣flect that the whole coure and intention of Christs co∣ming into this world, and preaching, and sufferring did not tend to the gaining to himself or vs any worloly pros∣peritie or delight, but that we shoud beleeve, and knovv God to be our chiefe Lord and Master, obey his com∣mands and orders, and so after this life come to be saved, of which the promises to the Ievves of milk and hony were but a figure. Christ reserving to his ovvne coming the increase of light in these supernaturall things, and the extension of his favour to all nations. In this knovvledge and dutie and in no other, we excell all creatures; fayling
of it we become like beasts, and in worse condition; be∣cause subiect to eternall condemnation, for not having lived like men subiect by nature to God, and his lavves. Give God thanks for giving thee this beleefe, and life at this time when with ease thou mayest come vnto it. III. Them that beleeve these signes shall follow, In my name they shall cast out divells, they shall speake with new tongues; they shall take up serpent, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay hands vpon the sick, and they shall be well, these signes when ever it is necessarie doe still follovv, and con∣tinue in the Church of God, as we see by dayly experience,S. Bern. bu mystically (as S. Bernard and others doe discourse) they dayly de happen; for by the abundance of Gods grace, and by true contrition, we cast the divell out of our harts; we speake with nevv tongues, not excu∣sing, but confessing our falts: though we suffer evill sug∣gestions, they doe vs no hurt, because we instantly cast them of,Act. 28. 5 as S. Paul did the viper. This strife, this conten∣tion and solicitude is troblesome, and dāgerous to infirme nature, but by beliefe, and confidence in the goodnes of God we shall find his, and his servants hand vpon vs, to protect vs, and strengthen vs. Temptations are to man oftimes very profitable though troblesome &c. Thomas Kemp. l. 1. c. 13. n. 2. Our Saviour appeares to his disciples in Galilee and els where. I. OVr Saviour in the forty dayes after his resur∣rection which passed before his Ascension ap∣peared severall times to his disciples,raebuit leipsum viuum po Passi∣onem su∣am. Act. 10. confir∣ming by many testimonies that he was truly risen, and teaching them the things belonging to his kingdome, which is the Church militant, and triumphant, and among other things he sayed vnto them. All power is gi∣ven me,Matt, 28.  in heaven, and on arth, and; behold I am with you all dayes, to the end of the world. Adore and sub∣mit to our Saviours povver so vniversall ioying that not
only as God, he is omnipotent, but as man he hath all povver also given him, to iudge, and to revvard, and to assiste, and to mediate. From whence the Apostle doth dravv this argument of confidence who is he that shall condemne? Christ Iesus that died,Rom. . 34. y that is risen, who is on the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for vs. And with all consider how short all hu∣man povver is; never all in one, and that which is, is e∣ver many wayes confined, and vncertaine to continue. His is in heaven and earth, eternall, commanding both, visible and invisible, outward and invvard,Dan. 4. 32. and where he pleaseth nothing can risist: whervpon he once vpon good ground gave vs this item.Luc. 12. 4. Yea, I say vnto you, fear him. II. But here he treates more of mercy; for after he had willed them to preach to all nations, teaching them to observ all his commandments, he promiseth them his conti∣nuall assistance to the end of the world: Behold I am with you, &c. as if he should have sayed, (as S, Prosper) doe not feare therfore by reason of your infirmitie, but confide in my power. which is allvvayes present invisibly, though my person be not visible to you. He is with all to assist them with his grace, though with his Apostles he is more particularly by reason of their charge: All dayes, that is, at all times, both of comfort and affliction, to the end of the world, never weary, never forsaking, and most of all assisting in the end of their lives those who have been faythfull to him,Th. a Ke. 1, 2. c 8, or with penitent hart have recourse to his mercyes. When Iesus is present all is good and no∣thing seemes hard. III. They which were present asked him, Lord, wilt th at this time restore the kingdome of Israel? And he sayed vnto them, it is not for you to know the times and sea∣sons which the father hath put in his owne power: but yee shall receive the vertue of the holy Ghost, and be witnesses to me, to the vtmost of the earth. See here thy ovvne weaknesse, who never so often put in mind of heavenly things, inclinest still to thy wonted conceits, and affections, and imperfecti∣ons, as if nothing had been sayed or done: It is not any temporall kingdome, or commoditie of this world at
which thou must ayme, but the kingdome of the other world: either is it for every body to knovv whether he be worthy of it, no the time and season of parting hence vnto it; but we must attend to our taske, that is, by good life, cording to the prescripts of our Saviour, witnes that we are his disciples, and of his flock, if we beare this marke, we shall be admitted when time is; which God of his goodnes grant. Christ Assenssion. 1. PART. I. OUr Saviour having pitched vpon a day for his Ascension,Vndecim discipuli abierunt in Galilaeā in mon∣tem vb constitue∣rat illis Iesus Matth. 28. 1 Cor 15 6. appointed his Apostles and disci∣ples to meee vpon mount Olive; of which meeting probably the Apostle speakes when he sayth, he vvas seen to above iue handerd brethren togeather; and invisibly had many thousands of Angls wayting on him besides the blessed ompanie of Patriarchs and Prophets, and all the just of the old restament; in which companie he approching, we may easily imagin with what joy and reverence he was received by them, and with what ex∣pectation of what he would doe or say; some admiring his maiesticall presence, others his blessed wounds, others recording what had passed in his passion, and comparing his sayings with the event, and hovv from that Mount he went once trivmphant to Hierusalem,uc19 37. all the people cry∣ing, Osāna, and accompanying him strovving boughs, and thier garments in the way and novv not fearing any nevv mischance, wished and hoped for the like triumph; and that he would declare himself king of Israël. Prayse God, as the Apostles did at that time vvith loude voyce; calling to mind all his wonderous works, and say, Blessed art thou vvho comest king in the name of God: Peace in hea∣ven, and glorie in the highest. II. Our Saviour after he had saluted them, and than∣ked them for thier love, and respect towards him sayed, these are the vvords vvhich I spake to you, 34 44 vvhen I vvas vvith you, that all things must needs be fullfilled,
which are written in the law of Moyses and the Prophets▪ and the Psalmes of me. Then he opened thier vnderstan∣ding, that they might vnderstand the Scriptures; and he sayed to them, that so it is witten, and so it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise agayne from the dead, the third day, and penance to be preached in his name, and remission of synnes, to all nations, beginning from Hierusalem. If in our Saviour all things were necessarily to be fullfilled, hovv can we expect reward vnlesse we fullfill our dutie and his commands? If it behoved him to suffer before he could rise to glorie, let vs not think to escape all suffering, if we pretend to glorie, but apply ourselves to doe penance for our synns, that we may have remission: nothing of this world is gayned with out some hardship; and what is all that is in this world compared to the glorie which we ae promised. The Patriachs and the Prophets, as they were figures, and foretellers of these his sufferings, so did they suffer also themselves. and we must incourage ourselves by the example of those who have gone befo vs. Hc sut verba, these are the words of truth itself, which cannot deceive, nor be deceived. III. And lifting vp his hands, he blessed them, and while he blessed them, he departed from them, and was ca∣yed ito heaven. Begge pate of this blessing, that thou mayst fullfill his sayings, and follow him in time, as now in thought: He was caryed into heaven by his owne power, having no need of assistance of Angel, or Cloude though these did thier dutie attending him: Thou nee∣dest in all things his assistance, and canst not doe any thing but by his power. O lumpish flesh of myne! hovv hard doest thou make it to follovv thy Saviour?Th. Kem,  . 3. c. 54. . . Nature is craftie, and dravveth many, and inangleth and decei∣veth them, and allvvayes hath itself for its end. O poore end.
Christs Ascension. II. PART. I. IN heaven our blessed Saviour was received with hymnes of joy and exultation,Dominur regnavit decorm indutus est. Ps. 92. such as the holy Prophet David foresignified when he sayed; Our Lord hath reigned, and is clothed with beauty; he is clo∣thed with strength, and hath girt himself to accomplish his worke from heaven which he began vpon earth; He hath established a nevv world vpon earth (his church) which shall not be moved, because its buylt vpon a rock, a∣gainst which hell gates shall not prevayle: His seate was prepared from the beginning of the world,Matth. 16. 18 but he, as God, was before, from all Eternitie; wonderfull persecutions will be raysed against him, but he will be more wonder∣full by overcoming them, as it hath been propheyed of him. And againe; who shall ascend vto the hill of our Lord,Ps. 23. 3. who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath in∣nocent hands, and a pure hart, lift up your gates yee Prin∣ces, O yee eternall gates be lifted vp, and the king of glo∣rie will make his entrance. Who is this king of Glorie; our Lord, strong and powerfull; our Lord powerfull in the com∣bat &c. And being seated at the right hand of his Fa∣ther, they all adore him; with whom we must concvrre, and so much the more because for vs was all his combat imployed,10. 14. 2. and he is gone before to prepare us a place, as parting with his disciples he told them. II. But the Apostles stood amazed vpon the hill gazing tovvards heaven,Viri Gali∣laei quid atis. Act. 1. doubtfull perhaps whe∣ther he would appeare againe among them. And as they looked stedfastly towards heaven, behold two men stood by them in white garments, and sayed, yee men of Galilee, why stand you looking into heaven; This Ie∣sus, who is assumpted from you into heaven shall so come as you have seen him going into heaven. He sends these blessed spirits as a restimonie that even from heaven he harh care of them, and is not so de parted as to have layed aside mindfulnes of them in his greatest joy, and prospere; He is to come againe but not now presently
and subiect to the miseries in which you have seen him, but in glorie as when he went novv from you. Why stand you looking only vnto heaven, fall to the performance of that which he hath commended vnto you and comman∣ded, so shall his coming againe in glorie be a comfort to you: In this shevv yourselves Men of courage and reso∣lution overcoming the instabilitie of your nature.Viri Gali∣laei. This is Iesus who is assumpted from you, and as he by fulfilling the commands of his father, and by suffering, went into heaven, so make account you are to doe, to attayne the eternall revvard, which he hath prepared for those who obey him. III. Then they adoring returned to Hierusalem with greate ioy,Et ipsi adorant regressi∣sunt. Luc 24 52. and continued with one accord in prayer. Thus the parting which naturally might have bread griefe turned to greate ioy and comfort; they revereneing our blessed Saviour in their minds no lesse then externally adoring him; and perhaps the print of his sacred feete did even then, or soone after, appeare (as is recorded) which was a continuall refreshing to them. Observe in the meane time tvvo notable effects and signes of Gods spirit to wit, vnion, and love of prayer; for from whence could it othervvise come that they who before were delighted only with thier trade of fishing, and were ready vpon the passion of our Saviour every one to parte vpon his severall occasions, should novv hold so fast together, and love retirement and devotion? loyne thyself to this blessed companie often; behold the ioy in which novv they are, and hovv they arrived to i persever in the vnitie of holy Church; have recourse to the blessed Virgen, and the Apostles, that by thier in∣ercession and imitation thou mayest come to see Iesus in glorie, and adore him with eternall comfort▪ Amen.
Considerations moving to the love of God and of our Neighbour Introduction. I.OVr blessed Saviour vpon his parting with his disciples before his passion, in the long speech which he held at that time, did particularly commend vnto them the love of himself,10. 14 21. and of one another: He that loveth me, shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and manifest myself to him. and v. 23. If any love me he will keepe my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make abode with him. And Chapter 15. As my Father hath loved me, I also have loved you; abide in my love.10. 13. 34. And concerning the love of one another; a new com∣mandment I give you, that you love one another, as I have loved you. In this all men shall know that you are my disci∣ples, if you have love one to another. This interim ther∣fore betvvixt the parting of our Saviour from his disci∣ples in his ascension, and the coming of the holy Ghost, may be not vnfitly imployed in considerations moving vs to the love of our Saviour, and of our neighbour; both to solace ourselves in his absence, and to dispose vs the better to receive the spirit of love: For doubtlesse the more we resemble him who is the eternall love of the Father and of the Sonne the more inclinable he will be to communicate himself in more abundance; and he that sends him, finding the dispositions allready layed, will willingly accept of the dvvelling, and direct him to it. II. S. Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians,Eph. 3. 16. con∣sidering the abundan iches of graces and glorie which are communicaed to vs by the merits of our Saviour Christ, stroken with admiration, breaketh forth into an affectionate prayer, that they, and in thier person, all Christians, strengthened by the holy Ghost inwardly in thier soules, might come to know, and to com∣prehend (so farre as our poore capacitie is able to reach) the breadth, the lenght, the height, and the depth of the exceeding charitia of our Saviour surpassing all . To the end doubtlesse that being filled
with abundance of the same charitie, we might ansvver with some proportion of love tovvards him, kindled by his, and in some sort correspond to the infinite mea∣sure of his charitie tovvards vs, and have latitude in our love tovvards him, and longitude, and depth, and height, as he tovvards vs hath had all these dimensions in a pro∣portion vncomparable. III. To this purpose it will not be amisse to inlarge our thoughts vpon these considerations, as foure excel∣lencies, to which all other properties of his love may be reduced; and by them we may best see what measure of love in all reason God may require of vs, and learne more perfectly by our ovvne experience the lesson which S. Bernard teacheth; that the cause of our love tovvards God must be God himself,S. Bern. the measure of our love, to love him without measure. God of his love inspire our thoughts to conceive worthy things of him, and inflame our harts in the love of them, that hovvever weake our love may be, it may increase to that measure which his immeasurable goodnes hath designed. Amen. An act of humble acknowledgment of our owne weakenes. I. O My God what am I or what is thy love Thy infinite love my God, tovvards man what is it? That I sylly worme of the earth so easily ven∣ture, not only to lift vp my head to behold it, and pon∣der it, and esteeme it (for to this end thou hast shevved it vnto vs that we should behold it and love it) but dare scanne in my thoughts, and vndertake to discypher the greate greatenes of it in these fevv words, the broken of∣alls of my shallovv conceits: Or is thy love peradventure a thing which can be comprehended by man, or declared by the highest Angel, or defined by any but thyself? for thy love is thyself,. 10. 4.  and the greate greatenes of it is the im∣mense Immensitie of thy loving self, by which thou dila∣test thyself tovvards vs, and in vs, thy creatures, and through the infinite length, bleadth, depth, and heigth of thy inflamed charlti comprehendest vs all in the bovvels
of thy love, loving vs before we were, that we might be, and ever loving vs while we are, that we may never leave to be, but ever live in love with thee. II. Who therfore can reach so farre as that infinite length? or who is there that can measure that breadth which is immeasurable? Who can sound the depth, or take the height of thy infinite love, but thy only self, who art sole equall, and sole equally infinite to thyself And yet thou wilt have vs measure it in our thoughts, and sound it in our harts, and stretch ourselves to that length, and dilate ourselves to that beadth, and lift vp ourselves to that heigth, and drovvne ourselves in that depth of thy love; that finding hovv farre we are from the true measure of it we may reach, if not as farre, and as wide, and as high, and as deepe as it deserveth, yet so farre in all these kinds as by thy grace our harts will serve vs, which is acceptable in thy sight, though too small a measure in regard of thy infinite deserts. III. O Imalnes of our measure O greatnes of thy deservings! VVho hast moved heaven and earth for our sakes, and searched all the corners of thy infinite treasure, and poured forth thy riches to the bottome, to help vs, to reclayme vs, to winne vs to thy love! And when thou hadst as it were spent all that thou hadst to gayne our af∣fection (forall that we see, or heare of, or can imagine, are thy love-gifts, as I may tearme them, to dravv vs to thyself) thou sparedst not thy ovvne bovvels, but gavest thyself vnto vs, and in that loving and free manner, that there was not any part of the breath of thy sacred body which thou didst not dedicate to our service, nor one drop of thy pretious blood which thou didst not shed for vs, but for the greater satisfaction of our vnbeleeving minds, and the more effectually to move our stony harts, even after thy death, thou wouldst have thy side opened with that cruel speare, that we might see with our eyes that there was no more blood left, when after the blood spent there issued water.10. 19. 34. IV. O sacred bath, rempered for my soares! soseen the hardnes of my hart, alay the immoderate heate which I find tovvards temporall occasions; moysten the
droughth of my faint desires; cure the blindnes of my eyes, that at least through this gap layed so wide open I may discover some parcell of thy love, and ina∣moured with it, may be dravvne further and further into the depth, that being wholy absorpt in it, I may leese my∣self while I go about to measure, and never find myself againe, but wholy drovvned in thee, who art my God and my only love. Amen. The length of the love of God is the Eter∣nitie of his love. I. THe length of the charitie of allmightie God, is the Eternitie of his love. If we cast our eyes vpon that beginning of his Eternitie which hath no beginning, even then before we were, and when he only was, he loved vs as novv he loveth, and deter∣mined then to give vs all that good which we find he hath since performed, or hath for hereafter layed vp in store for vs; in that Eternitie, before all time, before all thought, and to which no thought of creature can arrive, when he was delighting himself with his only self, and with the infinite riches which he hath with∣in himself, the Father with the Sonne, and the Father and the Sonne with the holy Ghost, then he vouchsafed to think of vs, to love vs, to ordayne all things for vs, and to desire our love: Then when not only he had no need of vs, but when he had no other reason to think of vs but his ovvne sole infinite goodnes,Sap. 8.  He disposed all things sweetly, to the end in time to gayne that which in Eter∣nitie he desired, to wit our love; and beholding vs with in himself, and seeing that we were all good, and all very good because we were all in him, he would,Gen. 1. 3 in time appoin∣ted, that we shoul have part of that good in ourselves by him, which we had from all Eternitie in him. And ther∣fore he made vs out of himself, that acknovvledging from whence we derived all the good we have, we should seeke not only in duty, or gratitude, to returne all to him who best deserved it, but also by nature we should be eve
orne tovvards him, as every thing naturally is ever bent tovvards that from which it hath its beeing. II. If againe we cast our thoughts vpon the end of his loving eternitie, which hath no end, we shall find his love not contayned with in the short limitts of a month, or a yeare, or ten thousand yeares, but that he loveth vs to the end, with out end, and desireth nothing more then that we should live,10. 13. 1. and love him, world with out end. And as in his Eternitie with out beginning he disposed all things sweetely for our good, and saluation, with out any desert of ours, so in this Eternitie with our ending, he reacheth strongly, striving against all our deserts, to bring our love to that perfection that his and ours may have no end. If the least of those iniuries which we offer to God (thou∣sands perhaps in a day) were done by man to another man,Sap.  it were enough insteed of further love to inflame a mortall, and as much as lyeth in him, an Eternall aver∣sion. But that which seemeth impossible to man is possible to God, who with infinite charitie doth dayly, and hoverly, and every moment put vp infite disgracefull actions and remayneth ever strong in love rill our dying day,Luc. 18. 27. when if we depart not in his love, he leaveth not vs, but we die leaving him: Othervvise so long as we live, he inviteth vs, and worketh vs to his love, desiring nothing more then that his love and ours should be Eternall. III. O svveete Eternitie! O strong and never fayling, but ever loving Eternitie! VVhat can a mortall, and ever fading creature doe in requitall of such immortall love? Of mortall to immortall, of temporall to Eternall, of man to God, what comparison is there? Betvvixt such bitternes as we offer him, and such infinite svveetenes of love with which he inviteth, expecteth, and recei∣veth vs, betvvixt such weakenes of affection on our parte, and such infinite strength on his, what equali∣ie may be expected? Ours lyeth dead a long time before it begin, his ever liveth with out beginning; ours when it beginneth to live languisheth yet betvvixt life and death, and staggereth oft whether it shall choose to live by loving him, or die by leaving him, though the diffe∣rence
betvvixt such a loving life, and such a hatefull death be infinite; his lasteth and liveth, never decaying, never wavting, never fayling, but allvvayes follovving, and persuing vs till our dying day, when both life and love, must either live our die Eternally. O love Eternall. The first means to perpetuate our love to God by desires that our love had been eternall. I. IT is not possible that our love should be eternall without beginning, for our life is not with out be∣ginning; as there was a time in which we were not, so there was a time in which we could not love was no time in which God was not; he time, and before all time he loved vs: VVhat shall we doe in recompense of this love? Let vs at least stretch forth the armes of our soule, which are our desires, and fervent∣ly wish our love had been eternall without beginning? shall we wish we were God? For nothing is eternall with out beginning but God: perhaps nothing can be so eter∣nall but God alone: But it is the propertie of love not to consider whether the things be possible which it desireth, or not possible; it is sufficient if affection be satisfyed in doing all that it can doe and in desiring a greate deale more then it shall be ever able to effect: And even these impossible desires, as they are pleasing to men, when ex∣pressed by some outvvard signe, because by them we see the harts of those that doe affect vs, much more are they pleasing to God, to whom all harts are open, and who doth not measure our love so much by the shevv of the worke, as by the poyse of the affection▪ if the worke be not wanting when there is means to performe it: let vs therfore wish that our love had no beginning, but had been eternall as God, not only in himself, but also in his love tovvards vs is eternall. God is more loved then vn∣derstood (sayth Hugo Victorinus) love entreth where knovvledge stands with out. O that I could from all Eter∣nitie have been with God, and loved him Eternally as deserveth▪
II. Let vs wish againe that at least from the first in∣stant of our Conception we had been so happy, as to have no sooner begun to be, then begun to love that infinite goodnes, by whom we had our beginning: For as all gifts, when they deserve least, doe yet deserve we should love the giver, this being of ours, being the beginning of all other gifts, even then deserved our love, and if it had been possible for vs we should have presently turned our harts to God, and as S. Ihon Baptist, not long after his conception in presence of our Lord,Lue. 1. 1. 49 have leaped for ioy, and love, at the voyce of our creatour, commanding vs to bee: For even then, he did greate things vnto vs, and things most worthy of his povverfull hand, when out of his infinite love he made vs capable of loving him. That which was wanting then, let vs supply novv and with in∣flamed affection love him the more fervently, the more time hath been spent before We began to love him. III. O Blessed Virgen, Mother of the eternal lovel thrice happy doe I account thee, though it were but for this alone, that even when thou weret in thy Mothers wombe thou didst more perfectly love the giver of thy life, then did ever pure humane creature love him in most perfect yeares: were it not possible for vs novv to supply this want which we find in ourselves of love to∣vvards thy loving Sonne? VVe may I hope by thy assis∣tance, and by conioyning our love with thyne, not only love him from the beginning of our life, but from the beginning of both thy life, and love, and restore him not only as many yeares as are past of our love but in recom∣pense of former losses give all those yeares which be∣tvvixt this and that time in which thou first didst begin to live, thou didst spend in his love. Therfore humbly trusting in thy favour; but what doe I say? I feate I am too bold, Noe. Thy love doth beare it; his love deserveth it; all love requireth it: I humbly conioyne my love and life with thyne, that this little drop of my love being drovvned in that sea of thyne, and both made but one life and love (as a drop is made one with the liquor into which it is infused) I may love him as he deserveth; no only as soone, but before I began to be. O blessed con∣iunction! Thou didst desire that thy love had been Eter∣nall;
to make it such thou didst ioyne it with the love of thy blessed Sonne, and Eternally with him thou de∣siredst and beganst to love him: My love therfore being novv one with thyne, and thyne one with his, all three make but one eternall love; which triple knot of love, God of his infinite goodnes ever please to continue. Amen. The miserie of most men bewayled and the happines of younger yeares. I. THe happy coniunction which we may make of our love with the love of God, and of our blessed Ladie, may be an exceeding comfort to vs: farre greater comfort would it have been, if besides the condition of being but in time, there had been no further distance. But alas! Hovv often besides have we made a breach of love betvvixt vs and God? we were no sooner Masters of our love,Luc. 15. 13. but we began to wast it lavishly, as the prodigall child did his substance, in a farre country from God, cleaving in affection to the husks of his Creatures, which the swine doe eate, the externall appearance of the things of this world, in which world∣lings doe delight: For they never enter by consideration into the substance of things created, to feed thier soules with the goodnes, and mercy, and wisdome, and povver, and other infinite perfections of God who made them: neither doe they consider to what end they were made, to wit, to incite vs, and help vs the more to his love; but as the psalmist speaketh,Psal. 31. 9. like a horse or a mule who have no understanding, they rest in that to which sense doth lead them, and like svvine feede gree∣dyly vpon the husks, and attend to fill thier bellies, that is, thier inordinate appetite, with things which for the present. and by reason of thier vnbridled hunger and distempered mind, doe seeme to content them, and in the meane time let thier soules pine avvay for want of the food they were created to feed on. II. VVhat a dreadfull distāce is there betvvixt such soules
and God when not thier love (by which alone we cā ap∣proch to him) but thier hated (by which we goe fur∣ther and further from him) begins by little and little to be eternall tovvards him, who deserveth eternall love: for the too much love of Creatures doth insensibly breed dis∣ast of the Creatour: the cleaving to the visible blinds vs owards the invisible; the eye that lookes much vpon earth is loth to looke vpon heaven, as too farre from its purpose: If wishes will supply, with what weeping and lamenting ought we to wish that such a gap had never been made, but that at least we had begun the love, which we ovve eternally to God, so soone as it was in our power o love him, and that when we began first to have the vse of reason, we had reflected how greate rea∣son there was not to desire to live but only for his love. III. Happy are they who have thier yeares before them: for by the benefit of thier age, having not settled hier affections vpon any thing els, they have them still wholy in thier hands, to bestow vpon him who beft de∣serveth our love; for all things beside him are either naught, or nothing in comparison to him. Happy yea∣res which make thier possessours able to say to God, my loving Lord; Thy infinite love hath been towards me ernall without beginning, because the being of thy∣self was the beginning of thy love, both eternall without beginning: This beginning therfore of my life shall also be the beginning of my love tovvards thee, that when by thy grace, and continuall assistance, I shall enter into that other Eternitie which hath no end, my love may be found to have been so long as my life, both equally eternall: for it would be a greate confusion to me, in that doubtfull day of thy judgment, to have it layed to my charge that I had lived longer then I had loved thee, who hast not lived one moment longer then thou hast lo∣ved me. IV. Thrice happy in this kind o blessed Gonzaga; who coulst lovingly glorie that at seaven yeares of age thou didst perfectly turne thyself to God,Lib. 1. vi . and with grea∣te fervour of mind consecrate thyself wholy to him. Thou knewest then how gratefull to God would be
these first fruits of thy love: Begge of him pardon for my neglect, and vnmindfullnes, and promote the desires of those who are yet yong, that they may follow thy steps▪ and place thier love betimes, where, if it be not placed▪ it will finally either be lost, or mispent; lost, if be∣stowed vpon things which doe not deserve our lo∣ve; mispent, if vpon things which rather deserve our hatred. O hatefull expence of love that is so prei∣ous. A second means to perpetuate our love towards God. I. THey who have let sip time so pretious, ust repayre thier losse so well as they can, not with often sighs and sorrowes only, for that which is past, bu with constant purposes for the time to co∣me, and say with the Psalmist, Now I begin, o Lord to love thee: This love by thy grace I will continue for e∣verPs. 76. till it be perfected after this changeable life in thy never changing Eternitie. O that I were able to say with they Apostle, or rather with that confidence, and with that love which he did. Cerius sum, I am certayne tha neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities,Bo. 8. 3, nor Powers, neither things present, nor things to come, neither might, nor heigth, nor depth, nor other creature shall be able to separate me from the charitie, which I owe, which I beare to thee, my God, for thy loving self, and for thy loving Sonne Christ Jesus our Lord. II. But how oft have I sayed thus to God▪ And may not I with reason feare least he slight my words, having experienced that the worke doth so slowely follow▪ Of this I am , that were not his goodnes immeasu∣able, he would long care this have loathed so much in∣stabilitie of hart, and so often change of love: no ma would have abided it: Bu God knoweth himself, and knoweth vs: He knoweth himself to be eternall, ever permanent, ever the same; He knoweth that as we have had a beginning in this life, and shall have an end, so all our life standeth vpon beginnings and en∣dings;
and consequently it is no wonder that we have in vs so many changes: but even this condition of ours must be to vs an incitement every houre in the day and every moment to begin, as if that houre, or that moment were the first, and last of our life: How many have been, to thier ovvne and others thinking, able and strong, and likely to outlive many dayes and yeares, and have been suddenly taken avvay? Let vs therfore make vse of this our nature, and beleeve this truth, that we have not one day, nor one houre certayne of life: why therfore should we neglect this houre, and not imploy it wholy in his love? III. O that our love were tovvards God so fervently earyed as it is some times foolishly bent towards crea∣tures! hovv short would these dayes of our life most iust∣ly seeme to bee? O love! hovv justly may I complayne of thy sottish ignorance, and blind measure? Greate, and long love towards creatures, little, and short towards our Creatour, what a monster is it? Few be the dayes of my life,  my God, the dayes of my life be few, com∣pared with the Eternitie of the love which I ovve thee; they be fevv compared with the love which I wish thee; O that I had a thousand lives to bestovv in they love! from this houe, if I had them, I would bestovv them all in thy love; from this houte, I doe conse∣crate all the houres, and minutes of my life, (hovv long or hovv short soever thou knowest it will be) who∣ly and intirely to thy love. Hovv to wish it, I cannot tell: The longer I live, the oftener I offend against thy love; perhaps, the more I shall doe, or suffer for thy love▪ here thou must be the chooser; grant me only thy grace, that that which is and shall be, may be wholy thyne; Grant that hovv long soever I live, it may seeme little in respect of the greatnes of thy love, which I desire to shew▪ cersaynly it will be little in comparison of that which ou deservst, my God, my love▪ Amen.
Of the desire of being dissol∣ved. I THe greate saincts of God out of the abundance of love which they beare him, doe oftimes de∣sire most earnestly that this thier miserable life were quickly at an end, not because they are weary of troble with themselves or others, but because love is in∣creased, and established by the presence of the parties who doe love, and especially by such an all seeing and all inioying presence, by which we discover infinitely more the infinite perfections of God, with out the least alay of imperfection, infinitely more then we can possibly ar∣rive to vnderstand in this life, by all the naturall and su∣pernaturall knovvledge which we have; and by this bles∣sed presēce we are ourselves perpetually cōfirmed in love, without any danger of fayling in the least duty of cor∣respondence; and finally we are made more capable, and never weary of loving him; because we still discover more and more that he infinitely, and incomprehensibly, deserveth the eternall continuance, and perseverance of our love towards him.Philip  23. Say therfore with the Apostle. I desire to be dissolved, from these mortall bonds, which aggravate and depresse my soule from that perfection of love which a sincere hart desireth, and thou my God de∣servest: I defire to be dissolved, if not out of perfect lo∣ve which excludeth feare,I. 10.  18. yet out of such love as brea∣deth a filiall feare of offending, and lothnes to continue in the least danger of leesing, or lessening thy love. II. O dreadfull danger! a danger worse then death itself! With what exquisite manner of all corporall death would I not willingly redeeme this hazard? What hazard would I not most joyfully runn to purchase an eternitie of never offending my God? O pretious Eternitie! One thing I have asked of my lord God,Ps.  this I will againe, and againe require, that the very houre, and moment that he seeth me inclining to offend, he will rather call me out of this life, then permit me to fayle in his love. Hap∣py man!Ps. 4. 7. If I be thus prevented; who will give me wings as of a dove, and I will fly, from this death of
synne, which doth hang over my head; ô love of my deare God! How long shall I abide this hazard of leesing thee, who art my only true life? III. I doe not envy any thing more in the blessed saints, and Angels of heaven, then that thier love to God is continuall with out intermission, constant without waering, certayne without feare of leesing it, or of relenting, Eternall with out end of loving; nei∣ther can death be truly welcome for any other end, more then that it may be a beginning of this loving Eternitie: O Eternitie of love! what time can be suffici∣t to dwell vpon so loving a consideration! What houre, or minute of my life should passe, in which I should not be found still loving thee my God, and still exercising acts of thy love in ha, and deed? Print this thy love, sweet Jesus, in my hart, by thy bitter Passion, and by hy sacred wounds: what better seale then thy loving self? VVhat stronger wax then thy sacred blood? What highter ire then thy eternall love? O that my soule were he whitest parchment worthy to receive such a noble impression! which being presented, and vnfolded in thy eternall Consistorie, nothing might appeare written in it from the beginning of my life to the end therof, but Jesus, my love, my love sweete Jesus. Amen. How we ought to imitate the Eternitie of the love of God, in the love of our Neighbour. I. THe ternitie of love which we indeavour after our meane kind of measure to expresse in our∣selves towards God, in answer to his eternall love towards vs, the same it is fit we should practise to∣wards others, in imitation of this first excellencie of his infinite love, both to fee ourselves from that inference which S. Jhon makes,. 10. 24. that if any say, I love God, and hath his brother be is a lyer, and from that imperfection to fullll the commandment which we have of it; for so the same beloved disciple assureth vs, This commandm have from d, tha who loveth God, loveth also his
rother,10. 14.  and againe; he that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me. II. VVe must therfore love our neighbour, even be∣fore he loves vs, and when he gives vs no occasion to love him, but rather occasion of hatred, by his hvvart demeanour tovvards vs, or ill cariage tovvards God. Againe, we must never be weary of loving him, or of doing good vnto him, or for him; we must with greate patience, and longanimitie beare his dayly, and continuall imperfections, and offenses; neither wondering, nor im∣patiently grudging at his often falling, or hard measure nor pusillanimously sitting dovvne, thinking hovv to fly, and retire from such companie to others, with whom we imagin we shall have no such troble;2. The 3 4. but imitating the charitie of God, and patience of Christ, and saying with S. Augustine,S. Aug  if the vessels of flesh be narrovv, let the bounds of charitie be enlarged, that is, let men be infirme, and troblesome and synfull, hard to be ruled, harder to accommodate themselves to my disposition, or conceie▪ it is the nature of flesh and blood to be so, my charit shall not be so scant, as not to out-reach all this, and per∣sever to the end in bearing, that so I may fullfill the lavv of Christ, and imitate his love. III. O love of my God more strong then death! for death could never have overtaken my God, vnlesse love had yealded him into his hands: This brought my deere Saviour to the death-bed of the crosse, and did not suffer him to come dovvne from it, for any of the vpbrayding-scoffs with which the Ievves did taunt him, nor for any weaker motive which humane frayletie might have sug∣gested, nor for any fayre seeming reason which worldly wisdome might have invented, but being stretched vpon it to the vtmost, as he had began to love vs from the be∣ginning of his, not only mortall, but immortall life, so h resolved to yeald vp his last breath and blessed Ghost for vs, that this his ying for our sake might be a most evi∣dent testimonie of his never dying love, seeing he choose rather to leave this life, then to forgo our love O that my hart and soule were woly absorpt in this thy eter∣nall love! that I might dye by thy love, who didst die for the love of me, and die rather then relent in the least
point of love tovvards thee, or tovvards my neighbour for thee. Amen. The latitude, or Vniversalitie of the love of God. I. THe latitude of the charitie of God, is the Vniver∣salitie of his love, extending itself to all in gene∣rall, and to every one in particular. He will have all men to be saved (sayth the Apostle) and to come to the know∣ledge of the truth;1. Tim. 2 4 and the beloved disciple, he inlighteneth every man that cometh into this world.Io. 1. 9. Eccl. 15. 15. Therfore when he had created man, he added his commandments, and preceps, that if he would keepe his commandments they should keepe him. Therfore he punisheth synners in this life by peeces,Sap. 12. 2. puting them in mind of that in which they have offended, that leaving thier malice, they may beleeve in thee, ô Lord: Therfore he picked out a choosen people, to shevv his wonderous povvre more signally to all the world by them,Deut. 4. 6. that hearing all his precepts, they should say, behold a wise, and vnderstanding peo∣ple, a greate nation Therfore he came himself, and tooke flesh vpon him, to satisfie for the synnes of everre one of vs, and to give vs example of obedience to the lavv of God, which he came to promulgate; and aftervvards sent his Apostles, and thier successours into the whole world▪ with commandment to preach the Ghospell to every creature, Matth. 28. 20▪ testifying that with the like assistance he will be with us to the end of the world. II. To this vniversalitie belongeth the sweetnes of the lavv of Grace, and the easynes by which we may come to the remission of our synns, and to saluation: for what cere∣monie could be instituted more easy then that of bap∣tisme? VVhat means of remissiō of synns aftervvards com∣mitted, more indulgent then that of private confession For whatever people ill disposed may think of it, if an earthly Prince had appointed such a way of pardon for crimes committed, who would not runn vnto it? And this not once, or tvvice, but ten thousand thousand times to be had; and in fine as oft as we shall have offended, and when ever we will have recourse vnto it, after never so long delayes or relapses. VVhat shall I say of the helps in∣ternall? by remorse, and inspiration, and externall, by ex∣hortation,
and example; of which in the Church of God there is continuall succession and abundance: what of the presence of our blessed Saviour in the Sacrament? conti∣nually as it were wayting vpon vs, and by it inviting vs. and puting vs in mind of our duty tovvards him: That he would be in every Countrey Church attending vs, is no small token of his vniversall love tovvards vs, refusing no body neither rich, nor poore, nor lame, nor blind, nor the most noylomest creature that we can imagin.Matth. . 28 Come to me allyee that labour, and are burdened, and I will refresh yee. III. That he refuseth no synner though never so greate, is particularly to be pondered, as a signe of the vniversalitie of his love; of which, though we see dayly example, the Apostle testifyeth it in himself, extolling this grace, and giving speciall thanks,1. Tim  that though before he was a blasphemer, and a persecutour, and contumelious in his thoughts, and speeches tovvards Christ our Saviour, yet he received mercy. Ponder the hardnes which naturally we find among men to forgive offenses, and compare it with what we experience in God, and be confounded at thy ingratitude; have recourse to his mercyes; inlarge thy hat in hope, and confidēce; and give not way to thoughts of diffidence: for if thy synns be as scarlet,Esay. 1. 18. they shall be whitened as snow, and if they be as red as crimson, they shall be white like wooll. He gave vnto Salomon latitude of hart as the sand which is on the sea shore,3. Reg 29. but what is this compared with the largenes of thy mercyes, my God, ready to forgive more offenses then there be sands on the shore, and to re∣ceive into thy armes more offenders then the whole world is capable of. One drop of thy pretious blood was capable to satisfie for millions of worlds; what a sea▪ then of mercyes hath all humane kind offered vnto it by thee, my God, to plunge, and cleanse itself to the full? O let me not be vngratefull! Amen. The love of God towards vs is vniversal because to every one in particular. I. THis is testifyed vnto vs by the Apostle, when magnifying the grace received by Christ he sayth I live in the fayth of the Sonne of God,Gal. 2, 20 who loved me,
and delivered himself for me. And is seconded by ovr Sa∣viour to S. Gertrude,Blosius in moni. . 1. saying, Behold thou seest how for thy love, I did once hang vpon the Crosse, naked, contemptible, disjoynted in every member, and woun∣ded in every part of my body; and yet to this very day my hat is so sweetely affected towards thee by love, that if it were convenient for thy good, and that thou couldst not othervvise get to heaven, I would for thee alone suffer all that which I suffered then for the whole world, O my God! what am I in particular, that thou shouldest thus lovingly expresse thyself? Or what doth my particular import thee, that thou shouldst be so tender of me? O that I had the loves of all in particular to be∣stovv vpon thee who deservest all! Blessed is he that vn∣derstandeth what it is to love Iesus, &c. II. That which our Saviour sayed to S. Bridget ex∣presseth an other degree of latitude in this love;Th. Ke. 1. 2. c. 7. for thus he is recorded to have spoken My love tovvards man∣kind is novv as greate,Blosius ibidem. and as incomprehensible, as it was at the time of my passion: And if it were convenient that I should die as many deaths as there be damned soule in hell, I would most willingly, and with the grea∣test love that may be, deliver my body to be tormented, and would suffer the same death and passion againe for ech soule in particular which I indured for all, This in∣finite charitie seemeth strange to men, who measure the perfections of God by thier ovvne imperfection: But the heavenly wisedome pronunced rightly of him? Thou lo vest all the things which are,Sap. 10. 25. and hatest nothing of that which thou hast made, neither hast thou ordayned, or made any thing hating it. In so much that the very damned soules are pu∣nished (though excessively) yet beneath the desert of synne▪ and hovvever he be a rigorous judge, yet he desi∣eth that in the later day he might find nothing to be pu∣nished; for which end he gives vs day to repent to the very last; and so many means to blot out synne, and the remaynders of it. III. To this end he reserved the blessed marks of his sacred wounds even in his glorifyed body, that we should nd, as it were, so many gates layed open to his mercyes and that these might be a never dying memoriall of his
pat and future love, both to vs, to excite vs, and to his heavenly Father, with our further words to plead for vs: for though neither he, nor his heavenly father, doe need incitements to love vs; or remembrances, not being subject to forget, or to forgo thier ovvne loving natures, yet out of thier superabundant goodnes they would that these marks should be reserved,Gen. 9. 15 more effica∣tious to assvvage thier anger against synne, then could the rayne bovv be against a second diluge. O Blessed wounds, layed wide open for my sake! it seemes by you that the divine soule of my Saviour had more love for me then the earthen vessell of his body could contayne: O that my soule were capable to receive the remaynder! I did runne in the way of thy commandments when thou didst dilate my hart,Ps. . . 32 sayed they holy Prohet supply it with thy ardent affection; stretch it to all thy commands that as there was nothing which thou refusedst for the love of me, so there may be nothing at which I may shrinke, which ought to be done, suffered for the love of thee. Amen. How we may imitate the vniversalitie of the love of God. I. PART. I. THe vniversalitie of the love of God may be imi∣tated first, by loving and esteeming all that he loveth and esteemeth, and disesteeming and hating all that he disesteemeth and hateth: To which we must indeavour to attayne by continuall mortification▪ and inure ourselves not to affect things which deserve not our affection, that is, all earthly things so farr as they have not connection with his service, vsing them meere∣ly as instruments to doe him service, and othervvise who∣ly neglecting them, and making no account of them, nor giving them any place in our thoughts or affections: which is that to which the Apostle exhorteth vs by his example,2▪ Cor.  10. allwayes bearing about in our body the mortifica∣tion of Iesus, that the life also of Iesus may be manifested in our hodys. Hovv came it that some saynts were so perfect
and so contemplative? because they laboured to mortifie themselves alltogeather from all terene desires.Th. a Ke. I. 1. c. 11. II. How large accordingly this measure of love to∣wards God was in the Apostle himself, and in divers o∣ther Saints. is apparent in thier lives, and writings; and in some of them we find it expressed not with inke, but with the spirit of the living God,2. Cor. 3. not written in tables of stone, but in the tables carnall of thier hart, and body▪ such as may say with the same Apostle,Gal. 6. 17. from hence forth lt no man be troblesome to me, (that is let no man think he shall be able to take Christ from myhatt) for I beare the marks of our Lord Iesus Christ in my body. In which kind S. Francis, founder of the Order of friars minors, might justly glorie in our Lord: for having expressed his love towards God in that strict povertie, and perfect re∣nuntiation of all things, to the end to give himself by prayer, and good works wholy to God; Our Saviour testifyed to the world that he was wholy his, printing the marks of his sacred passion in his hands, feete, and side, and as it were designing in his body that lon∣gitude, and latitude, and height, and deepth of love, which was long before ingraven in his soule ô blessed Sainct. &c. III. Blessed Mother Teresa of Iesus,Rub 1. . c for her excee∣ding love towards him, had a favour not farr inferiour, when the saw, and felt another Seraphim, digging in her hatt with a dat of gold, to make way for the incompre∣hensible greatenes of the love of God towards her, and to inlarge her hatt that it might be more capable of love towards him. And S. Francis Xavier, late Apostle of la∣pan was also often seen and heard, when walking in the garden at home, or on his journies abroad, he inlarged his garments with both his hands, to give scope to the love which burned in his breast; or by ex∣ternall cold to suppress from outvvard shevv the internall fire with which he was excessively inflamed, often repea∣ring those words. It is enough, O Lord, it is enough. IV. These blessed Saincts, and many more, had e∣nough of that of which no body can ever have enovgh; because though in effect they never had so much, but that they desired more, and evē then when they sayed they had
nough, not content with what they had, they enlarged themselves to receive yet more; which is a pregnant signe that indeed they had very much. VVe that feele not these inflamed desires, because we never were throughly posses∣sed by love, and none but such cā ever feele thē not being able to inlarge our harts into such fervent affections, what can we doe lesse, then by attentive ponderation of his love, and thiers, and humble indeavour, try whether by often striking the steele of our consideration vpon our stony harts, we may at last beate-out some one sparke of of true love, which taking in the tinder of our affections, and blowne with the most svveete breath of the heavenly spirit, may increase into a greater, and never quenched fire of love. Amen. How we may imitate the Vniversalitie of the love of God. II. PART. I. AN other means of imitating the Vniversalitie of the love of God is by extēding it to the love of our Neighbour, in that measure as we see God doth to vs, and his Saints have done in imitation of him. God out of his meere goodnes, when we were not, gave vs our being and all the good which we have; and though we deserve it not, continues his goodnes tovvards vs, making his sunn (which he hath at command) rise over good,Matt. 5 45. and evill▪ and rayning over just and injust; which kind of love he requires we should beare towards others; not con∣sidering what they deserve, but what is sitting for vs to doe, to the end to be like God in love tovvards them; and therfore also it is sayed, the second commandmē is like the first,Matt, 2 39. because it mst have the conditios of the first, that is, as we love God with our whole hat, our whole soule, our whole vnderstanding, and our whole strength, so must we imploy all these wholy vpon our Neighbours good; not loving him by halfs, or coldly, and remissely but with much heate of affection, solidly, constantly, couragiously, nobly; not giving way to what ever oppo∣seth it, and imbracing largely whatever may be for his ad∣vāage, ād prosecuting it with our whole strēgth ād forces
II. This vniversitie requireth also that we extend our love o all sorts of people, to the poore as well as to the rich, to the infirme as well as to the strong; and the more infirmities we discover in another, the more should we be inclined to assist him in imitation of our Saviour,Rom. 5. 30. who where iniquities did abound gave superabundance of his grace; and of S. Paul, who out of the largenes of his hart sayed to the Cotinthians (who gave him not the best satisfaction) our mouth is open to you,2. Cor. 6. 11. O Corinthians (for your  instruction) our hart is dilated: you are not streightened in  And againe to the same Corin∣thians;1. Cor. 9. 19. when I was free from all, I made myself a ser∣vant of all, that I might gayne the more: To the weake I became weake, that I might gayne the weake; to all men I became all things, that I might save all. III. In conformitie to this love, our good God hath not only set a part in his Church those of the Clergy▪ to attend to the help of all sorts of people by administra∣tion of the holy Sacraments, and of his divne word, but hath instituted all sorts of religions, both of men, and women, that those might be houses of refuge for all sorts of humours; and that at least by prayer and exam∣ple others might be benefitted by the most retired: the obligation of which vocations is duly to be considered▪ and specially of those who out of an vniversalitie of spirit professe themselves to be ready to assiste all nations, and confine themselves with in no bounds of countreyes, or persons, or pious imployments, by which they may any way advance the salation of thier Neighbours, to the end that having once opened thier mouth,Iud. 11. 36. and hart to God in this vniversalitie, they doe not aftervvards relent, ād our of pusillanimitie, or self love, streighten the boūds which they have once promised should be none at all. IV.2. Cor. 12. 15. O blessed Apostl▪ who couldst say, I most gladly will bestow, and will myself more over be bestowed for your soules though loving more, I am loved lesse. How well didst thou Follow the example given thee by thy Saviour who bestowed vpon vs all that which we have, and him∣self moreover, in o large and loving a manner, as to man is incomprehensible, and is so slenderly rewarded by vs:2. Cor. 11. 27. labour, and miserie, and much watching, hunger, and
, and much fasting, cold, and nakednes, could not streighten thy love, not whatsoever danger of thy life; be a means to inlarge this spirit in the harts of those who have dedicated themselves to the like imployments. The height of the charitie of our Lord. I. THe height of the charitie of God, and of our Saviour is the supetexcellencie of his love: for love being two fold, one by which we love be∣cause we doe or may receive benefit; the other by which we I ove to benefit; it is evident both that this second is the more excellent, and that the love of God ovvards vs could not have the imperfection which the first doth involue. Let vs love God, because God hath first loved vs sayth the beloved disciple;1 Io.  13. which, considering before we were we could not love, is of itself apparent; and considering to what end he loved vs, to wit to com∣municate himself to vs, first by sayth, then by cleere sight, and inioyment of his glorious self, we may take a scantling according to our weake apprehension, or dull affection, of the excellencie of his love tovvards vs; seeing nothing can be more eycellent then to see, and injoy God. All that we see or heare of in the world was created for our benefit, yet all that is nothing compared to one minute of time, what then to an eternitie of in∣joying God? O if thou hadst seen the eternall crownes of saincts, with how much glorie they now exult who were contemptible and not thought worthy to live. &c.Th. 2 Ke. l. 3. c. 47▪ n, 3. II. A second degree of excellencie of the love of God is, that which the Apostle doth reflect on, and with reason doth dilate himself vpon it, to wit, that not only when we were nothing, but when we were synners, when we were enimies, when we were weake,Rom. 5.  and infirme, full of vlcers and sores, he loved vs, and was beneficiall vnto vs; when we deserved his hatred, he did not only not execute it to the full vpon vs) as we miserable creatures are wont to doe vpon one another) but spared vs, had compassion on vs, releeved vs. God commendeth his charitie towards vs, in that when we were yet synners Christ dyed for vs:Ep. 3.  This is charitie which surpasseth all knowledge and all conceite of man; for as the same
Apostle discourseth. A body can scarce be willing to di when of necessitie he must,Rom. 5. 7. or when by justice he is condemned, perhaps for a good cause, or for defence of that which is right a body may dare to die, but for his enimie, for one that taketh away his good name, and as much as is in him, his life, who is there that would thinke of offering himself to die? O my God, in this thou shewest thyself to be God, that is, all goodnes, and all love; give me grace to love thee at least for this thy love, and die, that I may not die by syn. III. Yet a third excellencie is to be reflected on, which the same Apostle suggesteth, to wit, that God did not spare his owne Sonne, but delivered him for vs all.Rom. 8. 24. In the infinite treasure of his divine knowledge and goodnes, there could not but appear divers means to expresse his love, and exercise his mercy towards vs, yet this offering itself as the most convenient in all res∣pects, he did not spare it, though the most pretious jewell of his heavenly Cabinet, the neerest and deerest treasure of his divine breast, but gave it for vs; and who are we? You are bought with a greate price, it is reason we should glorifie,1. Cor. 6. 20. and beare God, not in our minds only, but in our body also, in our harts, in our tendrest af∣fections, and let nothing have place, where nothing can be spared from him, who sparing not his owne Sonne gave vs all things with him, and in him more then all: what can the world give thee with our Iesus? He that fin∣deth Iesus findeth a greate transure. Th. a K. l. 2. c. 8. n. 2. How we are to imitate the superexcellen∣cie of the love of God. I. PART. I. TO love God to benefit him more thē allready injoyeth, is impossible; we may notwithstan∣ding comply with the excellencie of his love, by wishing him all the good which he hath, and being glad that he is as he is; which is the part of a frend to an other frend, that is superiour to him: And we may dilate our thoughts, and affections of this nature congra∣tulating
him his Eternitie, his Immenitie, his Omnipo∣tencie, his Bountie, his perfection in all kinds, and pro∣fessing ourselves to be hartily glad that he is so. This is the expression which the Seraphims doe make who assist before the throne of God,Esaii; 6 2 covering thier feete, as short in conceiving or affecting so greate perfections, but yet stirring vp one another to prayses, such as they are able, repeating, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God of Hosts, full is heaven and earth of thy Majestie. II. To this Kind of love belongs the desire that all the world should know him, and serve him; and the sorrow that he is offended, and that we are so short of vnder∣standing what he is, and of loving him as he deserves: let vs therfore say with the VViseman, Glorifying him so much as you can, be will yet exceed▪ and wonderfull is his magnificence, Blessing him, exalt him so much as you can, for he is greater then all prayse. Exaling him put forth all your strength,Eccl▪ 43 32 be not wearied, for you shall not comprehend him▪ Many things are hidden greater then these for we have seen few of his works. To this also belongs the desire of even being with God in Prayer, and in other services be∣longing to him; not for the benefit which comes to vs by it, though it be greate, but because he deserves to be con∣tinually attended and served; which was the ground vpon which our Saviour retired himself so often to Pray∣er,Luc: 6 12, and spent whole nights in it, and when he was but twelue yeares old,Luc▪ 2 49. answered his Mother; did you not know that I must be about those things which are my Fa∣thers? And it hath been the drift of those saincts who have practised the retayning of the presence of God conti∣nually in thier thoughts; doing whatever they doe as in his sight, with affections to please him in what they can; that is, ever to doe his will in all things; endeavoring to imitate our Saviour in that which he sayed; He that sent me is with me, and hath not left me alone,Io: 8 2 because the things that please him I doe allwayes;Sap: 8 1 say therfore which the wiseman. Entring into my house (that is into the Closet of my hart, and secretest retyrement) I will rest with him, for in the conversation with him there is no bitternes, nor tediousnes in living with him, but joy and gladnes. Say with the Psalmist, one thing (aboue all others) have I askedPs. 264
of our Lord, this will I againe, and againe seeke after▪ that I may dwell in the house of our Lord all the dax of my life,Luc. 10. 40 that I may behold the pleasure, the delight, the sweetnes, the beauty, of my God. Blessed sisters Martha, and Mari, the one diligent in serving our Sa∣viour, the other attentive to heare his words both happy in his loving presence; who can expresse the de∣light, and benefit which you reaped by so desirefull a conversation? for if by conversing with men we come to knovv them, why should we not by conversing with God increase in his knovvledge, and consequently in his love; for in him there is no danger of discovering imper∣fection, as too too often it happeneth in men. How we are to imitate the height of the love of God. II. PART. I. OVr Saviour vpon his parting with his disciples, before his passion gave them command to love one another,Io. 13. 34. and styled it, anew commandment, because thier love was to have the exllencies of his love. I give you a new commandment, that you love one another, as I have loved you: VVe must therfore love our neighbour, before he love vs (as hath been sayed) yea though it were impossible for him to love vs; we must love him though he be vngratefull, vnthankfull, mali∣ious tovvards vs: we must love him though never so poore, and vnable ever to requite our love; and this not in words only, or bare affection, but with reall deeds and services, according to our abilitie, and ready for more then our abilitie seems able to reach vnto▪ and as the Apostle adviseth,Rom. 12: 21 we must not be overcome by any evill urne, but overcome evill with good; heaping coles of cha∣ritie vpon his head, vnquencheable by whatever misdesert. II. If we cast our eyes vpon our Saviour we shall moreover see that he was so farre from sparing himself in any thing for vs, that he debarred his humane nature from that happines which was from the first instant of his conception due vnto it▪ to the end to suffer for our sakes: what is it then for vs to barr ourselves of the con∣tentments
of this world for the service of our neigh∣bour? S. Ignatius Founder of the Societie of Iesus left a president in this nature, above the ordinarie strayne:S.  for discoursing of an offer which might be made of dying presently, and going directly to heaven to inioy God for ever or of staying still in this world to doe him more service in the way in which he was, he sayed, that of the tvvo, he would choose to stay, though vncertain as he was of aluation, if he might be sure to doe God any whit the more service, not doubting but God would have care he should not perih. Here certaynly self love was not called to counsell, nor slothfull pusillanimitie; but perfect love, and a true value of that which God deserveth at our hands, had taken full possession of that vertuous and lo∣ving hat, causing him to prefert the service of God before whatever concerned himself, though never so important. III. The like doth happen in other saints, who are so wholy absorpt in the desire and indeavour of helping thier neighbour for God, that they wholy forget them∣selves, and live and labour as if they had not bodyes as other men, or as if the common infirmities did not worke vpon them; such was S. Francis Xavier who passed nei∣ther for heate, nor cold, nor fayre nor foule weather, nor stormes at sea, nor dangers at land, but all was sweete vnto him, through the vehemency and sweetnes of his love▪ in so much that he rather desired more and more to suffer, that he might be more conformable to his Saviour who had suffered for him. IV. O love which in my Saviour wet more strong then death;Cant.  place thyself as a soale, or marke vpon my hart that beholding thee, I may never forget my dutie to God, and to my neighbour for God: place thyself as a badg vpon my arme, that all my works may carry a resemblanc of his love. O that thou wert in me as strong as death, which overcometh all things, high and lovv, rich and poore, mightie and infirme, beautifull and hard favoured, noble and ignoble! O that thou wert as fast holding as the very gate of Hell, which keepeth its prisoners eternally captive: Happy were this eternall captivitie for me: for though to those who measure all things by sense, and emporall contentment, it would seeme hard indeed to be
so toyled, as the saints of God have been, and a kind of Hell vnto them; for those who knovv what it is to love and serve God, it is a sweete captivitie, and the harder we are held by love, the easyer we shall beare the burdens of this life; for even in this it is most true, that nothing is hard to him that loveth. The depth of the love of God. I. PART. I. THe depth of the love of God. appeareth first in that when he had choosen to save vs by means of his eternall Sonne, being made man for our sake, and the life of that man might have been ordered severall wayes for our benefit, he choose the most abiect way of living, and the most paynefull▪ and ignominious way of dying; to be born of poore parents, in an obscure cottage, persecuted from his cradle, and in the height of his preaching to be circumvented, condemned as blas∣phemer, whipped and scourged as a slave, crovvned in scorne as an vsurper, and crucified betvvixt tvvo theeves as a notorious malefactour. This to the Iewes,1. Cor. 1. 23. who ex∣pected thier messias to be glorious in a worldly way, was a scandall, and by the Gentills, and worldly wise, to this day, is accounted folly. The sensuall man, (sayth the Apostle) perceiveth not the things which are of the spirit of God;1. Cor. 2. . for its foolishnes to him, and be cannot vnder∣stand, because it is spiritually to be examined. II. The depth of his love appeareth secondly, in the vnsearcheablenes of it, in that having vouchsafed to be the scorne of men, and outcast of people for our sakes, and suffered death for vs,. 21. 7. and the death of the crosse, he would notwithstanding that the finall effect and fruite of all his paynes (our eternall saluation) should depend vpon our correspondence with his graces, and conse∣quently that his infinite merit should be, in a manner, in greate part lost, by our vntovvardnes, or at least hazar∣ded; which as on the one side, to those who indeavour to make vse of his love, it is a greate incitement to love
him the more, who for the fruite in a fevv would suffer, and taketh from all men all occasion of despayre; so on the other side, by reason of our weakenes, it doth ne∣cessitate vs not to presume,1. Pet. 1. 19 2 Pet.  but to live in feare for the time of our seiourne, and to labour by good works to make sure our vocation, and Election. VVhich designe of his we must everence, and lovingly submiting to his divine ordination, industriate ourselves to concurr the more diligently with it, and with his love tovvards vs in it. III. The depth of his love appeareth, in the ex∣traordinarie vocations of some, and graces extraordi∣narie bestovved vpon persons oftimes in which we can∣not only not discover any merit, but rather much de∣merit, and desert of the contrarie; of whom that saying of God, and of the Apostle comes to be verifyed, I will have mercy on whom I have mercy,Rom. 9  and I will shew mercy to whom I will shew it. And with good reason; for he is Lord of his gifts, and free to give of them more or lesse to whom, and when he will: So that as we may admire, and must reioyce, and not envy when he doth bestovv them, so we must not grudge when and where he doth not bestow them; but attend that our eye become not naught, because he is good,Matth:  15 as our Saviour himself once answered. IV. O my God! give me grace so to consider this thy love, that I may increase in love tovvards thee; give me grace that by measuring this thy greatenes, I may grovv greater in thy favour, and by reaching to thy height wax higher in thy sight, and by diving into the bottom∣les depth of thy infinite charitie sink deeper into thy love, that being wholy absorpt in it, I may ever find myself wholy drovvned in thee, my God, my love▪ Amen.
The depth of the love of God. II. PART. I. FInally, in this matter of the love of God it will be profitable to reflect with a devout personage of this age. I. First that it was not possible for God to create man after a heigher modell, then according to the image and similitude of God. 2. It was not possible to create him for a heigher end, then the cleere vision, and fruition of God. 3. It was not possible to give him a greater Gift, then God himself, and all creatures. 4. It was not possible to give him a heigher, or more noble imployment then to serve God, and in some sort to serve himself of God, to dee in a manner himself and others. 5. It was not possile to give him a more perfect Guide in his pilgrimage, then our Saviour, and the holy Ghost. 6. It was not possible to feed him with more choyce sustenance, then the body, and blood, and divinitie of our blessed Saviour. 7. It was not possible to expresse a greater esteeme of man then, by shedding his blood for him. 8. It was not possible to give him a greater motive to abhorre synne, then that God dyed to abolish it. 9. It was not possible to give a greater ground never to despayre, then by constituting himself his Advocate. 10. It was not possibble to inable synfull man to corres∣pond to these and other his benefits but by giving him the merits of Christ, dignified infinitely in his divine person, by which we satisfie to the full for our offenses, and gayne a proportion in our good works to the re∣wards promised. II. O infinite goodnes! O immense charitie! O love imcomparable! Where shall I find, either conceptions, or words, or strength to expresse the least part of my greate obligation to thy love? hat hart can love thee enough? tongue prayse thee? VVhat forces serve thee, as
thou deservest? Help me yee blessed Angels, and saints of heaven: Assiste me all yee oreautes of my loving God: O that I had so many tongues to prayse him, so many harts to love him! I knovv not what to say, but with hart confounded, and blushing countenance, to offer my love and service, such as it is, conioyned with his, because he is so pleased, and begge of him that he will please himself with it and with his ovvne merits (for other∣wise whatever I can offer is nothing) and that all crea∣tures in whom he is most pleased, will incessantly prays him, and glorifie him. Amen. The coming of the holy Ghost vpon the Apostles in firie tongues. I. PART. I. OVr Saviour vpon his Ascension had willed the Apostles to remayne in Hierusalem,Cum comple∣rentur dies Pen∣tecostes. Act: 2 till they should be indud with power from above, which they observed carefully, persevering together in prayer, with our blessed Lady and others; when behold the tenth day arely in the morning there was sud∣denly heard a sound from heaven, as of a mightie wind, and it filled the whole house, where they were sitting: and there appeed to them parted tongues, as it were of ire, and it sat vpon every one of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speake with divers tongues, as the holy Ghost gave them to speake. Prayer, and obe∣dience, and agreement together, were dispositions novv▪ as well as afterwards effects of the holy Ghost. He came suddenly vpon them, to teach vs perseverance in our de∣vout imployments; for we know not at what houre our Lord will come;Math: 4 42 in prayer, or reading, or charitable ac∣tion; the wind was a token of dispersing the Cloudes of ignorance, and deceite, to which we are subiect with out the assistance of the holy Ghost▪ and no wonder that is was a strong wind, considering hovv closse the falla∣cis of the world doe stick vnto vs, and hovv they are apt to possesse themselves of every corner of our house.
that is of soule and body. The parted tongues as of fire signified the spirituall flame, and fervour infused into thier harts, and was then to manifest itself by thier ton∣gues, publikly and privately to be imployed in the prayses of our Saviour, and of his law, according as the holy Ghost gave to every one. Begge of him every one of these his gifts and dispose thyself to receive them. II. Consider that though the wind and firy tongues were figures of the inward operation, yet the gift this day communicated was not only the proportionable effects wrought by the holy Ghost but the very person of the holy Ghost communicated vnto them and vs, working these effects. And as in the Incarnation of our Saviour the holy Ghost in person overshaddowed our blessed Lady,Luc. 1. 3. so here he descended vpon the Apostles, and the rest there gathered together, though in such different measure as he thought good to communicate himself: where we have cause to admire and adore the goodnes of God, who would imploy his owne person in our service, however in a different way from that of our Saviour. Veni Sancte Spiritus &c. III. Reflect vpon the particular attributes of the holy Ghost, that he is a comforter, the spirit of truth, the light of our harts,10. 16. 13. spirituall vnction, and doth not speake of himself, but what he hath heard; and enlarge thyself in affections towards him, comformable to his properties, that thou mayest be partaker of his gifts, and honoured with his sacred presence. Vene creator Spiritus &c. The coming of the holy Ghost. II. PART. I.Erant autem in Hierusalem habitantes. ANd there were dwelling in Hierusalem Iewes, devout men, of every nation that is under heaven; and when this voyce was heard a mul∣titude assembled, and was astonished, because every one heard them speake in his owne tongue, And they were all amazed, saying, what meaneth this? Others deriding sayed, these men are full of new wine, The impulsions of the
holy Ghost are severall; some times more gentle, some times more strong: Here it concerned the whole fu∣ture Church of Christ, and the taking away the false aspersion layed vpon him by the Iewes in his death vpon the crosse, and the giving a happy rise to the Ghospell; therfore it imported that a multitude should be assem∣bled to receive the gladsome tidings, and to receive it in this extraordinarie way, with admiration, and astonishment, which should make them attentive, and dispose them to imbrace the truth; and yet we see a means so forcible did not worke in all the like effect: by which we are admonished to have an eye over ourselves both to dispose ourselves towards the receiving of Gods graces, and not to be forward to construe to the worst that which we doe not fully vnderstand, or is not to our humour and to reverence things which are above our capacitie. II. But Peeter standing with the eleven, lifted up his voyce and spake to them; these are not drunk, as you sup∣pose, seeing it is the third houre of the day: But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Ioel:Ioel 2, 2 It shall be in the last dayes, of my spirit I will poure out upon all flesh and every one who calleth vpon the name of our Lord shall be saved. Two prerogatives of the law of grace are sig∣nified vnto vs; first that it is not confined to one nation, as in the law of Moyses were the promises of the Messias, but to all nations of the world the benefit of saluation by Christ is proclaymed, and whoever calleth vpon his name with lively sayth, working by charitie, shall be saved. Se∣condly that the graces of the law of Christ are not scarce, but abundant, and plentifully poured forth vpon all sorts of people, to enable every one to correspond with his calling in whatever state he liveth. Be gratfull to God for these benefits, and apply thyself diligently to make vse of them. III. And hearing these things they were sory at hart, and sayed to Peeter and to the rest of the Apostles, what shall we doe? And Peeter sayed to them, doe penance, and be every one of you baptized in the name of Iesus Christ, for remission of your synns, and yee shall receive the
gift of the holy Ghost; and there were baptized that day about three thousand. We have reason to congratulate the Apostles these first fruits and to be thankfull to our Sa∣viou, and his blessed spiri, that they have been propaga∣ted to our dayes, with so much increase; and to observe the means by which the benefit of Christ his sufferings are to be applyed to vs, to wit by vse of th Sacraments after baptisme, and by dayly examen of what we are further to doe tovvards the fullfilling of his command∣ments, and hovv we comply with them; for so it is further sayed of the nevv converted. They were persevering in the doctrin of the Apostles,Act. 241 and in the communication of breaking of bread, and prayers. Fruits of the holy Ghost in the first Christians. I.Erant perseverantes in doctrina Apostolorum. THey were persevering in the doctrine of the A∣postles: VVhere we may observe the respect which they bare to thier teachers, the sub∣mission of thier vnderstanding to the mysteries of ayth above the reach of humane wit, thier constancy and peace of mind in the directions which they had received, to all which they were incouraged by the miracles dayly wrought by the Apostles;Act: 2 43 and by the same we have reason to this day to be confirmed in that which we beleeve as received from them. II. They continued also in the communication of breaking of bread and in prayer. It is a speciall fruite of the holy Ghost, and a signe of his presence, to have a pious affec∣tion and inclination to prayer, and to the devout vse of the Sacraments, and a due esteeme of them: for if no man can say, Cor: 113 Lord Iesus, but by the grace of the holy Ghost, as the Apostle testifyeth, much lesse can we continue calling devoutly vpon him, but by his speciall assistance, observing constantly our appointed houres, and times for it; and so much the more because it conduceth much to the worthy receiving of our Saviour in the blessed Sacra∣ment, and to the due inter¦aynement of him after we have received: besids the performance of that which our
Saviour taught,Luc: 18  it behoveth allway to pray and not to faynt in it. III. A third fruite was a greate contempt of humane things, and of worldly wealth, together with greate con∣fidence in God tovvards thier reliefe; and resolution to suffer for his sake who had suffered so much for vs; for it is sayed of them that all that beleeved were together, and had all things common, thier possessions and substance they sold, and divided them to all according as every one had need: Not that every one was bound to doe so, for S. Pee∣ter sayed to Ananias (who had made a shevv to quit all, and fraudulently de¦ayned part of his goods) remayning did it not remayne to thee,Act: 5 4 and being sold was it not in thy power? thou hast not lyed to men, but to God. But the perfection of the doctrine of Christ tending to this heigh contempt of all things, the better to serve him, very many did imbrace that course; in so much that it was ap∣parently the fruite of the holy Ghost, and the primitive spirit so to doe. IV. A fourth fruite was nitie, and peace, and agree∣ment among themselves;Act: 2 46 they were dayly continuing with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, they tooke thier meate with ioy, and simplicitie of hart, Praysing God, and having grace with all the people; and our Lord increased them that should be saved dayly to∣gether. So that in thier spirituall, and temporall actions there was no disagreement, but peace, and ioy, with out deceite; and thier conversation was much to the glorie of God, and to thier ovvne benefit, and the benefit also of others, who by the good example which they gave were invited, and incouraged to follovv the like course, and to imbrace the fayth of Christ, wherin otherwise there were points enough, both for beleefe and practise, which might have averted them. Prayse God for all, and have confidence in him. &c.
The Mysterie Of the Mysterie of the most Blessed Trinitie. I. A Principall effect of the coming of our Sa∣viour into this world was the declaration of the Mysterie of the most Blessed Tri∣nitie, hidden even from the Iewes though the chosen people of God, and not men∣tioned but in very darke, and hidden resemblances. But our Saviour did openly proclayme it, specially after his resurrection,Matth. 28 19 commanding his Apostles to baptize all na∣tions, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost, as three persons equall in all things, and one in name, that is, in povver, auctoritie, and es∣sence: wherin we have cause to admire, and adore the force of the light of the holy Ghospell, by which our Sa∣viour intending to abolish the beleefe, and worship of many Gods (brought in by the craft of the divel working vpon mens corrupt affections and desires) established the beleefe of one true God, yet so that they should beleeve in that one essence three persons, equall to one another, though vnder Appellations which, according to our meane expression, might signifie inequalitie; it being im∣possible for vs to conceive the divinitie cleerely as it is. ayth therfore must supply that which reason cannot comprehend, and with reverence submit to what our vn∣derstanding cannot reach. Adoring equally in three and one, the Omnipotencie, Eternitie, infinite knowledge, and goodnes, and all Perfection, the Immensitie, the Im∣mutabilitie, the Beautie, the sanctitie of God, contayning all, and more then we can imagin by the help or compa∣rison of all creatures, and all most perfectly, and with out multiplicitie in one. II. Adore the Father, as the incomprehensible source of the divinitie with out beginning, and of all things created in time, when he thought fit to give them a be∣ginning. Adore the Sonne, who being equall to the Father, vouchsafed for our sakes to take vpon him our humane nature, to instruct vs by word, and example, and by his sacred blood shed vpon the crosse to wash avvay our synns
and open vs avvay to the eternall inioying of God by perseverance in his commandments. Adore the Holy Ghost, as the mutuall, and recipocall love of the Father, and Sonne, the Auctour of our love tovvards God, the cause of our adoption by his grace infused, and by himself, in∣habiting in our soules;10. 16. 13. the spirit of truth, which leadeth vs into all truth, and by his heavenly lights disperseth the clouds of darknes, and facilitates our way to heaven by his heavenly vnction. III. Adore all three in one; one in nature, one by con∣sent, one in operation. Begge of him that we may be one with him, by submission to him, and to his blessed will; one by constant fayth; one by never decaying love; one by operation; esteeming ourselves in all our woks as in∣struments of his divine pwre, and goodnes, and so dispo∣sing ourselves in thought, and action that we may not differ from him in the least, which he of his goodnes grant▪ Amen. The obligation which we haveto love God. I. PART. I. SO soone as Moyses had declared to the people of srael that God was one, he in∣stantly inferres the commandment of lo∣ving him.Deut. 6. 4. Heare Israel our Lord God is one Lord. Thou shalt love thy Lord God wih thy whole hart &c. And our Saviour in his answer to the lawyer tells vs, it is the gretest, and the first commandement▪ and with reason ought we to think so,Matth. 2 38. and accordingly apply ourselves to love him. For as we were worse then beasts, if we did not love those who are beneficiall to vs, much more if welove not God, from whom we have ab∣solutely all that we have. The law therfore of nature doth impose this vpon vs so soone as we come into the world; vpon which account S. Thomas, and other divinc doe hold it a greate offense, if so soone as we come to the vse of reason in our Childhood, we doe not turne ou arts to God, with loving acknowledgment that he is ou
creatour, and Lord. And the holy Text infinuates as much, presently after the commandment saying. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thy hart,Deut: 6 6 and ho shalt  them thy Children, to wit, that they may knovv thier duty in time. II. It is also the first commandment, in dignitie, and excellency; for it hath the highest obiect that can be, to wit, God; and the noblest way of service, to wit, for love, not for feare of punishment, o hope of re∣ward; but riseth vpon consideration of his greate excel∣lencie With in himself, and greate goodnes tovvards vs. And besides, it gives vs the greatest excellency that we can attayne vnto in this world, and prepareth farre greater in the world to come: for as by loving base things, we become base, and contemptible; so by loving God, and other things, as they belong to God, we become onorable in the ight of God and men: and there can be no greater honour, and excellency ima∣gined, then that to which those have risen who have loved God in perfection. II. It was like wise first in the intention of the lavv∣gives▪ all other commands and directions, and indeed all the works and wonders of God, which he hath shevved vs, tending finally and properly to this that in thought word, and deed we should expresse our love to him, for how could any thing subsist,Sap▪ II 26 if it had not been thy will? or been preserved, if not called by thee? Thou sparest all, be∣cause they are thyne, o Lord, who lovest soules. As he therfore did, and doth all things out of love, so is it ex∣pected from vs that all should proceed from love; and further more as in the naturall love of one an other, we must not only not shew aversion from the thing which our srend doth (not synfully) love, but even observe his wayes of proceeding; much more ought we to love that which God loves, and commands, because we love him, and he loves vs; for which reason the Apostle sayth. The fullnes of the law is love,om: 13 10 even of our neighbour, because we love him for God. IV. It is the greatest command, because most necessa∣rie of all other precepts, as with out which no other i thoroughly avaylable, or ly commendable: Fo
the feare of God is but an introduction to love, and some way or other must be perfected into some degree of love, els it will fall of the effect we desire; and how ma∣ny things doth the Apostle reckon which are nothing with our Charitie?1 Cor: 13 If I have the tongues of Angels, if Prophecie, if Fayth if knowledge, if I give my goods to the poore, if my body to the fire, and have not Charitie, it avayleth me nothing. On the other side, it doth set an in∣estimable price vpon the least of our actions, when ever they are done for the love of God: so that with out it, all, with it nothing is lost. V. Finally it is greatest, because it is the most lasting, and worketh greatest,1 Cor:  8 and most lasting effects. Charite ne∣ver fayleth; Faith instructs; hope rayseth our mind to he∣venly things: Charitie vnites vs to God, and makes vs one spirit with him,Cor: 6 17 And as in nature, so in grace, love breakes through all difficulties; and accordingly we may see the efficacy of it in the Apostles, and Apostolicall men, in the Martyrs, and Confessours, Eemites, and Virgins, by things done and suffered beyond all compasse of other consideration then of love. Our Obligation to love God. II. PART. I. VVE may love those things which we have nor seen with our eyes, we cannot love that which doe not some way know: we know God by Fayth, by discourse, or con∣templation, and by fruition, or injoying him. The rea∣dyest and easyest way is by Faith, as we may discover by the difficultie which the greatest wits of the world anci∣ently had with out Fayth to know there was a God, one, eternall, Omnipotent, all seeing, all disposing. Ther∣fore we must both thank God for the light of Faith, and often exercise acts therof submitting all contrarie sugges∣tions vnto it. This kind of knowledge was delivered first from hand to hand by our forefathers to thier Children successively; then renewed in the old law by God appea∣ring
pearing to Moyses, and the children of Israël; lastly by the sonne of God himself our Saviour, coming into this world confirming by signes and miracles both the being of one God, and that himself was sent to establish his law in the harts of men, and to vnfold and perfect all that which formerly was delivered, and practised in figure of what was to come. The record wherof is holy Scripture, and Tradition; both which concurring are a proofe so invincible that vnder heaven there is not any more forcible. II. We may confirme this knowledge by discourse, and contemplation; as for example; finding nothing to be in this world which hath not some cause, or many causes concurring to its being, we begin to think there can be nothing which hath not some cause wherby it begins, and yet in all absolutely it cannot be so, and con∣sequently there must be a first cause, caused by nothing els, and that is God, Then the order, and government of the world, and seasons of the yeare shewes there is some greate thing that governeth it; as order among men cannot be without a directour; and the like. We must not think notwithstanding that we can compre∣hend his Essence, or his attributes, which are in him one single Essence; but by admiring them, and adoring them, and acknowledging our owne weakenes to deci∣pher them, we shall come to vnderstand more of him: for if we know allmost nothing of these inferiour things, but the outward appearance of them, and cannot dive into the substance, and essence of them, though we see them, and touch them, how shall we be able to comprehend the least attribute of God, in whom nothing is not infinie. III. Perfect inioying of God is not the state of this life, neither can any creature even in any life come vnto it, but by the speciall grace of God, vouchsafing to com∣municate himself; yet in some measure, through his grace we may even in this life inioy him, and so increase also in his knowledge, by beleeving him to be, as he is, all∣wayes present with vs, and that there is not a place, or creature, in which he is not, giving it life, and motion and subsistence; and consequently loving him for this
continual, and loving assistance, and ioying in it: for as by continual conversation with men we come to knovv them, so God is also knowne by looking vpon him; and because all that is in him, or proceeds from him, is good, there cannot but be insinite cause of loving him, with out any cause at all of distast; which can hardly ever be among men.Eccl. 43. 1. Blessing him therfore; exalt him so much as you can, for he is greater then all prayse, Exalting him, put forth all your strength, be not wearied, for you shall not comprehend him. Our obligation to love God. III. PART. I. THou shalt love thy lord God. By how many ti∣tles is he Lord? First he is God. 2, Creatour. 3. Conserver, 4. Prince over all the kings of the earth, 5. Redeemer, 6. Sanctifyer, 7. Judge, 8. Re∣warder. And even those qualities which naturally are awe∣full, are not in him without motives of love, for though he be judge, he is also our Advocate, and our Fa∣ther; and though he be so greate a Prince he hah parti∣cular care of vs all,Sap. 12. 13. and doth nothing injustly. III. How many wayes is he thyne? As Creatour, and Conserver, and Prince he gives himself in all crea∣tures which are all for our vse, and in them, and with them he is continually serving vs. As Redeemer, and San∣ctifyer, he gives vs againe himself, and as the Apostle ar∣gues, He that spared not his owne Sonne,Rom. 8. 32▪ but delivered him for vs all, how hath he not also given us all with him? Fi∣nally as Rewarder, he gives himself eternally, and in so compleat a manner, that nothing can be mote desired. III. What is there in the world among the things which either we accout, or desire to be ours, which are more ours, or more to be desired, then God▪ Ho∣nour, Pleasure, Wealth, Quiet, Power, Frends, in the world are all short, superficiall, transitorie; short, because they sa∣tisfie but part of our desire; superficiall, because they are ore outward, then inward  our mind; transitorie,
because soone lost, and oftimes so soone as we think we have them; All things which are desired cannot come in comparison,Prov. 3 15 sayth the VViseman: If all things fall short, certaynly every thing in particular is much shorter; and who in the world hath all but he that loveth God, who is all in all? And againe, if honour be to be desired, the greater honour is more to be desired, and so of wealth, and pleasure; which greatnes nothing vnder God can clayme. IV. As therfore by naturall obligation, be thou also by thy owne choyce wholy his; acknowledging thy sub∣jection to him, and doing him due homage, by obser∣ving all his commands, and follovving his counsels, and flying all things which may breed a distance. Let thy ton∣gue attend vpon his prayses, thy eares harked vnto his in∣spirations; thy eyes behold his wonderous works, thy feete be ready to go vpon his errands, thy hands to la∣bour in his affayres, and thy hart be wholy his. &c. Our Obligation to love God. IV. PART. I. THou shalt love thy Lord, thy God, with thy who∣le hart;S. August: when he sayth with thy whole hart, he leaveth no part of thy life vacant, no place to be given to any other love▪ Secondly love him with thy whole hart, that is, with much heate and affection; not coldly, and remisly. Thirdly with thy whole hart; that is solidly, constantly, vndantedly; not giving way to whatever opposeth, and bearing whatever crosseth, and going through whatever concerneth the divine love. Fourthly, with thy whole hart, that is, with a noble, and large hart, imbracing whatever may be for the advantage or will, and pleasure of God. II. Thou shalt love God with thy whole soul. Desire conjunction with him, as the soule doth with the body, and be as loth to be separated: labour for dispositions fit∣ing this conjunction: Have feeling of no thing, but what is for him, or against him: be ever moving towards him,
both thyself, and others also. VVithout the soule what is the body. VVorse is the soule without God: have a hor∣rour from this separation, both for it self and for the diffi∣cultie of returning: to returne to life is a greate miracle, so is this. III. Love him with thy whole mind, and strength, that is, imploy the whole force of thy mind, and body to love him; let nothing occur to thy mind, out of which thou doest not draw some occasion to love him: Be who∣ly transformed into love, such as our Saviour expressed, when that saying of the Prophet was verified in him, the zeale of thy house hath consumed me; making no rec∣koning of temporalls in comparison of the love of God.l0: 217. Aspirations tending to the increase in the love of God in our soules. The first Paragraphe. O My God, my love; Blessed be thy infinite goodnes and Charitie,Sorrow for for∣mer offen∣ses and omissions▪ by whose only gift it cometh that I may tearme thee my love; O love ternall! O that my love had been towards thee continuall, as I find, and feele thine to have been ever permanent towards me. II. O love, to whom it is never too late to come, though in regard of thy all-deserving love, all delay is long, all coming is late, because coming is a signe that there I was not before, whether I now only come. III. Alas where was I? That now only I may say I come? I know not where I was; it is a shame for me to say, it is a griefe for me to think where I was. This cer∣taynly I know, and must confesse to all, that I was not with thee in that measure of love, which thou ever de∣servedst of me. O measure without measure! why doe I so measure my affections as not to give them to the without any measure? IV. I say I come, and I think it is pleasing vnto thee; ad so it is; for thou art easyly pleased, and pleased with a little; But in reason I should not still say I comes
because so long as I come, there is some distance betwixt thee and me; which distance yet if it were only so, that thy Creature cannot be even with thee. My God, and Crea∣tour in love, as I cannot be even with thee in nature▪ and Essence, I could be wel content; because nothing ought to content me more, then thy infinite perfection in all things to which no Creature can arrive. But as long as I say I come, there is some thing els betwixt thee and me, and not only thy sole infinite goodnes which cau∣seth this distance. V. And this grieveth me againe, and to think that there should be any thing betwixt thee and me, or that there should be any creature so bold, as to take part of my love from thee; or rather; I so foolish as to give it frō thee towards whō it is apparent injustice, not to give full abū∣dāt measure, which cānot be without giving intirely all. VI. Come therfore without measure to me, and sup∣ply, I beseech thee, with thy infinite love the many de∣fects which thou findest in myne. Come, who art never absent, neither from those who absent themselves too too often from thee;Apoc. 3: 20. but standest at the doore, and knoc∣est expecting when we will open againe vnto thee: Behold, deere God, now my hart is wholy thyne; take it, possesse it, vse it, fashion it as thou pleasest that it may still be more capable, still more perfect in thy love. Amen. The second Paragraphe. I. ABove all things give me grace to be ever presēt with thee,The pre∣sence of God. who art never absent from me: Ever in thee, as thou art in me: Present with thee by walking in thy sight, who ever seest all things, and to whom nothing is hiddē, that I cā think, say, or doe, in the very secretest corner of my hart, every twinkling of my eyes thou markest, every glancing of my thoughts thou judgest; Give me grace to marke them, and to judge them myself, that I may allwayes, as I ought, adjuge them to thee, and direct them for thee, to whom only they are wholy due, and to no other but for thee.
II. In the light of the sunne who is nt ashamed to offend: if men looke, much : what if a Master, a judge, a king, from whome reward, or punishment is certaynly to be expected? What if my love? Shall I before his face reprochfully turne myself from him, and imbrace in his sight whome he doth disdayne? O eyes of pitty, pardon that which is past! forgiveme, my love, my ma∣ny offenses committed in thy sight: and let this thought of thy Allseeing eye ever fixed vpon me, be a stay to my thoughts, a temper to my actions. that nothing may passe vnbeseeming thy presence. III. Behold, o my soule, that God doth behold thee. O dreadfull! ô loving sight! ô that I had allwayes loving∣ly feared thee, and respectfully loved thee, my God, that thy eyes might have beheld with content thy worke vnde filed; but now give me grace at least to bathe myself with teares, and bitterly to bewayle my many losses, that so I may appeare before thee with lesse shame, and remayne more constant in thy service, through the memorie of my finnes, which in all reason I ought to endeauour to coun∣terpoise with ten thousand times more love, and more attendance vpon thee. The third Paragraphe. I. GRaunt me that I be ever in thee, with a right intention,Right intentio. and with pure Affection, doing all things for thee, and loving nothing in all that is, but thee alone, who art the life, the love, the All of all things. II. I know there is no Creature that can in reason aske any thing of me but for thee, but it will happen some times (as there are many of them many times vnrea∣sonable) they will demand vnreasonably▪ I myself too too often shall be inclined vnreasonably: Graunt me that I gi∣ve them but that which is reason: And what can be rea∣son which is not for thee? Nothing. Graunt me that I give them nothing but for thee; no thought, no word, no worke, no Affection, but distast of all things where I find not thee.
III. The whole world is a booke, the fayrest, the learnedost, the greatest that ever was made, verie creature is a letter, Everie Accident a line, E∣verie motion a sentence, Everie disposition a lesson, the whole a most eloqvent Oration, a most ample Treatise, full of all Rhetoricall persuasions; preg∣nant in teaching, forcible in moving, pleasant in delighting, sounding out thy divine prayses, speaking thy wonders, inviting to thy service, withdrawing from thy offence, inflaming in thy love. O that my vnderstan∣ding were so instructed, my will so inclined, as to apply themselves with profit to read of these lines, to learne by these lessons. There is nothing but may be vsed; nothing but is ordayned for my benefit. IV. VVo to me, my God, that have so long played the Trewant, going dayly to thy Schoole with this thy booke about me, and have not yet learned to reade scarce one little letter of it. O my deerest God, my loving Master, teach me to begin now at least this new Christ-Crosserew, this Alphabet of perfection. Grant me grace to profit by the occasions which thou shewest me. Amen. The fourth Paragraphe. I. IT is a deceite too too frequent inveigling such as have wavering minds,We may benefit ourselves by all oc∣currances: not settled in thee, no re∣signed to thy will, never content with the state they are in, still lamenting the miserable case, in which they find themselves, thier occasions of troble, thier inward griefs, or outward aggreevances, thier many distractions, and hinderances of thy service; but seldome they think of thy All disposing providence which ordayned even those trobles for the increase of thier merit. II. O deere God, hovv often vnder colour of thy better service, of more quiet and more continuall atten∣dance to thy will, have I sought my owne will, and fled the occasions of patience and mortification, lost diver actes of Heroicall Humilitie, and more perfect charitie? I thought I had been hindred by this or that, and even those hinderances thon didst ordayne, that wrastling with them, I might have the more glorious victorie▪
and the more tesplendent crovvne. It was myself alone that hindred myself of making vse of that which thou lo∣vingly; and graciously didst present vnto me▪ by my repi∣ning thoughts, and easefull desires, the sole causes of my dayly losses. III. Away slouthfull excuses, and deceitfull delayes: Not when this troble is past, or that other commodities presenteth itself, then I will attend to vertue, and wholy give myself to the service of my God▪ but now, even now▪ in this troble, and distraction whatsoever it be, in this griefe and sorrow, in this companie and concurrence of persons, and actions, will I make my best profit, and find out means to serve thee with perfection my God; for to this end thou hast ordayned them: Give me therfor grace, ô Lord, to be ever entirely resigned to thy will, receiving all things from thy blessed hand, and beholding in all things, not so much the things themselves, as thy All-disposing Providence, which in them doth present me such occasions of vertue as are best for me, though often times they be not best pleasing vnto me: In vertue, as well as in other things, I may seeke myself, and foolishly please myself in my owne inventions▪ but the way which thou layest before me must ever be my best rule, and surest di∣rection. Graunt that I may direct myself by it, and ever practise such vertues as are proper to the occasions which dayly happen. The fifth Paragraphe. I.A mor∣ning o∣blation▪ Psal, 6 O God, my God, (let me say so with thy Prophet) o thee I watch from the morning light, my soule hath thirsted to thee, my flesh to thee very many wayes. Thou beholdest dayly my poore estate, my mind weake in thy service, my body yet more feeble; yet both desirous of thee, both dedicated to thy pleasure. To thee I make offer of them both, beseeching thee to inrich them with thy graces, to innoble them with thy favours, to aist them with thy forces; establishing my memorie i good thoughts, replenishing my vnderstanding with holy discourses▪ inflaming my will with divine affections, se∣ling my imagination vpon good objects; my eyes, my eares, and other senses, disposing them to profitable im∣pressions,
and making my whole cariage such as thy fol goodnes may be infinitely glorified. Amen. II. O that all the enimies snares, and gilded ookes might be vnto me as so many baites, to draw me to thee! It is possible; because nothing is impossible to thee, in whom I conside that nothing will be impossible to me, not even that whatsoever it be in which thou seest me most infirme, for thou art my light, and my saluation, whom shall I feare? Thou the Protecour of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? while the harmefull approch upon me, to eate my flesh (to devoure my soule) my enimies that troble me them∣selves are weakened, and are fallen.  (of temptations) stand together against me, my hart  not feare; if battel (of affliction) rise upon me, in thee I will hope: for one thing I have asked of our Lord, this I will seeke for, that I may dwell in the house of our Lord all the dayes of my life, that I may see the pleasantnes of my Lord, and visit his temple. The rest I esteeme not, but I hope to see the good things, the greate wonders, and favours of thee, my God, evcin this land of the dead, because thou art my helper. The sixt Paragraphe. I.Prayer and medi∣tation. Sap. 8 THy conversation hath no bitternes. thy companie hath no tediousnes but all ioy and gladnes. VVho would not desire to be with thee, all the dayes of his life? all the houres of the day? But who is there that is so happy? or rather who is there that can find this hap∣pines as it is? for certaynly thou art ever with vs all the dayes, all the houres, all the minutes of our life. But who is there so happy as to find himself well with thee one houre in the day? O that one houre at least were duely and wholy spent in speaking with thee! O happie houre! II. One houre with a worldly Prince, dayly in his chamber of presence, to negotiate our busines, to propose our necessitie, to begge his protection, to present our pe∣titions, to receive his graunts, what a benefit would it worthyly be esteemed? One houre at table for our cor∣porall sustenance is not willingly omitted, for what∣oever busines; it helpeth rather then hindreth dispatch.
And who would be either so discourteous towards thee, or so cruell towards himselfe, as to neglect such a favour, of sitting one houre at thy blessed table, to take such hea∣venly repast as thou afordest to thy servants, in prayer and contemplation? VVho that is wise will overslip the commoditie of having so ample, and so favourable au∣dience, of so noble and so liberall a king? III. True it is, that in all places, and at all times, thy eyes are vpon me, thy eares are open vnto me; if I cry vnto thee, thou wilt willingly heare me, who standest thyself, and cryest allwayes alowde to my soule; and ther∣fore no houre in the day ought to passe, in which I must not turne my hart to thee, to give, and to receive (though allwayes in giving I doe receive, because my very giving is abundantly to receive from thee; yet foolish, and vngra∣tefull were , if because of this lesser means of benefiting myself, I should forgo thy greater favour, and such a fa∣vour with out which this other is commonly either cold▪ or not frequent. Flames and sparks doe not rise bu from a greater fire, or if they chaunce with out such fire to rise, thier continuance is but short, and they are but of little force. IV. O my God, my love; when I think of the multi∣tde of waters and forcible streames of severall distrac∣tions, which are wont to be heaped all the day vpon this little burning flash, the little fire of ervour▪ which I may rayse, what can I doe, but turne myself to thee, and with what courage and strength I can, not of myne owne, but of thyne, offer myself vnto thee, and cast myself into thy armes and say: Here, take me, I am thyne, vse me as thou wilt, I will not from thee: put me to what thou wilt, so thou allwayes keepe me thyne; for thyne I will be wha soever come of me. The seaventh Paragraphe. I. THou tendrest vs all as thy decrest Children, crea∣ted to thy Image,Conver∣sation▪ redeemed with thy blood, exal∣ted to be thy frēds, fellow heyres, and spouses; give grace so to behave myself, so to deale with others,
as allwayes I may have this in mind; if thou graunt me this, I shall never have the face to be careles of myself, or disdaynefull of others, but shall beare due respect and love towards all, desirous to doe for them, all that I may for the love of thee. II. It is true, there be many things, which may easily make me enter into misconceite of others, and grow into neglect, and by little and little into contempt of thy ser∣vants, if I take not heed, (as thier imperfections of mind and body) but I know it is my part (and I hope thou wilt give me grace to remember it) to weigh most of all myne owne many miseries both of body and soule; many which shew themselves without, and many more which lye hidden within me (which thou only knowest) and therfore to humble myself in the sight of all: And in them, to consider the many gifts of nature and grace which thou hast either bestowed vpon them, or peradventure layed vp in store for them; and perchance in heaven I shall be glad to sit at thier feete. III. O that this, and such like considerations could befixed in my mind! how affable meeke, how servicable should I be to all? It is thy only lesson in a manner, or most properly thyne, when, that which thou hadst shewed by thy example, coming downe from heaven to live a∣mong vs in that manner, as thou livedst, thou declarest in words, saying, learne of me, because I am meeke, and humble of hart. IV. It is besid the way to gayne others to thee,Matth. 11. 9. in whatsoever state they be; it breedeth in them confidence, and freedome, and openes of minde, which is the only true way that bringeth a soule to thee: where as rudenes, sadnes, vntimely ieasts, or vnconsiderate gestures, rising of passion in one kind or other, be the breeders of distast, and the overthrow of all; much more to contend, or to wrangle with those with whom we deale. Rather I must yeald, not only to betters, or to my equalls, but even in many things to my inferiours, and follow thier opinion against my owne, when otherwise there is no speciall in∣convenience.
The eight Paragraphe. I. O My God; infinite is the Circumspection,Circum∣spection. which I see I must have to live in this world, to give satisfaction to all, and above all to thee. I see, I must be carefull of not shewing any particular, or other∣wise inordinate affection to any, or disaffection from any, though there should seeme iust cause:  must be patient in bearing, where I perchance may have received the wrong: patient in hearing whatsoever complaints of my∣self or others, if it be committed to my charge to have any little care of others: Never making shew of much hast or of greate busines; much lesse of vnwillingnes to give free accesse to any, though the parties seeme importune, prolix, passionate vnapte to receive satisfaction, imperti∣nent, though tempted against myself: but with all mildnes intertayning them, when they shall require it, and if bu∣sines will not permit, appointing them with all quiet some other certaine houre. II. I must not, my God, be easy of beleefe, but esteeme it, as it is, the ruine of the household whersoever shall live the disvnion of those with whom I shall deale: It is the bane of charitie to give facill hearing, and easy credit to that which is first related. I know that many things are sayed, otherwise then they are, even by ver∣tuous and holy persons, not faynedly, falsly, or allwayes with offense of God, but good men, being men as others be, they may be also in these things deceived: Wherfore one eare must be kept for the contrarie part, and my mind rather incline to excuse, then to condemne, to defend rather then to oppresse; to all meeknes and lenitie, rather then to rigour and austeritie, as much as the order of true charitie will permit. III. Moreover I know thou wouldest have me to have a speciall care of the credit and good opinion of all, not only in my owne mind to think well of them, and not easyly settle my iudgement, though vpon some∣what apparent defects: But also with all others, concea∣ling thier defects, whersoever it may be done; and when any seeke to amend thier faults (be they never so greate) receiving them and esteeming them, as if never
any thing had happened amisse: for so thou of thy infi∣nite goodnes dealest with vs, forgeting our offenses, where thou findest repentance and rewarding vs in all things farr above our deserts. The ninth Paragraphe. I.Patience. O Patience! O longanimitie! O perseverance! O evenes of mind, and externall cariage! O cou∣rage and magnanimitie! O indifference! O con∣fidence! O feeling of thy providence! O my God, where shall I find all this, but in thee, my God, my love; whose nature is goodnes, whose works is mercy? Jf we see a poore creature, we are moved with pittie; we give what we can to releeve his necessitie. Thou seest my wants; I need not say thou art rich in all this, and much more; I need not say, thou art good, and infinitely good, or that thou art mightie, and infinit I mightie; cōceive it would be enough that thou seest my thoughts, in which are both ever represented thy riches and my povetie; I say no more, I trust in thy goodnes that thou wilt assist me; I am assured in ty love that thou wilt help me; more certaine I am that thou wilt help thyself, and dispose all things so as they may be best for thy glorie, which when thou doest, thou satisfiest me, who am the slave of thy honour, born to nothing els, but to attend thy ever blessed will and pleasure. II. I must confesse I would oftimes be shut of those distractions, me thinks in humilitie I ought to desire it, because I am not so much as worthy of the name, of thy vnprofitable servant. Me thinks charitie towards them, whom thou lovest, and among whom I live requireth no lesse, but seeing thou ordaynest so, I have no cause to complayne or to hrink. The greatest humilitie is to be subiect to thee; the greatest charitie is to conforme myself to thy holy disposall; I yeald myself therfore wholy and freely to thee, for I will be no more myne owne but thine. III. But this in love and inceritie I must make bold to tell thee, that the lesser my abilitie is, or my vertue,
thyne must be the greater care; for I account myself to be but thy instrument: in what soever good worke; thou art the directour, thou art the workman, I am as it were the Playne, or chisill in thy All-skisfull hand. Jf therfore I be blunt or crooked, the more is thy payne, the more is thy care; I in so good a hand, cannot but doe well; only give me grace not to shrinke out of thy hand, but to remayne as thou hast made me; for the very remayning will better me; the very benefit of thy vsing me in thy service, will give me new servour, and set a sharper edge on my decayed desires IV. To thee a greate deale more then to me it apper∣tayneth that thy businesse be well done. Watch therfore, and be carefull, and vse me as thou pleasest. I know thou doest not vse me because thou needest me, but only of thy infinite goodnes, for thy glorie and my good; as therfore thou art carefull of thy glorie, and desirous of my good, so carefull art thou and so desirous of my faithfull discharge. The tenth Paragraphe. I. VVHat more to say I know not, not because there is not infinitely more to be sayed of thy infinite goodnes,Resignatio. and of my wants, but because I know not where well to beginne, or when I should end if I should enter any further. I feele besids that all finally must be resolved in this, that thou must help me; thou must instruct me; thou must guide me, thou must strenghthen me, thou must be All in all, and I suffer myself in thy hand to be dealt with as thou pleasest. I see not what I need greately say more, but yeald myself ioyfully to thy disposition, and dayly purpose, and indeavour by thy grace not to hinder thy worke, and seeke to redresse what I may find doth dis∣turbe it. II. But alas▪ whether shall I go to seeke, Here againe I enter into an other wood; and how shall I get out of so many busshes, such thorny briars, and deep-rooted brambies, as I find in my soule? well may I be pricked
among them with sorrow and griefe; well may my soule be rent with affliction, but to pull them all away, and give thee free passage, how shall I doe it? It is possi∣ble to thee▪ to whom nothing is impossible, but for me i is wholy and absolutely impossible. III Yet why doe I say it is absolutely impossible? I remember a greate servant of thyne was wont to say, that if we did but in a whole yeare, roote out one only vice, we should be quickly perfect. O infinite goodnes! hast thou so greate patience?Examen. Th. a Ke l. 1. c. 11. . 5. or is it possible to be so? I is doubtlesse, for thou leavest not thy frends, to be so fouly deceived as they should be if it were not so. Ther∣fore seeing it is so, I dare be a little more bold, and offer vnto thee my indeavour, not every yeare alone, but everie month▪ o two, to doe the best I can, to roote out some one thing, that I may find to be a hin∣derance to thee. In which I have this comfort, that figh∣ting against one  I shall certainly together with that one pull vp manie more besids, because when I pull at one principall one, I shall shake the roots of all that be about it, and dependant of it, and plucking it out I shall pull the rest with it. IV. And not so must Iayme at one, but that of all I must have a speciall care. O infinite care? No I presume if I can sometimes in the day amidest all my trobles recall my mind to thee, it will be sufficient; thy grace will be ready, when at other times busines will not le me be so attentive to thee, if when I can, I be carefull to accustome myself to think of thee. Yet more trust I in thy infinite goodnes; that though sometimes I should be so carelesse as not to think vpon thee, when there is occa∣sion, yet if I be carefull to enter into myself and acknow∣ledge and iudge my offenses (though it were but once in a day) and bewayle them in thy sight, in my secretretire∣ment, with purpose of amendment, and humble confidēce in thy grace,  trust, I say, in thy infinite goodnes, thou wilt perdon me for the present, and give me plentie of thy gra∣ce to be more watchfull over myself an other day, and more mindfull of thee, my God, ever after.
The eleventh Paragraphe. I. BEhold, o my love, how bold I am with thee, how farre I have stretched and strayned thy love, thy infinite goodnes! Beginning with sor∣row, that I was not wholy with thee,Our mu∣tabilitie. and ending with care that I be not wholy from thee. O Creature that I am! what can I say other, but that it is the propertie of all creatures in this changeable world to be thus subject to change. Tho knowest it better then I myself that feele it, and smart dayly for it: And therfore thou hast pati∣ence with me, greater then I can many times find in my hart to have with myself; and yet alas, I have too too much patience, or rather Indulgence, when I see, and say nothing, and let myself go so farre, that where to find myself I canno oftimes tell, but only that I am sure I am too too farre from thee. II. O my God; my love; Behold I come againe, and desire to draw as neere thee now, as I was farre go∣ne before. I am bold to say so, I am bold to doe so, be∣cause of thy infinite and ever permanent love, which can∣not be overcome with ten thousand times ten thousand changes of myne in this kind; thou lovest me, though I leave thee, that I may returne vnto thee; Thou lovest me when I approch vnto thee, that I may be ever more inward with thee; love me now for ever, that I may ever stay with thee; for this is my only desire, never mo∣re to part from thee. III. To this purpose I give myself wholy vnto thee now and for ever. This gift of myne I dayly intend to re∣new, till that everlasting day comes, when there will be no more renewing, because transformed into thee we shall be allwayes new, and ever permanently conjoyned in love with thee without decay, which that it may quic∣ly be I humbly beseech thee, my God, my love, Amen.
The twelfe Paragraphe. I.Desire of being dis∣solved: O happy day, when shall I see thee? O everlasting day, when shall I injoy thee? Too too long be these short and ever decaying dayes the e∣vens of that one day which never fayleth, when will they passe? Too too many be these changing dayes, the fore∣running nights of that which never changeth, when will they be at an end? O end! The breake of that day which will never end,Iob. 10. 1. when wilt thou come? My soule is weary of this wearisome life, I will send forth my speech against myself, I will speake in the bitternes of my mind, I will say vnto God.Ps. 26. 13. When shall I see the good things of my Lord in the land of the living?Psal. 41. 3. My soule hath thirsted after thee my God, when shall I come, and appeare before thy face. My teares are vnto me my dayly bread while it is sayed vnto me everie day, where is thy God? II. Alas everie day it is here sayed vnto me, where is thy God? And betwixt so many dayes, and nights, as I find dayly, and hourely in myself, now rising, now fal∣ling, while I loose thee, and I leave thee; through my manifold imperfections, and doe scarce for one minute perfectly hold thee, what a life doe I live? VVhat death had I not rather die? That once with thy thrice happy spouse having passed these transitorie dayes, and these too too dobtfull nights,Cant. 3 4. I may say; I have found whome my soule doth love, I hold him, and I will not let him go. III. Here if one aske me where thou art, my God, I must confesse thou art a farre of,Ps. 137. 6. because a farre of thou doest behold those which are not humble.Ps. 29. 8. Thou turnest a∣way thy face,Ps. 114. 3. and I am filled with affliction; sorrowes of death doe compasse me round about, daungers of Hell doe pre∣sently assalt me, and whether to turne myself to seeke thee,antie. 1. and to find thee, I cannot tell. Shew me, O my love, where thou feedest, where thou restests at noone day, when the heate of temptation scorcheth my soule, that flying vnder the shaddow of thy wings, I may feed, where thou feedest and reste, where thou restest, and not beging to wander after the droves of these vnperfect comforts, in which there is no quiet rest, no solid foode.
IV. Shew me rather my God, that everlasting noone, in thy heavenly cittie,Apoc. 2 23. where neither sonne, nor Moone doe shine, but thou art the ever permanent comfortable light of all the inhabitants; that there I may rest, and feede with thee, without danger of resting in any other but in thee, or of feeding of any thing but of thy only self: for in this world I see there is no rest, but continuall tumbling, and tossing from one thing to an other; and who is he that amidst so many boisterous winds, and wayes can continually hold thee? Since thy blessed Apostle, the beloved disciple, giveth Sentence vpon vs all that we are subject not only to loose thee by many distractions, but also to leave thee by synnes by too too many, and dayly imperfections. V. And who knoweth, but thou, o my loving God! whether in this very desire of myne to be ever with thee in blisse, since I cannot be ever with thee in this fearefull banishment, there lies not secretly hidden more love of myself, then perfect love of thee? O hard vncertanti! I am delighted with the love of God,Phil. . 32 and drawne to de∣sire to injoy it everlastingly, there where it only ever permanently lasteth, I desire it, and begge it according to the inward man, but I see another love, which I feare creepeth in with it▪ repgnant to that perfect love, and pure desire which I should have of thee. Vnhappie man that I am, who shall deliver me from this doubtfull and vncertayne state. VI. I am in streights on everie fide; if I remayne, I am in doubt whether I shall ever remayne with thee: ra∣ther I am certaine I shall often shrink from thee,Iacob 3.  for i many things we doe all offend. Jf I desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee; thy Apostle sayth, it is a thing much more better, and yet he himself, what he shall choose he knoweth not; because to abide in flesh is necessarie for thy service. But alas, what necessitie can there be of me that am so vnprositable? Thou wilt say, that all must think and say of themselves, that they are vn∣profitable Servants,Luc. 17. 10. even when they have doone thier very best in thy service. Jt is so: And therfore, be I profi∣rable, or vnpofitable I know not what more to say, or doe, but yeald myself wholy into thy hands to doe with
me as thou pleasest. Take me, or leave me as thou thinkest good. Hastenme, or differre me, as thou seest reason. I refuse not the labour, if tho thinkest me pro∣fitable; I will beare patiently to be differred, if thou judge me vnworthy; yer still I am streightened of the two, ha∣ving desire to be dissolved and desire to be with thee, which is by thy owne Confession in thy blessed Apostle, a thing much more better. Intertaynments of our Blessed Saviour when we receive him in the Bles∣sed Sacrament. First as God. I. AT the birth of our blessed Saviour, the swathing bands did not hinder vs from be∣leeving that infant to be God, or stop the Angels from singing.Luc. 2. 14. Glorie to God in the higest degree, and from adoring him, but doe incite vs the more to admire, and love his goodnes: the resem∣blances of bread and wine, remayning after consecration in this blessed Mysterie, must not in like manner be any hinderance to vs from beleeving the truth contayned vn∣der them, delivered in our Saviours owne words. This is my body,Mat. 26. this is my blood, that is, the living body, and blood of our Saviour, and consequently his blessed soule, and divinitie, God and man, the eternall word made flesh for our sakes. And as in them we adore his power, we admire his wisdome, we imbrace his infinite goodnes; we doe not argue from his immensitie, that he could not be contayned in the manger; nor from his vni∣tie in essence with the Faiher, and the holy Gost, that he alone could not be man; nor from his immortalitie, that he could not suffer; but doe submit as to the manner, and doe beleeve the substance; soe we must rayse our thoughts, in this Mysterie to beleeve his reall presence, though in a way incomprehensible to our short vnder∣standing, and adore the person of the Sonne of God our Saviour; not arguing from his quantitie, that he cannot confine himself to so little roome; nor from his vnitie, that he cannot at once be in so many places; nor from his
Majestie, that he will not stoope to so meane an action, as to be dayly handled, and received by vs; but so much the more admire his goodnes, that as there once so here dayly he doth give himself vnto vs. O blessed Angels who in multitudes did adore him at his coming into the world,Heb. 1. 6. though in a disguise farre different from your apprehensions, with you I doe willingly submit my we∣ake conceits, and doe adore here present, the living God, the eternall word made flesh for vs. O blessed host! with how much reverence art thou to be handled, and received, seeing the ground on which Moyses stood, when God appeared to him,Exo. 3. 5. was holy; for here the holy of holyes is contayned after a more sublime manner; put (my Soule.) thy shoes from thy feete, that is, from thy ap∣prehension, and affection, all inferiour thoughts, and with eyes of faith behold this greate sight; I am he that is▪ He that is doth vouchsafe to be thus among vs for our reliefe. This is this name for ever, and this his memoriall from generation to generation. II. Anciently when God resolved to manifest him∣self to the Childred of Israël, thunder and lightening went before him,Ex. 19. 18▪ the mountaine was covered with a thick cloude of smoke, and all the people trembled at the clashing of the skies, and heard the noyse of the trumpets, and they were commanded not to approch least multitu∣des of them might perish by the fire. Lord God of hosts terrible,Ex. 15.  and worthy of all prayse, working wonderous things, what but thy owne infinite goodnes could induce thee thus to change thy style, and worke this wonder of won∣ders, that thou whose voyce is like thunder, and ligh∣tening, able to breake into shyvers the highest Cedars, shouldest thus meekely appeare among vs, not in a cloude of smoke,Ps. 28. . but vnder the resemblances of bread and wine, inviting vs to thy table? Come eate of my bread, and drink the wine which I have mingled for you. There, though sanctifyed according to the law, the people were forbidden to approch vnder payne of death;Rom, 9.  here thou in∣vitest vs, that we may live, if we will but observe thy law: shall not my soule be subject to God for from him is salvation. He is my God,Psal.  and my Saviour, my defence, and I shall not be: .
III. Finally presenting thyself before our Saviour, and bowing to the ground with Moyses say.Exod. 34 6 O Lord, Lord God, mercyfull, and grations, patient, and abundant in mercy, and truth, reserving  for thousands, I ac∣knowledge the greate honour which thou doest to me, and to all man kind, forgive my transgessions; pardon my vnreverent behaviour towards thee:Esay 6. The Seraphims cover thie faces in thy presence, whyle adoring thy great∣nes they sing vnto thee, Holy, Holy, Holy full is all the earth of thy glorie To me what is due but confusion in thy sight, who am not able to conceive the least part of thy worthynes? Benedicite Dommo omnes Angeli ejus. O blessed Angels of heaven, and all Creatres, Sunne, Moo∣ne, and Stares, Mountaynes, and valleyes, fruits of the earth, and sea, yong and old, supply my wants! with them all I doe prostrate myself at thy feete, begging th thou wilt cōserve vs in the order thou hast created vs, and that we may be ever subject to thy blessed will, and or∣dination. Amen. Whence is it that thou comest to me? VVho am I,Th. a Ke. that thou shouldst give me thyself? How dares a synner appeare before thee? And how comes it that thou vouchsafest to come to a synner.l. 4. c. . n. 1 Intertaynment of our Saviour as King. I. THat our Saviour is a king, is among Christians vndoubted;10. 18. 37. Apoc. 19. 16. himself ackowledging it before Pi∣late, and in the Apocalips we read that, he hath in his garment, and on his thigh, written, king of kings and Lord, of Lords; So that he is not only as other Princes, kings, and Lords, of a parcell of ground, bounded and confined with in certayne limits, but he is king over the whole vnivers; and as such, even in this disguise, we must acknowledge him; and prostrating ourselves in his pre∣sence with the foure and twentie lders, and laying all the Crownes of heaven and earth at his feete,Apoc. 4. 10 professe that he alone is worthy to receive all gloris and honour, from every creature in heaven and earth, and under the earth;
and however he hath not here that visible attendance which kings of the earth vse to have; it is for our sake that he conceales it, that we may have the more free ac∣cesse to him; for as he sayed to S. Peeter in the garden with one word he could shew vs,Matt. 25 53 that he hath at hand above twelue legions of Angels to attend him. II. The part of a good subject is, not only to ac∣knowledge the right of his Prince, and to doe him cor∣poall reverence, but to his power he must keepe the kings peace, observe his lawes, and also suppresse distur∣bers, so farre as it may concene him in duty to doe it.Luc▪ 17 27 Now our Saviour tells vs that his kingdome is within vs; with in ourselves therfore we must keepe peace, and watch vpon the quiet of our soules; suppressing our passi∣ons; which are the only disturbers, and not counterman∣ded doe breake the peace betwixt God, and vs, and his o∣ther subjects, which are our neighbours. Jn this occa∣sion therfore of receiving, or of being present at the holy Sacrifice, it is fitting we should offer vnto him our indea∣vour, one day in the weeke or one weeke in the moneth, to watch vpon the passion of anger that it doth not dis∣band; another day or weeke vpon feare, that it doe not withdraw vs from our dutie, another vpon too much in∣clination to libertie, or to sloth, and idlenes; and so vpon the rest of our passions, or inclinations, or also vpon our senses, our eares, our tongue, our sight, &c. That we may become, and persever perfectly subject to him, and he reigne peaceably in our soules. III. And because here he doth offer himself not only to the view of his people, to be worshiped by them, and to take thier alleageance, but also to be intertayned; as when kings go thier progresse, they appoint thier lod∣gings, and send thier harbingers before them; seeing he is pleased to choose thy hart for one of his stations, begge of him that the will be also pleased, to send his harbin∣gers, who are his holy Angels, and aincts, to take vp the roomes for him; and joyning thyself to them adorne with the vertues, which they suggest▪ all the powers of thy soule; thy Memorie with repre∣sentations of his owne noble act, and royall favours
bestowed vpon thee, and vpon all mankind; thy vnderstanding with reflections vpon his infinite perfection and worth; thy will with acts of submission, love, and thanksgiving: Thy Irascible power, with resolution against whatsoever synne past, or heare after to be suggested to thee: The Concupiscible, with desires of puritie, and of himself alone, addressing thyself to those Saincts in par∣ticular in whom thou hast most speciall confidence. IV. Finally present thy petition to him; and that it may be pertinent, doe not neglect to think well before hand what is best, and most necessarie for thee to demand; and let i be with full resignation to his blessed will, to obtayne, or not to obtayne what thou askest in particular; being assured that he will doe for thee for the best: and however, fayle not to repeate often in this occasion that which himself hath put into our mouth, Thy kingdome come: that it may be once vniversally spread over the whole world, and that in those who are vnder thy charge thou mayest ever have care to mayntayne it.Luc▪ 19. 38. Amen. Blessed is he that doth come king in the name of our Lord; Peace in heaven, and glorie in the higest. Intertaynment of our Saviour as spouse of our soule. I. S. Gregorie vpon the parable delivered by our Sa∣viour of a king who made a mariage for his Sonne sayth,S. Grego. that God the Father did then make a ma∣riage for his eternall Sonne, when he joyned him to hu∣mane nature in the wombe of the blessed Virgin; and a∣gaine, when through this mysterie of his Incarnation he did as it were wed him to Holy Church.Ep. 5. 32. According to that of the Apostle speaking of Matrimonie. This is a greate Sacrament, or Mysterie, but I say in Christ, and in the Church to wit, perfected, and compleated in the loving coniunctiō of Christ with his Church, and consequently with every soule that in it doth conserve his grace, and love. VVhich conjunction he doth renew and confirm with new demonstrations of love, every time that we
doe worthily receive him; in so much that we may iustly make account that every such time he sayth vnto vs, as in Ozea the Prophet,Oztae 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever; I will betroth thee unto me in iustice, and sanctitie, and in iudgement, (over thy enimies) and in mercy (taking pitty of thy infirmities) and in fayth, and fidelitie vnto thee: O my soule VVhere shall I have thoughts and forces sufficient to thank my Saviour for such exceeding love? or what doe I stand so long demurring, as if there could be an offer made more honourable, or more beneficiall? O mercy incomparable! prostrate at thy feete, I doe adore thy love, and by thy mercy doe promise faythfullnes vnto thee. II. The day of mariage is a day of ioy; the bride is as costly attired as her state will affoard; frends and kinsfolk are invited, and gifts presented. So we read in S. Jhon, speaking of the last act therof, of which this is a figure, let vs be glad, and reiyc, and give glorie to God, because the mariage of the lamb is come,Apoc. 19. 7. and his wife hath pre∣pared herself, and it was given her that she should cloth herself with silk, glittering and white; and the silk are the iutifications of the saints. VVith these, by the grace of God which is given vs, we must prepare ourselves before hand; not satisfyed with slight indeavour, but imitating the diligence, and care of Gods saints, and exercising acts of vertue, which may deserve the name of silk, and not of courser sturf; and with the like care conserving our soules white, and resplendent in the sight of our spouse, with out spot of synne, or too much affection to what ever creature. O saints of God! VVhere shall I find these silks? I give glorie notwithstanding to my God that he doth not despise my povertie: It is a rule approoved by thee. According to thy abilitie be mercyfull. If thou hast much,Tob. 4. . give abundantly; if thou have but little, give wil∣lingly a little. That which I have I give wholy vnto thee, and doe begge that by thyself, and by thy saints, thou wilt supply my wants, and take compassion of me, who doest not turne away thy face from those that ca vpon thee. III. Reflect more particularly vpon the greatenes of this match, and the beneficiallnes of it; for in all matches, the Bride is made noble by the noblenes of the bride∣groome,
groome, and he indowes her with his person, and sub∣stance; wher vpon the Prophet foretells, that the Church of God and every faythfull soule shall have a new name,Esay. 62 2 which the mouth of our Lord shall give it, and that he will reioyce or take contentment in such a soule, as a bridegroome doth in the bride; and she shall be to him as a crowne of glorie, and a royall diademe, that is, so much esteemed by him. And the argument of the Apostle is here also in force.Rom. 8 32 He that hath delivered for vs his owne Sonne, how hath he not also with him given vs all things? So that, honour and profit inviting vs, what can we say, but hum∣bly yeald ourselves his servants, admiring his goodnes beyond all desert, and indeavouring not to dishonour ourselves, and him, by any base act whatsoever, all sorte of greevous synns being tearmed in holy writ spirituall adulterie, in regard of the fidelitie which we owe to him. and the linke of love which he desires should be betwixt vs, and the obligation which we have vnto it. Intertaynment of our Saviour as he is the good shepheard. I. This title he gives himself, and with-all, the quali∣ties of the good shepheard;l0. 10.  I am the good shepheard. The good shepheard giveth his life for his sheepe: Call to mind the life of our Saviour, from the beginning, to the end, and thou wilt easily discover, how truly he may say, he hath given it all, and wholy for thee; and with much more reason then Jacob sayed to Laban,Gen. 31. 40 day and night I was parched with heate, and cold, and sleepe did depart from my eyes, and so for twenty yeares I served thee; and then standing betwixt the infernall wolfe and vs, he suffered himself to be torne in peeces, rather then we should perish. O loving Iesus! Whence cometh it that thou doest thus owne vs for thyne, and take so much care of vs? It is thy owne mercifull goodnes, that puts thee to this troble, and payne with vs, sylly creatures, and apt to be led astray; I acknowledge myself vnable to defend myself; thou art my protectour,Psal 143. in thee I doe place my hope. &c. II. The benefit which we reape by this his care is
in comparable; he performing towards vs that which he foretold,Ezech.  16 and promised by Ezechiel, I will seeke that which was lost, and bring back that which was driven away; and will bind vp that which was broken, and strenghten that which was infirme, and preserve that which is strong, and in good liking. Which is that which he sayth of himself in S. Jhon.l0. 10  I came that they should have life, and should have more abundantly, that is, more easy, and more plentifull means towards saluation, and dayly grow more perfect, by this his care and liberalitie. And againe, as my Father knowes me, and doth acknowledge me for his Sonne, with love due from a Father to a Sonne,l0. 10.  so doe I know, and ack∣nowledge my sheepe, and am as tēder of thē as of childrē. III. In consequence wherof he sayth further, that he knoweth every one of his sheepe by name, and taketh par∣ticular notice of every one, none excepted▪ he goeth befor them, to shew them the way by his owne example, and puts them to o hardnes, which himself hath no indured for them; he provideth them pasture, and such as the world cannot sufficiently admire:S. Ihon Chrysos∣ome. That, at which the Angels tremble and dare not freely fixe thier eyes vpon, that is our food; to him we are vnited, and made one flesh with him,Psal. 105  who can expresse the power of our Lord, and set forth all his prayses? VVhat shepheard doth feed his sheepe with his owne blood? Many Mothers doe put forth thier Chrildren, to others to nurse: He hath not indured to deale thus by vs; he feeds vs with his owne blood, and doth wholy vnite himself vnto vs. IV. O my soule! How is it possible thou shouldest not love this good shepheard, to whom nothing is too deere that may be beneficiall to thee? How comes  that thou doest not allwayes heare his voyce, and follow him, but turnest thy self to a stranger, who will lead thee into wayes, of which at last with griefe thou wilt confesse, that thou hast gone astray from the way of truth,Sap.  and wearyed thyself in the way of iniquitie, and perdition, and gone agy wayes, and not knowne the way of our Lord His wayes are full of pleasure, and his paths peaceable, and free from danger I will heare what my Lord God doth speake in me,Prov. 3 17. for he will speake peace to his people,Psal. 84 9 and to those that returne into thier hart, for his saluation is nigh those that feare him.
Intertaynment of our Saviour as he is our Teacher, or Master. I.Luc. 10. 39. CAll to mind how Marie Magdalen, having Christ her Guest, sat at his feete, hearing hi word; and make account that no lesse happines hath befallen thee, the day that thou receivest him in the blessed Sacrament, or art present at the holy sacrifice; for to this effect S. Jhon Chrysostome sayeth complayning and answering.S Ihon chrysost. How many doe now say, I would see his feature his garments, his shooes: Behold, thou doest see him, thou doest touch him, thou doest receive him; thou desirest to see his garments, and he doth thee a greater favour, that thou may not only see him, but touch him, and receive him with in thee sit therfore downe at his feete, and harken to his divine words: Consider the excel∣lencie of this master▪ his infinite comprehension of all things; his excessive desire of benefiting thee; his resolu∣tion to spare no labour and paines for thy instruction; the impossibilitie of his being deceived or mistaken, or of having any will to misinforme thee; and withall, the im∣portance of his doctrine; as concerning no lesse then our eternall wellfare, and that vpon the point, he is, and ought to be our only master, whom above all others, we must heare,Mah. 23 o and harken to no body against him. II. In this life time he had many places from whence he did teach the people; the Temple, private houses, the opē fields, and mountaynes, whether people did flock after him by many thousands; and  his enimies did con∣fsse that never did man speake as this man▪Io. 7. 46 This day he saveth thee the labour of running after him; he is come to thee, and hath choosen thy hart for his chayre; say with young Samel, Reg. 3. 10 speake ô Lord, for thy servant heareth. Say with the Prophet Esay. Our Lord hath opened my eare; I will not gayne say;say 50 5. I will not turne back. O my Jesus, forgive me many reluctances to thy heavenly inspira∣tions: I acknowledge thy goodnes towards me, and thy desire of my wellfare, my hart is at thy command, make what impression in it thou pleasest; how over hard I have been heretofore to receive them, now I desire to
be like wax in thy hand▪ to temper it according to thy owne mind which shall be ever mine &c. III. The need which we have, and the benefit which we receive by this our master, will be more playne vnto vs, if we reflect how many wayes, and in how many things we are of ourselves ignorant, and apt to mistake, or to be misled: How often doe obscurities rise in vs concer∣ning the knowledge, the goodnes, the providence of All∣mightie God? What feares and anxieties doe accompanie them? How often doth vice insinuate itself vnder colour of vertue? our faith, our hope, our Charitie is assalted by the wily serpent:Ps▪ 118 68 Say with the royall Prophet, thou art good; through thy goodnes teach me thy iustification. Teach me, not as other teachers, whose words sound in my eares, but touch not my hart;Marci  22 teach me as having power withall, to dispose one with hart and hand to follow thy doctrine. O divine master, I doe give thee full power to mould this my hart as thou thinkest best.S: August I say with S. Augustine, give what thou commandest and command what thou pleasest. I say againe with thy royall Prophet, give me vn∣derstanding, and I will search into thy law, and keepe it with my whole hart; lead me in the path of thy command∣ments, for it is that which I desire. Intertaynment of our Saviour as he is our Phisitian. I. A Chiefe imployment of our Saviour while he lived among vs, was to cure the sick, and the blind, and the lepers, and people touched with the palsey, and other diseases, preserving the life of many, and giving life againe to others; and we may observe with what eagernes the people flocked to him from all sides for thier cure,Mari 6  in so much that the Ghospel sayth, there were so many that came, and went, that he had not leasure to eate his meate: His intent was by it to cure thier soules from thier dead pales, and lamenes and blidnes; and to give them the true life, which is his knowledge, and a will to serve him. O that I did halfe so lively apprehend the danger, and troble of my spirituall diseases and death?
how eagerly should I runne to this heavenly Phisitian, from whom alone I can have reliefe? O dullnes! that I must be so often put in mind of my owne good, and be so low in seeking it? and why doe I say in seeking it? he presents himself vnto me, and seeketh after me to cure me; and insteed of taking a reward, he will reward me being cured. II. The Blessed Sacrament is tearmed the Sacrament of the living, and nor of the dead, because if our soules be dead by mortall synne (which God forbid) we must first confesse our synns, and have absolution, and so be resto∣red to life, that we may receive our Lord; otherwise in∣steed of cure we give ourselves another wound, and doe incurre greater damnation, and that which is ordayned for our good turneth to our greater harme. Yet for the receiving of that life, he is our Physitian whome we re∣ceive in this Sacrament; the Priest being his minister, and he by the mouth of the Priest pronouncing absolution; and here he confirmeth, and strengtheneth the same life in vs by his blessed presence, and by more abundant grace bestowed, giving vs more strength to overcome temptations, keeping of our Ghostly enimie by himself; and by his holy Angels accompanying him, and asswa∣ging the heate of our concupiscences, and earthly desires; and the oftener we come devoutly to him, the more we shall find these gracious effects to be wrought in vs; that we may humbly say with the Apostle. Here∣tofore I was blasphemous, Tim. 3 and a persecutour, but I have obtayned mercy. III. Life is defined to be the beginning, or fountaine of motion, or operation; we are sayed to live, so long as we can move, and so is a tree, or a plant, so long as it can put forth; when we see no more such effect, we say, it is dead. In which respect charitie, or the love of God, being the life inherent in our soules, S. Gregorie sayth, that the proofe of charitie is the exhibition of the worke: and our Saviour himself.I0. 14. 2 He that bath my commandments; and doth keepe them, he it is that loveth me; our Saviour in na∣ture of a Phisitian cometh to vs to strengthen this life, by the cordiall compound of his owne pretious body and blood, delivere vnto vs vnder the shapes of bread and
wine; that by the devout receiving, we may both breath out the superfluous, and corrupted humours remayning after our purgation and cure; and with more rigour apply ourselves to the exercises of Christian dutie, to which by his charitable assistance, we must concurre; first, by gi∣ving time to the working of this heavenly receite, by some little recollection, and not instantly ingulfe our∣selves in our wonted worldly affayres; and secondly, by renewing our good purposes in his presence, and begging of him that he will blesse them, and those most in which we feare we shall have most difficultie to accomplish; towards which also we may justly expect he will suggest some speciall remedie to a willing mind. Intertaynment of our Saviour as he is our Redeemer. I. THe word Redeemer doth import, that the redee∣med being once ether free, or in the power of one, cometh to be subiect to another, and is bought out of that subiection; so was man by his creation wholy Gods, and being left free, as to his will, he fell by synne voūltarily into the possessiō, and powre of the divel and as his captive, and prisoner, was loded with a thou∣sand miseries, and egged on dayly from one synne to ano∣ther, till dying in synne he should be eternally condemned to the prison, and paynes of hell fire; and no power vnder God being able to rescue him, the Sonne of God our Sa∣viour offered to pay his ransome, and to give him againe his freedome; wherby he might remaine in Gods posses∣sion perpetually, by his owne free choyce, as well as he was by nature, and come to inioy the happines which God had layed vp for him. The price where with he was ransomed, was the body and blood, and life of our Saviour layed downe for vs vpon the crosse i this very body, and blood, and life, himself doth here present vs in the Sacra∣ment, that we may make a gratefull oblation of it to our heavenly Father, as the price of our redemption in particu∣lar, and represent vnto him with ioy, and thanksgiving, our freedome to serve him, proessing that we will never give way to any other to possesse vs.
II. This benefit of our redemption will appeare in a better light, if we consider the miserie of the slaverie in which we were, or are by synne. And first by synne from reasonable creatures we turne vnreasonable, and the longer we continue in synne, the more vnreasonnable we become; not vnlike the man mentioned in the Ghospell, whose habitation was not among men, but in the fields, and dens,Marci 5. among beasts, and beastly company; aked, having lost all shame;Luc. 8. 26. and could not be held within any compasse but ranged about breaking through all bonds of the law of God and man: and being possessed by a legion of Divels, did not vnderstand that they were his masters who did egg him on to his owne destruction, in so much that he cut his owne flesh, and did make nothing of it; and when our Saviour, or any good body came neere him, he raged the more, crying out with a lowde voyce, what have you to doe with me, or I with you? VVhich state of a synner, however while one is in it he doth not heed it, in itself notwithstanding is extreame miserable, and men of reason see it to be so: And how much this man did af∣terwards acknowledge himself obliged to our Saviour, when being delivered from this legion of Divells, he quiet∣ly sat at his feete clothed, and well in his wits, much more ought we to thank our Saviour for our redemption; our spirituall slaverie being infinitely more preiudiciall, and more to be lamented. III. Our Saviour in S. Luke asketh this question, who among you having a servant ploughing,Lu. 17. 7. or keeping cattle, will say to him, returning from the field, go, sit downe▪ and sayth not rather, make ready for me, and serve me, and afterwards thou shalt eate and drink. This is the practise among men one to another; but our Saviour more indulgent to vs, not weighing that we are indeed but his slaves, bought at so deere a rate, as his most pre∣tious blood, and from so base and vnworthy a slaverie, as is that of synne, and so iniurious to himself, doth notwith∣standing coming from our owne worldly occasions, no much thinking of his service in them, invite vs to his owne table, that is, to his owne most pretious body and blood▪ intreating vs to pattake of so heavenly a banket at which the Angels doe reioyce, and doth not passe for many a spo
dust that stick vpon vs, though we have washed away the dirt and filth; it were our dutie to be as cleane as out of the font of baptisme; but, ô the weakenes of man! O the goodnes of God. Who notwithstanding our vnwor∣thynes, when least vnworthy, doth extend his kindnes vnto vs so farre beyond all humane kindnes or capacitie! He out of whome he had cast the legion desired to be with him still in his companie, and he did not admit of him, but bad him go home; and recount how mercyfull God had been to him, How much more ought we to retire our∣selves for a while into the closeth of our hart, and reckon vp the mercyes of God towards vs, and put this in the head of them, that notwithstanding so lately voluntarie slaves to his enimies, he doth vs this greate mercy, and favour, to admit of vs, not only to his presence, but to his table. Intertaynment of our Saviour as Judge. I. THe coming of a Judge to a citty, or house, is generally not without some apprehension, and feare in the parties to whom he comes; for if they be gylty they have reason to feare: if they be not giltie they know not how the Judge may be informed concerning them. That our Saviour is our Judge is vn∣doubted; the Father hath given judgement to the Sone,Io2. 5. 22. sayth our Saviour of himself: yet at this his coming vnto vs in the blessed Sacrament, we have not so much cause of feare; first because his rigorous judgement is reserved till after this life;Ioan. 3. 1 in which respect himself sayth, God did not send his Sonne into the world, to judge the world, but that the world should be saved by him. Secondly there is no danger that he should be misinformed of vs. Thirdly, when he comes to judge;Matt. 25  he comes in majestie, with the attendance of all his heavenly. courte; here he comes dis∣guised, of set purpose, because we should know that he comes in a familiar way, to doe vs honour, and favour, and not for any sinister end. II. Yet in regard he is a Judge, the Apostle doth put∣ in mind that before we presume to receive him,1 Cor 11 26 we examine
examine ourselves whether we be gylty of any such of∣fence, as may hinder his loving intertaynment; for if there be enmiie betwixt him and vs, with what face can we thrust ourselves thus vpon him? And according to our Saviours counsel whatever gift we offer to God we mst first make peace with our brother,Matt. 5 23 if we be at variance with him, and rather leave our offering, then bring it with that distance in our breast; how much more ought we to be wary that our Saviour himself be not our Adversarie, and if he be, reconcile ourselves vnto him quickly in the way, least we turne his mercyes into rigour; for h that receiveth him unworthily draweth judgment vpon him∣self, not making difference betwixt this and other eats. We must therfore before hand judge ourselves, that we may not be judged▪ and as for lesser offenses (though we must doe what we can to cleare ourselves also of them before hand) he will dissemble them, and give vs more grace to overcome them,ap. 1. 18. and jugde vs with compassion, because he is the sonne of man.Io. 5. 27. And we have the more reason to come with this confidence to him, becaue we see that he very seldome punisheth instantly those, that come vnwor∣thily, but gives them time to repent, even of that treache∣rous intertaynment; much more will he have mercy vp∣on those, that have done thier best indeavour to clear themselves even of lesser staynes. III. Moreover he comes vnto vs indeed as Judge, in favour of vs, against our Ghostly enemies, as once he sayed; 12▪ 31. Now is judgement of the world, now the Prince of this world shall be cast forth. And I, if I be exalted, wil draw all to myself (which he sayed; ignifying what death e should die) to wit, exalted vpon the Crosse. And here in the holy Sacrifice he is dayly exalted for vs, dayly Sa∣crificed for our redemption, and vtter distruction of the Divel, and his power; which is more and more lessened in vs, the more often, and more devoutly we receive him; for, as the Councel of TrentCouncel  Trent. speakes, this holy Sacramēt is an Antidote, by which we are freed from our dayly faults, and from mortall syns preserved. O mercyfull judge! Beholding my dayly offences, I have reason to feare,Apoc. 2 23 because thou art the searcher of hart and reyns; and man knowes not whether he deserves love or hatred.Eccl. 9. 1. Ye
eeing here thou comest to save me, I am the more con∣dent in thy goodnes, that thou wilt judge in my behalfe against my enemies, and beate downe thier power by thy authoritie, as thou didst often the evill spirits, and the winds and waves of the sea,Marc. 4 3 saying; Peace, be still; and there was a greate clame. O! clame my hart, that it may receive thee with loving respect, and respectfull love,Psalmo 2 and doe not withdraw thy mecyes from me! Iudica me Deus, & discerne causam meam. Intertaynment of our Saviour as our Me∣diatour, and Advocate. I. THe title of Mediator, and Advocate, as be∣longing to our Saviour, is full of cofort; and that he is so,1 Io. 22 S. Ihon testifyeth. If any man hall synne, we have an Advocate with the Father, Tim. 25 Iesus Christ the just; and S Paul. One is the Mediatour of God, and men, man Christ Iesus. Our need also is apparent, for as we dayly offend, so we have need of an advocate, incessantly to plead pardon for vs; and as vnworthy by ourselves to approch to the throne of God, specially being gylty, we have need of a Mediator, to make our way vnto him. This office our Saviour doth, as man, but man so neely linked to God, that he is also God, and therfore infinitely worthy to be admited, and to be heard, whether it be to plead for remission, or for some new grace, and favour: which is the reason why holy Church doth gnerally present all her prayers, with this clause, through Christ our Lord; that his merits may pre∣vayle, where on ouside there is little that can deserve to be heard, and much pradventure by which we may de∣serve rather to be reiected; for which we have reason deepely to humble ourselves and to have contiuall re∣course to him. II. This office he performed while he lived, by pray∣er, and good works, offering them for our sake; but hiefly vpon the Crosse, when also for vs, as well as for the Iewes and gentils present,Luc▪ 23 34 he prayed saying, Father for∣give them, because they know not what they doe▪ And for the same end he reserved the marks of his most pretious
wounds, that they might be a continuall plea for the r∣mission, for which they were first opened: And here in the blessed Sacrament, we receiving the self same body of out Saviour, with the selfsame wounds, what force and efficacie may not our prayers have, offering thē stee∣ped in these pretious wounds, and as it were, written, or imbellished with his sacred blood▪. 83. 10. O my God! Looke vpon the face of thy Christ. In him thou wilt find no cause▪ why thou shouldst deny him; the multitude of his de∣servings, will outweigh my ill deserts; heare his plea for me:. August. Behold he hath written me, and my petition, in his hands; read his handwritting, and have mercy on me. VVith him, I say Father forgive, and into thy hands I doe give myself with him. III. Though from the beginning he put himself vpon this office for vs, and not only before we could deserve it, but when we deserved that all the world should plead against vs, for which we owe him infinite obligations; yet having vndertaken it, and continuing it with the sa∣me efficacie with which he begun it, it is reason we should think how to gratifie him in what we are ablei and first, it is necessarie that while he is pleading for vs, we pleade not against ourselves by infringing his Fathers commandments; secondly, we must follow the order of petitioning which he prescribeth, and principally aske spi∣rituall things, and such as concerne our soule; before all temporalls, which rule he hath set us downe in our dayly prayer of the Paer noster. Thirdly we must not be weary of wayting the time, and good pleasure of his Father, as he is not weary; and be content whether he grant our pe∣tition in the tearmes we aske it, or some other way say∣ing as he did.Matth. 26. Not my will, but thyne be done: Not as I will, but as thou. Fourthly, the greatest obligation that we can put vpon him, is to be confident of his love and care, and often to vse this meditation, and especially, presenting his sacred person to his heavenly Fa∣ther in the holy Sacrifice, and Sacrament, When we assi∣ste, or receive. There is nor a more worthy obligation, or greate satisfaction towards the washing away ou synns, then to offer vp ourselves sincerly and intirely ith the oblation of the body of Christ in the holy Sa∣crifice
or Communion. Thomas a Kempis. lib. 4. cap. 7. num. 4. Intertaynment of our Saviour as a frend. I. OVr Saviour is plased to stile his Apostles, his frends, and the condition which he Puts, gives vs ground to extend this favour to all that observe the condition. You are my frends,Io. 15. . if you doe the things which I command you. An easy conditi∣on, if we consider with the Apostle,Ro. 13. 10▪ that the fullnes of the law is love. Love God, love our Neighbour, and we have fullfilled the law, and become frends with God; though indeed God is our frend before we love; for so we have in S. Jhon, God first loved vs. And it could not e otherwise,Io. 4 19 for he first created vs, and the wiseman as∣sureth that he loveth all things which are, and hateth not any thing which he hath made,sap. 11. 25▪ neither out of hatred did he make any thing. But it is in our choyce whether we will be frends with God or no; and all our miserie came, and comes to this day, through our choosing the nega∣tive, by breach of his commandments. Our Saviour as a frend exhorteth vs to the affirmative; and here in the most blessed Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the Altar repre∣sents vnto vs what God, and he have done for vs, to re∣clayme vs to his love: our mercyfull and gratious Lord hath left a memoriall of his wonders, food for those,Ps.  4 that feare him: sayth the Royall Prophet. O wonderfull in∣citement to love. Our Saviour in person to be ever soli citing vs, as if it did concerne him as much as vs: and to be dayly present with vs, desiring nothing more then to be one with vs▪ and therfore he did institute this blessed Sacrament vnder the formes of bread and wine, to be taken inwardly by vs; that as bread, and wine so taken, are turned into our substance, and made one thing with vs, so we by receiving him should become one with him, transformed into his love and imitation, which is the sense of that which the Apostle sayth of himself. I live, not I, but Christ lives in .
II. And indeed a frend should be as it is sayed, alter go. not properly another, but as it were the same againe through conformitie in thier humours, and wills▪ and proceedings. How farre our Saviour doth indeavour this, he makes sufficient demonstration, when he sayth to his Apostles I call you frends,Io. 15 15 because all whatever I have heard from my Father, I have made known vnto you; and againe,Luc: 11 9 aske and it shall be given you, seeke and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you. For as in all frendship, so in this much more, it is supposed that we will not aske things either vnlawfull, or hurtfull, to ourselves. And wheras frends, because they cannot be the same in person, desire to be allwayes at least in place, and companie together, our Saviour, you see, doth not fayle in this, being content with any kind of accomoda∣tion in the poorest parish Church, or Chappel, ra∣ther then to be from vs▪ and so i our soules, so they be in grace. III. Moyses by often treaing with God grew to that confidence that once he sayed to God,Exod: 33 13 If I have found favour in thy sight shew me thy face, that I may know thee; and God answered, I will shew thee all good. When the promise came to be performed, i could not be other∣wise then by a little hole in the rock, and God passing in a cloude, and covering that little hole, so as to con∣ceale most part of his glorie; for as the Apostle witnes∣seth, Tim. 6 16 God dwels in a light inaccessible, no man ever saw him, nor can see him. In the person of or Saviour while he lived vpon earth, God was seen vnder the vayle of his humanitie; here he is seen vnder the resemblances of breade and wine: that his intention is to shw vs finally his glorie, this blessed Sacrament he hath left vs for a pled∣ge: therefore the beloved disciple recordeth before the washing of the feete, and before the institution of the blessed Sacrament,Io. 13. 1. that wheras he had loved his who wer in the world, he loved them to the end. It is our duty to be carefull that he be not frustrated of this end, and we fayle of that eternall frendship which he desires we should have with him.Prov. 328 The Counsel of the Wiseman is. Say not to thy frend go and come againe; to morrow I will give it thee▪ when thou mayest presently give: we know not
how soone our end is, when it will be too late to give our love to him, which we may doe presently, and the more, having so loving an imitation, and so sure a pledge of his love. Intertaynment of our Saviour as our Brother. I. OVr Saviour after his resurrection appearing to the women,Matth. 28▪ 10 bad then go, and tell his brethren of it; honouring his Apostles, and disciples with this title, in regard that by his goodnes thy had one heavenly Father; his by nature; hiers by adoption, one eternall inheritance, as the Apostle witnesseth, tearming vs Heyres to God,Rom. 8  and coheyres to Christ. VVhich Brother∣hood being derived vnto vs by the grace of God, and by Charirie,Rom▪  or the love of God, poured into our harts, by the holy Ghost which is given vs, we are the more beholding to our Saviour, because by this holy Sacrament received, he doth confirme vs in this grace of adoption, and increaseth it, and strengtheneth it more and more. making the etetnall inheritance belonging to it more sure vnto vs,Gen. 37 4 so farre is he from envying vs his Fa∣thers love,Luc. 15 2 as Iosephs brothers did, or not rejoycing at our returne into grace after our going astray,Luc. 12  as the elder brother to the prodigall child, or contending about the inheritance, as two brothers in the Gospell. II. The wiseman telleth vs,Prov.  that a brother that is as∣sisted by his brother, is like a strong citty, and thier counsels like the barres of citty gates: VVhy therfore should we distrust the overcoming, or keeping ou our Ghostly enimies from the castle of our hart, seeing our Saviour doth so lovingly offer vs his assistance, not only incoura∣ging vs by his words, and exhortation, but himself puts himself into our hart to defend it with vs; so that we ay with Esay the Prophet confidently say.lisay  He that doth iustifie me is by me; who shall gayne-say me? let. vs stand together, who is my adversarie? let him come: And indeed if we do not faintly, or treacherously flinch from him, we shall be impregnable▪
III. By which we may vnderstand how much they wrong themselves, and others who diwade from often ecoiving this blssed food, vnder pretence perhaps of more devotion, but indeed not well vnderstanding how to order thier devotions; for as it is the counsel of phys∣tias, and experience teacheth that they who have weake stomacks should eate often, and of things that are of good nutriment; so it fares also with our soules, which of themselves are weake: and as to the fimilitude in which we are, they are numbred amōng the six whome God doth hate,Prov. 6 19 who sow discord betwixt brethren: And certaynly, to keepe vs from often intertayning this our brother▪ must needs be the seed of discord betwen him and vs; for by neglect of the Sacrament we grow lesse able to resis temptations, and consequently are the easyer drawne into synne, which only can make a distance betwixt him and vs▪ IV. Finally by this title we are put in mind, that we Christians, being all brethren, should labour to maintayne brotherly love among vs so much the more by how much our Saviour is also our brother; and we know that gene∣rally one brother taketh vp the quarel of another brother; and it is not for our purpose to have our Saviour against vs▪ Therfore particularly when we are to receive, or have received, we must according to the counsell of S. Peter, lay a side all malic, Pet. 2▪ all deceite, and dissembling, and nvy, and all detraction, to the end to mayntayne this brotherly love as being of one familie with Jesus Christ, and feeding vpon the same supercelestiall bread of his sacred body; and dispose ourselves to all meekes, and af∣fabilitie, that there be no dissention, nor hartburning, not any occasion of it, by word or ded, but aist one another in what we can, with no lesse promptitude, and readynes, then one hand is ready to help the other. Intertaynment of our Saviour as he is the sacrifice of the law of grace. I. SAcrifices were practised in the law of nature from the beginning of the world, and instituted in the law of Moyses, as the prime act of worship due
to God, as he is the author, and giver of all things, and as due to none but God. And because none can deserve better then he who is the fountaine and giver of all, the light of nature did dictate, and the law prescribe, that the best things, and prime fruits should be offered, nothing ame, nothing corrupted▪ nothing which was not per∣fect in its kind.Gen. 4.  So Abel is commended for offering the first begotten, and the fat of his flock. Cain not looked vpon because defective. And because life is the best thing that we have, and most esteemed, and for the mayntay∣ning of it all other things serve,Gen. 22▪ God commanded Abra∣ham to offer him the life of his only sonne Isaac, as a testimonie that he was Lord of life, and death, that is, supreme over mankind; and secondarily, as his acknow∣ledgement of it, and obedience: Content notwithstan∣ding with the demonstration of his willingnes, and not pleased that we should exercise that vpon one another which would turne to crueltie, and barbarime, he fur∣nished him with a ram to sacrifice; and in conformitie, all the sacrifices of beasts, or fowle, or what other thing offered, were testimonies and acknowledgements that what we did to them, was due to be done in our own persons, God of his goodnes accepting other things in lieu of vs, as afterwards he appointed in the law, that the first begotten Children should be redeemed with mony: where besides the truth of the thing.Exo. 13.  We may see how pleasing it must needs be to God to part with life and goods, and the contentments of this world, rather then offend, or that we may serve him better, and persever; for every such act is a sacrifice, and hath the nature, and me∣it of the highest act of religion. II. Christ our Saviour coming into this world to perfect the written law of Moses, and to institute the law of grace, could not leave this law of his, with out a more perfect sacrifice, then had been before; therfore be∣ing to compleate all the sacrifices of the old law by the sacrifice of himself vpon the altar of the Crosse, and to provide a continuall sacrifice, not inferiour to any, for his people, and Church, to the worlds end; the day before his death he institued this blessed sacrifice of the altar, hat is, his owne self to be offered, and no only in words,
but by a publick ceremonie common to the whol Church, and to be really sacrificed, not bloodyly as once vpon the Crosse (for that would have been incompetent to him, and inconvenient to vs) but yet so that his death should be dayly, not only represented, but in a manner ac∣ted, the words of consecration dividing, as it were, the body from the blood, and the blood from the body, by being pronounced severally vpon severall matters; not that the blood of our Saviour is not also in the sacred host, and his body in the chalice, but it is not there immediatly by force of the words, but accidentally because the body, and blood is now living, as at the last supper. VVhen our Saviour sayed.Luc. 22. 19  Cor 11: 24▪ This is my body which shall be delivered for you; this is my blood, which shall be shed for you. And againe, doe this in memorie of me. Ordering the same sa∣criice to be continued successively in his Church, by his Apostles, and those who were to succeed them in thier Pristly function: so that here is the best thing offered for vs, and offered in the highest way of expression of our acknowledgement towards God; the only Sonne of God, the first born of all creatures,Coloss. 115 Who as God, contayneth all things in himself O unspeakable grace. O wonderfull fa∣vour! O immense love expressed towards man! what shall I render to our Lord for this grace, for so excessive love▪ I cannot give him a thing more gratefull, then wholy to deliver him vp my hart, and intirely vnite it vnto him. Thom▪ a Kemp. lib. 4. cap. 13. num. 3. III. As in the sacrifices of the old law, so in this our Saviour would have all his people partake of this sacri∣fice, and therfore did institute it vnder the forme of bread and wine, and not in the proper shape of flesh and blood, bread and wine being things both most vniversall. and best agreeing with every bodies taste, and from which gene∣rally people not only have least aversion, but most vse; and doe best signife the effects of this holy sacrifice, as it is also a Sacrament; to wit, the spirituall nourishment, and fortifying of our soule by the presence of our Sauiour in person,Io. 6. 55. 56 and by speciall graces flowing from him; in which respect our Saviour tearmeth his body and blood truly meate and drinke, and that he that eateth this bread shall live for ever; because, as by often eating and drinking we main∣yne
our bodily life, so by this bread we may maintayn ou spirituall life, which is to remayne for ever. O how greate and honourable is the office of Priests to whom power is given with sacred words to consecrate our Lord of Maiestie, with thier lips to blesse him, in thier hands to hold him, to receive him in thier mouth, and to minister him to others! O how pure ought those hands to be, how cleane that mouth, how holy that body, how vnspotted that hart into which the authour of Puritie doth so often enter. Thom a Kemp. 1. 4. c. 11. n. 6. Intertaynment of our Saviour as he is a spirituall banket. I. MEate and drink is for necessarie sustenance, a banket is moreover for pleasure and con∣tentment, not only of the taste, but generally all other delights concurre in it. Now if the wiseman ould say of the Manna in the old law,Sap. 16  that it had in it all delight, and the siveetnes of every thing that we taste; doubtlesse, if we apply ourselves vnto it, we shall find also in this heavenly Sacrament (where of that was a figure) all sort of spirituall delights. And first, occurs the exqui∣sitenes of the food; it being the bread of Angels, and sen vs downe as farre as from heaven, prepared to our hand, without other labour on our part, then, as in all bankers to dresse ourselves handsomly, that we be not found to appeare at so greate a table, and in such companie, without our nupiall or wedding gaent, that is, without Charitie▪ the love of God,Mat. ▪ 1 and our neighbour, or puritie of hart from mortall breach of his commandments, though we be otherwise poore, and lame, and weake, he doth not disdayne our companie, but gives vs a most harty wel∣come. Come vnto me all yee that labour;Matth. ▪ 28 and to whom it is paynefull to serve me, and are burdened with evill cus∣tomes, and passions, and I will refresh you. O sweete,Thom. á Kemp. l.  c. 1. n. 2▪ and frendly word in the eare of a syer; that thou my Lord God doest invite this poore, and needy Creature, to the feeding vpon thy sacred body: The heavens are not pure enough, and thou sayest, come vnto me all. II. Besides this exquisitenes of the food, and com∣panie, and harty welcome, if we attend, we may find
that which will please the eye of our soule very much▪ to wit, the death and passion of our blessed Saviour (to put vs in mind. VVherof, this holy Sacrament, and sacri∣fice is instituted; and, as it were, to Act it before vs.) And what can be more comfortable to a synner then to see be∣fore his eyes, the price of his redemption layed downe? to receive into his breast the forgiver of his synnes? the sacred body and blood by which they are more and more dayly washed away? If we doe vnderstand what synne is, and how much it doth import vs to be cleare of it, we cannot but take greate contentment thus to re∣ceive our Saviour, the lamb of God, who taketh away the synns of the world.10. 1 29 Reioyce, ô my soule, and give thanks to God for so noble a gift, and such singular comfort left thee in this vale of teares; for as often as thou recor∣dest this mysteric, and receivest the body of Christ so oft doest thou work the work of thy redemption, and art made partaker of all the merits of Christ. Thom. à Kemp. l. 4. c. 2. n. 6. III. As to our tast, and other senses; if we consider the refreshment which we receive by this holy Sacra∣ment, we shall find that the effect of it, is, to cure the palae of our soule; to take away our false appetites, which egge vs to feed vpon things that are hurtefull, and poysonsome; to breed satisfaction, and contentment in our devotions, and spirituall exercises, and a right temper of body and oule, in which our health doth consiste: By often receiving devoutly we shall come not to thirst so much after vanities; nor to be altered vpon every sugges∣ion or temptation, as being strengthened with this fruite of the Tree of life: And as by the practise of vertue we shall find the sweetnes of it, so the same sweetnes will diffuse itself to others by good example, and the house will befilled with the odour of the oyntment, that is, we ourselves,Io. 12 3 and others will be pleased with it. O admirable ād hidden grace of the Sacrament which is knowne only to Christs faythfull people. In this Sacrament spirituall grace is given, the strength of our soule is repayred, the beauty therof, lost by synne, is restored. The grace is sometimes so greate that from the fullnes of devotion▪ ot the mind only but our weake body also doth feel
more strength bestowed vpon it, Thomas à Kempis lib. 4. cap. 1. num. 11. IV. VVho could by contemplation rayse vp his soule so high, would not fayle to heare the musick also of the Angels singing glorie to God in this blessed mysterie▪ for, that the Angels doe assist in multitudes, both at the consecration and receiving, there is no doubt, Holy Fathers confessing it, and many visions confirming it; and seeing in his life time, in the desert, after his tempation, they came, and ministred to him;Matth. 4 11. now in glorie, they certaynly never leave him; and attending him, they cease not to sing his prayses; and also thy happines, who hast the favour to intertayne so greate a Lord, to lodge so greate a Guest, to have so pleasant a companion, so faythfull a frend, so noble. and so beautifull a spouse. ô happy soule which hast been made worthy devoutly to receive him, and receiving to be replenished with spiri∣tuall ioy. Thom à Kemp. l. 4. c. 3. n. 4. Intertaynment of our Saviour with the blessed Virgen, and S. Ioseph. I. THe time which our Saviour lived with our blessed Lady, and S. Ioseph, may be distin∣guished into three parts; the time of his Child∣hood; the time of his youth till mans estate; and the time after of his preaching: In the time of his infancie, and Childhood, though he were in most things like other children, yet some rayes of his divinitie at times appearing did not fayle to put them in mind that he was more then a Child, he carying himself with more discre∣tion, and more pliablenes then vsually infants, and Children doe; never froward, never vntoward, mo∣dest in his sports, moderate in his desires: so that besides the naturall love which parents have to thier little babes, they had a particular sweetnes, and contentment, in that he was such a babe, so qualifyed above all others; and accordingly when they beheld him, or tooke him into thier armes, or provided necessaries for him, they did it not only with extraordinarie love, but with loving reve∣rence
and respect; thier minds being elevated to a higher pitch by the continuance of his divine comportment, and never having any the least cause of distaste▪ by him. This is he whom we receive into our breasts, and as so quali∣fied he doth commend himself vnto vs, he having▪ as it were, lessened himself into this forme, to the end we should take him between our ames, and imbrace him▪ and reverently kisse his feee, and hands; assuming the af∣fections of father, and mother, so farre as to expsse the tmost of our tender love towards him, in regard, that for vs he would become an infant first, and then in this blessed Sacrament be as tractable to vs, as a little infant, in whom is all that a fatherly, or motherly hart can desie. II. VVhen his Child-hood was past, we cannot but think they tooke so much the more soqd comfort in him, by how much they observed in all his actions, and speeches, not only more of the man, but more of that maē who was dscyphed vnto them by the Angl, to wit that it was he who should be greate, the Sonne of the highest, the Saviour of his people, rigne for ever: And his dicour∣ses tending to the clearer xplication of those high poits to wit, in what true greatens did consiste, what was the saluation expcted, what was truly to reigne, how all might come to be Sonnes of God, and favored by him as such: they were infinitely taken with his conversation, spending nights and dayes with greate contentment in him: and though at times he wrought with S. Ioseph at his trade of Carpentie,Marc 6 3▪ thier eye was never of him, nor thier are from taking vp evey word, and action that fell from him; which actions doublesse were sometimes mi∣aculous, and such as aftewards bred that confidence in ou blessed Lady at the maiage feast to aske of him wine by miracle.Io. 3. 2 His coming vnto vs in the blssed Sa∣cramnt, is to hold thse discourses with vs, to inlighte our vndestanding, and to inflame our affections towards things of the other world; if we find it not at all, or not so muh as e might, it is because we give not ourselves leasure to haken to him, but withdraw ourselves in∣stantly from him to our worldly occasions: Attend a little to prayer, reade some good booke with reference, and respect to his presence, and yo will find, that as the
wiseman sayth, he will impart good things to you; and be a comfort in time of care and tediousnes:Sap. 8.  If a that instant you be called away indeavou to supply it afterwards by sometime of retirement: Sometime miraculously, he doth inlighten and inflame people without these dili∣gences on thier part; we must not presume of those ex∣traordinarie favours, but apply ourselves to the ordinrie way of his proceedings. III. After our Saviour began publickly to woke miracles, and to preach, we read nothing of S. Ioseph, probably he was dead, our Saviour and our blessed dy assisting him; but our blessed Lady followed him, among the rest of the devout women; and we read in the Ghos∣pell, that she stood sometimes with out doore, and could not get in by reason of the throng:Luc. 8. 20 By it we see her desire, and indeavour to be present with him at his exhortations and miracles, the more to increase in his love by the experi∣mentall knowledge of his greatenes. Labour that the throng of importune thoughts, or affections, doe not divert thee from inioying. thy Saviour in this coniunc∣ture, and from hakening to what he will speake to thy hart: say vnto him: How come I by this favour tha I may find thee alone and open my whole hart vnto thee, and inioy thee as my very soule desireth▪ that now no creature may divert me; that thou alone mayest speake to me▪ and I to thee as one frend to another, and as the be∣loved is wont to his beloved. Thom. a Kemp. lib. 4 cap. 13. Intertaynment of our Saviour with S. Ihon Baptist. I. S. Ihon Baptist in his Mothers womb leaped for ioy,Luc. 1▪ at our Saviours presence, and for the benefit of sanctification then received; our Saviour, by the voyce of our blessed Lady when she saluted S. Elizabeth▪ manifesting himself vnto him, and presenting him with the first fruits of redēption, by freeing him from originall synne, and imparting vnto him his holy grace in extraordi∣narie manner before he was born so that though he did ot see our Saviour with his corporall eyes, by the eye o
he knew him to be there present, and to his power ex∣pressed his ioy and contentment in it. By the words of our Saviour, and voyce of holy Church we acknowledge our Saviour to be present in the blessed Sacrament, though vayled with the resemblances of breade, and wine as the he was concealed in his mothers wombe; if we reflect with all vpon the worth of his person, the intent of his coming to vs in this manner, dayly more and more to sanctiy vs, and strengthen vs in his grace, and service, the familianes and frequencie of this favour, we shall find that we have cause to leape for ioy with S. Jhon, and so much the more in regard that our Saviours presence to S. Ihon was at a diance, but to vs, he is with vs in our breasts; where we may make vse of the words of S. Eli∣sbeth speaking of herself, and for her speechlesse infant. Whence is this to me, that my Lord cometh thus to me. Luc. 1. 43. When the rke was brought into the Campe, Rg 4. he Children of I srael gave a great shout, and the earth rang of it, and thier imies were astonished at the ioy; much more ioy should we shew at the coming of our Saviour into vs; and all the powers of our soule and body should make thier expressions ioynly and severally welcoming him. II. Our vnderstanding raysing itself to acts of lively fayth, and humilitic may say in imitation of S. Jhon (when our Saviour came afterwards to be baptized by him;)Matt. 3. 14 I ought to be baptized by thee, and thou cmest to me? It were my part to runne through fire and water to come vnto thee, Werc it but to touch the hemme of thy garment with the devout woman,Luc. 8 44 to the end to be cured of my inveteraed diseases; and thou comest to me? Thou▪ who art the king of kings, the Lord of Angels, the onl onne of my God▪ God from all eterniti without be∣ginning?Io. 127. I am not worthy to vntie the latchet of hi shooe, nor to approch so neere him as to doe him th humblest service that can be imagined, and e co∣meth to me, in this familiar, and frendly, and hum∣ble manner.Thom. à Kemp. l. 4. c. 1. n. 10. O invisible Creatour of the world, my God, how wonderfully dost thou deale with vs? how sweetly, and gratiously doest thou communicate thyself vnto vs in this blssed Sacrament. This doth surpasse all vnderstanding▪ this doth in paicular manne
draw the harts of devout people vnto thee, and inflame thier affections. III. Towards which we may consider further, the ontentment which S. Ihon tooke in beholding our Sa∣viovr as he passed along divers times by him, when poin∣ting at him he sayed, Behold the lambe of God; 1 3 behold him that taketh away t synne of the world; for his thoughts rested not in that which bodyly eyes only did disco∣ver, but they reached to that which had been taught him by spirit of God; that this was he who though borne into the world after him,Io. 11 was from all eternitie before him, the Redeemer promised, and now come to take away the sinnes of the whole world: and as he sayed in an other occasion, this was the Bridegroome,Io. 32 or spouse of our Sou∣les, himself being only a frend of the bridegroome standing, and rejoying at his voyce: how much more reason have we to rejoyce, and take content, who doe not only heare his voyce, but receive him with in vs, for the selfsame ef∣fect for which he came first into the world, and to ac∣complish the worke which hen he began. And as the eye of the bride is never of from the eye of the bride∣groome whom she passionately affecteth, so should out eyes be fixed vpon our Savior in this blessed Sacrament, taking contentment in his perfections, which are without blemish, and in his benefits hich are incomparable.Th a K l 4 c.  12 It is very much to be lamented and pittied that we are so cold ād negligent, aéd are not caryed with more affection toward our Saviour, in whom is all our hope of salvation. IV. S Ihon when he was in prison, sent two of his disciples to our Saviour with this Message for thier satis∣faction, Matt.  art thou he that art to come or expect we an∣other? Our Saviour gave them no other answer, but that they should go, and report to S. Ihon what they had he∣ard, and seen; the blind see, the lame walk, lepers ar lensd, the deafe heare, the dead rise againe, to the poor the Ghospell is preached, and blessed is e who is not scandalized in me. This is the way to increase in de∣otion towards our blessed Saviour, and this blessed Sa∣crament; not to be scandalized, or stumbled at what we see outwardly of him, but consider his power, his mercy his meekenes, in stooping to the poorest
among vs, for our comfort, and reliefe; and that we ca expect no reliefe but from him; let vs therefore humbly present our blindness, and lamenes, and deafnes, and o∣ther miseries to him, with confidence that he will cure vs, for he refuseth no body that truly desires and labours to be cured, ād gives vs more over forces to desire, and labour it. Intertaynment of our Saviour with the Samaritan Woman. I. AS our Saviour sat alone,Io. 4 vpon the brink of the well (at which people were wont to draw water for ther occasions) expecting his spiri∣tuall, and corporall, refection; so in the Churches of Catholiks (where his pretious body is reserved in the blessed Sacrament, for the refreshment of the , and of those that are in healh) with greate patience h expecteth that people will come vnto him; and though he might well be wearyed with so much attendance, and thirseth nothing more them our reliee, yet even so h sitteth still expecting, and by inward inspirations, and outward admonition sayth to out soules as to the Sama∣itan woman, give me to drink. It were to be wished, that we would not so often answer him with the put of, which the women vsed towards him a fist. How doest thou, being a ew, aske of me to drink, who am a Sama∣ritan Woman? (for the Iewes doe not vse to converse wit the Samaritans.) for much like is the answer of many, who pretend, that being people of the world, incum∣bred with worldly occasions, and imployments, they can∣not attend so often to be present at the holy sacifice, or to receive: and ought not to be pressed, or exhorted, to it, it belonging (as they conceite) to such as are retired from the world, and not to thier profession; as in the pa∣rable of the supper expressely they began all to excuse them∣selves; one because he had bought a farme, and was to take a view of it; another because he had bought five yoke of exen, and was to make triall of them; a third because he had maried a wife, as if that did make his co∣ming impossible.
II. Our Saviour, by his answer to the Samaritan, doth barre all excuse. saying, If thou didst know the gift of God, and who he is, who sayth vnto thee, give me to drink, thou peradventure wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. For certainly if we did truly weigh the greatenes of the gift, and of the giver, in this blessed Sacrament, the wonder would be ather on his part, how he being the founaine of all that can be desired (in whō are all the treasures and the fullnes of that which is God) doth aske of vs,Col: 2 3  to drink and eate, at his table▪ and that with such thirst, as if he wanted our companie: and a second wonder on our part, that being so lovingly invited to these living waters, we still hang-of; and it is but peradventure that we will accept of them; wheras there is no peradventure on his side, but he would certay∣ly and freely give himself, and with himself impart his treasures vnto vs: and doth not refuse vs because we are synners, so we doe confesse it, as this Samaritan, who acknowledged to him that she was an advlteresse, and carnally given, having had five husbands; nor doth he decline vs, because of our worldly busines, but with rea∣son expects we should lay it a side for some houres to at∣tend him, as this woman who did not think this time long which she spent in discourse with ou Saviour; and left her pitcher behind her for a time, that she might mo∣e fully comply with him. III. At the first pehaps we may not find so much comfort in eciving, by reason of our overmuch gree∣dynes about our worldly affayres▪ or little vse of praye; the one dulling, the other withdrawing our thoughts; neither doth God allwayes suddenly woke any notabl alteration in our soules, but by degrees as in this woman first asking her to drink, as if himself had needed: every good motion hath its beginning from him,Iac.  every good gift is from above; and then he expects we should hel∣pe ourselves by consideration of the dignitie, the necessi∣ie, the profit of this blessed Sacrament. (Every one tha drinketh of the water of this world shall thirst againe,Io. 4.  and be ever thiftie, till his dying day, not on in tē thousād thin∣king that he hath enough, but that for one occasion, or o∣her he would have more; but he that drinketh liberally of
water which our Saviour will gives him, shall not thirs after the manner of the world, with troble and vexa∣ion, but the very water of grace received shall be vnto him as fountaine ever bubling and thrusting vs on to life everlasting. The water of this world is heavy, ever pressing vs downewards, cold, and subiect to ill avours, and corruption, the waters of his grace received in the Sacrament give life eternall, and as bewixt temporall, and eternall there is no comparison, so betwixt the worth and benefit of the one, and the other water. IV. Lord give me this water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw. This was the first good effect in the woman of ur Saviours motion, to wit a desire of the water of which he was speaking; and it was seconded by further instruction; for she, all this while, thought he had spoken of the materiall water, and therefore alleaged, that the well was deepe, and seing he had nothing wherwith to draw water, she wondered where he should have thos living waters: But he by little, and little raysed her thoughts to vnderstand that he spake of spirituall water, and re∣freshment belonging to eternitie; a thing which even in her vnderstanding was of more importance; and therfore she sayed, she expected the Messias who would instruct her in all those high matters; whervpon our Saviour dif∣ferred her no longer, but told her he was the Messias ex∣pected; which she instantly proclaymed, with greae ioy, through the whole citty from whence she came; and he was received in it with much satisfaction. O powerfull word! I am he who speakes with thee. It is the Saviour of the world who doth thus familiarly impart himself vnto vs. Too greate a person to be put in balance with what∣ever thing created, and his blessed presence too greate a favour that any thing should be admitted to stand in com∣petencie with it. Come and s the man, who is able to satisfy you in all your doubts, and from whome you shall receive all goodnes; take these things into your conside∣ration, that you may inioy the living waters which he promiseth, and in which you will find eternall comfor▪ V. His disciples returning from the tone with pro∣vision, wondered to find him talking with the woman; but more, when inviting him to take his refection vpo
what they brought, he answered, that he had other meat to feed on, which they knew not; and to take away thier ondering, he declared himself, that his food was to do the will of his father; and wheras it was then neere harvest time, his harvest was the good of soules; in all things in∣deavouring to rayse our thoughts from these temporall things, to that which doth infinitely more import vs, to wit, our spirituall food, and the harvest of which we ar to make ou eternall living; for which end he would re∣maine with vs continually vnder the shapes of bread and wine that as we cannot forget, nor forgo for any thing, our corporall food, so we should be as mind full, at leas▪ of our spirituall food and sustenance; and not neglect it, or differe it long for any temporall occasion whatsoe∣ver. O Lord my God, prevent m with the sweetnes of thy blessings, that I may devoutly, and worthily approch to thy Sacrament: stirre vp my hart towards thee, and ake away the heavy dullnes hich possesseh me. Tho▪ Kemp. lib. 4. c. 4. Intertaynment of our Saviour with the pe∣nitent Magdalen. I. S. Mari Magdalen is set before vs as a patterne of the best love,Luc. 7. 32▪ after harty repentance for our synns; her teares bearing testimonie of her sor∣ow; her incessant kissing of our Saviours feete, witne∣ing her love; and her annointing them, her desire of ma∣king satisfaction to her power: which three though at all times it behoveth vs to practice, yet chiefly in order to the holy table of our Lord, before and after receiving him▪ wich might be the cause among others, why he ordered her convesion to happen while he was sitting at board with the Pharisee; whose invitation he accepted the ra∣ther, because (as in the Samaritan) he had other food to feede on, then was outwardly set before him, and accor∣dingly he wished him to take notice of what this woman was then doing, to receive instruction, how it had bee itting for him to have behaved himself towards our Sa∣viour in his receptiopn, by discoverie of his errours com∣itted in it.
II. The paable which our Saviour vsed to the Pha∣isee of two debters, wherof one owed a greate summe of money, the other a lesse, and were both forgiven; may serve vs for the first document, and each vs, that we are all debters to our Saviour, more or lesse; and that he that hall think himself lesse debter then another, shall runne greate hazared to be grossely mistaken; as we find this Pharisee was; and that other, who comparing himself with the Publican,Luc▪ 1: v. 14 however in his owne eyes he thought he deserved better, was found in the eyes of God to be farre behind. Let every one therfore retire himself into the closet of his hart, and looke over his obligations, new and old; he will not find them all cancelled; if those for which he was eternally to lye in chaynes have been delivered vs vpon repentance, and promise of amend∣ment (as to the servant that fell at his Masters feete,Mae. 18. 27▪ and craved his patience) let vs looke whether the obligation which we have to our Neighbour, to deale by him as God hath dealt by vs, be dischaged. And if we fid no greate summes of this nature owing, yet besides infinit little debts which we dayly incurre, we have the greate debt of his patient forbearance▪ still lying vpon vs, and of his more then patient love, out of which he hath not been overcome with our often offenses, but still favored vs with his graces: in regard of all which, we must pro∣strate ourselves with the Magdalen at our Saviours feete, with teares acknowledging our Arriers. More in number then the hayres of our head, and poure them out large∣ly as water, confessing that all we can doe is not suffici∣ent to discharge even this new obligation of his gracious admitting vs, poore synners, to his table, What doth this pious condescendencie meane, and this frendly invi∣tation? How shall I dare to approch, who have nothing good wheron to presume? Th. a Kempis. lib. 4. c. 1. n. 3. III. But o draw so neere as we can to our discharge, we must chiefly in this occasion practise acts of love; which is two fold, towads God, fignifyed by her incessant kisses; and towards our Neighbour, signifyed by the oyntment bestowed vpon our Saviours feete. These two are the fullfilling of the law;Ro 13 10. and in these two consisteth our Plenarie Indulgence, and remiss: for, having received
bsolution of all greate offenses, which we could remem∣ber, in the Sacrament of confession; in this are forgiven more fully those which we could not remember, and what other veniall synns we may have committed since confession, being sory for them, with purpose o amend; and by acts of love, and true contrition, which are pro∣per to this Sacrament of love, much of the payne due to synne is eleased; and the more, the more we love, as our Saviour sayed, in conclusion, of this blessed saint. Many syns are forgiven her, because she loved much, he that finds lesse forgiven him, it is signe he loved lesse. And of that love which we owe our Neighbour the holy Ghost telleth vs, that almes giving, or works of mercy deliver from all synne,Tob. 4. 11. and from death, and will not suffer a soule to goe into darkensse.Th. a Ke l. 3. c. 59▪ Lord what is my confidence in this life, or what greater comfort among all things vnder heaven; is it not thou my Lord God? IV. The Magdalen vnderstood her vnworthynes yet did not forbeare to approch to our Saviour▪ but kno∣wing the greatenes of her disease, she came with humili∣tie to the Physitian, whom she found able and willing to cure her, she placed herself behind  his feete; shame commanding her to be bashfull, love drawing her on to a reverent confidence: she began with teares, but never ceased to kisse his feete; for whoever hath least cause to weepe hath most cause to love, his synns being either forgiven him, or prevented▪S. Greg She considered what she had done and would put noe stint to what she was to doe for satisfaction▪ she poured forth teares from her eyes, but more acts o love from her hart, and her very teares served her as oile to  me her affection, comparing her owne vnworthynes with so kind a reception Behold this woman: compae reception with eception: by how much this is more gratious, by to much thy teares and kisss ough to be more abundat and ervent.
Intertaynment of our Saviour with th Cananean. I. THe Magdalen was not so lovingly intertayned, but the Cananean may seeme to have been as roughly,Matth.  22. at first, reiected; for though she cryed after him a mayne; and had his Apostles intercessours, and coming neerer prostrated herself before him, she could hardly be heared; because she was a stranger by nation, and not of the Iewes, to whome our Saviour was imme∣diatly sent and not to the gentils. It is true also that her request was not directly for her spirituall reliefe, as the Magdalens but for the reliefe of her dughter that was tormented with an evill spirit: Yet that was figuratively her soule,S. Ierome. (as S. Ierome interpreteth it) oppressed as then with Idolatie. And all this to vs is an Instruction, no to come at any time to this blessed Sacrament for human respects, as to doe as others doe, or because we ill no displease, or only for some temporall end that tendeth not to our spirituall good; for thogh nothing of this be absolutely vnlawfull, ād in time God hath so much mercy of vs, that he turnes our affections to some better motives▪ yet we shall not have or the present so much benefit; but ather doe deserve in some measue a check and that out Saviour should turne himself from vs; for he comes not to vs for those ends, but for our spirituall occaions. II. The poore woman, as it seemes, had so much be∣leefe of our Saviours power, and so much confidence in his goodnes, that she would not be beaten of; but the more he delayed her, the more earnest she was in her re∣quest; and having vsed other expressions before, explay∣ing her daughters necessitie, here prostrating herself be∣fore him, confined herself to few words saying only, Lord help me. And our Saviour elling her, that it was not good o take the bread of the Children, and to cast it to the dogs: She nothing trobled at i, but humbly acknowled∣ging her vnworthynes, replyed, that it was true, but ye hat little dogs did feed of the crumbs that fell from thier asters table. In effct saying with the prodigall Child vpon his returne,.  I have synned against heaven and
in thy sight, now I am not worthy to be called thy sonne make me as one of thy hyrelings, or servants, or the mea∣nest in thy house, to sit vnder thy table; for the crumbs which fall from it are more delicious then all the daynties of the world, and more soveraigne for all my infirmities. O heavenly banket,O sacrum convi∣vium▪ in which Christ is received, the me∣morie of his passion is recorded; the soule is filled with grace; and a pledge of future glorie is givē into our hands. III. Her perseverance, and humilitie prevayled so farre with our Saviour, that he not only granted her re∣quest, in the cure of her daughter; but greately commen∣ded her faith; giving vs to vnderstand, that nothing must beate us of from stedfastly beleeving his blessed presence, and the power of the Sacrament, though we doe not sudenly feele the effect of receiving▪ and that we must humble ourselves the more, and impute the delay to our owne vndeservings, as truly the cause why we feele not so much benefit: And it is no ill way to deserve increase of grace, to offer to our blessed Saviour at the time of receiving a good purpose to abide, or dissemble a re∣proch, or a hard word, which may fall from our neigh∣bour towards vs, by example of this Woman, who in effect seemed to be reckoned no better then a dog; and how meanly doe some people think, and speake of our Saviour himself, and of this holy table? Yet he dis∣sembleth it for our good, and continueth his gracious presence with vs. Intertaynment of our Saviour with Ma∣tha Marie and Lazarus. I. LAzarus is figure of the purgative life, Martha of the active▪ Marie of the contemplative. The acts which are proper to all these three, can not be better imployed then in intertayning our Blessed Sa∣viour, with the like love that these two sisters, and thier brother Lazarus did intertayne him in thier life time. La∣zarus first languished,▪ then dyed of his siknes; but was restored to life by our Saviour, and at an intertaynment, a little before our Saviours passion,Io.  was one of thse that sat at table: It is farre from our dutie, but too often seen in vs, that by disorder, we suffer ill humours, and ill
dispossitions to grow in our soules, which vitiating the health therof, we languish, and are dull in the service of God; ad not vsing convenient remedie in time, we come to dye mortall offense; and abiding long in it, we be∣come oysome,Io. 11 39 and of ill example to others; and were not the goodnes of God incomparable, so we should lye irre∣coverably turned into very earth, without possibilitie of returning, or raysing our head towards heaven: But our Saviour; of himself, profers to coem to vs, and rayse vs. He is dead, but let vs go to him; and out of our corruption draweth our greater good. Here it fitting we should bor∣row teares of the systers; and contemplating our owne spirituall misfortunes, bewayle them vnconsolably. Lord, what a disastre was it to me, that I should forsake thee? if I had had thee in my thoughts, as I ought, this would not have befallen me; I am loathsome to myself in this dungeon of synne, in which I am buryed; what a weight of difficultie doth presse me downe, that I cannot rayse myself▪ Command, sweet Iesns, that the stone be removed; give me grace to vnderstand thoroughly where I have layed myself; call vpon me with a strong voyc Lazarus come forth; vntie the bonds in which I am in∣snared; ô how willingly will I obey thy voyce, and be carefull not to fall into the like herafter. II. We may easyly imagin what ioy this bred in the two sisters, but it bred also no lesse envie; and malice in some of the Iewes in so much that the chiefe of them contrived how they might kill Lazarus, because many did beleieve in our Saviour by occasion of this miracle.Io. 12 0 By which we must learne both to be thankfull to our Saviour for so greate a benefit, as at which the very Angels doe reioyce; and be the more wary we be not intrapped by our Ghost∣ly enimie,Luc. 5 10 who like a roring lion walketh about, seeking whom be  devure; the diligence of Martha in inter∣taying will put vs in a way to secure our∣selves . Our Saviour in such an occasion sayed vnto  Martha, Martha, thou art carefull, and art trobled about many things.Lu. 10 42 He did not misike her care∣fulnes: not to be , is next degree to neglect; to be carefull and  I, argues pusillanimitie: to be out of a noble disposition, con∣fident
in that which is best: And, speaking of intertayn∣ment, in three things people vse to shew thier care; that there be varietie of good meates; that they be tender and well seasoned; that they be served in good order and time. These three betoken the serious mortifications of our passions and evill customes after our reconciliation: Varietie of vertuous actions sometimes praying, some∣times reading, sometimes doing some deed of Charitie, spirituall or temporall, sometime attending to our other occasions according to our calling. And thirdly that all these things be not done at randome, but in an orderly, and constant way, and distribution so neere aspossibly we can. III. It is very true, that Charitie, or the love of God▪ is the queen of vertues, and is that one thing, which is absolutely necessarie, as indeed comprehending all other vertues,1 Cor. 13 4 as the Apostle setteth forth vnto vs: Charitie is patient, benigne, doth not envie &c. and is never to be taken from vs; because fayth, and hope, and other vertues will cease in heaven, where there will be no occasion of them. Charitie remayneth for ever. And happy are they who with Marie Magdalen can sit at the feete of our Saviour; by hearing and speaking of his love▪ to inflame it in thier harts: It is the best part, yet they must vnderstand that, so long as we live in this vale of miserie, it is but a part; it must be so attended vnto▪ as not to hinder other occasions, which dayly call vpon vs. And even in this intertaynment of our Saviour, when we receive him, though our whole life time were not sufficient to attend vpon him for once receiving, yet having set at his feete some convenient spce, so we part o from him for idlenes, ortediousnes, or neglect, we may not omit other necessarie bysines; but having com∣mended all the occasions of the day, or weeke following▪ to his direction, we shall find that we shall have no rea∣son to complayne that we are left alone, but be holpen, assisted in our distractions by our former quie. thou art my beloved,Thom.  Kemp. l. 4 c. 13 n. 2 choosen among a thousand, in whome it hath pleased my soule to dwell all the dayes of my life; thou are he in whome is all true peace and quier.
Intertaynment of our Saviour with Zacheus. I. ZAchus was Prince,Luc. 19 or chiefe of the Publicans: a rich man, and desirous to s our Saviour, as he passed that way, but could not by reason of th throng of peopl, himself being low of stature, therfore run∣ning before, he went vp into a sycomore tree. that he might see him. This represents vnto vs the condition of many. who are hard of beleefe, and find a thousand difficulties▪ particulaly in this Mysterie of the blessed Sacrament; hu∣mane reasons throging vpon them so thick, that the more they strive inthem, the further they are thrust of from seeing our Saviour as he is; and the richer they are indowed with naturall wit, the more difficultie oftimes they find; and where thier naturall wit doth not help the ownes of thier stature, they think that runing before every body with philosophicall discourses they shall discover that which will give them content and satisfac∣tion. But as Zaches had been little the better, if no other coe had been taken, but his stepping into the sycomore tree, and perhaps that only sight might have put him into a maner conceit of our Saviour then be∣fore it;Thom. à Kemp. l. 4 c. 18 so it fares with these men. Thou must beware of curious, and unprofitable searching into this most pro∣found Sacrament, if thou wilt not be drowned in the depth of doubtfulnes. &c. II. In regard nothwithstanding that his indeavour to see our Saviour was not all together of curiositie, b probably out of some reverend conceite of him mingled with it, our Saviour taking compassion of him shewed him the way how he might come, both truly to know him, and inoy him; wherfore looking vp vpon him, he vnto him, make hast, and come , for this day, I bide in thy house. It must be light from our Saviou eye, supernaturaly inlightening vs, that must give vs rue notion of this myserie; it is our dutie how lo we be of stature, or howeve rich in naturall to make hast, When ever any reason represents itself trarie to what fayth doth tell vs (not to runne higher a higher in our ) but baing discourses, to
lower and lower into our owne disabilities, mind∣full of that caveat which S.Cor. 8.2 Paul gives vs: If any man think that he knoweth some thing he hath not yet knowne how he ought to know.Thom. à Kemp. l 4 c. 18 n. 2 Many have lost thier devotion, while they would be searching into higher things. III. And he made hast, and came downe, and received him reioycing; and when all saw it, they muttered, saying, that he turned in to a man that was a synner. But Zacheus standing sayed to our Lord: Behold the half of my goods I give to the poore, and if I have defrauded any man of any thing, I restore foure-fold. Let people mutter as they please, either at the blindnes of our fayth, or at our hast to come to our Saviour, and often receiving; We see here the beneit of it▪ the more we submit our thoughts to fayth, the more constant we become in it; the ofener we receive, the more grace is derived into vs, and more ligh, and resolution to discover, and remedie things of which before we made no account: And he office of our Saviour, and intent of his coming, being to seeke and to sav that which was lost, we have the more frequent occasion, and more potēt motive to seeke ith him into our soules, and expect saluation from him.Thom. à Kemp. l. 4▪ c. 16. n. 2▪ Behold I stand before thee, poore and naked, begging gace, and craving mercy. Intertayment of our Saviour with the people of Hierusalem. I. THe Prophet Zacharie exhorts the people of Hierusalem greately to reioyce, and to exult in regard of our Saviours coming:Zach. 9 9 Behold thy king shall come vnto thee poore (or as S. Matthew records it) eeke, sitting vpon an, Asse, and vpon a colt, the fole of an Asse. And he gives the reason,Matth. 21▪ because in this meeke and umble manner he intended to conquer the world brin∣ging both Iew and Getill to receive him as thier king, and to obey his commands and directions. The same meeke, and humble manner he continues till this day, particularly in the blessed Sacrament, offering himself to be received b vs in so loving a way, that however they who have ier thoughts pinned vpon worldly greatnes, may tnk it strange in him, and folly in vs to beleeve, tha e should come vnto vs in so poore, and infirme wise,
yet to those who truly consider his loving intent in it, it is both admirable, and to be received with all ioy and exul∣ation, subiecting our vnderstanding to his power, wis∣dome, and goodnes; and bridling our wilde thoughts from ranging out of the high and beaten way of Gods received truth. II. The expression which the people made of thier ioy and contentment, was not a little also to be admired, considering the humble manner in which he choose to make this his solemne entrance: The disciples covered the Asse, and the colt with thier garments; the people likewise Spread thiers vpon the ground all a long as he rode; others cut downe branches, and leaves of trees, and strewed them in the way, and multitudes that went bfore him▪ and followed him, cryed Hosanna, to the Sonne of David; bles∣sed is he that cometh in the name of our Lord, Hosanna in the highest: And when he was entred Hierusale the whole citty was moved, saying who is this? and the people sayed, this is Iesus,S. Bern. the Prophet, of Nazareth in Galilee S. Bernard tells vs, that to receive our Saviour worthyly, we must be clad with the garments of the Apostles, thier doctrine, thier vertues, thier obedience, thier charitie; we must lay ourselves vnder his feee, acknowledging that whatever we have is his; garment, branch, and leafe; and inces∣santly consider who he is; for whatever we can arrive to know of him will fall short of his worth: This is Iesus: Blessed is he that can vnderstand this word.Thom. à Kemp. l. 2 ▪ 8. n. 2. He that finds Jesus, finds a good treasure, yea a good above all goods: He that leeseth Jesus, leeseth more, then the whole world. III. Our blessed Saviour, amidst all this intertaynment, and all this joy of the people, so soone as from the top of mount Olivet he discovered the citty of Hierusalem, brake forth into teares, and into a most sad expression of himself.Luc. 19. 2 O Hierusalsm; if thou  knowen, even in this thy day, the things which belong to thy peace; but no they are hidden from thy eyes. &c. He saw that however the whole citty was moved at his coming, the greatest part of it, had not the motions towards him hich be∣comed them, and him; and even many of those  for present cryed Hosanna, would not long after be
and cry Barrrabas, and Crucifie him. Where we see with how much reasō the Apostle admonisheth every one of vs,1 Cor  28. to examin, and prove himself, before and after he eates of this facred bread, that he come not vnworthyly not making difference betwixt this and a common table; nor after having been intertayned at it, returne like a dog to his vomit. We approch to him who hath an eye which searcheth into our very harts; there is no dissem∣bling: but as he searcheth into vs, let vs search into his deservings, and be midfull of them, and we shall find the peace of God, which is hidden from the eyes of the world, and injoy the peace of our mind, which will be to vs a continuall banket.Prov. 15  And insteed of drawing teares from our Saviour, we shall rejoyce him and the Angels; who will joyne with the devout people, and sing Hosanna,Th. a Ke 1. 4. c. 17. n. 5 at this happy meeting. Let all people, nations, and tongues prayse thee, and thy holy, and me∣ifluous name, and magnifie it with ardent devotion, end jubilee. &c. Intertaynment of our Saviour with the first Christians. I. IT is recorded of the first Christians that they were presevering in the doctrine of the Apostles,Act. 2 42 and in the communication of breaking of bread, and prayers, and greate feare was in all. And all that beleeved were together, and had all things common. Thier possessions, and substance they sold, and divided them to all, as every one had need. This being the practise of those primitive times, it must serve vs as a patterne, in some proportion, to imitate, at least in the occasion which we have to re∣ceive our Lord, and partake of that heavenly bread, which they handled with so greate reverence: And first we must continue stedfast in the doctrine of the Apostles concer∣ning it: which doctrine we may read at large in the ele∣venth Chapter of the first of S. Paul to the Corinthians, confirming what the Gospells deliver, concerning the realitie of the Body and blood of our Saviour, vnder the shapes of bread and wine; and teaching vs how greate difference we ought to make betwixt this spirituall ban∣ke, and other meetings; and consequently examin our∣selves
before hand, and cleare our consciences from synne coming to receive him, who is the searcher of harts and judge of the quick and the dead.Th. a Ke. 1. 4. c. . If thou hadst the puritie of Angels, and the holynes of S. Ihon Bap∣tist; thou were not worthy to receive this Sacrament. II. Secondly; it is fitting we should bestow some ti∣me in prayer, both before and after receiving; and not come abruptly to the holy table, or go from it, as we would from an ordinarie meale; but think what we are doing, and have done; and commend ourselves to God, and his Saints vpon it, that we may receive the benefit of so greate a treasure more plentifully. The Apostle tells vs▪i, Cor. 11 30 that many were weake, and feeble among the first Christians, and many did dye, because they made little or no difference betwixt this and other meats; which spiritually at least doth befall vs, when we come and go away vnreverently; for first we grow weake, and feeble in our resolutions of serving God, and keeping his com∣mandments, and then neglect them, which brings vs to the death of our soules. III. Thirdly the day in which we receive, it were fitting we should continue in our thoughts the feare of God, more particularly thn other dayes, remembring now and then what a guest hath vouchsafed to lodge in our breast: and fourthly also weane oursel∣ves some thing from the pleasures; and vanities of the world; doing some act of charitie towards our Neigh∣bour, by way of almes or otherwise; taking heed that we fall not into contention with others, but maintayne love and charitie towards all; for our Saviour hath re∣served nothing from vs, but given vs his whole substance; and this is properly the Sacrament of love, in which he desires to be with vs, one body and one spirit, and that we should be so one with another,Ec. 4. 4. as we have been cal∣led in one hope of our vocation. O my God! how much did they indeavour to doe to please thee? How little is that which I doe? How little time doe I bestow wben I prepare myself to receive? Seldome wholy recollected, more seldome free from all distraction. Thomas a Kempis l. 4. c. 1. n. 5.
Intertaynment of our Saviour with the Apostles. I. S. Peeter vpon occasion of the transfiguration of our Saviour sayed vnto him. Lord it is good for vs to be here;Matt.  if those wi, let vs make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moyses, and one for Elias. Our Saviour in the blessed Sacrament doth not shew himself in a glorious shape, but shrouded with the cloude, or forme of bread and wine; yet beholding him (not with the eye of sence, as then S. Peeter) but with the eye of faith, we may with as much love and confi∣dence say vnto him, Lord, it is good for vs to be here: and insteed of the tabernacles of Moyses and Elias, make vse of the figures of the old testament, which represented this blessed mysterie; as the Sacrifices of Abel, and Abra∣ham, here accomplished; and the Manna, outgone by many degrees; and the Paschal lambe, and the bread of proposition, and the dayly Sacrifices, and what ever el is recorded in all the ceremonialls, with all the prophe∣cies; and consider how much the person of our Saviour, and the manner of his being present with vs, and the in∣rent and effect of this my sterie, doth exceed all that is go∣ne before; and taking vp thy rest in the tabernacle of thy hart with our Saviour, say often to him, how amiable are thy tabernacles o Lord of hosts!Ps. 83. My soule longeth, and langui∣sheth after the cours of my Lord: my hart, and my flesh have exvlted in my living God. &c. II. S. Paul had a desire to be dissolved; that is even to dye, that he might be with Christ, esteeming better then life, or any thig that that this life can affoard;Phil. 1. 23. that was a desire of seeing him in an other world; yet if we did conceive things in thier right value, we should in rea∣son, with as much fervour, lay aside all worldly busines to be with Christ in this blessed action at convenient ti∣mes; saying with the same Apostostle; To me,Ibid. V. 2. to live is Christ, and to die is gayne: that is Christ is my life; and though I forsake all the world to be with him, I shall be a gayner by i- Who therfore shall sever vs from the Chari∣tie or love of Christ. Tribulation? Or distresse? or famine? Or nakdnes?Rom. 8▪ 35. Or danger? Or persecution? Or the
sword? I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither things present, nor things to come, nor might, nor heigth, nor deapth, nor other creature shall be able to separate &c. I desire to be dissol∣ved from this mortall body, that I may see thee face; but seeing it is thy pleasure that I only injoy thy in this co∣vert manner, I willingly forgo all worldly content, all companie, all pastime or intertaynment, to be with thee, for thou art my God, and all things. III. S. Andrew with another, seeing our Saviour once passe alone by him, and hearing S. Jhon Baptist (whose disciple then he was) say,. t. 36. Behold the lambe of God, accosted our Saviour, and asked him, Master, where dwellest thou? And he sayed, come, and see; they came and saw, where he abided, and taried with him that day. VVhat can be more beseeming thee in this blessed action, then even out of compassion to aske our Saviour where he dwelleth here below, seeing his glorious habitation is so adorable in heaven. VVhat are our Churches, be they never so sumptious? And how many of them are more like stables then Churches? And what is thy breast? Co∣me neere, and home to thyself, and see where, and how thou intertaynest him, and how long thou vsest to stay with him▪ S. James, and S. Ihon, vpon occasion that the Samaritans once did with discurtesie refuse to give passage to our Saviour through thier citty,Luc. 9 52 would have commanded fire from heaven vpon them, which zeale though our Saviour repehended as vnreasonable, yet it behoveth vs to reflect, how deepely we are apt to take an indignitie offered, where ourselves are concer∣ned and how slight oftimes we make of this so greate a curtesie of our Saviour, though it wholy concerne vs; and againe how that really that punishment was not exorbi∣tant, considering the person contumeliously rejected, and yet how little oftimes we value him. IV. Finally therfore joyne with S. Ihon, who deser∣ved the name of the beloved disciple; and seeing our Sa∣viour is pleased to remayne in thy breast, as he gave vpon his a resting place to S.Io. 13 23 Ihon, be not backward, nor streight laced in point of love, but as the favour is greater, so to thy abilitie straine thyelf to greater love: give him his full rest in thy soule: doe not disquiet him with v
quiet thoughts, words, or deeds. Begge of him that he will stay with thee, even beyond the time limited by the species;Luc 24. 29 say with the two disciples. Mane nobiscum Domine quoniam advesperascit.l. 4 c. 16 n. And with the devout Thomas a Kempis. VVould to God that thou wouldest totally in∣flame me by thy presence:Io, 20. 2 stretch forth thy hand with S. Thomas, and touch his sacred syde, and hands, and frete, and kissing them say. My Lord and my God. Intertaynments of our Saviour with the Angels and Saints. I. VVHile the Apostles, at our Saviours Ascen∣sion, were looking towards heaven af∣ter him, two Angels appearing sayed, what stand you looking into heavon?Act. 1 1 This Iesus, who is ta∣ken vp from you into heaven shall so come, as you have seen him going into heaven. And really if we should con∣sider only the worth, and dignitie of his person, it were but fitting he should in all occasions appeare in so much, and much greater glorie; but stooping to our weaknes, and to our commoditie, behold how he cometh, not clad with glorie, but clouded vnder the shapes of bread and wine; yet this is the same Iesus, who then taken vp into heaven, sitteth at the right hand of his heavenly Father in glorie. Stand therfore, and looke earnestly into this heavenly mysterie. Admire and love his goodnes; once he will come to judge; but to doe mercy vpon vs, to increase his graces, to bestow himself in so frendly a man∣ner, he comes millions and milleons of times, and will continue so till the end of the world. This is Iesus, this is my Saviour, my Redeemer, my all things. O that I could say, he shall never be taken from me. Come sweet Jesus, and come so, that I may ever inioy thee. Amen. II. His taking vp into heaven, betokeneth not any need that he had of assistance (for he ascended of himself) but the reception, or intertaynment, which the Angels and Saints gave him at his ascension: all the nine quiers ranking themselves in order, from the highest to the lo∣west heaven, and taking him in the midst of them sin∣ging prayses of his divinity, and humanitie, and of the wonderous things which he had done; and suffered for mankinde, and rejoycing at his exaltation even above
themselves;3. reg. 8. 7. the Cherubims, not daring to stretch thier wings over his head, as anciently over the Arke; and the Seraphins,Esay. 6. 2. hiding thier faces, in reverence of the splendour of his glorious countenance; the Thrones, and Dominations, and Principalities proftrating themselves vnto him as king of kings and Lord of Lords;Ap. 9. 16. and the rest of the heavenly court doing homage every one in his degree. VVhy stand we looking only vpon him? And not industriating ourselves to doe him, with the holy Angels, all the honour and ho∣mage thar lyeth in our powre; or perhaps doe not so much as looke after him, but let our thoughts ād feete wāder in∣stantly after other objects. O object eternally to be looked on, and vpō which the Angels; ād saints doe eternally loo∣ke, and cānot be satiated with the beauty and riches of it. III. S. Jhon sayed once to the people. There hath one stood in the midst of yee whome yee know not.Io. 1. 26. Let not this be now veryfied in thee, after so many evidences; Imitate the fayth of the Apostles, and say with S. Peeter. Thou art Christ,Matth. 16 the sonne of the living God. Say with Natha∣nael, Thou art the Sonne of God,Io. 1. 49. thou art the king of Is∣rael. Looking vp into heaven with S. Stephen, acknow∣ledge that this is the same Jesus,Act. 7. 55 who standeth at the right, hand of God. Harken to S. Ihon Chrisostome,S. Ihon Chrysost. who tells vs, that millions of Angels doe assist at the holy sacrifice, and holy communion, with head and knee bowed before him:S. Agnes say with S. Agnes. To him I keepe my fayth, to him with intire devotion I commit myself. Say with S. Agatha,S. Agatha Carnall medicine I never applyed to my body but I have my Lord Jesus, who by his word alone doth, repayre all things.S. Cecilie Sing with S. Cecely▪ Let my hart be∣come without spot, that I may not be confounded in the sight of my heavenly spouse. Offer vp vnto him with these, and other Virgins. Puritie of hat; with the holy Confessours, mortification of thy senses: with the holy Bishops ād Doctours, entire obediēce to that which they have generally delivered concerning this blessed mysterie▪ with the glorious Martyrs, constanci and resolution in whatever opposition? VVith all the Saints, joy and exulta∣tion at the glorie and goodnes which shineth in it, and fal∣ling downe with them vpon thy face before him say. Amen Benediction, and glorie, and wisdome, and thanksgiving, honour, and power, and strength, to our God for ever and ever. Amen.
THE TABLE. PReface to the Reader. 3 Introduction to the following Medit. I. Part. 5 Introduction. II. Part. 6 The Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour. I. Part. 8 The Incarnation. II. Part. 9 The Incarnation. III. Part. 10 The Incarnation. IV. Part. 11 The Visiting S. Elizabeth. I. Part. 12 The Visitation. II. Part. 14 The Nativitie of S. Ihon Baptist. I. Part. 15 The Nativitie of S. Ihon. II. Part. 16 The office of S. Ihon as Precursor. 17 S. Joseph certifyed by the Angel. 1 A preparative for the receiving of our Saviour. I. Part. 20 Of the preparative. II. Part. 21 III. Part. 22 IV. Part. 22 The journie of Jesus, Marie, and Joseph to Bethleem 23 The Birth of our Saviour. 25 The Angels joyfull tidings to the sheepherds. 26 The shepeherds make hast to our Saviour, 27 The Circumcision of our Lord. 28 Of the name of Jesus. 29 The start which appeared in the east. 30 Herode trobled. 31 The Sages find our Saviour. 32 The purification of the Blessed Virge. 33 The law of Purification. 34 Old Simeon meets our Saviour. 35 He take the Child in his armes. 36 Simeon his Prophecie. 37 Anna the Prophesse. 38 The flight into gypt. 39 The killing of the Innocents. 40 The returne out of Egypt. 41 Christ in the Temple at twelve yeares of age. 42 His Answer to his mother. 44 His life till thirty. 45 Introduction to the meditations of the Passion. 46 The Councel of the Jewes against our Saviour. 47
The Pascal Lambe. 49 The Washing of his disciples feete. 50 The parting of Judas from the test 52 The Institution of the Blessed Sacrament. 53 His Prayer in the Carden. 55 Our Saviour betrayed. 56 What passed in the night. I. Par 58 II. Part. 60 Our Saviour accused before Pilate. 61 He is sent to Herode. 63 Barrabas preferred. 65 The whipping of our Saviour. 67 The Crowne of thornes. 68 Ecce Homo. 70 The Carrying of the Crosse. 72 The Crucifying. 74 The words of our Saviour. I. Part. 75 II. Part. 76 III. Part. 77 IV. Part. 79 V. Part. 80 VI. Part. 81 What happened after his death. 82 The taking from the Crosse and buryall. 84 An exercise in honour of the woundes of our Saviour. 85 Of the Passion by way of repetition. I. Part. 87 II. Part. 89 III. Part. 90 IV. Part. 92 V. Part. 93 The soiitude of our Blessed Lady. 95 Introdnction to the Mysteries of the Resurrection. 97 Our Saviours going downe to limbo. 98 His Resurrection and appearing to his Mother. 100 II. Part. 102 III. Part. 103 The Angel speakes to the women. 104 Peeter and Ihon runne to the sepulchre. 106 He appeares to the Magdalen. I. Part. 107 II. Part. 109 He appeares to the women. 110
To the disciples travelling. I. Part. 11 II. Part. 113 He appeares to the disciples together. 114 And to them with S. Thomas. 116 The causes why our Saviour kept the marks of his wounds. 118 Our Saviour at the fishing. I. Part. 119 II. Part. 120 Our Saviours discourse with S. Peeter. 122 He foretelleth him of his death. 123 He appeareth to them at table. 125 He appeareth in Galilee. 126 Christs Ascension. I. Part. 128 II. Part. 130 Considerations moving to the love of God and of our Neighbour. 132 An act of humble acknowledgment of our owne weaknes. 133 The length of the love of God. 135 The first means to perpetuate our love. 137 The happines of younger yeares. 139 The second means. 141 Of the desire of being dissolved. 143 The Eternitie of love in the love of our Neighbour. 144 The latitude of the love of God. 146 Its vniversall because to every one in particular. 147 How we may imitate it. I. Part. 149 II. Part. 151 The height of the love of God. 153 How we are to imitate it. I. Part. 154 II. Part. 156 The depth of the love of God. I. Part. 158 II. Part. 160 The coming of the holy Ghost. I. Part. 161 II. Part. 162 Fruits of the holy Ghost in the first Christians. 164 The Mysterie of the Blessed Trinitie. 166 The obligation we have to love God. I. Part. 167 II. Part. 169 III. Part. 171 IV. Part. 172
Aspirations tending to the increase of the love of God in twelve Paragraphes. 173 Intertaynments of our Blessed Saviour when we receive th most blessed sacrament. First as God. 188 As king. 190 As spouse. 192 As the good sheepherd. 194 As Master or Teacher. 196 As our Physitian. 197 As our Redeemer. 199 As our Judge. 201 As Mediatour and Advocate. 203 As our frend. 205 As our Brother. 207 As the sacrifice of the law of grace. 208 As a spirituall banker. 211 Intertaynment of our Saviour with the blessed Virgen and S. Ioseph. 213 VVith S. Jhon Baptist. 215 VVith th Samaritan woman. 218 VVith the penitent Magdalen. 221 VVith the Cananen. 224 VVith Martha, Marie and Lazarus. 225 VVith Zaccheus. 22 VVith the people of Hierusalem. 229 VVith the first Christians. 231 VVith the Apostles. 233 VVith the Angels and Saints. 225 FINIS.
Errours of the Second Part. Such, as is hoped will not troble the vnderstanding reader, are omitted Pag. Lin. Err. Corr. 9 1 mind winde 9 9 vs more more 11 10 to tho 15 28 it turne it to turne 16 31 spuorie savorie 25 17 then their   30 the to 52 32 of dele 54 25 soldeers soldiers 55 God go 61 21 diffension dissension 62 11 ofsentation oftentation 63 35 spead spread 31 o of 25 not reflect not to reflect 22 we we if we, if we 41 which with 4 ffi all shall 95 4 in in the   34 then thou 100 33 impace impeache 104 1 to vs s 117 27 ercised exercised 122 18 and at 125 39 house of a house   40 of a dele 130 39 all not 140 1 consider we consider 149 1 loving leaing 156 6 best be best 168 2 ayp has Cayphas 174 2 owe awe 184 20 say I say 202 7 followers flowers   10 per pen 206 29 mal map
THE LIFE AND DOCTRINE OF OVR SAVIOVR IESVS CHRIST. With short reflections for the help of such as desire to vse MENTALL PRAYER. THE SECOND PART. Wherin every seventh Meditation is an application of the former to the most BLESSED SACRAMENT. Also seven Seates, where, by the contemplative our Blessed Saviour may be found in the seven Dayes of the Weeke. IHS BY H. M. of the SOCIETIE OF IESVS. GANT by MAXIMILIAEM GRAET at the signe of the Angel 1656. Permissu Superiorum.
INTRODVCTION To the Following MEDITATIONS. THe following considerations being groun∣ded vpon the doctrine of our Saviour, it is connaturall first to cast our thoughts vpō the excellencie of the deliverer of it: For as S. Ambrose observeth,L. de Virg Primus dis∣cendi ardor, nobilitas est Magistri, the first spurre to le∣arne is the excellencie of the Master. And who more ex∣cellent then our Saviour? VVhom the Angel proclaymed Greate in all things that can be esteemed greate;Luc. 1. 32. and the sonne of the Highest in all things that can be accounted high; himself being equall to his Father. The beloved disciple tells vs,Io. 1▪ he is the word of God from the beginning of all eternitie, coëternall with him who spake him; so that nothing that is in God, or in his pleasure, can be hidden from him. And againe, in him was life, and life was the light of men. As who should say, he was from all eternitie, and is, the fountaine of life, and light, and all that proceeds from him gives life, and light; all is dar∣ke, and deadly which is contrary to his doctrine and word. II. This only begotten sonne,10. 1. 18. who is in the besome of his Father, and privie to all his counsells, vouchsafed to come among vs, to impart them vnto vs, and not only to teach as a Master, but to incourage vs as a Companion in performing of them; nothing so hard doth fall from his mouth which he doth not in his deeds, and sufferings shew that it is not beyond flesh and blood to doe and suffer; he was in the bosome of his Father, in eternall rest, ād pleasure, aod happines, ād did not disdaine to come in mortall flesh to partake of our miseries and infirmities, to shew vs how to beare them, and how to cure them, He is a dull, and cowardly soldiar that seeing his Cap∣taine march, and menage his armes before him, ither cannot learne, or will not follow, specially
such a Captaine, so noble, so charitable, so deserving. Behold,Esay. 55. 4. sayth Esay the Evangelicall Prophet, I have given him a witnes to all people, a leader, and master to all na∣tions, Him, who is the all-knowing wisedome of the eter∣nall God; him, who cannot testifie any thing but what is truth; who cannoa lead to any thing but what is righ∣teous, who cannot teach but what is honorable, and prositable, and also pleasant to such as have not thier thoughts and actions seasoned with that which will be thier destruction, if not abandoned. Him I have given of my infinite goodnes; and he out of his equally infinite charitie hath accepted this charge, not valuing the labour and paynes to be taken in leading and teaching so poore creatures as we all are, refusing noe though neer so weake and wretched. III. Exult therfore Sonns of Sion,Iol. 2. 23. rejoyce in our lord God because he hath given you a master of justice. The benefit which you shall reape by following his doctrine i not only the assured performance of that which is just and right (which of itself norwithstanding is a benefit in∣estimable) but our Lord will cause to descend, vpon yo morning and evening showers of his timely graces, to pre∣vent evills, an further good thoughts and actions, your floores  filled with wheate▪ with food that substantiall an free from the chaffe vpon which world∣lings feed? And your wine presses shall flow with wine oyle of spirituall comforts, even in those things which to flesh and blood are pressures: and I will restore vt you the yeares, which the locust hath eaten, and the caket∣worme and the ctterpiller; by ervour of spirit reforming your former loose behaviour, and repayring the losse of former time; for my strength is Greate, which I sent among you. It is not our desires or indeavours which are of force to worke any of these things. It is th strength of our Saviours merits and sufferings and grace which he of his goodnes grant vs. Amen.
The Baptisme of our Saviour. I. THen Isus cometh from Galilee to the river Ior∣dan to Ihon to be baptised by him:Tun ve∣nit Iesus a Galialea in ordanem. &c. But Ihon for∣bad. him, saying, I ought to be baptized by thee, and comest thou to me? Our Saviour had lived thirtie yeares at home in Nazareth,Matt 3. 13. and with S. Joseph in his trade of carpentring, as may be gathered by the opinion of the Jewes saying, Is not this a Carpenter,Mac 6. . the Sonne of Marie? Now, when the time was come which he had alloted for his preaching, and manifestation to the world, he cometh as poorely, and as humbly; among the throng of people who floketh to S Jhon, to be buptized by him: He had not need of baptisme, or other preparation to perfection as the rest; but as he obeyed the law of circumcision in his in fancie, he would not now discountenance, but ho∣nour the pious practise of S. Ihon, and vndergo that in figure, which he was to establish afterwards as a neces∣sarie means towards our purgation; in this, as in other things, giving vs example not to vndervalue things of this nature, though to a worldly eye, and haughtie mind thy may seeme impertinent: so sayth S. Paul of himself writing to the Corinthians, and I was with you in in∣fmitie, and feare, and much trembling, and my speech, and my preaching was not in the persuasible words of hu∣mane wisdome. &c. Humilitie is the ground of all greate actions proceeding from God, who being in all things greate, would also be greate in the humbling himself, to humble (if possible] our pride. II. Ihon forbad him saying, I ought to be baptized by thee. &c. Our Saviour was not ashamed to be accounted a synner among the rest; but S. Ihon knowing by revela∣tion who he was, proclaymed his innocencie, and tooke occasion to acknowledge, and confesse his owne wants ād vnworthines; and everie one of vs may with much mo∣re reason say. It is I who have reall need of this sacred ce∣remonie from thy hands, who alone canst wash away my synnes: it is I who have dayly and hourely need of wash∣ing; my synnes and imperfections are so greate and so many: It is I that ought to vndergo this shame of confes∣sing them, having not been ashamed to cōmit them: It is
I who owe the debt, and must pay it to the uttermost far∣thing, Matth. 5 26 vnlesse thou by thy Sacraments, and by thy mer∣cyes doest forgive me. Iesus, answering sayed, suffer it now for so it becometh us to fullfill all iustice. Many convenien∣ces may offer themselves to thy infinite wisdome for which it may become thee thus to humble thyself: but for me it is necessitie, it is my dutie, it cals vpon me by all the titles of a creature, and a synner, and a subject, and a servant, and infinite other obligations; these are titles of iustice, which if I doe not fullfill, I shall beare the smart: thou fullfillest all this with out any obligation to doe so, but of thy goodnes, to correct our backwardnes in doing that which is fitting for vs to doe. VVhat is there that will not become me to doe to the vtmost, be it never so meane, or seeming to be below me, seeing thou hast stooped thvs low to thy servant. III. Iesus being baptized, forth with came out of the water, and lo the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the spirit of God descending as a doue, and coming vpon him, and behold, a voyce from heaven, saying, this is my beloved sonne▪ in whome I am well pleased. Three signes of the effects of the baptisme which those receive who are washed in the water sanctifyed by our Saviour. The gates of heaven are opened vnto them, the holy Ghost descends vpon them; and they are made the adop∣tive sonnes of God. But our Saviour was his natural, and eternall sonne, eternall beloved, and now vpon a new title of his superexcellent obedience as man, and charitie towards mankind, coming into this world with the in∣nocencie and meekenes of a dove, not to punish, but to spare and to forgive. Have recourse vnto him while the heavens are thus open; delay not thy conversion; prepare thy hart with puritie to receive the spirit of God, and his graces bee meeke, and humble, and peaceable, because such are styled the Sonnes of God;Matth. 5 9 love, that thou maiest be beloved; indeavour to Please God aboue all, and for no mans pleasure displease him. How sweere, and how rich is the name of Sonne, which he vouchsafed vs from heaven,Psalm: 4 3 and in order to the heavenly inheritance? Sonnes of men, how long heavyharted. To what purpose doe you love vanitie, and hunt after a lie? The only true honour and true riches is to be the sonne of God.
The fast, Temptation, and Victorie of our Savionr. I. THen Iesns was led by the spirit into the desert,Tunc Ie∣sus ductus est a spiri∣tu in de∣sertam &c. to be tempted by the divel,Matth, 4 and when he had fasted fourtie dayes and fourtie nights, afterwards he was hungrie. He was led by the same spirit that had descended vpon him at his baptisme, to the holy actions of retirement from worldly occasions, and of fasting, and by occasion of that, to be tempted by the enimie of all wholsome exercises. His food all that time was prayer, and the fer∣vent desires of performing in life, and death, the will of his heavenly Father: by which he taught vs how to arme ourselves against the assalts of the divel, and not to thinke because we are sorely now and then set vpon, that therfo∣re we are deserted of God, and of his spirit: How also to prepare ourselves to what ever imployment God doth call vs vnto. And though hepersevered so long without touch of hunger, at last he was hungrie: stooping to the infir∣mitie of man, whose nature he did beare, and whome he had vndertaken to instrvct; the tempter not being able to dive into the deapth of the mysterie of the Incarnatiō, yet by many circūstances cōicturing, tooke hold of his being hungrie, and approching sayed, If thou be the sonne of God, command that these stones be made bread: knowing that it was much easyer to doe so, then what had been done in creating all of nothing. Our Saviour did not yeald vnto his motion, because (as S. Augustine reflects.) The Tempter is not overcome but by contemning him) but answered.S. August. Not in bread alone doth man live, but in every word which proceedeth from the mouth of God. For the Children of Israel themselves in thier fourty yeares pilgri∣mage in the desert, were not maintayned so much by the Manna, as by the divine providence, concerning both body and soule. Rayse thy thoughts to this spirituall food, and to confidence in God, who will not suffer vs to be tempted above that which we are able, but with the tempta∣tion will give vs issue that we may sustaine it.1 Cor. 10 12
II. Then the divel tooke him vp into the holy ciy, and et him vpon the pinnale of the Temple; and sayed, if thou bee the Sonne of God, cast thyself downe; for it is written; he will give his Angels charge of thee, and in thier hands they shall hold thee vp &c. No man can pretend to be free from temptation, seeing the divell so bold with our Saviour and the neerer we come to holynes, and higher we are taken into the favour of God, the more we must beware; for the temptations are allwayes the more secret and cloked with some pretēce of good, as heece with the words of scripture misapplyed: if thou b the Sonne of God do not cast rhyself downe to things inferiour to God, and his service; doe not permit thyself to be taken vp by a high con∣ceite of thyself, remayne rather in the desert; if thou be ta∣ken out, live notwithstanding in feare; be not rash; doe not thrust thyself into occasions, which may be dange∣rous. Our Saviour answered: Thou shall not tempt thy Lord God. Gape not after extraordinarie comforts, vnusuall lights, new conceits; go vp and downe by the vsuall degrees of vertue, practised by saints, allowed by the Church; and by those who in it have the place of di∣recting vs. He hath indeed given his Angels charge of vs but we must not be head-long, or head-strong in our wayes. III. Againe he tooke him vp into a very high mountaine, and shewed him all the kingdomes of the world, and the glorie of them, saying, all these will I give thee, if falling downe thou a dore me: VVhether doth not pride and ambition carie a mind that is once poisoned with them? of what doth it not brag though never so false, as here the divell, as if all had been his to give and to take away at his pleasure? I will give thee all the kingdomes; as if all did consist in present wealth, and glorie, and pleasure, and command: They who have had all at will, what is be∣come of them? All these what are they? people climbe mountaines, and passe through a thousand dangers, to gaine a little parcell of them, and with them they heape vpon themselves mountaines of synns, and torments due to synne: say with our Saviour. Avant Satan, thou shalt adore thy Lord God, and serve him alone. No inticement of Inrem∣perance,
no smoke or mind of vanitie, no splendour of wealth or command shall remove me from this resolu∣tion, or inveigle me with thier allurements, to forget or forgo my dutie to my God, and to Conscience. And as vpon this the Tempter gave over for that time, and the An∣gels came, and ministred vnto him, what was necessarie; so by constantly resisting, we shall be the more free, (though never absolutely secure, so long as this time of warfare lasteth) and the Angels will be  more ready to assist vs against this common enimie. Begge all this of thy Saviour by his merits. Amen. S. Ihons restimonie of our Saviour. I. THe next day Ihon saw Iesus coming towards him;Altera die vidit Io∣annes Ie∣sum ve∣nientem ad se &c. Io. 1. 29 Thom. 2 Kemp. l. 2 c. 8 and sayed, behold the lamb of God; behold him who taketh away the sinne of the world: When Iesus is present all is easy, and nothing doth seeme hard vnto vs: VVhen Iesus is not present every thing is harsh Come sweete Iesus, and take from me this heavy burden of synne, and of repugnance to that which is thy will. O blessed lamb; Innocent, meeke, patient, obedient; silent, rightly styled the lamb of God, because from God alone these vertues can proceed; and in whome they are there is God,Prov 3. 34 because with the simple is his conversation: Behold with a loving, and thankfull eye this lamb, who only is able to take away thy synnes, and out of his infinite mercy doth dayly take them away by means of his holy Sacra∣ments, and other helps; and though dayly multiplyed, is yet ready to take them all awy, vpon the first repentance, and doth meekely and patiently beare with vs day by day. II. Againe Ihon was standing, and two of his disci∣ples, and beholding Iesus walking sayed, behold the lamb of God. the two disciples heard him speake this, and they followed Iesus. Iesus sayed nothing; but his modestie and his humilitie spake for him, and shewed that indeed he was the lamb ordayned, and ready for the sacrifice. Be∣hold him againe and againe; observe all his actions, stand and consider; be not easily diverted from so profitable and pleasing an obiect; follow him with thy thoughts and ac∣tions:
he compels no body, vnlesse his love be so potent in thee as to compell thee. O sweere compulsion! draw me after thee,Cant. 13 and we shall runne in the fragrancie of thy oyntments; there is nothing in him which will nor invite thee to follow; if thou doest duly consider whom thou doest behold. He walketh not the wide wayes of the world, which lead to perdition; he walketh the way of righte∣ousnes and shewes vs the way to our eternall repose. III. And Iesus turning, and seeing them follow him sayeth to them, what seeke yee? they say to him, Master where dwellest thou? Our Saviour was pleased with thier prompt∣nes to follow him vpon S. Ihons words, and with thier modestie, and respect towards his person, forbearing to interrupt his thoughts, while he was walking; he liked also well thier intention of not contenting themselves with some smale conversation with him by the way, as being desirous at leasure to heare and converse with him more at large. He therfore turned himself to them, and fa∣miliarly asked. What seek you? to the end to make them the more confident. O loving aspect! Observe the benefit of making vse in time of holy inspirations and suggestions; and that our Saviour doth not aske, whom seeke you? for it was apparent enough they sought him; but whht seeke you in me? VVhat doe you ayme at in following me? A question which may give every one of vs occasion to lay his hand vpon, his breast, and examin whether really in following him, we seeke him, or some thing els which self love or some other occasion doth suggest. If thou seekest Jesus in all things,Thom. à Kemp. l. 2 c. 7 n. 3. thou shalt find Jesus; if thou see∣kest thyself thou wilt find thyself. IV. He sayeth to them; come and see: they came, and saw where he did abide, and they taried with him that day. They desired to know, where he dwelled, that they might in private heare his instruction, and resort the ofte∣ner to him, they saw where he did abide; perhaps as then he had no house, or dwelling; however; in them he invites vs to come and see at leasure: where? poorely enough in all. probabilitie, as once in the stable, and in his banishment in the desert, and by whole nights in the fields, in prayer, and even then vpon the Crosse in thought and resolution. Come, and see, how long, and with what disposition of
mind he remayned in all these, and doth still in the most blessed Sacrament; stay with him in the closet of thy hart, in thy lawfull Superiours, in every one of his little ones, all the dayes of this life: Ascend into heaven with thy thoughts; there he dwelleth eternally; passe thither in de∣sire, that thou mayest passe the more couragiously follo∣wing him by the way which he sheweth thee.Psalm. 83: Quam di∣lcta tabernacula tua Domine virtutum? How lovely are thy Tabernacles, even in this life? Master, teach me where I may find thee best, shew me where to feedest,Cant. 1. 7▪ where thou restest at noone day that I may not begine to wander after the heards of my fellowes, that is, after the multitudes of those who wāder without guides they know not whether Our Saviour beginneth to gather disciples. I. ANdrew brother to Simon Peeter was one of the two that had heard what S. Ihon sayed,Erat au∣tem An∣dreas fra∣ter Simo∣nis Petri vnus ex duobus. Io: 1 40. and followed our Saviour. He first findeth his brother Simon, and sayeth vnto him, we have found the Mssias; and brought him to Iesus. The spirituall treasures are not as those of the world; they increase by communication: The spirit and the spouse say come;Apoc. 22 17 and he who heareth, let him say come; and he who thirsteth let him come. There is abundance for every body that will receive. We have found the Mes∣sias: imagin what ioy was in the hart of S. Andrew when his thoughts were vpon this purchase. Thom. à Kemp. l▪ 2▪ c. 8 If Jesus speake but one word, we feele greate comfort, and he that findeth Iesus findeth a greate good thing; yea all that is good; and if he bewell with him, he is most rich. We have found him; and he brought him to Iesus: this was a true brotherly part; a brother who is holpen by his brother,Prov. 18 19 Bēda. is like a strong towne. This is truly to find our Lord, if we truly burne with his love, if we have true care of our brethrens sa∣luation. II. Iesus beholding Peeter, sayed, thou art Simon, sonne of Ionas, thou shalt be called, Cephas, which is interpre∣ted Peeter. Or a Rocke, or stone; it is not enough to find Iesus by faith, or by a sensible sweetnes in our prayers,
faith is the groundworke, spirituall comforts are helps so buyld the more couragiously vpon the principles of faith; we must incorporate his precepts and his instructions, and (as S. Paul speaketh) put on our Saviour, that is,Rom. 13. 14 his conversation, and manner of living. Therfore so soone as he was found, he gave divers of them other names besides that which they had before: simple obedience (which Peeters former name might seeme to signifie) agreed well with him while he was a subiect, but he was to be gover∣nour of the whole Church, for which much fortitude was necessarie, and much solidiie, allwayes ayming at that which is the center of our soules, the glorie of God, and the exaltation of his holy name: acknowledging that of ourselves we are but earth, hard to take any good im∣pression, and still tending downewards; but if Christ say the word, that is able to make no lesse change in vs, then he did in S. Peeter. III. On the morrow he would go into Galilee, and he findeth Philip, and sayeth vnto him, fellow me. Philip findeth Natbaael, and sayth, him of whome Moyses in the Iaw, and the prophets wrot. we have found, Iesus Sonne of Ioseph, of Nazareth. Nathanuel sayed, from Naza∣reth can there by any good? Philip sayeth vnto him, come and see. Consider the goodnes of our Saviour in seeking after thee, when thou thinkest not of him; fol∣low his holy inspirations, and indeavour by word and example to incourage others. Be not rash iu iudging, nor conceited of thyself, as if thou didst vnderstand more then others; take leasure and consider whether another may not have more reason and more ground: be not contentious: Contemne no mans Country and descent, or occupation; God hath his saints in every degree and place: see the riches of God in the poorest snakes. IV. Iesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and sayth of him; behold as Israelite in very deed, in whome there is no guile. Nathanael sayth to him: How knowest thou me. Iesus answered, before Philip did call thee; when thou were vnder the fig tree, I saw thee O all seeing eye! from which nothing is hidden:Psam 138 Thou vnderstandest my thoughts a farre of; thou foreseest all my wayes, there passeth not a word from my tongue which thou doest not know:
O wonderfull knowledge: It is folly for me to indeavour to hide or conceale, or dessemble any thing before thee: give me grace to serve thee in true simplicitie of hart, and converse in the sight of men, and Angels with out guilt, or fraude▪ for thou wil iudge with equall weights,Esaye 2 17 and doe iustice with right proportion, and frustrute the hopes grounded vpon lyes, and vnder falshood no man shall be protected. Nthanati sayed, thou art the Sonne of God, thou art the king of Israel. Iesus answered, because I sayed to thee I saw thee vnder the figtree, thou beleevest; greater then these things thou shalt see; yee shall see the heavens opened, and the Angels of God ascending and des∣cending upon the Sonne of man.S. Bern: They ascend and descend in one and the same man, admiring the Maiestie of his divine person, and the infirmitie of human nature, in both stooping to his service, and to his command, which they esteeme the greatest honour they can ascend vnto. Adore our Saviour as God, and as king of the whole vniverse, who hath command of life and death; humbleth the proude and exalteth the humble,Reg. 2  he rayseth the needy man from the dust, and he lifteth vp the poore from the dung, that he may sit with princes, and hold the throne of glorie. The turning water into wine at the mariage feast. I. THe third day there was a mariage in Cana of Galilee, and the Mother of Iesus was there,Et die te∣tia nuptiae factae sun in Cana Galilae: Io: 2. S. Maxi∣mus. and Iesus also was called, and his disciples to the ma∣riage: And the vvine fayling, the Mother of Iesus sayed to him; They have no wine. He went to the mariage, to the end that as he had long before by his soveraigne power ordayned mariage, now by his blessed presence he might sanctifie it. But S. Ihon Chrisostome puts vs vpon another consideration and sayth thus.S. Ihon Chysost▪ If you think good, let vs set before our eyes two houses; one of those who are marying, and at a mariage feast, another of such as are in mourning and affliction; let vs enter them one after the other by our consideration, and see which is the better. And the wine fayling: this is what we may be
sure of in all iolities of the world, they cannot aste: and how soone doe such comforts fayle? how often doe they breed discomfort and disastres, even whyle we are in∣ioying them? A discomfort so much the greater, because most commonly they trench vpon that which alone is a continuall banket to wit,Prov. 15 15 a good Conscience, and a quiet mind. These found in thier necessitie the favourable interces∣sion of the Mother of God: if they had not been in want they would not have thought him so much as a conside∣rable person; being invited as it seemes more for his Mo∣thers sake then for his owne. II. Iesus sayth to her, what is it to me and thee, wo∣man? my houre is not yet come. His Mother sayth to the wayters, whatever he shall say to yee, doe yee. It is apparent, by his Mothers instant and confident words to the servants, that our Saviours answer was no check, but only that he would expresse that it was a thing not belonging to him, nor to her, to take care of supplying such temporall wants, or rather superfluities; not to him because he came to relieve the spirituall necessities, and not properly for any temporall occasion; not to her, be∣cause she was there as a stranger and guest: yet she moved him in it (though otherwise he did not intend to mani∣fest himself in that occasion) because she vnderstood it was his pleasure to condescend to her motion, (which was also very modest, only mentioning the want) and sayed, whatever he shall say be sure to doe it, for you will see a comfortable effect. III. And there were six water-pitchers of stone standing (according to the purification of the Iewes) holding every one, two or three measures: Iesus sayth to them, fill the pitchers with water; and they filled them vp to the top; and Iesus sayed to them; fill out now, and carie it to the chiefe steward; and they caried it. The ceremoniall Ievves vnlesse they ofren vvash thier hands they doe not eate,Mari 7. 3 holding the tradition of the Ancients; our Saviour made vse of this custome, the stone pitchers standing in the roome for that purpose: He caused them to be filled vp to the top with water, and to be filled our presently, that there might be no place to say there was some thing mingled with it, or some thing done which required time: The same intel∣lectuall
word changing instantly the water into wine,Gen. which in an instant created heaven and earth in the begin∣ning. It behoveth vs notwithstanding at leasure to con∣sider who it is that at his pleasure changeth water into wine, and wine into water, and hath all things at com∣mand, to the end no body should be so rechlesse as not to be wholy depending vpon him, and wholy at his beck. The meditation of the Blessed Virgin, the prompt obe∣dience of the wayters, but chieflly the glory of God, which he only sought, did cooperate to this wonder: These are the means by which the waters of affliction are turned into wine of comfort,Rom. 8. 28 and that to them who love God all things doe cooperate to good. After the chiefe steward had tasted the water made wine, and knew not whence it was, but the servants knew that had drawne the water; the chiefe steward calleth the bridgroome, and sayth to him, every man first setteth the good wine, and when they have welldrunk, then that which is worse, but thou hast keept the good wine till now. The ioyes of this world, begin with defect and want, fal∣ing short of our expectation, and end with greater de∣ceite: how many favours doe we receive from God, and know not of them? chiefely perhaps because we seldome reflect vpon them, or doe not looke about vs sufficiently; if we had once well asted of the wine which our Saviour presents vs, we should easyly esteeme all other meane, and vnworthy to be rasted. His wine lasteth for Eternitie: If it were wonderfull to turne water into wine,S. Ambr▪ much more is it turne synners into saints; and that things which to the world are insiped, and cold, and dead, should be restored to heate, and colour, and life, and tast. The Apostles be∣leeved vpon that one signe, we having received so many wonderfull benefits, shall we not beleeve? Applications of the former Meditations to Blessed Sacrament. I. THe Ancient Patriarches, in the words of the pro∣phet Esay, did with much devorion begge that the heavens would send downe thier dew from a∣bove, Esaye 45  and the clouds raine downs the Iust, that the
earth vvould open, and bring forth a Saviour: But here the heavens are allvvayes open for vs to behold the beloved Sonne. who sits at the right hand of his Father, and in vhome he it vvellpleased, coming dayly downe in the holy Sacrifice, in no lesse humble, and meeke manner, then when he came to be baptized; ô that we had the eyes of S. Ihon to see his inward perfections, and worth, and glorie! How should we cover our faces with the Seraphins? And say, thou comest to me? Thou, the eternall sonne of God, Creatour, and Lord of all things; thou, the beloved of the Angels; Thou in vvhome is all hope of life,Hccl. 24. 25. and strength, and pleasure, vouchsafest to come thus to me, most miserable creatute: I have grea∣te reason, not only to suffer it now, but with all the strength of my soule and body to desire it, and to labour to fullfill all justice, that I may not be altogether vnworthy; but thou, ô infinite goodnes, infinite mercy, infinite com∣passion, and love; I have not words to expresse what I thinke, nor thoughts to equall thy deserts: come notwith∣standing, sweet Jesus, and be a Saviour to me. II. O bread of life! it is not corporall food that can mayntaine me to eternitie; nor all that the world can present, though I should be master of all the kingdomes of the vvorld; thou alone art the sustenance that must maintaine vs to those long dayes. I that am made of earth can hardly think of any thing but of earth, ād earth∣ly commodities; thou comest from heaven,Io. 3. 31. and vvhat thou hast seen,Prov. 9 5. to that thou doest invite vs. Come eate of my bread and drink of the vvine, vvhich I have mingled for yee. Thy bread is thyself, having in thee all that can delight. and the svveetnes of every thing that is spvorie; thy vvine,Sap. 16. 20. is thy sacred blood, which thou hast thus mercifully, and ad∣mirably mingled with the outward shape of wine, that as it is most comfortable to our soules, it should not be distastfull to our bodyes: this bread will never feyle vs (as Sauls did in his iourney) nor this wine (as in the ma∣riage feast) but the more greedyly we feed,1. Reg. 9. 7 Io▪ 2. the more plenty we shall have of the fruits and effects of it. Fill your eyes with teares of sorrow and love, and poure out your hart to him, for even these he will turne to
your eternall comfort, and fill them againe with his gra∣ces. Amen. III. Come often, and see where he dwelleth, how poore∣ly he is content to be lodged for thy sake; looke into the Churches, where be remayns day and night for thee; all that is there is not devotion, God wor, all is not re∣vetence and respect; all is not cleanlynes, and decen∣cie, and yet he doth not avoyde the roome: looke into the soules of the attendance, and chiefly into thy owne; even when he is received into thy inward roomes, how are they swept? How are they hung? How are they furni∣shed for him? and yet he hath patience.Ps. 118. 124. O blessed Ma∣ster? have mercy on thy Servant; give me understanding, and teach me thy iustifications; I am thy servant, that I may know thy testimonies. It is time of doing, o Lord; for they have made voyde thy law. Therfore have I loved thy commands above gold and pretious stone. &c. They who did trafick in the Temple are cast forth. I. THe Passeover of the ewes was at hand, and Iesus went vp the Hierusalem; and he found  the Temple them that sold oxen,Prope erat Pascha udaeo∣rum. and sheep, and doves,Io. 2 13 and the bankers sitting; and when he had made as it were a whip of little cord, he cast them all out of the temple, the sheep, also, and the oxen, and the money of the banker  poured ou, and the tables he overthrew, and to them that sold doves he saved, take away these hence, and make not the house of my Father a house of marchandise. Our Saviour duly kept the feast ap∣pointed; but it was no smale griefe vnto him to see so little respect to that place, which being the house of God, should be the house of prayer, as he sayed in another such occasion. Here he thought fitting moreover to shew his zeale,Matth. 21 13 and his power. But S. Paulinus recals vs home to ourselves and telleth vs,S. Paul∣nus. that it is for vs convenient that our Lord Jesus would often visit the temple of our hart with the whip of his holy feare, least our soule be possest withsome kind of vaice, or the slownes and dullnes of oxen retarde our senses, or that we set our owne innocencie, or the divine graces to sale &c. This
is a good zeale to imitate. And also as S. Bede adverti∣zeth, S. Bede that seeing he shewed so much zeale in behalfe of that Temple, in which such sacrifices of oxen and sheep were offered, much rather should we shew zeale where the body of our Lord is consecrated, where there is no doubt but that the Angels be allwayes present. II. He made at it were a whip of little cord. The pu∣nishments of this life are but as it were a whip in compa∣rison of the torments of the life to come, both in respect of the grievousnes of them, and of the continuance. Yet seeing with so contemptible a weapon he was able alone to doe such execution vpon such a multitut (S. HieromeS. Hiero∣me deservingly accounting it as greate a miracle as any other done by him) we have reason to dread and to beware least through our misdemeanours his heavy hand doth not at last light vpon vs.Prov. 11 4 Wealth will not avayle in the day of revenge; but iustice will free vs from death. III. The Iewes sayed to him, what signe doest thou shew vs that thou doest those things? Iesus answered: disolve this Temple, and in three dayes I will rayse it againe; the Iewes sayed, in six and fourtie yeares was this Temple buylt, and wilt thou rayse it in three dayes! But he spake of the Temple of his body. It was true of both the one, and the other; he had been able to have raysed in three dayes the materiall Temple if it had been demclished; and he would insinuate that the Temple, and all that which was done in it, was but a figu∣re of his body, and of the humane nature which he had assumed to accomplish those figures in it, so sayth S. Am∣brose.S. Ambr. The body of Christ is truly the Temple of God, wherin is wrought the purgation of our synnes; that flesh was truly Gods Temple in which there could be no con∣agion of synne; but was itself the sacrifice for the synnes of the whole world; that flesh was truly the Temple of God in which the image of God did shine, and the fullnes of divinitie did corporally dwell. The Iewes required a signe of his commission to vndertake such greae things, as if that very Action had not been signe sufficient. Yet our Saviour did not deny them a signe, but referred them to that which had been figured in Ionas of him and prophecyed; that is, to vse thier owne Industrie and the ordinarie means of vnderstanding the mysteries so faire
as is necessarie, and not to be still asking new signes, and still remaine vnsatisfyed, because things were not accor∣ding to thier fancy. He instructs Nicodemus. I. THere was of the Pharisees a man called Nicodemus,Erat ho∣mo ex Pharisaeis Nicode∣mus no∣mine &c: Io. 3 a Prime man among the Iewes. This man came to Iesus by night, and sayed, Rabbi, we know thou art a Master come from God: For no man can doe these signes which thou doest, vnlesse God be with him. He came by night; held back as yet by the infirmitie of his profession (as S. Ihon ChrysostomeS. Ihon Chrysos∣tome. reflects) and loved God but by halfes; the other halfe the world had still in possession. And by his speech it appeares he did not beleeve as yet that our Sa∣viour was God, but some speciall teacher, or prophet sent from God, testifying his mission by those signes. Our Sa∣viour finding that he retayned too much of the Pharisai∣call spirit told him three things very strange, and wholy contrarie to his and the worlds apprehension and humour for first he sayed Amen, Amen, that is, in every truth, I say vnto thee vnlesse a man be born againe, he cannot see the kingdome of heaven, as if he would have sayed, you talk to me of greatnes, but I say you must all become little, and begin of new, and take new wayes if you will enter the kingdome of God: and when Nicodemus asked how can these things be done? how can a man be born when he is old? Our Savior re∣peated the same againe, and told him moreover, that now he must withdraw his thoughts from materiall and won∣ted obiects, and things concerning this corporall life, and think of a spirituall life, the beginning and entrance wherof is baptisme, and so to be born of water, and the spirit was necessarie towards it. This to naturall reason and common apprehension seemes strange, and to some perhaps imper∣tinent. But no man hath ascended into heaven to know the secrets of Gods eternall disposition, but he who descen∣ded from heaven, the sonne of man, who is in heaven. To him the greatest Clarks must stoope, and humbly receive from this greate Master that to which by strength of wit and industrie they cannot reach. And to our dayly pur∣pose, besides the thanks which we owe to God for the benefit of baptisme, and of faith. S. Augustin puts
vs in mind dayly to renew ourselves; for sayth he,S. August. wherfore should a body be borne againe, but to the end to be re∣newed? And wherfore should he be renewed; but for that he is become old? II. The second strange thing was, that wheras Moyses had set vp a brasen serpēt in the desert,Num. 21. 9 to the end that they who were bitten by serpents should be cured, by casting thier eyes vpon that figure; so sayth our Saviour; must the sonne of man be exalted, that every one that beleeveth in him, may not perish, but have life everlasting, as if he had sayed: this very man, whom thou doest so much reverence as a man of God, must be exalted vpon the Crosse and die a shamefull death, and vnlesse people doe notwithstanding beleeve in him, ād follow him, they cannot have life ever∣lasting. His person will be hated among you as much as those serpnts of the desert, yet you must fix your eyes of faith vpon him, or ells you will perish. As Moyses by Gods appointement placed that serpent for a corporall reliefe of those who were stroken; by the same Gods appointment shall I be placed vpon a Crosse, for the cure of those who have fallen into spirituall serpents jawes by synne. III. And yet a stranger thing I doe tell thee. God so loved the world, as to give his only Sonne to be so mis∣vsed, and so tormented, to the end that every one that beleeveth in him perish not, but have life everlasting, Thou takest me to be man only, as other men, and doest wonder that I, so much favoured by God, should come to suffer as I tell thee. But the love of God is greater then to content himself to imploy a man only: I am not man only, but the only Sonne of God; and yet I am to suffer as I sayed for mankind. O strange thing! o infinite love! Tell vs (ô blessed Ihon) what doth this short word,S. Ihon Chrisost. so, signi∣fie? Tell vs the measure, declare the greatnes, teach vs the excellencie of this love. God so loved: ô love incom∣prehensible by man or Angel. So that none can compre∣hend the reason of it; why so? why not otherwise? O deapth vnsearcheable! renew thy love dayly testifie it by thy ac∣tions; declare it by thy conformitie to him in beleefe and life; serve him night and day, in publike and in private; let no part of thee be wanting to this love, that thou may not perish but live and love eternally. Amen▪
The Conversion of the Samaritan. I. IEfus cometh to a citty of Samaria,Venit Ie∣sus in ci∣vitatem Samariae quae dici∣tur sichar &c. called Sicar; and there was a fountaine, or well of Iacobs Iesus therfore wea∣ried, of his journey, sat so vpon the fountaine, it was about the sixt houre. There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water; Iesus sayth to her, give me to drink. His disciples were gone into the citty to buy meate. She sayth to him, how doest thou, being a Iew, aske of me to drinke,Io. 4. who am a Sama∣ritan; for the Iewes doe not communicate with the Samaritans. Iesus answered: if thou didst know the gift of God, and who he is who sayth to thee, give me to drink; thou perhaps wouldst have asked him, and he would have given thee living water. It is not for nothing (sayth S. Augustin) that Ie∣sus, the power and strength of God, is wearied; it is not for nothing that he is wearyed by whome all who are we∣aryed receive refreshment. We find Jesus strong, what can be stronger then he who made all things with out labour or pains taking? We find Jesus infirme; the word was made flesh, and dweleth among vs. By his strength he created vs, by his infirmitie he repayred vs. and againe, our inobe∣dience, our backwardnes, our dulnes, is wearysome to him, see how this womā holds back. O if thou didst know who he is: and yet there comes in a perhaps on our part, where we find none on his: she replyes againe; neither hast thou wherin to draw, and the well is deepe; whence therfore hast thou living water? Art thou greater then our Father Iacob, who gave vs this well, and himself drunk of it, and his Children, and his cattel? How doe we preferre our earthly commodities before better things? How fast doe we stick to that to which we are accstomed? VVhat po∣wer hath Father, Children, cattel with vs? How slow are we to beleeve that which we doe not see? The well is deepe by our owne fal. II. Our Saviour besides his owne, naturall goodnes which lead him into this conversation, was pleased with the womans religious scruple of not commoning with a Jew, and with the esteeme she had of Jacob, and of that which he had laboured for posteritie: yet two things were wanting, to wit, a desire of that which was better, and a vessel fit to rive it. He therfore continuing his
discourse sayth, every one that drinketh of this water shall thirst againe, but he that shall drinke of the water, which I will give shall not thirst for ever: But the water which I will give shall become in him a fountaine of water springing vp to life everlasting. And she begging. Syr give me this water that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw, though her desire were imperfect, and for low ends. Yet our Saviour goeth on, and sayth to her, call thy husband, and come hither. Giving her occasion to confesse her falt, as she did saying, I have no husband; which our Saviour shewed her that he knew before, telling her that she had had five husbands, but he whome now she had, was not her husband, and commended her for saying the truth. III. Vpon this the woman perceiving he was a prophet put an other question concerning religion; whether the mountaine in Samaria, or Hierusalem were the place where God was to be adored? Our Saviour graciously answered, that the saluation was to be frrom the Iewes, but that the time was at hand when neither to Hierusalem, nor to that mountayne, they should be confined, but as God is a spirit, and every where, so every where he should be adoreal in spirit, and truth; for such the heavenly Father requireth. And she refering herself to the coming of the Messias; our Saviour sayed to her: I am be who speake with thee: Here the fountaine of living water springing vp to life everlasting discovered itself more playnly to this sincere and humbly religious creature, then to many others who had other means to find it out. Not he that only dippeth, but every one who shall drink of this water shall not thirst after worldly contentments, nor desire to come back to earthy channels to draw with vnprofitable, and often with dangerous labour a small pittance of tran∣sitorie comfort in creatures. Water in a well (sayth S. Augustin)S. August. is worldly pleasure; running in a darke deepnes and hardly drawne vp with the bucket of desire: This breeds a troblesome thirst, and doth not quench it: The living water is the grace of devotion, the love of God, the knowledge of holy Scripture, these fill our desire with good things. Lord give me this water that I may not thirst▪ nor come hither to aravv.
The conversion of the Samaritan. II. PART. I. THe voman therfore left her pitcher,Reliqui ergo hy∣driam suam mu∣lier &c. v. 28 and vvent into the citty, and sayth to those men, come and see a man that hath told me all things vvhatsoever I have done; is not he Christ? They vvent forth of the citty, and vvere coming to him. She caryed not her earthly pitcher home, but full of the heavenly grace,S. Cyillus and doctrine of our Saviour, she made hast to instruct others. Our Saviour had bid her call the man with whom she lived; she not content with that, out of her zeale, summoned the whole towne, and doubtlesse by our Saviours instinct, he being desirous to be invited, that he might be the more beneficiall to them all. Come thou also, and behold the man, from whome no∣thing is concealed; come greedely, that thou mayest re∣ceive the more plentie of his gifts, invite him kindly to thy poore cottage, he will not refuse thee. II. In the meane time, his disciples being returned, de∣sired him to eate, of vvhat they had brought. But he sayed to them, I have meate to eate vvhich you knovv not. They say to one an other, hath any man brought him to eate Iesus sayed: My meate is to doe the vvill of him that sent me, and to perfect his vvorke: You doe say there be foure months to haruest; but lift vp your eyes and see, the countreys,S. Ambr. they are allready vvhite for the haruest. VVhat meate is more pleasing, then to doe the will of God? This is the food of Angels, to obey the commands of thier Creatour. S. Jhon ChrysostomeS. Ihon Chrysost. sayth moreover, that our Saviour tearmed the saluation of man meate, to declare how greate care he had of vs, and with how much affec∣tion he desired our good. The Apostls were as yet vnac∣quainted with these metaphors, and wondered of what meate he should speake; therfore he bids them lift vp the yes of thier mind, and behold the spirituall harvest, the ga∣thering in wherof was his imployment, and his ayme, and must be thiers; specially the time being come preorday∣ned by his heavenly father, wherin all regions of the world were now ripe for it. O dullnes! that we know not our owne happines, but turne that oftimes into vineger which would be hony to vs if we would behold the will of God in it.
III. And many of that citty beleeved in him, for the word of the woman giving testimonie, that he had told her whatever she had done; and when they were come to him, they desired he would tary there; and he taryed there two dayes; and many more belved for his owne word; saying, ourselves have heard, and doe know, that this is the Saviour of the world indeed. This woman represents vnto vs the Church of God, par∣ticularly instructed by our Saviour: And as these cittizēs, so they who at first beleeve because the Church reacheth so, are afterwards much confirmed in thier beleefe, when by practise and further instruction out of holy scripture they find all things agreable. Consider also and pitty the obstinacie of the Jewes and such like people, who have much more means of instruction at hand, and yet profit lesse then these to whome our Saviour came as it were by chance and cursorily. Yet he stayed tvvo dayes vvith them, and at parting we may easyly imagin what thanks he received from them, and with what heavy harts many of them did take thier leave. Keepe thyself by Jesus living and dying, and commit thyself to his trust, who when all doe sayle can alone help thee. Th. a Ke. l. 2. c. 7. n. 2. He cures a noble mans sonne. I. There was a certaine noble man,Erat quldam Re∣gulus cu∣us si∣lius infir∣mabatur &c. whose sonne was sick at Capharnaum. He having heard that Isus came from jurie into Galilee, went to him, and desired him that he would come downe, and cure his sonne, for he began to dye. Observe tha neither nobilitie, not wealth, nor favour, nor youth, no Court, nor countrey are exempt from sicknes, and death, and other accidents of this world;Io. 4. 46 and oftimes God doth send these accidents, to the end people should be mindfull to have recourse vnto him, and not forget what they are of thēselves. However; it behoveth vs to be allwayes prepared for them, with patience, and resigna∣tion, and humble acknowledgment of our owne naturall miserie. And as for corporall helps we are vigilant and in∣industrious not to neglect them till the last; so for our spi∣rituall helps we must not be backward, least we be taken short: This young man was at deaths doore, before this soverain Physitian was looked after.
Iesus sayed to him, vnlesse you see signes, and wonders you beleeve not. He came downe to our Saviour begging his sones health by his means;S. Greg▪ how then did he not beleeve? He did not beleeve that he could be cured, vnlesse our Saviour had been corporally present; in part therfore he did not beleeve, as not conceiving our Saviour as God to be every where. S. AugustinS. August. rayseth our thoughts yet higher, and sayth, that our Saviour would teach his faith∣full people never to expect miracles, but to have sayth stronger then all signes and wonders. Yet mercyfully he provides that in his Church there be allwayes miracles and wonders wrought, to strengthen the infirme, and confound the obstinate, and increase the devotion of such as are otherwise piously given; to recompense also in some measure, even here among men, the labours and affronts which his saints have suffered in this world, by then glorie not only in heaven, but on earth; and to ma∣cifest his owne continuall presence both for spirituall and norporall assistance. Magnifie his holy name in them, and looke not for etraordinary visists or signes vnlesse vpon extraordinary occasions, and then with all submission and humilitie of hart grounded in our owne greate vnwor∣thynes and misdeserts. III. The noble man sayed, Lord comedowne before my sonne die. Iesus syed to him: go, thy Sonne liveth. The man beleeved the word that Iesus sayed to him, and went.Chrsolo∣gus. Harken how low he trayles vpon the ground: as if he could not have ray∣sed him dead, or did not know in what state his Sonne was. Yet our Saviour both to exercise the mans faith and the shew more evidently his owne power, bids him go, for that he should find his Sonne living, and out of dan∣ger. TheophylactTheophil. taketh occasion from this word, to tell vs that we must not stand still in the way of Gods service, but walke on, for if we doe not, we are in dan∣ger to die. But the man beleeveth, and went and moreo∣ver meeting his servants, who brought the good newes, he examined at what houre he began to mend and found it was iust at the time that our Saviour had sayed, he li∣ved; and he, and his whole household did beleeve. Happy sicknes which brought so many to our Saviour. &c.
Sitting in Peeters ship he teacheth the people. I. VVHen a multitude pressed vpon him to heare the word of God,Cum tur∣b irrue∣ in um &c. and himself stood by the lake of Genezareth, he saw two ships standing by the lake and going vp into one which was Simons,Luc. 5 desired him to withdraw it a little from the land, and sitting he taught the mul∣titude out of the ship.S. August. That he teacheth the people frō the ship, signifies this present time, in which our Lord from the Authoritie of the Church reacheth all nations,S. Ambr: For the Church is a ship, which vnder the mayneyard of the Crosse, and with full sayle, inspired by the holy Ghost sayleth prosperously in this world. Those who will heare the word of God truly delivered must presse to this ship; others sayle in the sea of this world, but Christ is to be found in Peeters ship only. He desires it be drawne frō the land, because the more we withdraw out thoughts from earthy and worldly principles the more capable we shall be of his heavenly doctrine. Give him thanks for tea∣ching thee from this ship, and presse to heare the word of God from it.Io. 669. For there be the words of everlasting life. II. As he ceased to spake, he sayd to Simon launch forth into the deepe; and let your nets loose for a draught Simon answered, Master, labouring all night we have taken no∣thing, but in thy word I will let loose the net. And when they had done, they inclosed a very greate multitude of fishes.S. Ambr This ship is no meane vessel, which laucheth into the mayne; and is sequestred from the vnbelee∣ving: frō which they are commanded to let downe their nes, and Hookes of wholsome doctrine, and fih for soules, launch into the maine, that is into Christ. The Sonne of the highest, who exalteth the humble above those who are high. This is that which is rustly to be ad∣mired, that the point of Christian faith being so deepe, and so hidden from humane reason, so many notwithstanding of all sorts should submit vnto them, contrarie to the corrupt inclinations of nature; the greatest wits of the world laboured all that long night of Infidelitie, before our Saviours coming, and could not reach to halfe
that which a true beleever vnderstands in a very sh time. And in all things we may be sure we shall have little for our labour but our paines, vnlesse our Saviour sayes the word, and gives his blssing. Imi∣tate the promprens of S. Peeter against his owne ex∣perience. III. And thier not brake, and they beckoned to thier fellovves vvho vvere in the other ship, that they vvould come, and help them; and they came, and filled both ships, so that they did almost sink. Which vvhen Peeter did see, he fell dovvne at Iesus his knees, saying, go forth from me, because I am a synfull man, ô Lord. For he vvas vvholy astonished▪ and all that vvere vvith him. And Iesus sayed to Simon, feare not; from this time forvvard thou shalt be taking men; and having brought thier ship to land, leaving all things, they follo∣vved him. Miserable creatures who fall out of the net in which our Saiour hath taken them: more miserable those who teare it: Happy they who are called, and im∣ployed to assist, that it be not torne. They will be filled with heavenly graces; and though they be often ready in a manner to sink vnder the burden, they will be re∣lieved in time, so that they shall suffer no prejudice. Fall downe before our Saviour, with admiration, and thanks,S. Ambr. and acknowledgment of thy vnworthynes. Pee∣ter doth not aske to be forfaken, but that he may not with the successe be puffed vp with pride, Leave all things rather then leave thy Saviour. &c. Second Application to the most blessed Sacrament. I. OSonne of the highest! o depth of mercy and love! I a synfull man, and thou not only to re∣ceive me into thy ship, but into thyself? for so are thy words; he that eateth my flesh,Io. 6 57 and drinketh my blood, remayneth in me, and I in him. O deepth vnsearcheable! the life of the fish is to be in water; it thinks it death to be in the net; and struggles to get out. But here is a net out of which no man that is wise will be; be∣cause the more he is in it, the more water he hath, and
the more scope to doe whatever is fitting to be done. His precious wounds are as so many messhes, which captivate vs to Christ, yet doe let in vnto vs the fountaines of living vvater, promised to the devout Samaritan; fresh, sweete, pleasant, springing vp to life everlasting, in which we may live, and drink when ever we will: Lord, give me the right tast of this vvater; that I may not go other where and thirst when I have done. I am not worthy to approch vnto thee, because I am a synfull man, but thou hast ordayned this sea of vvater, to the end that plunged in it, we should both be cleansed and refreshed, and live eternally in thee. O that we did knovv how greate a gift this is! fall dovvne at his knees, and aske; he is not sparing of his gifts, who so freely and bountifully giveth his ow∣ne self vnto thee. II. O prodigious bounty! O wonderfull dulnes of such as hearing, and knowing that Iesus comes thus dovvne from heaven for our reliefe, doe not make hast vnto him! How insensible are we of our dangers, and our disea∣ses? we have but one soule, which ought to be more deere vnto vs the any Sonne to his father; it lyeth gas∣ping oftimes for life, and here is life which offereth itself, and we are slow in accepting it. VVhen a sick person be∣gins to have no heate in his fecte we say he begins to die; what are the feete of our soule, but our affections? If these be not warmed with this fire of love, which is our Saviour, what can we thinke of ourselves? Lord come dovvne before my soule dye. O stupiditie of mankind! can this Lord of Lords come dovvne lower then he hath done? he came into a Virgins wombe, into the Crib, vnto the Crosse, into the jawes of death, and yet here he comes lower then in all these, into thy bosome, into thy breast. Go, and beleeve, and obey readyly his commands, and his Angels will meete thee, and bring thee the ioyfull tidings of health, and thou wilt know that that houre most of all will be the time in which thy feaverish distempers will leave thee. III. Be not still asking with Nicodemus, in the cold night of thy tepiditie, hovv can these things be done? But buyld vpon the testimony of our Saviour, who speakes vvhat he knovves will be done vpon his word; this is my body. God so
loved the vvorld as to give his only Sonne; this sonne hath no lesse love to the world then his father: He giveth him∣self, and is dayly giving in this admirable manner, no contenting himself to be once only for three and thirtie yeares and vpward vpon earth; he will be with vs to the worlds end really present among vs; that after-ages need not envy those yeares of his visible appearance, having the selfsame Sonne of God here present vnder these visi∣ble shapes, more vniversally through the whole world, and more for our present vse, and necessities. Exalt him as Moy∣ses did the serpent in the desert, Behold him with a devou, and loving eye, and he will preserve thee. Cast out all earthy conceites, and tumultuous busineses from the temple of thy hart, and make it as it ought to be (specially in this coniuncture of time) a house of prayer, a house of thanks∣giving, a house of prayse, and of magnifying thy loving Saviour who hath done so greate things for thee; and this greatest of all that he vouchsafeth to be within thee.Luc  49. O invisible creatour of the world,Thom. 2 Kemp. l. 4 c. 1. n. 10 how wonderfully doest thou deale with vs! how sweetly, and graciously with thy elect, offering thyself vnto them to be received in this Sa∣crament. His fervourin preaching, and divers cures. I. ANd they enter into Capharnaum; and forth with vpon the Sabboth,E tingre∣diuntur Caphar∣naum & statim &c. going into the Synagog, he taught them and they were astonied at his doctrine, for he taught as having power, and not as the Scribes. And there was in the Synnagog a man possessed with a vncleane spirit who cryed out,Mar 1 21 what to vs and to thee Iesus of Nazareth?Luc. 4 art thou come to destroy vs? I know who thou art, the holy of God. And Iesus threatened him saying, hold thy peace; and go out of the man. And the uncleane spirit tearing him, and crying out with a lowde voyce went out, and did not hurt him. And they all marvelled, and questioned among themselves, what thing is this? What is this new doctrine? For with power he comman∣deth the vncleane spirits, and they obey. And the bruit of him went forth presently through the whole country.
we have no lesse reason to admire, and rejoyce, and mag∣nifie his name, and his power; which he retaynes over all evill spirits; and his wonderfull wholsome doctrine, and to begge he will ever exercise the same power over them, to restrayne thier malice; and over vs by the force, and vertue of his doctrine to over-power all that may con∣tradict it in vs:Rom. 7 23 for we find a law within vs striving a∣gainst the law of our mind (which is reason and ver∣tue) and captivating vs vnder the law of synne: vnhappy that we are, who shall deliver vs? But the grace of God, by Iesus Christ. This law as it were teareth vs in peeces▪ yet doth not hurt vs, vnlesse we voluntarily consent vnto it, for it is left in vs not to damnation but for exercise, and reward, if we fight couragiously. II. Going forth of the Synagog, they came into the house of Andrew and Simon. Simons wifes Mother lay sick of a greate fever, and they besought him for her, and taking her by the hand, he commanded the fever away, and it left her, and she presently rising ministred vnto them. And when the Sunne was downe, all that had diseased of sundry mala∣dies brought them to him; and he laying his hands vpon every one cured them. And divels went out of many, crying thou art the Sonne of God; and be rebuking them, suffered them not to speake that they knew he was Christ.S. Ambr. The fever of which we lye sick is our Avarice, our ambition, our wrath, and anger &c. a fever inflames the body, these dis∣teper the mind. We must have recourse to our Saviour, and beseech him to help vs: those fevers neglected grow grea∣ter and greater, and bring vnlucky deaths: if we be freed from the violence of these passions, we must not be idle, but diligent in the service of our Saviour. See how worldly busines doth delay our spirituall cure; people flocked not till sunne set. How many differ repentance to the last? God is mercyfull, and oft wayteth our leasure, but not allwayes. III. And rising very early be went into the desert, and prayed; and Simon sought after him, and they who had been with him, and when they found him, they sayed, all seeke thee; but he answered, I must preach to other citties also the kingdome of heaven; for therfore am I sent. He went into the desert to teach vs that if we chance to doe any
thing extraordinarie, we must fly the prayse of men and give God thanks in private for the benefit received. He went away sudainly, and without the knowledge even of his owne disciples, to teach vs to take time while ti∣me is, and not to delay, but dread the judgments of God, who oft withdraweth himself even from those, who at times desire his presence, because at other times they neglect him. And he rounded all Galilee, preaching and healing all diseases; and his fame did spread itself through all Syria, and multitudes did follow him from Galilee and Hierusalem, and Iewrie, and from beyond the river Iordan. Thou mayest soone drive away Iesus, and leese his sa∣vour,Thom.  l. 2. c. 8. n. 3. if thou turne thyself to externall things. &c. Three pretending to follow our Saviour. I. AS they were walking in the way,Ambulan∣tibus illi in via &c. one of the Scribes sayed vnto him; Master, I will follow thee whersoever thou goest. Iesus sayed to him, the foxes have holes, and the birds of the ayre neasts,Matth. 8 9 but the Sonne of man hath not where to lay downe his head.Luc. 9 57 VVe may well conceive (sayth S. Augustin)S. Augutin. that this man, if he had followed Christ, would have sought himself, and not Christ: therfore he was an∣swered, that, the sonne of man hath not where to rest his head. But where hath he not? He hath not in thy faith: foxes have taken vp thy hart, because thou hast a doble hart; the birds of the ayre have neasten in thy hart, be∣cause thou art proude: the deceitfull, and the proude doe not follow me. How can craft and deceite follow sim∣plicitie, or pride humilitie? And withall admire the po∣verty of our Saviour, in which he lived, and how he was often put to exigents for want of shelter, and retired himself, into the desert to pray. The Sonne of man hath not where to rest his head; and is it for me so easyly to give way to lazines, or to seeke my ease? II. To another he sayed, follow me, and he answered, Lord let me go first, and bury my father; and Iesus sayed to him, let the dead bury the dead; but go thou and preach the kingdome of God.S. Augu That which this man desired to doe, was an act
vvas an act of pietie: but the heavenly Master taught him what he ought to have preferred. VVhen the misbelee∣ving bury a corps, the dead bury the dead, the mans body lost the soule, but thier soules had lost God. Ponder the difference betweene these two deaths, and these two bu∣rialls; and againe reflect, what hast thou to doe with se∣cular busines, when it is time of prayer, and such spirituall imployments? Let the dead bury thier dead. III. Another sayed, I will follow thee Lord: but let me first take leave of them that are at home: And Iesus sayed to him; no man putting his hand to the plough, and look∣ing back is apt for the kingdome of heaven.S. Basilius He would not suffer that those whome he brought vp for the king∣dome of heaven should be one moment diverted from it, but that having given themselves to God they should make no account of earthly things at all, nor have any thought of them. And if no man looking back be apt for the kingdome of heaven, how canst thou expect the divi∣ne illustrations in prayer, or his assistance in other things if thou hast not thy eyes vpon him, but art looking back vpon things impertinent? How canst thou hope to profit, if thou lookest vpon those who lag behind, and not vpon the fervent who go before thee? One thiug (sayth S. Paul is of importance,Philip. 3 13 or one thing I endeavour) forgeting the things which are behind, and stretching myself to those which are before, I pursue the marke, the prize of the supernall va∣cation of God in Christ Iesus: let vs therfore as many! as are per∣fect be thus minded. He calmes the sea. I. ANd they take him into the ship,Assumunt eum ita vt rat in navi &c. as he was; and be∣hold a greate tempest rose in the sea; the wind blew and the waves beate into the ship; so that it was cove∣red with them, and he was in the hinder part sleeping upon  pillovve.Matth. 8 23 It is a greate commendation, and excellencie of faith,Marc. 4 36 to receive our Saviour, as he is in the ship, that is, in the church,S. Chry∣ogue. leaving the multitude of questions and reasons▪ A tempest rise; it is but to trie the skill of the Pi∣lote and the diligence of the mariners; for vvhatever happe∣eth,
will not contristate the Iust;Prov. 12 2 who repose vpon the pillow with our Saviour; to wit vpon a good conscience, with trust and confidence in him, and resignation to his will. Record what stormes the Church of God hath in∣dured, and hath been delivered out of them all: Consider also the inward stormes which rise in thy soule, and how thou art to behave thyself in them.S. August▪ Hath some body slandered thee, or miscalled thee? It is a wind which is risen against thee; hast thou been angrie at it? It is a wave which hath beaten into thy ship. Remember how our Sa∣viour hath behaved himself; and he was sleeping. II. His disciples came to him, and raysed him, saying▪ Master doth is nothing belong to thee that we perish? Save vs: And he sayth to them, why are you fearefull, ô yee of little faith? As if he should have sayed. You doe well to call vpon me, and to beleeve that I can save you; but you should moreover have beleeved that even sleeping I have care of you that you perish not, and have a mind to save you, though for a time I permit you to be in troble: He sayed well,S. Bernar let the world rage, and the wicked bend thier teeth against me,Psal. 43. 23 yet I will hope in thee. Rise, why doest thou sleepe ô Lord? Rise and doe not put me of to the end; wherfore doest thou turne thy face frrom me? Why doest thou forget our want and our tribulation? Rise ô Lord, and help vs, and redeeme vs for thy name sake. III. Then risen he commanded the winds and the sea, and sayed to the sea, Peace, and be still; and the wind ce∣sed, and there was a greate calme. And the people admired at it, and were stroken with much feare, saying, what an is this? seeing the winds and the sea obey him. Thou hast no lesse cause to wonder, and to reverence him, who is so powrefull, and mayest often experience it in thyself; for if at any time thou hast a calme it comes from him. Follow S. AugustinsS. August. advise. Imitate the winds and the sea; obey thy Creatour. The sea doth heare the command of our Saviour Christ, and art thou deafe? Let not the waves overcome you in your affliction. When a man well disposed is afflicted or temped,Thom.  Kep. l c 12. n. 2 then he vnderstands that God is more needfull to him, with out whome he finds he can doe nothing.
Our Saviour casteth out a Legion of evill spirits, and suffereth them to go into the heard of hogs. I. VVHen he was come beyond the water into the country of the Gerasens,Cum ve. nisse trans fre∣tum in re∣gronem Gerasen∣rum &c. there met him a man possessed by the divel of a long time, and had his dwelling in the sepulchres; exceedeng fierce, so that no chayne would hold him, nor could any man passe that way: But seeing Iesus a farre of ranne and adored him, and crying out with a loude voyce,Matth. 8 28 sayed what is it to me and thee Iesu Sonne of God most high,Marc. 5 1 I adiure thee in the name of God not to torment me. For Iesus had sayed to him,Luc. 8 27 go out of the man thou vncleane spirit. It is apparent (sayth S. Hierome)S. Hiero∣me. that this confes∣sion was not voluntarie, but wrested out of him by the vertue of Christs word; as fugitive slaves, when they see thier Master, think of nothing but of stripes. In the meane time we may see how the enymy domineers over those who are in his power; how they dwell vpon those things which are rather to be fleed by reason of thier noysomnes, leaving the right rode (as it is in the Proverbs) and walking obscure wayes,Prov. 2. 14 reioycing when they have done mischiefe, and exulting in the worst things. And by continuing thus a long time, they grow loth to leave thier courses▪ and clamour if any body admonish them; what have you to doe with what life I lead? And as S. Luke addeth he wnt naked and cut himself with stones; for they grow shamlesse, and with out sence, or feeling of any good thing, neither moved with feare nor love, nor regarding any bounds of any law either of God or man; a very miserable spectacle to all that have any reason in them. II. Our Saviour asked him, what is thy name? he sayed, a legion, for we are many; and he beseeched him much that he would not cast them out of the country nor command them into the depth. And there was a heard of swine fee∣ding on the mountaines, and they desired he would permit them to enter into them, and he permited them. The divels therfore went out of the man, and entred into the swine, and the heard with violence went into the lake and stifled. First observe as one divel brought in many; so
synne brings a multitude after it, if it be let stay any time: Secondly; that synne is as loth to leave vs as the divel, our concupiscens and disorders favouring it: third∣ly; that greatest synners some times see thier owne ruine, and feate it; and fourthly; by that which hap∣pened vnto the swine, we may see whether at last the di∣vel with violence will east vs, not into this materiall sea, but into a sea of torments in which we shall never dye. Fiftly; for our comfort, that the divel hath not power so much as over hogs, vnlesse God permit it, muchlesse over sheepe (sayth Tertullian)Tertull▪ who are of his flock. III. And the swine-heard fled, and told it in the citty, and they came to Iesus, and found the man siting at his feete, clothed and well in his wits; and they were afrayd, and besought him to depart from them. And the man out of whome the divels were cast, desired he might be with him: but Iesus dismissed him saying, returne into thy house, and tell how greate things God hath done to thee; and he went through the whole citty preaching how greate things Iesus had done to him. Observe that no man in this life is so greate a synner, or so much overgrowne with vice and imperfection, that his conversion is to be despayred. Se∣condly; reflect vpon the effect of true repentance, which is humilitie: So the Magdalen layed herself at the feete of out Saviour: Intertayne a wholsome feare of being a∣gaine separated from Iesus, and from the means by which we were cured: Also a continuance of a greate esteeme of the benefit which we have received, magnifying it with in ourselves, and extolling it also before others, when there is is occasion. Those of the towne sought the contrarie, not knowing what was good for them. Acknowledge thyself vnworthy of divine comfort and rather deserving affliction.Thom.  Kemp. l.  c. 2 n. 4 He cureth one sick of the Palsey. I. ANd againe he entred Capharnaum after some dayes,Et iterum intcavit Caphar∣nan &c. Marc▪ 2 Luc.  and many came together, so that there was no place, no not at the doore: and he spake thm the word; and they brought one sick of the
palsey caryed by foure, and when they could not offer him vnto him for the multitude, they uncovered the roofe where he was, and let downe the couch wherin the sick man lay. Begge of our Saviour that he will againe and againe enter thy hart, and make it his seate, and teach thee to over∣come the passions of it, and remedie the diseases: That the holy Angels will compasse it, that no ill incounter may appeare even at the doore; acknowledge thy weaknes, and besides having recourse thyself to thy Saviour;S. Ambr. Endea∣vour to have some who will admonish thee of thy dutie, and how dull thou art; some that will lift thee vp to hi∣gher thoughts, and by whose help thou mayest as occa∣sion shall be humble thy self before Iesus, and be lifted a∣gaine vp with confidence. II. Iesus seeing thier fayth; sayth to the sick man, sonne thy synnes are forgiven; and there were certaine Scribes sitting there, and thinking in thier harts, why doth he say so? He blasphemh: who can forgive synnes but only God? Synne was the greater evill of the two, and is the cause of all our evills: Therfore he speaketh of that to put vs in mind (with S. Augustin)S. August. that if we be sick of any spirituall disease we have recourse to this spirituall physitian, and open to him that which is covered, or hidden in our sou∣les, and regard not the censures of men, but humbly be∣leeve we may be cured.S. Hieron. And with S. Hierome, extoll the humilitie of our Saviour, who vouchsafeth to call such a poore snake Sonne, whome the proude Scribes and Phari∣sees would scarce have looked vpon, how ever zealous they seeme here to be of the honour due to God alone. III. But Iesus seeing thier thoughts, sayth why think thus within yourselves? Which is easyer to say to the such man, thy synns are forgiven? Or to say, Rise, take vp thy couch and walk: But that you may know that the Sonne of man hath power on earth to forgive synns; I say vnto the Rise, take vp thy couch and go into thy house. And he forth∣with arose, and tooke up his couch, and went away in the sight of all; and all marveled and glorified God who given such power to men. By answering to thier though he gave them to vnderstand that by the same power he could also forgive synnes, and confirmed it by this mi∣cle; that as his word was made good in the outward
so it would by the same vertue be made good in the clearing of soules from synne. And observe by the way, that as this man coming for his corporall health received with it that which is better; so we praying for things which occurre to vs as beneficiall, may receive that which is better, though perhaps we receive not directly that which we then aske. And be not ashamed to confesse thy synnes, seeing God knowes thy secretest thoughts. Rise take vp thy couch.S. Augus Our couch is our body; we take it vp, when we cause it to obey the commandments of God; it is heavy, therfore he sayth walk. Few are they who after much infirmitie can runne: we walk into our house, follo∣wing the commandment of Christ, when after death we are received into the celestiall habitation. The calling of S. Matthew. I. ANd when Iesus passed thence,Et cum transisse: inde, vid it hominem &c. he saw a man sitting in the custome house, named Matthew, and he sayth to him, follow me; and he rose vp, and leaving all things followed him. Other Evangelists call him levi out of respect to S. Matthew,Matth. 9 dissembling his or∣dinarie name:Marc. 2 14 He calles himself Matthew and a Publican; for as the wiseman sayth;Luc 5 29. the Iust is first in accusing him∣self.S. Hiero∣me. And with all sheweth vs, that no man must despayre of saluation: Iulian the Apostata imputeth it to folly that people vpon a slight call would follow our Saviour; as if they had not reason, he working so many prodigious wonders. Besides that the Majestie of his divinitie, which doubtlesse did shew itself in greate measure in his very countenance, was able to draw people to him: For if a lodestone and amber be able to draw after them materiall things, how much more forcibly is the Creatour able to draw his Creatures▪ Looke vpon this mirrour of perfec∣tion; harken what kind of doctrine, and in what manner, he delivereth it; observe him diligently, and thou wilt see thou hast reason to follow him without delay. II. And Levi made him a greate feast in his house, and there were a greate multitude of Publicans, and of others that were sitting at the table with him, and with his disci∣ples. And the Pharisees seeing sayed to the disciples, wherfore
doth your Master eate with Publicans and synners.S. Hier. These Publicans saw one of thier trade converted to better life, therfore they did also hope to find place for repentance and saluation; for they did not come to Iesus with intent to remayne in thier former vices, as the Pharisees murmu∣red, but being repentant, as the following words of our Saviour doe insinuate. And who (sayth S. Gregorie Na∣zianzen)Gregorie Nazian∣zen. accuseth a Physitian that he visiteth the sick, that he abideth the stench, that he endeavoureth to set vp the infirme? III. Iesus hearing it, answered; they that are in health and able, need not a Physitian, but they who are ill at ease. Go, and learne what it is, I will mercy, and not sacrifice. For I am not come to call the just,Hilarie. but synners. No man by the law is iust; he sheweth therfore that they did in vayne brag of justice. And the wiseman asketh this ques∣tion,Prov. 20 9 which concerneth every body. Who can say, my hart is pure, I am frre, from synne? Let vs therfore have re∣coure to this mercifull Physitian, whose fees are but what is for our profit, and not his owne; he hath the labour, and we the fruite; he the thanks, and we the reward: and seeing mercy is that which he desires, and esteemes it as sacrifice, follow the advise of old Tobie to his sonne:Tobie 4 8 To thy abi∣litie be mercyfull; if thou hast much bestow liberally; if thou hast little, give a little willingly. And that which is all∣wayes in thy power, forgive as thou desireth to be for∣given. The third application to the most blessed Sacrament. I. S Matthew vpon his conversion made a banket fo our Saviour: Our Saviour vpon our turning to him, makes vs a banket: But, ô infinite difference▪ that banket was of temporall and perishable meates, tur∣ning to corruption both of body and soule;Io. 6 33 this banket co∣meth downe from heaven and giveth life to the world, and is his owne flesh, and precious blood, which whoever eateth, hath life verlasting. Drinking of this cup (sayth S. Am∣brose)S. Ambr. our body doth not stagger, but doth rise to better
life; our mind is not trobled, but consecrated and made holy. And the councell of Florence:Concil. Florent what ever good ef∣fect materiall meate and drink doth work in vs towards corporall life, mayntayning, increasing, repayring, and de∣lighting, this Sacrament worketh towards our spirituall life; it withdrawes vs from that which is evill, it streng∣theneth vs in that which is good, and encreaseth grace and vertue in vs. But if we consider further, that it is our Saviour himself, who feeds vs with himself, the bread of Angels,Io. 6 32 and the true bread from heaven, not in figure on∣ly, as the Manna of the Iewes, but really himself, as he is God and man, what a treasure have we? what a banket? what love? what mercy, what desire of our love shewed vs? O Sacrum convivium in quo Christus sumi∣tur &c. II. It is moreover a medicine for all spirituall diseases? and what a legion of syns, and imperfections, and passions doth possesse vs? So exceeding fierce, sometimes, that no man can passe by,Matth. 8 28 but we must have a saying to him, or whome by word or example we do not anoy,Luc. 8 27. neither re∣mayning in house, that is, in the Church at our devotions, nor in the citty among men of civill conversation, but in the sepulchres and in the mountaines, among those who live a wild, and barren kind of life, voyde of good works, having little respect to the chaynes of the commandments in which we are bound,Marci 5 3 but breaking them at pleasure, and not being willingly subiect to any body. A pittifull stae: ô Saviour of the world! command this evill disposition out of me, that it cast me not into the depth, among the hogs: suffer me to be with thee, I beseech thee, and I will pub∣lish the greate things which thou hast done for me, having mercy on me. III. And here most of all must we take our Saviour,Marc. 4 36 as he is, and as he is pleased to present himself vnto vs vnder the shapes of bread and wine; and whatever wind of contradiction rise from our sense, or from our weake ynderstanding, say vnto it: Peace, be still; and be∣leeve the power of the mighty hand of God, who wih a word made all things, and the infinity of his love, who, as he gave himself to be rudely handled by the Iewes, gives himself here to be lovingly handled by
vs vnworthy creatures, not valuing that he is sometimes also misused by vs; wherin his love is the more manifest, and more to be valued by vs. Present him thy hart and soule, as a pillow to rest on, and attend him resting. Afford him the curtesie which the spouse in the canticles recei∣ved;Cant. 2 7 doe not rayse him, nor cause him to awake, till he wil himself.Cant. 5 2 He sleepes, but his hart watcheth over thee. Let not thy eyes go of from him, least through thy negli∣gent attendance thou receive not with him the fruite which he bestoweth vpon the watchfull. I rose (sayth the spouse) to open to my beloved; I opened the bolt of my doore for my beloved; but he was gone a side, and passed away; my soule was melted when he spake, I sought, and did not find him;Thom.  Kemp. l. 2 c. 8 n 3. I called and he did not answer me. Be devour and quiet and Iesus will stay with thee. He rayseth the daughter of Iayrus and cu∣reth the woman of her bloody issue. I. THere cometh one of the rulers of the Synagog na∣med Iayrus,Et venit quidem de Archisy∣nagogis &c. and seeing him, faleth at his feete and besought him much, saying, my daughter, is at the point of death, come and lay thy hand vpon her, that she may be saved and live.Marci 5  And he went with him, and a greate multitude followed and thronged him. In diseases, and death of our soule what expressions ought not we to vse? These bring vs truly to the last cast; for after our tem∣porall death, there is another death to be feared, farre more grievous, because ever and never dying: In these occasions therfore bestirre thyself; fall at our Saviours feete, beseech him, follow him; thou seest his readynes to concurre with thy indeavours, and to go along with thee; feare not that the multitude, feare not that the greatnes of thy synnes will divert him from thy help, if thou prostrate thyself with a syncere hart, and beseech pardon, as thou oughtest. II. And a woman who was in an issue of blood twelve yeares and had suffered much from many physitians, and ha bestowed all that she had, neither was any thing better, but rather worse; when she heard of Iesus, came behind him, in the presse,Luc. 8 44 and touched the hemme of his garment; for
she sayed, if I shall touch but his garment, I shall be safe and forthwith the fountaine of her blood was dryed vp and she felt in her body that she was healed of that maladie. Search into the causes of thy long diseases; consider how thou spendest thy time, and thy spirituall, and temporall substance, and vpon whome, and why thou goest rather backward, then forward; come with humilitie, and confi∣dence to the Sacraments: Let the very name of Iesus give the assurance of remedie; specially if thou touch with reverence the garment with which he is pleased to cover his sacred body in the holy ucharist, which are the re∣semblances of bread and wine, in which he gives vs his sacred flesh and blood, and doest not come rudely and disorderly vpon him,S. Cyillu as the multitude; for when Christ remaynes in vs he cooleth the raging law of concupis∣cence, he strengthens devotion, and quailes the vnbridled motions of our mind. And Iesus turning sayed, who hath touched my garments? His disciples sayed thou seest the mul∣titude thronging thee; and sayest who touched me? But the woman fearing and remkling fell downe before him, and told him the truth: and he sayed, daughter, thy faith hath made shee whole; go in peace. See how he takes notice of the reverent and not of the rude,S. Ambr. and how greate a grace it was that she who was ashamed to be seen, was not asha∣med to confesse her imperfections; hide not thy falts, ack∣nowledge that which he knowes allready. III. As he was speaking; they come to the ruler of the Synagog, saying, thy daughter is dead, why doest thou troble the Master any further? But Iesus sayth to him; feare not, only beleeve: And be admitted not any to follow him, but Peeter, Iames and Ihon: And seeing folk weeping and way∣ling sayth why weepe you so? She is not dead, but sleepeth: and they derided him: but he having put forth all, but the Father and Mother, and them that were with him, taking her by the hand, sayth, wench, I say to thee rise: and forth∣with she rose vp and walked, and they were greatly asto∣nished, and he commanded them earnestly that no body should know it; and bad that some thing should be given her to ate: and the fame of it was spread through the whole countrey. God so disposing that the more we are carefull that the good which we doe should be secret God should be more
glorifyed by it. She rose and walked: because a sonle raysed from syne, must be stirre itself that it fall not into a re∣lapse; but be dispersing noysome thoughts, and disposi∣tions; by vertuous actions it must also cast of the multi∣tude of worldly occasions; and weepe and wayle those losses only, which most of all deserve the name of losses; con∣verse with a few and good, exercise the fayth of Peeter, the hope of Iames, the love of Ihon, finally frequent the Sacra∣ments, to the end to get strength and vigour after so dan∣gerous infirmities. He cureth the sickman at the Poole. I. IN Heerusalem there was a Poole, having five porches;Est autem Hieroso∣lymis pro∣batica &c. Io. 5 in these lay a greate multitude of sick persons, blind, lame, withered, expecting the stirring of the water; and an Angel of out Lord descended at a certaine time into the poole, and the water was stirred, and he that had gone downe first into the poole after the stirring of the water, was made whole of whatever infirmiti he was holden. God in all ages and all times, even among the faithfull, provideth certaine places where constantly miraces are wrought for the increase of the devotion of the faithfull, and to confirme thier fayth of the omnipo∣tent power of God, who as he created all with a word, can in an instant restore all things to thier perfection, yet will not doe it with out our particular concurrence, and according to the times and wayes which in his wisdome he hath ordayned. But for our spirituall diseases he hath left in all places present remedie, with out expecting times and seasons; for the holy baptisme may in necessitie be administred by any body; and for the Sacrament of pe∣nance there be in all places those who are appointed, nor for one only, or for the first, or second, but for all, and the sooner the infirme come vnto it, the better it is, neither night, nor day excepted. In these the diseases of our five senses are cured; the five porches signifying the five pre∣cious wounds of our Saviour, by which they have entrance to thier cure: Enter, and bathe thyself in these. II. And there  a ma that had been eight and
thirtie yeares in his infirmitie; him vvhen Iesus savv lying, and knevv that he had a long time, sayed to him: vvil thou be made vvhole? the sick man ansvvered, Lord I have no man, vvhen the vvater is trobled, to put me into the poole: for vvhiles I come, another goeth dovone before me, Iesus sayth to him: rise, take vp thy bed, and walke: And forvvith he vvas cured, and took vp his bed, and walked. Our Savior came to cure mankind, who me no man, nor Angel, or other creature could cure: O in∣finite mercy. And no lesse infinite, that he oftimes pickes out one from a multitude to bestow his graces and fa∣vours vpon him, leaving other synnes, and diseases; to seeke the ordinarie remedies, not by chance, or at adventure, but knowing all the circumstances, and causes of the weaknes of the partie, and when he thinks not of any such favour, Nor doth he with out great ground aske: wilt thou be cured▪ For how many times cometh it to passe, that we will, and we will not? we will be cured, but will not vse the means which is necessarie, or will not put ourselves to the vt∣most to obtayne our desires; though we have layen eight and thitie yeares in syn, yet, if we will, we may be cured. Rise rouse thyself, and put on a resolution to overcome what∣ever difficultie;S. Agus take up thy crosse, and walk. When thou wert infirme, thy neighbour did beare with thee; art thou cured▪ beare with thy neighbour. III. And it was the sabboth that day. The Iewes ther∣fore sayd to him, it is the sabboth, thou mayest not take vp thy bed; he answered: He that cured me sayed to me: take vp thy bed, and walke; they asked him, what is that man, that sayd: take vp thy bed, and walke? But he that was cured knw not who it was; for Iesus had declined the multitude standing in the place. Afterward Iesus findeth him in the tem∣ple, and sayth to him: behold thou art cured, synne no more, least some wors thing happen to thee. The man went, and told the Iewes that it was Iesus who had cured him. Tr∣vpon the Iewes persecuted Iesus because he did these things vpon the sabboth. Temporall cures are ordayned for the cure of our soules; the diseases wherof, and the punishments due to them, are incomparably worse, then what ever can happen here: these we must attend vnto chiefly vpon th sabboth dayes, which, to our shame, we
oft bestow more in idlenes, and in vanities, then in what they where ordayned for: frequent the churches; give pray∣se to God for thy deliverance; in these Iesus will willingly find thee out and give thee wholesome instruction: requite him not with ingratitude, as this man did as it seemes, at first overjoyed with his cure for he never looked after him from whom he had received so much benefit: though that afterwards he went,thym. and told the Iws, was not t betray him, but to divulge his prayse. He cureth the man that had a withered hand. I. ANd he entred againe into the Synagog,Et introi∣vit iterum in Syna∣gogam &c. and there was a man that had a withered hand, and they watched whether he would cure on the sabboth; and he sayed to the man that had the withered hand, rise into the middest:Marci 3 then he sayth to them, is it lawfull on the sabboth to doe well or ill? t save a soule, or destroy? and they held thier peace. And looking vpon them with anger, being sorrowfull for the blindnes of thier hart, he sayth to the man: stretch forth thy hand, and his hand was restored him. In the Synagog one man had a withered hand, many had withered harts, which planted so neere the fountaine of heavenly waters tooke no benefit by them. They watched vpon him, but for no good intent, and by thier owne malitious thoughts did put a barre to the heavenly graces; watch thou vpon him, and observe him, disposing thy soule so as it may reape good, for thou seest that much doth depend vpon thy inward disposition. Ris into th middest: be not asha∣med nor backward to cooperate to thy owne cure. Stretch forth thy hand,S. Ambr. to be mrcifull to the poore, often to receive, and lodge a pillgrime, allwayes to God for forgivenes of thy synnes. Lt not thy hand be stretched forth to receive,Eccl. 436 and shut to bestovv. He lookes about vvith anger and sorrow in this life; have recourse from his anger to his compassion,Matth. 37 and beware of the anger which is to come. II. And he sayed to them, vvhat man shall there be of you that shall have one sheepe, and it  into the ditch on the sabboth, vvill he not take hold of it, and lift
it vp? Hovv much better is a man, then a shp? Ther∣fore it is lavvfall on the sabboth to doe a good deed. Ho oft notwithstanding doe we preferre our inferiour occa∣sions before the reliefe of our brother, and make no ac∣count of that which is more to be esteemed, and prefer∣red? We ponder much that we have but that on sheepe, that one child, that one thing that we esteeme in the world, and doe not consider that our neighbour also hath but one soule to save; he hath oft but one bit of bread to put in his mouth, one peny for the whole weeke, one poore rag to his back, where as God hath given thee a sab∣oth of rest and plentie wherin thou mayest take thy plea∣sure and case. III. And the Pharisees going forth immediately made s consultation with the Herodians, how that they might destoy him. But Iesus with his disciples retyred to the sa, and a greate multitude from Galilee, and from Iewrie followd him; and he healed many, so that the folk pressed vpon him to touch him, that they might be cured. Miserable Pharisees who turned to venome the doctrine, and the wonders or∣dered for thier saluation! O wretched going forth from all reason and conideration of what was fitting bur Isus cea∣sed not to doe good not with standing: follow him, presse re∣verently to touch him; specially when he offereth him∣self in the blessed Sacrament; shrink not away, but prepar thy self carefully and approch with confidence, there is o disease which he doth not cure. The choosing of the Apostles. I. ANd he went forth vnto the  to pray,Exit  monte orare. and he passed the whole night in prayer, and whn day was come, he called his disciples to him, and he chose twelve of them,Lu. 6 whome also h named Apstles. Simon, whome  surnamed Peeter, and Andrew his bro∣ter; Iames and Ihon, ad he called thier naes Borges that is sonnes of Thunder &c.S. Ambr Not every one that prayeth ascendes vnto the mountaine, but he that prayeth well, who going forward from earthly thing, to those which abo us, mounts vp to the top of the heavenly court.
He doth not ascend who is solicitous about his worldly wealth or honour: All great and high spirits ascend. And doe not think that he prayeth as infirme and weake: The owner of Power becomes Master of obedience. He is out Advocate; he prayeth not as infirme, but as compassio∣nate; what oughtest thou to doe in order to thy owne sal∣uation, seeing Christ prayeth all night for thee? what oughtest thou to doe when thou beginnest any good worke having our Saviours example before thee. II. He changeth thier names, to give vs to vnderstand that we must change our conversation vpon whatever favour received from our Saviour, and indeavour to have the soliditie of a rock in the service of God; and to be able with out resolution, in that which is good, to terrifie his opponents.Victor Iudas also among the rest was choosen to be an Apostle, to shew vs, that it is not our nature which is cause of our perdition,Euthym. but our wretched will; and that God receives a man while he is good, and till himself fall of,S. Ambr. and become evill: Also that we might learne the force of Truth, and of the Sacraments which are the same, though ministred by the wicked: And that, if thou chance to be forsaken, or betrayed by thy frend, thou mayest learne to beare it patiently. III. And he made them to be with him, and that he might send them to preach: and he gave them povver to cure infir∣mities, and to cast out divells. First we must be vnited with Christ, acknowledging that all that we can doe proceeds from him, and depends of him, and must be done for his glorie, and with confidence in his goodnes: then we must indeavour to have a longing desire to be with him, as much as we can, and to find sweetnes in con∣versing with him in prayer, as with the fountaine of all goodnes, our Redeemer, our frend, our benefactour, our spouse; that in all our afflictions, and in all occasions, we find ourselves with him, as it were at home; and even in our outward actions never to be from him; but be doing them for his love, and with reflection, and desire to please him in them; holding ourselves as instruments in his hand, and working by the force, and strength, and aptitude which he gives vs.Tom.  Kemp. l. 3 ▪ 22 n▪ 5▪ Nothing ought so much to reioyce him that loveth thee, ô Lord, and acknowledgeth thy b∣nefits,
as thy will in him, and the good pleasure of thy eternall disposition. The eight Beatitudes. I. ANd seeing the multitude he vvent vp vnto a mountaine and vvhen he vvas set his disciples came to him,Vidns sus turba ascendi in mon∣tem &c. and opening his mouth, he taught them, saying. Blessed are the poore in spirit, for thiers i the kingdome of heaven.Matth.  Blessed are the meeke, for they shall possesse the land. Blessed are they that mourne, for they shall be comforted. His going vp to the mountayne betokeneth the height of the doctrine which he then did intend to deliver, farre beyond the expectation of all people of this world, and contrarie to thier wonted dictamens, and desires; therfore also he is sayed to have pened his mouth, as the tresurie of divine wisdome, hid∣den hitherto from the world, for the world placeth happi∣nes in riches, and in filling thier desires with wealth and plentie; he placeth happines in povertie; nor in that which comes vpon vs by necessitie; but in voluntarily quitting ourselves of the mcumbrances of this world, and putting of the very desire of wealth; this making the way to the kingdome of heaven playne, and ready, without those rubb which the desire of wealth doth rayse. In like manner wheras in the world there is perpetuall contention about lands and possessions, and nothing can be had, or kept, without strife, and debate, the land of the living, so grea∣te as it is, is wholy, and quietly possessed by meekenes, and by yealding of our seeming right, according to the world. Besides that nothing is more powerfull towards the world (sayth S. ho Chrisostome)S. Ihon Chrysost▪ then meekenes, for as water putteth our fire, so doth a meeke answer quench the flame of Anger. Finally not those who live in jolytie shall find comfort of it at last, but those who bewayle the offenses committed against God, and passe soberly through the miseries of the world, and through the losses of frends and goods: for all will make at last for thier eternall comfort, being borne with paience and with thoughts fixed vpon our heavenly habition.
II. Blessed are they that hunger, and thirst after jus∣tice, for they shall have thier fill. Blessed are the mercyfull for they shall obtaine mercy. Blessed are the clean of hart, for they shall see God. Hunger and thirst are things which we seeke to avoyde in this life, and we are never long satisfied: But the hunger and thirst after justice; is to be procured▪ for of itself it is a full satisfaction to our soules; and though we should want wherwith to satisfie our bodies, we are satisfied in mind▪ because even that want cooperates in our justice.S. Hiero.  Neither is it enough to desire to be just, unlesse we hunger and thirst after it, ac∣knowledging ourselves never to be just enough, but being allwayes desirous of more. How much vnmercy∣full dealing is there in the world, in all states, and occu∣pations▪ Nothing but opression, nothing but squeezing, nothing but exacting satisfaction to the vtmost, and mo∣re then the vtmost. This is not the way to have mercy where we most need, but to be mercyfull, compassionate, easy in our dealings towards another, as we would others should be towards us in our necessities. And because pure∣es of hrt is so little looked after in the world as being out of sight, he puts vs in mind of the Allseeing eye, from which nothing is hidden; promising that if we have care that he see no vncleanes harboured in our thoughts, he will discover himself vnto us, who is puritie itself; neithe is it possible to arrive to the sight of God without puritie of hat. III. Blessed are the peace-makers, because they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they that suffer perse∣cution for justice, for thiers is the kingdome of heave. They who sow discord,. reg. let them reflect whose children they must needs be; for if they who make peace he earmed children of God. doubtlesse they who disturbe it are chil∣dren of Satan.S. Leo. But with in this peace are not comprehen∣ded certaine fond familiarities, and frendships, grounded vpon sympathie of nature, but such peace as is made ac∣cording to the will and pleasure of God, and for his ho∣nour. Finally he concludes with suffering persecution, to the end to cut of all at once, the desires of the content∣ments of this world, seeing our happines is not to be wrought by them, but by suffering on all , in our
goods, and in our good name, in our bodyes, and in our estates; keeping our mind free to God in thanksgiving for the reward which is layed vp for vs in heaven, for pa∣tiently and ioyfully going through with them▪ for he ex∣horts vs not only to patience, but to ioy, because our re∣ward is to be plentifull in heaven.Thom.  Kemp. l. 2 6. 6 n. 2 To glorie in tribula∣tion is not hard to him that loveth▪ for it is to glorie in the crosse of our Lord. Other documents belonging to the Evan∣gelicall law. I. I Tell you,Dico u tem vobis nisi abun∣daverit justitia vestra &c. v. 20 unlesse your justice abound more then that of the Scribes, and Pharisees: that is, then that which they reach and practise, you shall not enter into the kingdome of heaven. Then because Ager is a chiefe vice, and passion, which generally reigneth in all men, he she∣wes how we ought to overcome it, and come to the per∣fection of meekenes contrarie vnto it: And first he sayth thus. You have heard that it was sayed to them of old, thou shalt not kill: and who killeth is in danger of judg∣ment. But I say to you; whoever is Angrie with his bro∣ther, shall be in danger of judgment; and whoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of a councell▪ and whoever shall say, thou foole, shall be guilty of elfire. By degrees therefore of the falt (as S. GregorieS. Greg. tells vs) the sentence doth also increase; Anger, without outward expression; Anger, with expression, and clamour; Anger, with clamour, and reproch are all of them condemned, but differently punished. If therfore thou offer thy gift at the Altar, and there doest remember that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy offering, and go first to be reconciled with thy brother. Behold neither is sacri∣fice pleasing from the hand of them that are at variance. II. You have heard that it was sayed: an eye for an eyes▪ and a tooth for a tooth: but I say to you, not to resiste evill: but if one strike thee on the right cheeke, turne to him also the other; and to him that will take away thy coate, let go also thy cloke. This is a second degree of meekenes: for having come so farre as not to expresse Anger, neither
by word, nor outward signe, but mastred it within our∣selves, we must indeavour after one iniury, or hard dea∣ling, to be willing to receive another, and not say: I am not Angrie with him, or▪ I doe forgive him, but I will doe by him as he hath done by me; this being to contradicte by deed that which we seeme to say by word. III. And yet to a third degree he endeavoureth to rayse vs, saying: you have heard that it was sayed, love thy neighbour, and hate thy enimie; but I say to you, love your eimies, doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them that persecute you, and abuse you, that you may be children of your Father who is in heaven; who maketh his Sunne ise vpon good and bad, and rayneth vpon the just and vn∣just: for if you love them that love you what reward shall you have? doe not also the Plublicans this? and if you salute your brethren only, what doe you more; doe not also the heathens this? Be you therfore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect.S Hiro. e. Many measuring the commandments of God by thier owne weakenes, and not by the strength which is in saints, esteeme these precepts to be impossible, and say; it is perfection enough not to hate our enimies, but to love them is more then human nature can beare. But they must know that our Saviour Christ doth not command things impossible, but that which is perfect, and such as David practised toward Saul, and Absalon; and S. Stphen the martyr, who praeyd for them that stoned him; and S. Paul desired to be an outcast for them that did perse∣cute him. This Iesus taught and performed saying. Father pardon them, for they know not what they doe. The fourth application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. THe dignitie of the most Blessed Sacrament is so very greate, that no puritie of hart, no per∣fection vnder God, can be thought sufficient to receive it, as it deserves to be received▪ our Saviour him∣self, God, and man giving himself to vs in it. Yet he vouchsafeth graciously to come vnto vs, if we be but free from mortall synne▪ much more if we endeavour withall
to free ourselves frō the inveterate passions of the mind, which consume the strength, ād substance of our thoughts in things either impertinent, or hurtfull. The woman humbly touched the hemme of our Saviours garment, and was cured, She had done her endeavour for twelve yeares; at last our Saviour tooke compassion of her, and by this one act of devotion towards him the obtayned her desire: he mercyfully also accepted the excuse of the sickman at the poole, that in eight and thirty yeares he had not a man to help him in: Have recourse to this man, who is also God.Psalm. 22 He hath prepared in thy sight a table against those who tro∣ble thee.S: non Chrysost: VVho be those that troble thee? The suggestions of the enimie, thy owe passions, and disordered desires, the pleasures and honours of the world which thou loo∣kest after. Come to this table with feare and trembling and thy trobles will be turned into comfort: those things which infirme flesh esteemes will become contemptible, and spirituall things be held in that repute which they deserve. II. Likenes in disposition, and manners doe breed fa∣miliaritie. VVhat was the disposition of our Saviour while he lived here on earth? Of himself he sayth,Matth.  29. learne of me, because I am meeke, and humble of hart. And the Pophet Esay sayh of him. He shall not contend, nor cla∣mour, neither shall any man heare his voyce in the streete; the bruised reed he shall not breake, and smoaking flax he shall not extinguish: he practised povertie frō the beginning to the ēd of his life: VVho more zealous for the honour of God? who more mercyfull, and desirous of making peace, and yet who more persecuted; and reviled? These be the vertues in which according to the proportion of our state of life we must indeavour to appeare clothed, that we may be the more welcome to this heavenly table. For as he sayth, by his Prophet;Esay. 66. 2 vpon whome shall I rest, or vpon whome shall I cast my eye, but vpon the meeke, and humble, and him that trembled at my words?Gen. 81. The dove which was let out of the Arke found not where to set her foote, till the secōd time the discovered an olive tree, and brought a brāche to the Arke: And our Saviour in his life time resorted much to mount Ovelit, signifying how much desire he had of peace of quiet, and that we should follow him in it.
III. Our Saviour finding the man (whome he had ured at the Poole in the temple, sayed vnto him: behold thou hast been cured, synne no more, least some thing worse befall thee. By which passage we learne three things itting to be endeavoured after receiving. First, we must remaine in the Temple sometime in thanksgiving for so greate a benefit Secondly, we must search into the causes of our long diseses, and order remedie for them, and specially beware of those synnes, which we have lately confessed begging assistance to avoyde them. Thirdly, we must in∣deavou to increase in the knowledge, and love, and res∣pect to our Saviour: For the man, before e presented himself this second time, knew him not; knowing him, he proclaymed that it was Iesus who had done that greate miracle vpon him.Thom.  Komp l4. . 2. n. 2 O sweete and mercyfull Iesus how much reverence, and thanksgiving, with continuall prayse is due vnto thee for the receiving of thy blessed body, the dignitie wherof no man is able to explicate. The narrow way commanded. I. ENter by the narrow gate; Ip au∣gustam portam. wc. for broade is the way, and large is the gate, which leadeth to perdito, and many enter by it: But narow is the gate, and straight is the way which leadeth to life, and few there be that find it,Mat. 7. 13. Blinded by their owne worldly, and carna desires, which they choose rather to follow; and because they are pleasing to sence, the way they walke in seemes large and pleasant; but in fine it leads them to eternall perdition; and they are hardly recoverable in this world, when they are once entred; because it is harder to leave the wayes of the world when one hath once pleased him∣self in them, then if he never rasted them▪ yet we must not think that the gate ād way to life of is so narrow, as to be allwayes irksome; but as S. GregorieS. Greg. advertizeth: The way of God to beginners is narrow to those who are per∣fect it is broade: for the narrowest gate is widened by lo∣ve; and when a man considers that for temporall com∣modties forsaken, he is to receive eternall ioy, he be∣gins to love that which otherwise would afflict him. II. Not every one that sayth vnto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the kingdome of heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father which is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdome of heaven.S. Hier. For what kind of confession is it, so to beleeve in God, as not to care what he comman∣deth? or how can we say, Lord, from our hart, if we con∣temne his precepts, whome we acknowledge to be our Lord and Master? Our hands therfore must go with our mouth, and our works according to our belfe: for other∣wise there will be many that will say in the latter day. Lord, have we not prophecyed in thy name, and in thy name cast out divells, and wrought many wonderous things? and then I will confesse unto them that I never knew them: depart from me you that worke iniquitie. III. Every one therfore that heareth these my words, and doth them, shall be likened to a wise man that built his house vpon a rock. And the raine fell, and the fluds came, and the winds blew, and they beate against that house and it fell not, for it was built vpon a rock. And every one that heareth these my words, and doth them not, shall be like a foolish man that built his house vpon the sand, and the rayne fell, and the flouds came, and the wind blew, and they beate against that house, and it fell; and the fall therof was great. The Rock on which we must build is our Saviour, whose only merits doe vphold vs: for of outselves we can doe nothing, nor pretend any thing in the sight of God towards eternall life. His doctrine is the ground of our faith: His life is the sampler according to which we must frame ours, to the end to be accepted at the later day; and to be able in the meane time to withstand al our Ghostly enimies. S. Ihon ChrysostomeS. Ihon Chrysost▪ tells vs more over that a strong resolution to go forward in Gods service is the rock on which, vnder our Saviour, we must build our spirituall building. For the other building (sayth he) was easyly overrowne; not by the violence of the Temptatations; for so the first also might have fallen; but by reason of the weakenes of the foundation, that is of our resolution. Temptation is not the cause of our fall, but the vnconstantie of our mind, and our want of courage▪ by which oftimes, even without any temptation, we come to be overthrowne▪ for sand of itself doth yeald; but a dia∣mond resisteth the force of the hammer.
Our Saviour cureth the servant of the Cnturion. I. ANd he entred Capharnaum, intrvit Caphar∣naum &c. and the servant of a certaine Centurion being sicke, was ready to dye; who was deare vnto him; and when he had heard of Iesus,Luc▪ 2 he sent vnto him the Ancients of the Iewes, de∣siriug him to come, and heale his servant: They being come to Iesus, besought him earnestly, saying: he is worthy that thou shouldst doe this for him; for he loveth our nation, and hath buyl a synagog for vs: and Iesus went with them, The Centurion went not to our Saviour in peson:S. Angust. with the strength of faith he went vnto him; an Alien by birth,Crige. by faith pertayning to his household. And wheras others had recourse vnto him for divers infirmities, this man alone intercedeth for his servant▪ saying within him∣self; this is my servant, and I am servant to my Creatour; if I doe not take pitty of my servant, how shall I expect that my my Creatour will have mercy on me? II. And when he was not farre from the house, the Centurion sent his frends to him, saying: Lord, troble not thy∣self: for I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter vnder my roofe; for the which cause, neiher did I think myself worthy to come vnto thee: but only say the word and my ser∣vant shall be cured. For I also am a man, subiect to autho∣ritie, having solders vnder me. And I say to this, go, and he goeth; and to another, come, and he cometh; and to my servant, doe this, and he doth it; Beleeving and profes∣sing that, as he, being in command, though a subiect, had his servants and soldiers obedient vnto him, much more our Saviour, being Lord of the whole world, could cō∣mand any creature, and it would obey without resistance. Be ashamed at thy stownes in doing his commands▪ whome sunne, and moone, and starres earth, and hea∣ven doe obey upon his word. He beleeved also that it was not necessarie that our Saviour should so much as see the sick person; but that whatever disease he had, it would leave him upon his command: wherfore though he re∣ceived him not under his roofe, he had him in his har, so much the fuller, the more humbly he did demeane himself.
III. And Iesus hearing this message marvelled; and tur∣ning to the multitude, sayed: Amen, I say to you: neither in Is∣rael have I found so greate faith. And I say to you,Matt. 8. 11 many shall come from the East, and west, and shall sit downe with Abra∣ham, and Isaac, and Iacob in the Kingdome of heaven; but the Children of the Kingdome shall be cast out into the exteriour darknes, there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth: and he sayed to the Cēturion, God as thou hast belved, be it done unto thee: and the servant was healed at the same houre The Iewes certanly had more helps towards the faith, which they should have had in Christ our Saviour; But this alien, bread up in his youth in idolatrie among the Romans, whose servant he was, made better use of the benefit which God had done him in bringing him to live among his chosen people, where his eyes might be opened, and be a dócument for us not to neglect Gods greate grace towards us; least we come at last to be reiected. Our repiditie and negligence is much to be lamented, and pittyed, that we are not lead which more affection to our Saviour. &c.Th. a Ke. l. 4. . 32. He ayseth from death the sonne of the widdow of Naim. I. ANd he went into the citty which is called Naim;Et ibat in in Civitatem qu dicitur Nam &c▪ and there wēt with him his disciples, ād a very greate mul∣titude: and when he came nigh to the gate of the citty, behold, a dead men was caryed forth, the only sonne of his mother, and she was a widow,Luc. 7. . and a greate multitude of the citty with her. the citty was called Naim, because it was a beautifull citty: butwhat did beauty, or strength of the citty avayle against death? Or the youth of him that was carryed out, or that he was the ouly sonne, or rich, or wellbeloved, ād respected, and attended? We all dye, and as water we sink downe into the earth. And who is there allmost, that doth think of it as he ought, and prepare for another world, in which he is never to dye? We are caryed away with that which concernes this body of ours, which no industrie can preserve long; and think least of our soule, which must be preseved by good life here, if it will not be mise∣rable for ever, when this everdying life is gone.
is gone.hom:  Kemp. l.  c. 7 n. 2 Glorie not in wealth if thou have it, nor in frends that they are powerfull, but in God, who giveth all things. Be not extolled with the beauty and propor∣tion of thy body; a little sicknes doth dissigure it, and destroy it▪ II. Whome when our Lord had seen, being moved with compassion vpon her, he sayed to her, weepe not: And he came eere, and touched the coffin, and they that caryed it, stood still; and he sayed, yong man, I say to thee; ise; and he that was dead sat vp, and began to speake, and he gave him to his Mother. O blessed eyes of my Saviour! looke vpon me with compassion; for behold, I am caryed,  know not whether, now with one phancy, now with another, now with one passion, now with another: And this wret∣ched body of mine in which I am coffind will be cause of my doble death, if thou doest not lay thy mercyfull hand vpon it, and stop the course which naturally it is running. O soule! forget not that thou art allwayes yong, if thou wilt thy self: Rise, take courage, sit vp, speake to thy sen∣ses, and desires, to keepe themselves in order and com∣passe.Thom.  Kemp. l. 3 c. 57. n. 4 O Lord: Blessed be thy word, sweete to my mouth above hony and the hony combe. What should I doe in so ma∣ny trobles and vexations if thou didst not comfort me with thy holy speeches? So I may arrive at the haven of saluation what matter is it what I suffer &c. III. And feare tooke them all, and they magnifyed God saying: a greate Prophet is risen among vs, and God hath visited his people. And this saying went into all Iewrie of him, and into all the countrie about. The people had more reason to feare when they saw the yong man caryed out dead, not knowing what was become of the Better part of him, or by whome, or whether it was caryed. His reviving being a signe of the common resurrection, when that voyce, which called the world out of nothing,S. Chryso∣logus will in the later day call it againe out of coruption; and he that in the beginning raysed man out of earth, will rayse him againe in the later end out of dust. Magnisie this greate prophet, who hath brought thee to the beleefe of these things: Begge of him that he will often visit thee with his heavenly inspirations; and be thou more ioyfull to receive his heavenly instructions, then the sorrowfull m∣ther could be to receive her sonne alive.
S. Ihon Baptist sends his disciples to Christ to be instructed. I. VVHen Ihon had heard in prison the work of Christ,Ioanne cm au∣disset in vinculis &c. sending two of his disciples, h sayed to him: art thou he that art to come, or looke we for another? And Iesus making answer sayed to them:Matth.  go, and reporte to Ihon what you have heard and seen: the blind see, the lame walke, the lepers are clensed, the deafe heare, the dead rise againe, and to the poore the Ghos∣pel is preached; and blessed is he that shall not be scandalized in me. S. Ihon did not doubt but that our Saviour was the on∣ly Messias expected; but, to satisfie his disciples more fully, he sent them so our Saviour, who answered not in words, but by the admirable works he was then working in all sort of cures; which cures it was long before prophecied the Messias should worke. And we also are to restifie by our works, that we are Christians, not beleeying and professing one thing, and doing nothing sutable to that which we professe, but suting our lives to our beleefe. If our voyce be Iacobs, our hands must not be Esaus. Nor be∣cause God hath perhaps blessed vs with riches must we neglect the poore There is no other to come to save vs by any other way,Gen. 2 22 then Iesus hath allready traced our vnto vs: be not scandalized in him, because crucified, dead and buryed: the same will come at the later day to Iudge the more rigorously, the slighter we make of his commands and directions here: Harken after all his works of mercy and lustice, that esteeming him the more, thou mayest follow him the more willingly, and expect him with the more comfort. II. And when they wen their way, Iesus began to say to the multitude of Ihon, what went you into the desert to see? A reed shaken with the wind? Or what went you to see? A man clothed in soft garments? behold they who are so clothed are in kings houses. But what went you to see? A Prophet? ye, I tell you, and more then a Prophet; for this is be of whome it is written: Behold I send my Angel before thy face, who shall prepare the way before thee. Our sa∣iour proposeth vnto vs what we are to reverence, and
imitate in S. Ihon; His constancie in his course of life, per∣severiug from his childhood to his dying day; not shaken with every wind as a reed; nor hollow and emptie, and able to beare nostreffe; but with fervour of spirit, and manly resolution overcoming the weakenes of flesh and blood: not given to delicacies, but content with that which bare necessitie required: those who are otherwise disposed, are fitter for the courts of earthly princes, and to be rewarded accordingly; the courtiers of our heavenly King must put thēselves to more hardship, that they may have the reward of eternall ioy; and indeavour to resemble the Angels here, that they may inioy thier heavenly com∣panie. III. For from the dayes of Ihon the Baptist till now; the kingdome of heaven suffereth violence; and the violent beare it away. That is, you must not think that the kingdome of heaven is to be gotten by lazynes, and remissenes: it is a kingdome, and it is the kingdome of heaven, deserving farre more then any earthly kingdome. And they are as violent∣ly opposed who fight for it, as are any forraine armies as∣salting any Princes dominions. It is a Kingdome, and our Kingdome:Th.  Ke. l. . c. 25.. 11. if we suffer ourselves to be thrust out of it, we are eternally miserable, vnlesse by force we regaine it. It is greater paines to resiste our vices and passions then to sweate at any corporall labour. The conversion of the Magdalen. I. ONe of the Pharisees desired him to eate with him:Rogaba illum qu∣dam Pha∣isvs. &c. and behold: a woman that was in the citty, a synner, as she knew that he was sit downe in the Pharisees house, brought an alabaster box of oyniment, and standing behind at his feete, with teares she began to water his feete, an wiped thē with the hayres of her head, and kissed his feete, and anoynted thē with the oyniment.S. Greg. She had entred deepely into consideration of what she had done, and would put no stint to what she was to doe; she was greately confounded wthin herself? therfore she did not valve the confusō which might come vpon her from abroad: of the things which had been in∣strument
of her delights, she offered holocausts to God for remission of her synnes. She kept behind our Saviour, as not daring to appeare before that mirrour of perfection, till she were cleansed; she lay at his feete, as more worthy to be troden vpon as dirt, then regarded, or looked after: she bathed them with her teares, that from thence they might receive vertue to cooperate to the washing away her syn∣nes, and cleare those eyes which had been so often soyled with obiects not befitting them; she imployed the hayre of her head as a towell, more to pur a new tincture vpon her hayre, and to wash away the ordure it had contracted, then that our Saviours feete needed it, and sayed with in her hart: ô Lord. my iniquities have been multiplyed above the number of the hayres of my head▪ pardon my offences, and receive this sacrifice of myself in an ad∣oure of sweetnes; but this sweetnes must come from thee, for not all the oyntments the world can bestow ae able to take away the stenche of one of my vggly syns. O how loathsome are they to me! but haue thou pitty vpon me, Amen. II. The Pharisee, who had invited him, seeing it, sayed within himself. This man, if he were a Prophet would know who, and what mnner of woman she is who toucheth him, that she is a synner. Iesus sayed to him; Simon I have some∣what to say to thee. And he sayed, Master say. A certaine Creditour had two debters: one did owe five hundred pence the other fiftie: They not having wherwith to pay, he for∣gave both. VVhether of them doth love him more? Simon sayed▪ I suppose be whome he forgave more. And be sayed to him, thou hast iudged rightly. From the rash iudgment of the man concerning himself, and the woman; our Saviour ta∣king no notice outwardly of it, gives him an instructi∣on which concerns vs all; That we are all debters to God, and that it behoveth every one to looke into his accounts▪ for to reckon vp others falts will avayle him no thing, but bring him at last to confusion, when his falte shall be represented vnto him in a different looking glasse then he hath framed to himself. And be they little▪ or be they greate, we are not able to satisfie, but must have recourse to the mercy of our Creditour
to forgive vs; now, as to the question, who loveth more▪ S. AugustinS. Angust. answereth rightly: O Pharisee! therfore thou lovest little, because thou thinkest that little is for∣given thee; nor that it is little, but thou doest think it little. And thou who ever thou best who sayest thou hast not offended much, tell me, why▪ And by whose helpe hath it happened? III. And turning to the woman, he sayed doest thou see this woman? I entred thy house, water to my feete thou didst not give me; she with teares hath bathed my feete, and with her hayre hath wiped them▪ Kisse thou gavest me not, she since I came in hath not ceased to kisse my feete: with oyle thou didst not noynt my head, she with oyntment hath annoynted my feete. For the which I say vnto thee; many syns are forgiven her, because she hath loved much; to whome lesse is forgiven, he loveth lesse. And he sayed vnto her; thy syns are forgiven thee: and againe; thy faith bath the made sufe, go in peace. Follow the advise of our Saviour, looke attentively vpon this woman; see her dili∣gence, in applying herself vnto him for that, which did most import her: see her perseverance, not ceasing to kisse his feete; her noblenes in bestowing what was best vpon him. The Pharsee did not annoint our Saviours head, he did not beleeve he was God; she even in the infirmi∣tie of his humanitie beleeved it, and therfore had recourse for forgivenes of her syns: Before she knew they were forgiven she loved much; how much afterward▪ being loth to leave her hold even vpon the second saying of our Saviour.Thom. à Kemp. l. 2 c.  n. 2 Hold thyself by esus living and dying. He casts out the dumbe divell, and gives divers wholsome instructions. I. HE was casting out a divell,Et erat eijens doemo∣nium. and it was dumbe: and when he had cast out the divell, the dumbe spake; and the multitude marveled, and sayed, is not this the Sone of David How many wayes are we dumbe to our prejudice?Luc. 11 14 We conceale our falts, when according to the eouncell of the holy Ghost,Prov. 18 1 we should be the first to revcale them, that we might be justified in
the sight of God by humble confession; we are forward to speake of other folkes falts, and silent in occasions of thie commendation: forward to hold impertinent discourses, flow in speaking of things profitable to ourselves and others. Such were the Phaisees and thier associates, who seeing this miracle sayed. In Beelzebub the Prince of the divells, he casteth out divells; and others tempting him, asked of him a signe from heaven. As if they might not have found matter of prayse and commendation, as well as the multitude; but thier ares were , and thier tongues tied from that which was behooufull, and open to all kind of wicked suggestions, Begge our Saviours assistance against these pestiferous diseases. II. He seeing thier thoughts, sayed vnto them. Evry kingdome devided against it self, will be brought to desolation, and house vpon house will fall: If satan be devided against himself, how shall his kingdome stand? And if I in Beelz∣bub cast out divels, your children, in whome doe thy cast them out? therfore they shall be your iudges. But if I in the finger of God doe cast out divells, surely the kingdome of God is come vpon you. Beware of dissension: the mischiefe which comes of it is too apparent. Beware of censuring other-folks actions, or words and construing them to the worst: most commonly they condemne themselves as one time or other guiltie of the same. Imitate our Saviour who is still doing good to these, who shew themselves thus vngratefull▪ for it is a signe that we pertayne to the kingdome of God, who makes his Sunne to shine over the good and the bad,Matth.  4 and rayneth vpon the just and vnjust. III. When an vncleane spirit departs out of à man, e wandereth through places without water, seeking rest; and not finding, he sayth: I will returne into my house whence I departed, and he findeth it swept, and trimmed, but va∣cant: then he taketh seaven other spirits worse then himself, and entring in, they dwell there; and the last of that man becomes worse then the first. S. AugustinS. August. sayeth that they are signified in this parable, who beleeving in Christ and imbracing his doctrine, shrinke afterwards in the per∣formance of it, overcome with thier too much inclina∣tion to case and pleasure; for though at first they resolved to overcome it, yet missing afterwards of those remporall
delights, to which they were too much affected, they fall to them more greedily then before, and are vtterly lost in them. Begge of our Saviour, the seaven gifts of the holy Ghost, contrarie to the seaven wicked spirits which la∣bour to prossesse vs. To witt true wisdome, ioyned, with profound humilitie: cleare light of the vnderstanding, with out too much adhering to our owne conceit, easynes, not only to take advise, but also to follow it, fortitude, even in those things which are not all togeather to our liking, if otherwise sitting, or commanded to be done: knowledge without of tentation; true pietie and devotion with our all kind of dissembling: and the true feare of God, not to be overcome with the falsly stiled freedome▪ which endea∣vours to vndermine it. Veni Sante Spiritus. The fist application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. THe Magdalen, the Centurion, and the Widdow of Naim gives as an ample subiect wherwith to interrayne our Saviour at the holy Communion, with teares of repentance for our manifold offences; with humble acknowledgment of our greate vnworthynes to be visited by such a guest, and with ioy at the raysing of our soule from  to life by the powerfull mercy of our Saviour, taking ompassion of vs when we were ca∣ryed away by our disordered desires to our vtter ruine. Prostrate thyself at thy Saviours feee with the one, beg∣ging pardon, and washing with reares, the aspersions which thou hast cast vpon them by thy disorder. Retire thyself with the other into the bosome of thy owne no∣thing by nature, and worse then nothing by synne; and be ashamed to approch: yet not soe, but that with the third thou mayest rayse thyself to confidence, seeing he is pleased to meete thee, and to stretch his loving hand towards thee to be received by thee. II. But we must not rest in affections only; we must bestow vpon him the oyntments which he desireth, reso∣lutions to imbrace the narrow way by him commended.
For not every one that sayth, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven,Matth. 7 6. but he that doth the will of his hea∣venly Father. This resolution we must strengthen by often applying ourselves to this holy Banket,Palm 17 and often receiving it. For heis our strength, and our refuge, d in him is all our hope See how he gives sight to the blind, hearing to the dease Speech to the dumbe, life to the dead; how he refuseth not the poorest snake that is, but gives free accesse, and comfort to every body that is willing to be holpen by him. And be not scandalized in him, thinking that he ma∣kes himself too cheape, or that it is better to foxbeare▪ for if he be willing to afford vs this comfort, and this ho∣nour, as certainly he is, it were rather a discourresie to shrink back, and as it were to forbid his coming to vs. For neither did the Centurion so, but presenting himself vnto him, expressed only his firme beleese, that in absence also he could cure his servant. III. When thou hast received take heed of instantly turning to other thoughts, vnlesse some absolut necessarie busines come vpon thee, but give him some time of loving intertaynement, least he that is cast out, watching his op∣portunitie, finding the house trimmed, but vacant, and emptie of any good imployment, or thought, strive to come in againe; and for our ingratitude we find lesse de∣votion, if not some thing worse happen vnto vs. Imploy thyself in his prayses, as he did in S. Jhons when his dis∣ciples were returned: say vnto thyself; what a Guest have I received into my house? A Prophet? an Angell? No: the inlightner of Prophes, and the Lord of Angels, in whose prelence-they stand with reverent respect singing: Holy, Holy, Holy, the Lord of hosts: full is heaven and earth of thy glorie ād Maiestie: Thee The, glorious quire of the Apostles: The multitude of Prophets: The, glitering ar∣miers of blessed Marryrs: The, whole Catholick Church spead through the world, doe prayse, and glorisie, and con∣sesse to be thier God, thier redeemer, thier glorifier.
The parable of the seed. I. VVHen a grte multitude assembled,Cum tur pluri∣ma conve∣nient. and hastened out of the citties to him, be sayed by a similitude; the sower went forth, to sow his seed, and in sowing some fell by the way side, and was troden vpon,Luc. 84 and the fowles of the ayre did eate it. Othersome fell vpon the rocke, and being shot vp, it withe∣red, because it had not meisture. Othersome fell among thornes, and the thornes growing vp with it choked it. Other∣some fell upon good grod, and being shot vp yealded fruit an hundred fold.S. Bern. The sower is the most Blessed Trinitie. the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, the blessed Angels, the holy Apostles and Prophets in thier doctri∣e preached and written for vs. The seed is every good thought, every good motion, stirring vs to that which is our dutie towards God, towards our neighbour▪ and ourselves. Every good thought that is given, and every per∣fect gift is from heaven, descending from the Father of lights, It behooveth vs to think, how we receive them, not to be vngratefull to the gratious giver, and prerudiciall to our∣selves. God is bountifull to all, and vpon every mans ha he soweth his seed:Prov. 16 36 it belongs to man to prepare his sou by the selfsame graces, and to render it upple, and plyable by cooperating with them: for we are not by tute rocks, but by our owne willfull hardening our harts, nor are we necessitated to lye by the high way side, where every one is apt to tread vpon vs, nor bred so among tho∣nes, that we cannot avoyde them. II. In the explication of this similitude our Saviour tells vs, that the birds of the ayre, signifie the evill spirits, who while we lye open by the high way side to every one that passeth by, cast in other thoughts into our mind, and so tread downe, and overwhelme the good, which we had received, and put it quite out of our memorie. They that fall vpon the rock, are such as with ioy receive the word and having no moisture take no roote, and for a time be∣leave, and in time of temptation they fall away. And that which fell into thornes, are they that having heard going thier wayes, are choked with cares and riches, and pleasures of this life, and render no fruit. So that we have here three enimies
of our good; The evill spirits vpon whō we must wach, and keepe our hart recollected, that they may have noe entrance by thier devices. Our owne flesh, which if it be not subdued, and broken of its wicked and stubborne de∣sires, and so made capable of the heavenly dew, will grow harder, and harder to be brought to good: and however pleasing for a time a heavenly inspiration is, it will take no roote▪ but as a resty iade will fly-of where most of all it should go on. And thirdly the cares and wealth, and plea∣sures of this world are as so many thornes, which instātly choke vs, so soone as we begin to think that the service of God cannot be complyed with, vnlesse in some measure we forgo them: for thier importunitie is without measure and stint. III. And that which fell upon good ground, are they who with an honest, and good hart hearing the word, doe retayne it.Matth.  23 and yeald fruit in pacience; some a hundred fold, another three∣score, another thirty; As S. Matthew relates it. Though God doth bestow his graces liberally vpon all, yet is he to some more liberall then to others. For which every one, according to his measure, ought to give him thanks, as being his free gift without any originall obligation to vs.Sap. 8. 1. And if he have bestowed vpon vs a soule inclined to Good, we are the more bound vnto him: and yet we cannot ex∣pect to yeal fruite without pacience: for in hearing and retayning, ad in cooperating, we shall find our difficulties, Custome will lye crosse in our way,Th. a K  and is to be over∣come by better custome. Our flesh will repine, and is to be bridled by fervour of spirit; the old serpent will tempt vs. and afflict vs, and is to be put to flight by prayer, and alo to be shut ot by profitable labour. The Parable of the Cockle. I. Another parable he proposed to them,Alam paboam proposu eis dicens &c saying, the King∣dome of heaven is ressembled to a man, that sawed good seed in his field. But when men were in sleepe, his enimie cme, and sowed over it cockle among the wheats, and went his way;Matth.  and when the blade was shot up, and brought ith fruite, then also appared the cockle. Another similitude
to stirre vs vp to watchfullnes; for as sleepe is necessari for our corporall fustināce, so to our soule it is pernicious▪ that is, spirituall drow synes sloth, and neglect of what pas∣seth in vs or about vs;Th a Ke. l. 1. C. 19. n. 2. lightly to omit our exercises, scaree ever passeth with out some losse. In our beginnings we re∣ceive good seed; if we be not watchfull the enimie crasti∣ly sowes other principles, tending to libertie, to self will, and self iudgement, and the like; and he lets vs alone for a time, as if nothing had been done; but as we grow in yeares, and into imployment, then those loose principles begin to appeare, and, vnlesse we be aware, will over beare the good corne: ād by the neglect of thē, and not choking them in thier first sowing, many a sad event befalls those, who otherwise might have borne much fruite in the Church of God. II. The same parable signifyeth also vnto vs. that in the Church of God, and in all communities, there be good and bad, ervent in the service of God, and some lesse fer∣vent; God giving every one means to doe well, but some out of neglect suffer the enimie to sow other seeds in thē. which hinder the fruite which they might beare, and turne them from wheate into cockle. These he sayth are not alwayes to be dealt with rigorously, but with pacien∣ce, and good admonitions, exemples and reprehensious expected, till God dispose them either to better in this life, or to punishment in the next. The servants sayd, wilt tho we go, and pluck vp the cockle; and he sayd: No; least gathering the cockle, you roote vp the wheate also with it. Let both grow till haruest and in the time of haruest. I will say to the reapers, ga∣thr first the cockle, and bind it into bundles to burne, and the wheate into my barne. III. Admire the pacience of Almightie God, who suf∣fereth so many affronts fō synners, and yet expecteth thē to the last; reckon thy self in the number, and bware thou trie not his pacience too long; but a wake be times, and looke about thee, and search eve conner of thy field, that is, thy soule; see what is there sowed, and by whome: many an one seemes a frend and is an enimie, because fa∣vouring our humours, he speakes things pleasing, and not profitable, but preiudiciall to us. VVhile we doe not re∣sist the enimie in the beginning, he enters by little and
little wholy into vs: and the longer we continue sloath∣full in resisting, the weaker we grow, and our enemie the stronger; yet we must take S. HieromesS. Hierom advertisement in our way, who vpon this parable sayth, that our Saviour forbiddeth to passe our censure sudainly, where a thing is doubtfull, but rather leave it to God to iudge. The parables of the Mustarseed, the Treasure, and the pearle. I THe Kingdome of heaven is like to a Mustardseed,Simile st Re  &c. which  the least of all seeds, but when it is growen, is greater then all hearbs, and becomes a tree, so that the sowles of the ayre come and dwell in the branches therof.Matth.  Chri∣stian faith and the doctrine therof at first seems contemp∣tible,S. Ambr. and had but slender beginnings from the preaching of a few fishermen, but in processe of time, being well pondered and thoroughly sifted, the life and vigour of it appeared, and it hath over toped all other professions; so that the sublimest wits have found full satisfaction in it. Besides that persecution hath increased it, as the seed whē it is grinded is more forcible; Our Saviour himself how contemptible did he appeare to the world being crucified dead and buryed? Yet that made for his greater glorie, and by it he would shew vs the only way to glorie to be to humble ourselves, and be humbled, bearing it patiently, and with courage, and assurance that at last we shall have a crowne of glorie, and immortalitie for our sufferings Let vs therfore not be dejected with persecution, or cro∣sses, but according to the advise of S. HieromeS. Hirom take wings of a doue in simplicitie of hart, and fly into the branches of this tree, and contemning earthly things, and that which here is in esteeme, make hast to things celes∣tiall. Againe the kingdome of heaven is like a Treasure hidden in a field, which a man having found, did hide it, and for ioy therof goeth and selleth all that he hath and buyeth that field. From how many in this world is the treasure of the ser∣vice of God hidden, or rather how few be there, who know the perfect valve of it? Hidden, because they will no take the paynes to find it, and doe think every thing too
much that is bestowed that way; wheras for other things, which at last will prove but trah, they spare no labour nor cost: he that finds it, and considers the worth, hides it in his hart with wholsome feare of loosing it, and with joy parteth with all, rather, then he will part with it: and happy are those who doe voluntarily part with all other things, with which of necessitie they must part soo∣ner or later, to be the surer possessours of it. III. Againe it is like a Marchant man, seeking good Pear∣les, and having found one precious pearle, he went and sold all he had, and bought it. One and the same thing is decla∣red to vs by divers similitudes, because no one thing can sufficiently expresse the worth of it. The Pearle is hidden, within the shell, in the deepth of the Sea, and among roks and stones; so is the service of God beset with difficul∣ties; yet is a pearle, and the most pretions that is which an experienced Marchant finding, prefers it before all other wealth, and spareth no labour to get it. Others who know not the value of it,Th. a Ke. l.  c. 24. n. 5 neglect it, or sell it for naught. The day will come, when he shall be thought the wisest marchant, who here was accounted a foole. Then tribulation will be pleasant, them devotion will breed joy▪ then our flesh, here afflicted▪ will more rejoyce, then they who have been bred vp in dainties; a poore cot∣tage will be commended above princely palaces. He is misused in Nazareth. I. ANd be came to Nazareth,Et venit Nazareth vbi Nutritus. where he was brought vp, and entring according to his custome vpon the abboth into the Synagog, he rose vp to read: And the books of Esay being delivered vnto him,Luc, 4. 16. he found a place where it was written▪ The spirit of our Lord vpon me, for which he anoynted me, to evangelize to the poore he sent me, to heale the contrit of hart, to preach to captives remission, and sight to the blin∣de, the acceptable day to our Lord and the day of retribution▪ And he sayed, this day is fullfilled this Scripture in your eares, Give God thanks that thou hast been borne, and bred vp in this day, when these things have been fullfilled; and he that is the light of the world hath been revealed vnto
thee, in whome, and by whose holy Sacraments, thou mayest have remission of thy synns, and an eternall retri∣bution besides, for the things done in his service, and according to his service, and according to his doctrine, and example. Think often of the rewards both of good and bad, that avoyding the one, thou mayst be pertaker of the other, and be accepable to God in the day of retri∣bution. How many, even to thishoure, have not this hap∣pines? among those who were present when he opened these things vnto them, divers were of another mind, and tooke rather harme then good) for though divers admi∣red him, and his doctrine, and the grace with which he delivered it,Maci. 6. yet others sayed: is not this Iosephs Sonne? Is he not a Carpenter, the Sonne of Mary? And they were scan∣dalezed in him. II. And he sayed to them, surely you will say to me this similitude: physitian cure thyself; As greate things as we have heard done in Capharnaum, doe also here in thy countrie; Amen I say vnto you, no prophet is acceptable in his owne countrey. There were many widow as in Israel in the dayes of Elias, and to none of them was he sent, but to Serepta of Sidon to a Widow woman. And many leprouse people were in srael vnder Elizeus, and none of them were cured, but Naaman the Syrian. A docu∣ment for vs, not to weigh too much the outward circum∣stances of the parties who are our Superiours, and Go∣vernours, but thier inward alents, and vocation: for God (as it is in the psalme) rayseth vp the poore out of the dust, and lifteth the needy from the dunghill, to set him with the Princes of his people. Also to beware that custome in the vse of good things doe not diminish our devotion, and respect to thē: but indeavour that they be alwayes new to vs, as certain∣ly, if we apply ourselves accordingly, they will every day breed in vs some new grace, wherby we may be more acceptable to God, and he more deere to vs. III. And all in the Synagog were filled with anger, hearing these things: and they rose, and cast him out of the Citty, and brought him to the edge of the hill vpon which thier Citty was uylt, that they might throw him donne headlong, and he passing through the midst of them, went his wayes. Insteed of taking benefit by his admonition, they fell into rage; ô how of∣ten doth this happen ro vs? And how lamentable effects
doe often follow of it? VVe seeke to revenge ourselves for a good turne, and we cast ourselves headlong into a thou∣sand inconveniences, and indiscretions, by speech, and ac∣tions vnbeseeming vs.Matt. 5. 14. The Citty, that is the Catholich Cruce, in which we dwell is buylt vpon a hill: How many have cast thēselves headlong out of it by willfull opposing themsel∣ves to thier teachers, and thinking to hurt them, have been eternally ruined▪Thom. a emp. . c. 3. Our opinion, and our thinking doth often deceive vs, and seeth little. VVhat doth it avayle to cavill about hidden and obscure things▪ &c. Instructions given to his Apostles, and Disciples. I. SEnding his Apostles about the countrey to preach,Nolite  aurum. and giving them power, and command over evill spirits, and all kind of diseases, towards the cure of them;Matt 10. 9. he first armes them against Covetouses, and too much solicitude about corporall sustenance. Doe no possesse, (or provide) neither gold, nor sylver, nor mony in your purses, nor a scrip for the way, nor two coates, nor shooes, nor rod; for the workeman is worthy of his meate: freely you have received, freely give. Thier whole care he will have to be about the spirituall worke for which they were sent, and for the rest rely vpon God Allmighs providence, who as he hath ordayned them for the spiri∣tuall assistance of his people, so doth he provide that tho∣se who have tempotall means shall assist them without pressing vpon them. II. Secondly he commends circumspection, joyned with sinceritie. Behold I send you as sheepe, in the midst wolves; be therfore wise, as serpens and simple as doves: and beware of men.S. Ihon Chrisot. What shepheard sends his sheepe into the midst of wolves, and doth not rather gather his sheep together when he discovereth the wolfe▪ Christ doth contrarie: and he doth not say, Go of your owne head, but behold I send you; who art thou? I am he who have spread the Canope of the heavens over thy head. O power of the omnipotent? Wolves round about, and the wol∣ves they were changed into sheep▪ The wisdome of the
serpent is to looke to the principall, as the serpent doth to save his head, whatever becomes of the rest of his body: this wisdome must be accompanied with synce∣ritie; for worldly craft doth not beseeme the servant of him who is the eternall Truth. III. Thirdly he commends courage and constancy: feare yee not them that kill the body, and cannot kill the sou∣le; but feare him that can destroy both soule and body into hell: Feare of temporall inconveniences is to be overcome with a more just feare of eternall punishment, if we shrink from our dutie: but much more with love of our dutie, and of him for whome we labour, and by whom we live. And to incourage vs he addeth. Are not two sparrowes old for a farthing? And not one of them shall fall to the ground without your Father. But your very hayres of your head are all numbred: feare not therfore, better are you then many spar∣rowes: and more deere to him whom you justly call Fa∣ther, and who hath a fatherly care over you, that you co∣me not to harme, but when it is most for his glorie, whe∣rin you are also most to glorie: For every one that confesseth him before men, he will confesse him before his heavenly Fa∣ther. IV. Finally he will have them shake-of all carnall af∣fection whatsoever. He that loveth Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me; and he that loveth sonne, or daughter above me, is not worthy of me: and who taketh not up his Crosse,Euthinius and followeth me, is not worthy of me. The Crosse was the instrument of his death; he signifyeth by it that we must be dead to the world, and to all worldly contentment. Another Gospell sayeth, he that taketh not up his Crosse dayly;S. Hierom least we should think that one er∣vent act were sufficient: our Crosse is allwayes to be ca∣ryed that we may testifie that we allwayes love our Savi∣our. These things are hidden from the worldly wise, but in fine, we shall find them not only necessarie, but comfor∣table, according as he sayth in the sequell.Math.  Come to me all yee that labour,S. Angust▪ and are burdened, and I will refresh you: take vp my yoake vpon you, and learn of me, because I am meeke, and humble of hart, and you shall find rest in your soules; for my yoake is swete, and my burden light. That which is hard in respect of the labour, is easy to the self same parties in
gard of thier love; for love makes hard things easy, and in a manner nothing. The death of S. Ihon Baptist. I. HErode apprehended Ihon,Herodes tenuit Ioannem. and bound him, and put him in prison, because of Herodias, his brothers wife: for Ihon sayed to him, it is not lawfull for thee to have her:Matth. 14.  and willing to put him to death, he feared the people, because they esteemed him as a Propher. No man is so innocent but is subject to suffer either by power, offended with out cause, or by ennie of others, in whose light he is conceived to stand, or by mistake, aud misconstruing of some word, or action, or some other accident of a thousand in this world; so that it behoveth every body be prepared for a blow, which when least expected, falleth; least taken at vnaware he be transported to that which may be vnbeseeming his person, or his qualitie; in which occasions, though innocencie may be modestly pleaded, yet the best satisfaction is to content ourselves with a good conscience, and not to be too eager in de∣fending, but commit himself, and his cause to God, who in his good time will reeale the truth. II. And on Herodes birth day, the daughter of Hrodias aunced before them, and pleased Herode, where vpon he pro∣mised with an oath to give her whatever she would aske, him. And she being instructed before by her Mother, sayd: give me ere in a dh the head of hon Baptist: and the King was strooken sd, yet because of his oath, and for them that sat with him at table, he commanded it to be given. See how one syn∣ne breeds another, and to what rashnes passionate affecti∣on to any thing brings vs: How humane respects over∣come reason: How the rulers of the world have oftimes least cōmand over themselves: And practise betimes mo∣deration, that when the occasion happeneth thou mayest not be to seeke.Euthymi  O slave of a woman! Thou fearedst to have witnesses of thy periurie those who sat at table, and fearedst not a world of spectatours of thy vniust murder III. And he sent, and beheded Ihon in the prison; And his cam, and tooke the body, and buryed; and came, and
told esus Consider how S. Ihon tooke the newes first, and then the stroke, being ever ready for it; how happy he was to be at once delivered out of two prisons; how much his happy soule was welcomed among the Patriarchs ād Pro∣phets; those of old time, and those who were later decea∣sed, as old Simeon, and his Father Zacharie, and . Ioseph, and such others, meeting him with ioyfull acclamations, and saluting him in the qualitie of forerunner to the Mes∣sias so long desired. And as his disciples did thier dutie to∣wards his body, doe thou to his soule the respect no lesse due to it,S. Angust▪ and imitate his constancie! Ihon condemning openly Herodes impietie lost his life, but gayned immor∣tall glorie; how oft doe we rather fall to flatter, for feare of offending, or to curry favour▪ The sixt aplication to the B. Sacrament. I. VVHat a hidden treasure have we in the most B. Sacrament▪ And what a pearle▪ Christ Iesus,Coloss. ▪ 3 in whom are all the treasures, of the divinitie, and of his sacred humanitie, hidden vnder the shapes of bread and wine, in most admirable manner, and layed vp in the field of holy Church for our refection, when ever we shall think good to make vse of it. Hidden from our corporall eyes, but open to the eyes of fayth: buylt vpon his never sayling word: This is my Body, this is my Blood: The living Body, and Blood of my Saviour, torne and shed for me vpon the Cosse, but presented in∣tire as it is now in heaven at the right hand of his Father A Treasure signifieth that which is able to supply all our necessities, and moreover to inrich vs and rayse vs to a higher stare then that in which we were before: Such is our Saviour here offered; and moreover a Peale to adorne vs. How short are all other ornaments to this! As a Trea∣sure, we hide it, and lay it vp in our breasts, not thinking of any things els but of it: and how we may make best vse of it. As a Pearle, we glotie to have such an ornament about vs, by which we may seeme to all the heavenly Court more beutifull, ād be more welcome. And as Pearle is a Cotdiall taken inward, so is this most B. Sacrament.
An Antidote against death,Ignatius ad Pretios a preserve for immortalitie, a medicine chasing away all vice, ād freing vs frō all evill. II. The seed; which we read was sowed, was food-seed: what better seed then our Saviour Christ? Able to tue the hardest rock into good mould, being softened by his pretious Blood distilling vpon it out of his sacred side. O sacred dropes fall vpon my stony hart, that I may receive the with fruite an hundred fold! If it hath hitherto layed by the high way side, I will now hedge it in, that thou be not trampled vpon, and I by my owne falt frustrated of the profit. I confesse I am but as a dead carcasse ever tending to corruption, and by the ill savours of my synnes inviting the brids of the ayre to prey vpon me;en. 15. . but as faithfull A∣braham chased them away from his sacrifice, so will I en∣deavour that they light not in my field, to bereave me of so beneficiall a seed. Away with thoughts of worldly oc∣casions in this happy coniunction: What greater wealth, or what happyer pleasure can offer itself, that it should withdraw vs? Can we not spare one houre, or one peece of an houre to inioy it, and make our benefit of it? Vnlesse the seed falling vpon the ground have some time to alter it,10. 1. 24. itself remayneth alone; but if it hath time it bringeth forth much fruite.Th. a Ke. l. 4. c. 1. n.  O the blindnes, and hardnes of the hart of man, not to attend more vpon this vnspeakable gift, and from dayly vse to fall even not reflect vpon it! III. The Synagog of Nazareth would have cast him headlong from a steepe hill. How came they to this ou∣trage, but by vndervaluing the person of our Saviour? Many things lead carnally minded men to the like, as we find by the hereticks who denying his power to doe this greate wonder, cast him quite out of the Church: more over deriding him and misusing him in words and deeds: O that loose Catholicks did not very neete the same▪ co∣ming scarce once in a yeare, and with little preparation ād respect. He passed through the midst of them, and wondered at thier incrudeitie; And did not eave notwithstanding to doe good round about, that they also might repent▪ reflec∣ting vpon his goodnes, and come at last to beleeve, and vnderstand the benefit.Th. a Ke. l. 4. c. 1. n. 1. O admirable and hidden grace of the Sacrament, which the faithfull Christians doc only know; the incredulous and slaves to synne cannot expe∣rience.
The multiplying of the five Loaves. I. IEsus liting vp his eyes saw the greate multitude,Cum sub∣levass et oculos e∣sus. &c and sayd to Philip, whence shall we buy bread that these may eate? And this he sayed tempting him; for himself knew what he would doe.a: 6. 5 Philip answered, two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one may take a little. Andrew sayth, here is a boy who hath five barly loaves and two fishes, but what are these among so many▪ God tempteth his frends, that is, he tryeth in severall occasions how much vertue they have, how much humilitie, how much con∣fidence, how much beleefe in him, the occasions them∣selves serving as incitements to that which is best:Iac: 1 For he temped no body to supplant thē, or that evill may come of it. Philip answered right in words; his mind peradven∣ture was diffident how, and were so much bread might be had, because they were in the desert, and thier stock of money would not reach soe farre, Our saviour expected they should have reflected vpon his power to provide so much, ād more, they acknowledging him to be the Sonne of God: Of themselves indeed those five loaves, and two were not sufficient, but the power of our Saviour could have made lesse to serve:Pf: 144  The eyes of all creatures hope in thee, and thou givest them food in seasonable time: Thou openest thy hend, and fillest every living creature with blessing. II. Iesus sayth, make the men to sit downe; and there was mush grasse in the place; The men therfore sat downe, in num∣ber about five thousand. Iesus takes the loaves, and whn he had given thanks, he distributed to them that sat: in like manner also of the fishes, as much as they would. Nor only the Apo∣stles, but the whole multitude must needs wonder what our Saviour ment when he caused them all to sit downe in ranks by hundreds and fifties,Marc. 6 40. as S. Mark relateth; and in it he shewed his Authoritie among them, as afterward his power in making those few loaves, and fishes to serve so many, and that every one notwithstanding should have as much as he wold; And the Apostles shewed thier obedi∣ence to his commands▪ though the event was hidden from them. A greater miracle is the governing of the world,S. August: then the feeding of five thousand with five loaves: This no man wonders t, the other seemed wonderous,
not because it was greater, but because it was rare. This was done to the eye to rayse our minds to the admiration of our invisible God, working these things visibly, and to the end that lifted vp by faith, and purged by Faith, we might desire to see him though now invisi∣ble to vs. III. After they were filled, he sayed to his disciples, Ga∣ther the fragments, that are remayning, least they be lost, and they gathered, and filled twelu baskets with the frag∣ments of five barly loaves which remayned to them after they had eaten. Those men therfore when they had seen what a sign was done they sayed, this is the Prophet indeed which is to come into the world: And esus knowing that they would come to take him, and make him King, fled againe into the Mountaine himself alone. He had distributed the loaves be∣fore by his disciples, and now bids them gather the frag∣ments, to make the miracle more visible to them, and to the multitude; that God might be the more glorisied, and he acknowledged the Messias, though not in that temporall way of power which they imagined, and sought to put vpon him. In a mysticall sence, according to S. Au∣gustin,S. August. the five barly loaves ignifie the five bookes of Moyses,▪ which being broken, that is expounded, and distributed, what a world have they filled with sp∣rituall sustenance? And by the fragments which the people could not eate, are vndestood divers hard and hidden passages of holy writ, which the vulgar doth not vnderstand▪ but are revealed to them, who are appointed to teach the rest. Magnifie our Savi∣our by occasion of this miracle; acknowledge him King, and Governour of the whole world; confide in him in time of necessitie; and want; he hath millions of wayes to supply vs, which we doe not understand▪ rely in all occasions vpon his word; performe what he comman∣deth and directeth: the least fragment that falleth from him is sufficient to fill thy hart with infinite satisfaction: Offer it vnto him to be filled. Endeavour by his example to be, but avoyde to be accounted, greate in the eyes of the world. He fled from the height of glorie which was offered him, and imbraced the paynes of an approbious death,S. Geg. that his followers might learne to decline the fa∣vours,
and not to feare the threats of the world, to love adversitie coming vpon vs for maytayning of truth, and to decline prosperitie for feare of miscarying in it; be∣cause this doth often stayne our hart by the affections of Pride, adversitie, by the payne-fullnes of it doth rather purge vs. Jesus walketh, and biddeth Peeter wal∣ke vpon the water. I. HAving dismissed the multitude he went vp to a mountaine alone to pray;Dimissa turba as∣cendit in montem. &c. and when it was evening he was there alone. But the boate (in which his Disciples were) in the midst of the sea was tossed with wa∣ves; for the wind was contrary.Matth. 1. 3 And in the fourth watch of the ight came vnto them, walking vpon the sea; He knew what was to happen, and what would be the event, and reme∣die, and yet prayed; we with much more reason not knowing, and not being able to dive into future events, ought continually to have recourse to God, that by his allseeing Providence he will direct vs to the best: He prayed alone, and in a solitarie place; circumstances vse∣full for recollection, and to reape profit by it. Our sou∣le may be tossed with contrarie winds wherever we are, because they rise from our inward passions, now desiring one thing, now another quite contratie; but in the midst of the sea of this world the rising of the winds is more dangerous, because of the waves of severall allurements by which we are in danger to be swallowed.Theophr Our Savi∣our came not till the fourth watch, that is, towards morning to teach vs that we must not instantly crave to be delive∣red from affliction or payne, but abide it with courage. II. His Disciples seeing him vpon the sea walking, were trobled, saying it is a Gost; and for feare they creyed out: and immediatly Iesus spake vnto them, saying, have confidence; It is I; feare yee not: Our fancy generally is so sudainly moved, and so strong, that it is one of the master peeces of this life to gouerne it, so that it be not transported into grosse mistakes of errour for truth, and truth for er∣roneous and deceitfull: the night, the vnusuallnes of our
Saviours being vpon the water: the present troble in which they were made them apprehend strangely of him, that was no stranger to them: and the like doth happen dayly in words, and actions, meant with all synceritie, and yet, by mistake of our fancy, construed to the worst: As we take a thing to hart;Th. a Ke: l. 1 c: 14 1 so doe we often judge of it; for we easily mistake the right, being transported with selflove. III. And Peeter making answer, sayed, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come to thee vpon the waters, and he sayed; come; and Peeter going out of the boate, walked vpon the water to come to Iesus; but seeing the wind rough, he was affrayd, and when he began to sink, he called out, saying, Lord save me: And Iesus stretching forth his hand tooke hold of him, and sayed to him, O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt? And when they were gone vp into the boate, the wind ceased. Behold Peeter (sayth S. Augustin)S. August: who then was a fi∣gure of you, now he is confident, now he straggers: In the Church there be those who are firme and strong, and there be those who are infirme: doest thou love God? thou walkest vpon the sea, all worldly feare is vnder thy feete: doest thou love the world? It will swallow the vp. Every ones disordered desires, is a tempest to him; if the world favour the, see that from within thyself some contrary wind doe not rise to subuerte thee.Th; a kc: 13  Sonne I am thy Lord, and a comforter in tribulation. Come to me, when it is not well with thee: This doth chifly hinder heavenly comfort, because it is late before thou turnest thyself to prayer. He cures the Daughter of the Cananean. I. GOing forth from Genezareth,t Egros. sus inde. ecessit in partes Tyri. he retired into the quarters of Tyre and sidon: and behold a Cananean woman came out of those parts, and crying out say∣ed to him, have pitty of me, o Lord, Sonne of David: my daughter is sore vexed by a divell:Matth:  who answered her no one word: and his Disciples came, and be sought him, saying, dis∣misse her, for she cryeth out after vs: And he sayed; I was not sent, but to the sheep that are lost of the house of Israel.
Those whom he had first choosen, he did not desire t forsake;S. Ambr but wheeas they forsooke thier Creatour, by little and little he turned himself to the Gentils, (of whom were Tyre and Sidon) that by the respect which the heathens did to him, the Jewes might learne, or be the more justly condemned for thier contumacie. Among others, a woman came craving help for her daughter, tormented with an evill spirit:S. Hier Who are those, but poo∣re soules, who not knowing thier Creatour, adore stoks and stones, as if they were God?S. August▪ He answered not at first, not to the intent to deny her mercy; but to increase her desire, and to shew the force of humilitie by her ex∣ample. The Disciples offered themselves intercessours, and were refused,S. Her; because they knew not the mysterie of our Saviour delaying her, and perhaps as imperfect, were weary of her importunitie. II. But she came, and adored him, saying, Lord help me; who answering sayed, it is not good to take the bread of the Children and cast it to the dogs. But she sayed, yea Lord; fer the welps also eate of the crumbs which fall from the table of thier Masters! She did not despayre though put by so oftē: we we if doe not obtaine what we aske, doe presetly leave of; wheras we should come neerer, and fall to our prayers with more carnestnes. The answer of our Savi∣our might have seemed harsh, but he tempered it so with his maner of delivering of it, that it wrought the effect which he desired, to wit, that she should acknowledge herself vnworthy of the benefit, and yet presse to receive i. I confesse myself to be no better then a dog, yet as such vouchsafe me a crumb.S. Ihon Cysot III. Then Iesus answering sayed to her. O woman greate is thy Faith, be it done to thee as thou ilt, aud her Daughter was healed from that houre.Chriol; She is deservedly adopted into the number of children, and set at table, seeing with so greate humilitie she cast herself vnder the table. Sonne stand steadfast, and hope in me: what are words, bu words▪ If thou be giltly, think that thou wilt willingly suffer it for God.
He cures a deafe and dumb man, and one that was blind. I. ANd againe going forth of the coastes of Tyre he came by Sidon to the sea of Galilee;t Iterum exiens de finibus Ti i Mar, 7, and they bring to him one deafe, and dumb, and besought him to lay his hand vpon him, and taking him from the multitude a parte he put his fingers into his eares, and spiting, touched his tongue, and looking vp to heaven, he sighed, and sayed to him, Ephetha which is, be thou opened: and immediatly his eares were opened, and the string of his togue was loosened, and he spake playn. Our Saviour could with a word have cured him, but he would commend vnto vs a reverent opinion of the cere∣monies, which were afterwards to be vsed in his Church, no lesse significative then these.Vict. Antioch. He tooke him from the multitude a part, to teach vs, that whoever will be cured of his spirituall diseases must vvithdraw himself from evill companie, and attend to God in private. Also that synners are often to be admonished in private, least shame keep them from repentance. He sighed more bewayling the in∣vvard deafnes of the Iewes, then the outward of this one man: And vsed those other ceremonies to shevv that he spared no indeavour to correct them. S. Gregorie,S, Gregor by fingers, vnderstands the gifts of the holy Gost, infused in∣to his soule, and by his spitle, heavenly vvisdone, vvherby vve come to speake rightly, and teacheth vs by his sighing to lift vp our harts to God, and sigh for those heavenly gifts of vvhich we have so much need. II. And the Pharisees and Sadduces came to him tempting him, and demanded of him a signe from heaven. But he answe∣red; when it is evening you say it will be fayre weather, for the limnt is red; and in the morning. This day there will be a tem∣pest, for the sky doth glow, and lowre: The face of the eliment you have skill to discerne, and the signes of times can you not▪ There shall not a signe be given, but the signe of Ionas the Pro∣phet; and he went away; and left them. So many signes and miracles our Saviour was dayly vvorking, ād none would satisfie them, desirous of some after thier owne fancy, which when it had been yealded vnto would have wrought as little vvhich them. For hovv oft had a voyce
come from heaven declaring what he was, and they ne∣ver the neerer, finding some other thing to impute it vn∣to. This is a deafnes more to be commiserated then any other, wearying out even our Saviour himself, and cau∣sing him to forsake them vpon whome words, and signes were spent in vaine. Though he put them oft in mind of his resurrection by the example of Jonas, who was three dayes in the whales belly, yet at it when it happened; they were as blind, and willfull seeking new occasions, and tooke no benefit by it.Th. a Ke. 1. 2. c. 4. 11. 2. If thou wert within good, and pure, then thou wouldst without hindrance see and vnderstand all things III. They came to Bethsaida, and bring to him one blind, and desired him that he would touch him; and taking the hand of the blind, he led him forth of the towe, and spiting into his eyes, and laying his hand vpon him, asked him if he saw any thing; and looking vp he sayed, I see men, as it were trees walking: and againe he layed his hands vpon his eyes, and began to see, and was restored so that he saw all things clearly. The Ceremonies are much the same, the event different; He cures him by peeces; not for want of power but for our Instruction; who must content ourselves with what God will allow vs; and by our thankfulnes, incite him to doe more at his owne time. He saw men walking lik trees, with thier heads downwards, and thier feere vp∣ward; groveling in the earth, and alltogether busy to get roote in worldly wealth, and honour, and seting hea∣venly things at naught; O tha our Saviour would lay his hand againe and a gaine vpon our eyes, that we might see all things clearly, how different judgment should we make fo that which passeth most cōmōly for good in the world Peeter confesseth Christ to be the Sonne of the living God. I. IEsus came into the quarters of Cesarea Philippi,Vnit Iesu  parte Cesar Philippi. and as∣ked his Disciples, whome say men that the Sonne of man is? And they sayed, same Ihon Baptist, and other-so∣me Elias, others Hierome, or one of the Prophets.Matt▪ 16.  How many ifferent opinions, have there been, and are still of our Second Part.
Saviour? For to say nothing of the Arians, and such like Heretiks, who denyed our Saviour to be God, or to be truly man, how many even among those, who professe themselves Christians and Catholiks, have not so reve∣end opinion of him in effect, as these Jewes had, whose censure the Disciples did relate? For either they think his doctrine foolish, or harsh, and impossible; or shew by their actions that they beleeve not that he shall come to judge, or that he hath zeale of the glorie and honour of his heavely Father, which Elias, and the Pophets had; dissembling thier iniquities; and doe measure his procee∣dings by thier owne foote. Enter into thy owne breast, and aske thy soule, whome it thinks Christ to be? Exa∣mine thy actions, and see whether thou findst not two different opinions, one of thy beleefe, another of thy life; and beware that that of the pfalme be not true of thee, deceitfull lips,Ps▪ 11. 3▪ in hart and hart they have spoken; that is, in two harts, one drawing one way, the other to the quite contrarie. II. And he sayth to them, but whome doe you say I am? Simon Peeter answered, thou art Christ, the Sonne of the living God: And Iesus answering, sayed to him: Blessed art thou Simon Barion; because flesh and blood hath not revealid o thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And we also must shut the eyes of flesh and blood, which see no further then she outside of every thing, and opening the eyes of faith, beleeve as we have been taught, that however in the out∣ward he is man, and subject to the common miseries of mankind, he is truly the Sonne of God, and one God with him, and reverence him accordingly: what is there in the world of which we see more then the outward li∣neaments, and yet from the effects, we come to beleeve, and know that there is more in it then we doe see; much more of our Saviour, and of all that belongs to him, and to the other world, ought we to be most certaine▪ that it is otherwise then our short sight or vnderstanding can of itself discover: Blessed are they who beleeve inlighte∣ned from above; begge increase, and strength of faith, that thou mayest partake of the rewards layed vp for hum∣ble beleevers. III. And I say to thee, that thou art Peeter, and vpo
this rock nill I buyld my Church, and the gates of hell shall no prevayle against it. And I will give to thee the Keyes of the King∣dome of heaven, and whatever thou shalt bind upon earth, if ffiall be bound also in the heavens; and whatever thou shalt loos on earth, if stetall be loosed also in the heavens. God is never backward in rewarding that which is good; and the mor heroicall acts we doe, the more we shall experience it. Peeter signifies a rock, or stone, therefore alluding to the name which himself had given him before vpon designe▪ he promiseth to buyld his Church vpon him, so strongly that no attempt of hell gates shall prevayle against it. I say vnto thee;S. Hierom▪ I whose saying is doing. The Keyes which he promiseth signifie wisedome to discerne,S. Bed▪ and power, wherby he may refuse the vnworthy and receive the wor∣thy into the Kingdome. Buyld confidently vpon (this rock submit thyself to these Keyes; for our Saviours word and promise cannot fayle.Luc▪ 1. 33▪ Heaven and earth shall passe away, but my word shall not passe away. Christ foretelleth his Passion. I.Exind capi Iesus otender Discipuli . FRom thence forward he began to shew his Disciples, that he must go to Hierusalem, and suffer many things from the Scribes, and chiefe Priests, and e Killed, and the third day rise againe. And Peeter taking him vnto him, began to rebuke him, saying, Lord, bee it farre from thee; this hall not happen to thee: who turning sayed to Peeter. Go after me Satan, thou art a scandal to me, because thou savourest not the things that are of God, but the things which are of men. The more knowledge he imparted to them of his divini∣tie, the more he did inculcate to them that he was to suffer, that by the beleefe of his power as God, they might be the lesse trobled when they should see him suffer as man; but hope, as then, in his resurrection, so ever after in thier owne aflictions for his assistance from above. Peeter vnderstood not as yet how these things might stand together, and out of his affection to our Saviour, and naturall aversion from suffering, measured his desires that they might both he happy without suffering. Our Sa∣viour ranketh him among the instruments of Satan, as
withdrawing him  ourse which God had ap∣pointed; and teach  we must not only beleeve, that it ought to have  but to find sweetnes in it, in regard that it is God▪Th. a Ke. . 2. c.   To whom all things sa∣vour as they are, and no  are sayed or esteemed to be he is truly wise, and aught rather by God then by men. II. Then Iesus sayed to his Disciples. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take vp his Crosse, and follow me; for he that will save his life shall loose it, and he that shall loose his life for me,Theophil▪ shall find it. You forbid me to suffer; but I say vnto you, not only if I doe not suffer, it will be hurtfull for you, but if you also doe not dye you cannot be saved, nor any body els, man or wo∣man, rich or poore: and yet observe that he doth not say, vnlesse a man dye whether he will or no, but he that will loose his life, Now what it is to deny ourselves, we may easyly learne, if we consider what it is to deny another: and who ever by denying himself flyeth synne,S. Bede▪ must labour to increase also in vertue, for therfore it is added let him take vp his Crosse and follow me. III. For what doth it profit a man, if he gaine the whole world, and sustaine damage of his soule: For the Sonne of man shall come in the glorie of his Father, vvith his Angels, and then vvill he render to everyone according to his works.S. Victor. For we have not another soule to put in place of that which we loose.Theophil. Here thou mayest give teares, and almes, and fasting: There such things will have noe place, if dif∣ferred; for the judge jndgeth of thingh past.S. Hier▪ Doest thou feare this kind of death? Harken how he promiseth glo∣rie. Doest thou feare a Crosse? Behold the Angels com∣ing. to receive thee. And remember that he will render to every one according to his workes; there is no accep∣tion of Persons, rich or poore; not the man, but the worke is regarded. In all things have regard to the end and how thou wilt stand before the severe Judge, fro whome nothing is hidden. Th. a Ke. l, 1. c. 24.
The seaventh Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. THe miracle of the five loaves multiplyed so as to serve five thousand people was fore-runner to the mysterie of the most blessed Sacrament, admirable in very many things, and in this particular, that one and the same Body of our Saviour, vnder the shapes of bread and wine, is distributed in the whole Christian world to millions of people, at one and the self same in∣stant oftime, and consecrated in millions of places at on∣ce, by the word of our Saviour pronounced by so many severall Priests; but as then our Saviour by his divine po∣wer did not make of One loafe many, but still multiplyed the same loaves, till all were satisfyed, and had not∣withstanding a remaynder of twelue baskets fll of the fragments: so now by the same divine power, he gives vs his self-same body in many pleaces at once; and not only while we are actually receiving (as the heretiks fayne by their faith) but afterwards, to be reserved for the oc∣casions of sick and dying people, and for the continuall comfort of Christians; that as he is ever present to the Church triumphant in heaven, so the Chrch militant might not want the continuall comfort of his actuall, and reall presence with it.Th▪ a Ke▪ l. 4. c. 1. fine There be many Priests, and in many places Christ is offered, that the grace and love of God may appeare so much the more towards men, by how much the more this holy communion is spread through the world. Thanks be to thee sweete Iesus eter∣nall pastour, who hast vouchsafed to refresh vs poore ba∣nished people with thy most pretious body and blood. II. They who looke no further then naturall reason, and ordinarie principles of Philosophie doe lead them, will be apt to say in this particular, and many others con∣cerning this blessed Sacrament with the Jewes,I0. 6▪53 How can this man give vs his flesh to eate? And the winds and wa∣ves of contrarie arguments will rise so as to indanger to over whelme vs, unlesse confident vpon our Saviours wod we tread them vnder foote, and doe not suffer our Faith to grow cold and weake in it. It is I, that say
it, sayth our Saviour, e not affrayd to give credit to my word in this, more then in any other mysterie of your faith, in which you will find full as much contrarietie to human reason as in this, if you fall to questioning how can this be?I0. 3▪ 9 So Nicodemus did in the point of baptime How can thee things be done? so did the Arians in the blessed Trinitie; How can the Sonne be equally eternall with the Father? O thou of little faith werfore didst thou doub▪ And by doubting experience the wind to grow stronger, and stronger against thee, so as to be ready to sink, wher∣as at first vpon his word thou wert confident, and didst walke without feate. Lord save me, that I may not perish with the incredulous. III. I am not worthy, ô Lord, to partake of this bread of Angels; it were enough for me to stand a looe, and feed vpon the crumbs which fall from the table of that heavenly court. But,  the goodnes, and greatnes of our Saviour! not content to feed vs with the comfort of holy Scriptures, nor wi his dayly inspirations, and inward and outward assistances, he gives vs himself for our spiri∣tuall sstenance.S. Ihon Chrsost: Parents oft-times put out their Chil∣dren to others to be nursed, and mayntayned: I (sayth he) doe not so, but doe feed you with my owne flesh, and set myself before you, desiring that all of you should be noble, and assured of your furture inheritance; for see∣ing here I give you myself, much more shall I doe it in the life to come. I would be your brother by taking your flesh and blood vpon me; the selfsame flesh and blood by which I became of kin vnto you, I doe give you. Approch therfore with greate reverence to his heavenly table; re∣tyre thyself from the multitude; prepare thy eares to heare his word, and thy tongue to receive the touch of his sa∣cred flesh, that thou may heare, and speake perfectly of those things which belong to thy salvation and spirituall profit. Say with S▪ Peeter; thou art Christ the Sonne of the li∣ving God; and be in this confession constant, buylding thy faith vpon the rock which cannot fayle, and against which the gates of hell shall not prevayle.Th. A4 418 Tou must be∣ware of curious and vnprofitable searching into this most profound Sacrament, if thou wilt not be sunk into the depth of doubtfullnes.
The Transfiguration of our Lord. I.Et post dies sex assumit iesus Peltrum &c. Matth: 17▪ ANd after six dayes Iesus taketh vnto him Peeter, and Iames, and Ihon his brother, and bringing them vnto a high mountaine a part; he was transfigured before them; and his face did shine like the Sunne, and his garments became like snow. And there appeared to them Moyses and Elias, talking with him. He had lately spoken to them of his passi∣on, ād though with all he told them of his rising the third day, yet to confirme them in the confidence of his divine power, and nature, and that those miseries were not to be perpetuall, or without greate fruite of glorie, he she∣wes them part of the future happynes, which he was to in∣ioy, and those also who should follow his example and doctrine. Moyses led the Children of Israel out of their captivitie in Aegypt through the red sea, and the desert, and fed them from heaven with mana, and provided at times other necessaries: Elias was taken vp to heaven in a firy chariot; both figures of what our Saviour was in a better and spirituall way to do for vs by the sea of his sa∣cred Blood shed for vs, to deliver vs from the captivitie of synne, and of the divell, and bring vs through the de∣sert of this world to eternall rest in heaven; and of these things they discoursed with him; teaching vs to record often the benefits, and the glorie to which we are orday∣ned by them. II. And Peeter answering sayed to Iesus, Lord, it is good for vs to be here; if thou wil, let vs make here, three tabernacles, one for thee,S. August. and one for Moyses, and one for Elias. He had a tast of one drop of sweetnes, and loathed all other sweet∣nes; what if he had tasted that greate masse of sweetnes, which thou hast layed vp in store for those who feare thee,S. Greg. and as yet is hidden? Yet he was taxed for what he sayed (another Evangelist recording:Mac: 9▪6. he knew not what he sayed) because not having yet perfectly discovered the truth, he desired to plat his tabernacle here on earth, wheras all good people know that they are here strangers and pilgrimes; and yet he had easyly pardon, because so much good as he saw could not be but very desirable. No man is worthy of heavenly consolation,Th▪  Ke▪ l 5 C 20 5 vnlesse he hath diligently exercised himself in holy compunction.
III. And as he was yet speaking, behold a light cloud over-shadowed them; and lo a voyce out of the cloud saying, This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased, heare yee him, and the disciples hearing it, fell vpon their faces, and were sore afrayde. The voyce from heaven instructs vs in two things; first that our Saviour is truly the eternall Sonne of God: secondly that to please God we must heare him, and follow that which he teacheth vs; which is in effect, that by the Crosse we must go to glorie, and by no other way; which though it troble vs, and deiect vs according to sense, yet the neerer we keepe ourselves to our Saviour, the leffe we shall feare it; for so it is sayed immediatly. And Iesus came, and touched them, and sayed to them, rise, and feare not. Stay a while my soule attend the divine promise,Th: a Ke l 13 c 16 n 1 and thou shalt have abundance of all good in heaven. This is the way to be the beloved Sonne of God. IV. And they lfting vp their eyes, saw no body but only Ie∣sus, and as they went downe from the mount he commanded them saying, Tell the vision to no body, till the sonne of man be risen from the dead. To teach vs that we must not rashly, and out of season speake of the favours, which we receive frō God, but in the closset of our hart be thankfull for them? At that time, (as S Ihon Chrisostome advertiseth) the more strong the things were which were sayed of him.S. Ihon Chrisost. the lesse credit they found with many, specially procee∣ding from a few of his owne disciples, whome they might account partiall to their Maister. Happy soules, who co∣ming downe from prayer can have their minds and inten∣tions to recollected, as to see none but Iesus only, their minds being lifted vp above all earthly allurements. &c. He casteth out a divell which his disciples could not. I. ANd when he was come to the multitude, there came to him a man falling downs vpon his knees before him saying,Et um venisset ad turbam Matth; 17 14 Lord, have mercy vpon my sonne, for he is l∣natick, and sore vexed, for he falleth often into the fire, and often into the water; and I offered him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him. And he asked him, ho long is it since this
hath chanced to him?Mare. 9. 2▪ And he sayed from his infancie. We are borne sonnes of wrath and from our first father we are infected with a disease much like to the falling sicknes; ād though the falls of our soules are neither so sudaine not so against our will as those of the body, yet we have so greate an inclination from our youth to fall▪ that even those who converse most familiarly with our Saviour, and indeavour to follow him neerest, cannot easyly a∣voyde the effects of it: It casts vs to the ground, while we hunt after earthly things, not without damage to our sou∣le: It makes vs for the time dumb, and deafe to holy ad∣monitions: It tormenteth vs, and trobleth vs, so that we lye wallowing and turning ourselves every way, ra∣ther then to that which we ought; and it is none of the least evills, that the very name, and first aspect of vertue seemes harsh vnto vs; as our Saviour did to this man, for when he had seen him, imediately the spirit trobled him, and being throwen to the ground he tumbled foming.Marc▪ 9 20 Iesus answered and sayed, O faithlesse generatio! how leng shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? bring him to me; and the Father sayed to him, if thou canst any thing, help vs, having compassion on vs. And Iesus sayed to him, if thou canst beleeve,Marc. 9 22 all things are possible to him that beleeveth; and the Father of the boy crying out with teares, sayes, I doe beleeve; Lord, help my incredulitie. We are indeed an incredulous generation, and able to move the greatest patience; as being subject to so many evills, and yet can hardly be in∣duced to beleeve that they are evills, but doe take delight in that which is our vtter ruine. Begge light and crave help with teares; for what is more worthy of them, and more to be lamented, then this heavy yoake which lyes vpon vs from our Mothers womb,Eccl. 40 till our very grave, and is the cause of all our spirituall and temporall mise∣ries? O sweete Iesus, who alone canst doe all things, help vs taking compassion on vs. If I, by thy grace, indeavour to overcome this propensio, it exclaymeth, and greatly teareth me,Marc: 9 26 and oftimes it lyeth dead, so that many say, it is dead, but this is another thing to be lamented, that even from myself that is hidden which is in myself:S. Agust. And no man in this life (which all of it is called a temptation,) can be secure, that as from worse,
he was made better, so he may not become from better worse; our only hope; our only confidence, the only thing vpon which we can buyld is thy mercy. III. And when Iesus saw the people coming together, he threatened the vncleane spirit, saying, I command thee; go out of him, and enter no more into him; and the chile was cured from that hours: and his disciples asked him in pri∣vate, why could not we cast him out? Iesus sayed, this Kind is not cast out, but by Prayer and fasting Prayer and fasting doe much conduce to the remedie of these evills, to which we are naturally subject: for by these holy exerci∣ses, by little and little, we put on as it were another na∣ture, becoming from carnall spirituall, and delighting more in that which belongs to vertue, then we did before in our worldly contentments: but our chiefe assi∣stance is in our Saviour of whome we must be continually begging, that he will end vs his powerfull, and concur∣ring hand, that we may be wholy free. Humilie commended, and care of avoy∣ding scandall. I.In illa ho∣ra accesse∣runt Dis∣cipuli ad Iesum &c. Matth. 18. AT that houre the discipless came to Iesus, saying, who thinkest thou is the greatest in the Kingdome of Hea∣ven? And Iesus calling vnto him a little Child, set him in the midst of them, and sayed, amen. I say vnto you, vnlesse you be converted, and become as little Children, you shall not eniter into the Kingdome of heaven: whosoever ther∣fore shall humble himself as this little Child, he is the grea∣ter in the Kingdome of Heaven. S. Marck relating this passage,Marc: 9. 33 sayeth that our Saviour asked them first, What they had treated of by the way, and they held their peace; for in the way they had disputed among themselves, who should be great? So that it was no spirituall question, as how by vertuous life they might come to be greate in heaven? Of which they had not need to be ashamed; but it was a kind of ambition of the greatest place in the temporall Kingdome, which they imagined our Saviour would come to, because he spake often of his kingdome; and of this they were ashamed; wherby we may see, that if we will carefully observe our owe thoughts, and que∣stion
with ourselves, as we would doe with another, what is it that thou art musing on, or going about? We should easyly discover that our conscience would tell vs many truths which otherwise we slubber over, and conceive that we thinke, or doe, no harme. But our Saviour she∣wed them, that he knew both what they thought, and sayed; and gave them and vs a lesson that we must be converted from those pretenses, and turne our harts to other thoughts then people of this world intertayne themselves with; and think of humbling ourselves; for the gate of heaven is narrow▪ and the more we stoope, the easyer we shall enter, and be the more acceptable. We must returne to the simplicitie of infants (saith S, Hila∣rie)S: Hilie. because by it we shall carie in our conversation the resemblance of our Saviours humilitie. II. And he that shall receive one such little one in my na∣me, receiveth me; and he that shall scandalize one of these litleons that beleeveth in me, it is expedient for him that a milstone be hanged about his neck, and that he be drowned in the deapth of the sea: see that you despise not one of these littleones, for I say vnto you, that their Angels in heaven doe allwayes see the face of my father which is in heaven. Next to humilitie, and simplicitie of hart he commends Charitie, even towards the least and poorest creature that is, giving it the high reward of receiving our Saviour himself, while we re∣ceive our neighbour; then which what can be more ho∣nourable, or more to be desired? It is a greate motive not to neglect such good officies that they have an Angel attending, and having care of them, but what is that to the receiving of the Lord of Angels? Much more ought we to be ware of scandalizing them, that is of giving thē just cause of offense,S. Hierom or of offending; for punishment will doubtlesse followe and better were it (sayth S. Hierome) that some short punishment should here attend vs in this life, then that we should be reserved to further torment. III. Woe be to the world for scandals; for it is necessarie that scandall dos come, but woe to that man by whome scandall cometh. If thy hand, or thy foote scandalize thee, cut it of: it is good for thee to go into life mayned, and lme, rather then having two hands and two feee, to be cast into hell fire. And if thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; It is good for thee having one eye to enter
into life, rather then having two eyes to be cast into hell fire: supposing the malice of men,S. Hierom it is necessarie: that is, in∣fallibly scandalls will happen; but woe to him by whose falt they doe happen. And as concerning ourselves, every one may easyly find out what is a scandall to him, that is, what is the occasion of his offending God, or of slacking in his service. VVhatever therfore or who-ever it be, though so necessarie, and vsefull to vs as our hand, or our eye, we must forgo it; for nothing must be pre∣ferred before the service of God, no affection, no Kindred, no assistance, no frend whatsoever. The parable of the King calling his ser∣vants to account. I.Tuuc ac∣cedeus Petrus ad  dixi. Matth. 18: 21 THen came Peeter vnto him, and sayed, Lord, how oft shall my brother offend against me, and I forgive him? Vntill seaven times? Iesus sayed to him. I say not to thee, vntill seaven times; but vntill seventy times seaven times.Theophil. And yet he doth not limit our pardoning to this number; for it were absurd to set and number till forty, or twentie, and so forth: but as oft as one falls, and asketh pardon so often forgive him.S: Barill. Neither is it to the purpose to aske what kind of offenses we ought to forgive;S. Hierom seeing our Saviour excepteth none. And doe not say, he doth not aske pardon from his hart: leave that to God. I take that which I heare; let Chist take that which he knoweth. II. Therfore is the Kingdome of heaven likened to a King, takeng account of his servants▪ and when he began to take account, one was presented to him, who owed him ten thousand talents; and having not whence to pay it, his Lord commanded that he should be sold, and his wife and Children, and all that he had, and it to be repayed▪ but the servant faling downe, besought him: Have patience with me, and I will repay thee all: And the Lord of the servant moved with pittie, dismissed him, and the debt he forgave him. The debt of ten thousand talents, being a debt incomparable (as reckoned to be six hun∣dred times ten thowsand crownes) signifies the debt which we owe God vpon infinite titles; and yet▪ so gre∣ate
is his mercy; that not being able to pay it; he pardo∣neth vs vpon our falling downe with humilitie and sor∣row before him,S. Ihon Chrisost▪ and promise of amendment; and as S. Ihon Chriostome reflecteth, doth not only grant what we aske, but what could not so much as come into out thoughts to aske. III. But that servant going forth, found one of his follow-servants, who owed him a hundred pence, and laying hands vpon him, throtled him, saying, repay that which thou owest; and his follow servant falling downe, besought him, have patience with me, and I will repay the all: And he would not, but went his way, and cast him into prison till he repayed the debt. See the different wayes of men towards men, and of God towards men. For how little a matter in comparison of what we owe to God doe we molest on another, and how patient is God towards vs? How cruell, and mercy∣lesse are men? How easy is God to pardon? How soone doe we forget what God hath done for vs? How little doe we consider anothers case as our owne? But see the event. IV. And his follow-servants, seeing what was done, were very sory; and came, and told their Lord, all that was done. Then his Lord called him; and sayed vnto him, thou vngratios servant; I forgave thee all thy debt because thou besoughest me, oughtest not thou therfore also to have mercy on thy follow servant, as I had mercy on thee? And his Lord being angry, delivered him to the tormentours, vntill he repayed all the debt; soe also shall my heavenly Father doe to you, if you forgive not every one his brother from your harts. In the first falt, and fayling in his account he was to be cast into prison, but no mention of tormentours,S. Ihon Chrisost. in the second, he is delivered to tormen∣tours: For as S. Ihon Chrysostome reflecteth: God ha∣teth nothing more, then a man greedy of revenge, foste∣ring in his breast everlasting enmitie against his neigh∣bour. And in the conclusion,S. Hierom▪ he excludes all dissem∣bling, and all fayned and plastered peace, saying if you doe not forgive every one his brother from your harts. A fea∣refull sentence: that according to our disposition of mind, God frameth his judgement; if we forgive not our breth∣ren in small matters, he will not forgive vs in greater.
He goeth priuately to Hierusalem to the feast of the Tabernacles. I. THe festivall day of the Iewes,Erat aut n proximo dies Festus Io. 7. 2: Scenopegia, was at hand, and his brethren sayed to him, go into Iewrie, that thy disciples also may see the works which thou doest: for no man doth any thing in secret, and seeketh himself to be in publick: if thou doe these things, manifest thyself to the world: for neither did his brethren beleeve in him. Iesus therefore sayed to them, my time is not yet come, your time is allwayes at hand; the world cannot hate you, but me it hateth, because I give testimonie of it,S. Bede. that the works therof are evill. His disciples were well acquainted with the works and wonders which our Saviour wrought; but his Kindred did not beleeve in him, as knowing where he was bred and borne, and were ambitios of worldly glorie and esteeme; therfore they sayed, Passe from hence into Iewrie, that the head city and the chiefe of the nation, may see thy wonders; ma∣nifest thy self to all, that thou may be praysed, and com∣mended by all. But our Saviours glorie depended of his Passion and death, which they could not conceive: he was hated by the chiefe of the citty, because he spake a∣gainst their proceedings; they as complying with the world could not be hated, and therefore might appeare when they pleased.Th. a Ke. l. 3. c. 28. Sonne doe not take it ill, if some have an ill opinion of thee. I. After his brethren were gone vp, then he also went vp to the festivall day, not openly, but as it were in private: And he sent messengers before him, who entred into a citty of the Sa∣maritans to prepare for him, and they received him not, because his face was towards Hierusalem, His Disciples Iames and Ihon, seeing it, sayed, Lord, wilt thou we say that fire come downe from heaven, and consume them? And turning, he re∣buked them, saying you know not of what spirit you are. The Sonne of man came not to destroy soules, but to save, and they went to another toune.S. Ambr. Perfect vertue seeketh not revenge; nei∣ther hath āger place where there is fullnes of charitie▪ Infir∣mitie is not to be crushed, but holpen; Indignation must be farre from a religions spirit.Th. a Ke. l. 1, c. 16. That which a man cannot
mend in himself or others, he must beare patiently: think that perhapt it is better so. III. The Iewes therfore sought him on the festivall day, and sayed, where is he? And there was much murmuring in mul∣titude of him: some sayed he is good; others sayed, No, but h seduceth the multitude: yet no man spake openly of him, for feare of the Iewes.Th▪ a Ke▪ l. 3. c. 36. Sonne, set thy hart stedfastly in our Lord, and feare not the censures of men, where thy con∣science tells thee thou art innocent: It is good, and a hap∣py thing so to suffer: neither will it be grievous to an humble hart, confiding more in God then in itself. Officers sent to apprehend him, Com∣mend him. I. THe Pharises heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him;Audi∣runt Pha∣resaei tur∣bam ur∣murantē. Io. 7. 32. and the Princes and Pharisaees sent ministers to apprehend him. Iesus therfore sayed to them, yet a while I am with you, and I go to him that sent me; you shall seeke me, and shall not find me, and where I am you cannot come. The Iewes therfore sayed among themselves, whether will this man go, that we shall not find him? Will he go into the dispersion of the gentils, and teach the gentils? The Princes and the Pharies had most reason to reve∣rence our Saviour, because they were most learned, and could not choose but know the Prophecies which were of him; and blinded with ambition, and covetousnes, and other vices which our Saviour reprehended in them, insteed of seeking to him, they sought to take him, and kill him. A miserable condition: and worldly greatnes the more to be feared; and that councell of the wiseman the more carefully to be followed.Eccl. 3. 20 The greater thou art, humble thyself the more in all things, and then shalt find favour in the sight of God. This is the way to seeke our Saviour so as not to misse of finding him, and to come where he is.Th a Ke. l 2   Iefus hath many lovers of his heavenly Kingdome, but few caryers of his Crosse.▪ II. And in the last greate day of the festivitie, Iesus stood, and cryed saying, if any man thirst, let him come to me, and
drink; He that beleeveth in me (as the Scripture sayth) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water: And this he sayed of the spirit which they should receive, who beleeved in him▪ When he saw that few gave him the hearing, he redou∣bled his indeavours, and cryed out with a loude voyce: If any man thirst let him come to me: As if he should have sayed. I know you thirst after worldly commodities, but they will not quench, but increase the distemper: If you will be truly satisfied, come to me, and drink of the doctrine which I teach you; that will coole the heat of your ambi∣tion, by shewing you where true honour dwelleth: it will quench the desire of heaping up wealth, shewing you how ickle it is, and how full of troble and vexation. It Will put you out of conceite with other pleasures; teach∣ing how much they are under the noblenes of man, and either meere toyes▪ or filth. Come to me, you will see no∣thing in me but honourable, substantiall and divine. III. The multitude when they heard these words, sayed, This is the Prophet indeed; This is Christ. And the ministers came to the chiefe Priests and Pharisees, and sayed, never did man speake so as this man: and the Pharisees answered; are you also seduced? Hath any of the Princes beleeved in him, or of the Pha∣risees? But this multitude which knoweth not the law,S. Ihon Chrisost. is accur∣sed. They should have asked what were these admirable things, which he had so delivered as no man the like; but they avoyded that, and when themselves should ha∣ve been compunct they fell to accuse him.Th: a Ke: l 1 c  n 3 Truly high words doe not make a man a sainct, and just, but a ver∣tos life makes vs to be beloved of God▪ The eight Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. OVr Saviour while he lived on earth, appearing outwardly as an ordinarie man, shewed his dis∣ciples part of the glorie (even then due vnto him, and at his command) being transfigured before them, his face shining like the sunne, his garments as white as snow; Being now glorious in heaven, and presenting his sacred body on earth vnto vs, in the most Blessed Sa∣crament,
to be adored, and received by vs, be coveret the glorie due vnto it, with the shapes of bread and wine, as much for our good, as his transfiguration was for the instruction of his Apostles. For if the children of Israel were not able to looke Moyses in the face, when he came downe from conversing with God, for the glo∣rie which shined in his countenance, how should vve be able to receive so greate a benefit, as is the presence of our Saviour glorified, if he did not mercyfully cast this vaile before his face, that we might confidently approch. The Apostles hearing the voyce from heaven, This is my belo∣ved Sonne, heare him▪ fell to the ground, and were much afrayd; so should we be stricken at the voyce of the Priest pronouncing. This is my body, if our Saviour, as he makes it instantly present, should present it glorious; and we should not be able to make that devout vse of it as he de∣sires. Yet it is our dutie to acknowledge, ād say with hare and tongue; This is that beloved Sonne of the heavenly Fa∣ther, in whome he is pleased. This is my Saviour, and my redeemer, my Lord, ād my God, who is pleased thus mer∣cyfully, and miraculously to afford himself present to me. O, in whome, or in what should I take more pleasure then in this beloved, and so greate lover of me sylly wretch▪ as not to be content to give himself once for our sakes, but is continually giving himself in this familiar way, for my comfort, and for the strengthening of me in his ser∣vice, that is, in that which is my only glorie. II. Let vs make here three Tabernacles: and all three for him alone. One in my memorie, recording, if not perpe∣tually, yet at convenient times this incomparable bene∣fit of his presence with vs and thanking him infinitely for it, calling all creatures to assist me; for all is too too little. Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domin, ladate & super exaltate um in . A second tabernacle, in my vn∣derstāding, submitting it to his heavenly word, this is my ody, this is my Blood, beleeving both his power to doe it, and eternall truth, which cannot say, and not doe, or de∣ceive those with whom he doth deale. At this shore the boysterous sea of Philosophicall arguments must breake the swelling waves of humane conceite, and turne into froth: for who is able to contradicte the Omnipotent? Second Part▪
A third Tabernacle, in my will, pouring forth itself into affections of love, and dwelling upon them perpetually. O beloved Sonne of the eternall Father! in whom he doth take full satisfaction, and contentment, wherefore should I seeke content els where? Seeing tho alone doest fill the eternall God who is infiite? O hart of myne! empty thy self of all other things, that thou mayest receive this be∣loved Guest, to his and thy full contentment. O poore Tabernacle! O miserable dwelling which I doe present thee! Let thy glorious face shine upon it to disperse the darknes; clothe it with the white garments of thy vertues. III. Moyses and Elias, even in this manifestation of his glorie,  of his passion, and of the death which he was to sur: for he was still on earth, though for the time glorifie; And this Blessed Sacrament is a cōmemoration, and representation of the sacrifice, which once he offered vpon the Crosse, dying for vs: to put vs in mind that our chiefe meditaions and indeavours here, while we live on earth, must be of suffering and of hum∣bling ourselves as he humbled himself, and of imitating him in the carying of our Crosse, that so we may come to an everlasting glorie: And consequently the most accep∣table offering that we can offer to him at holy masse, or at receiving, is to think of his bitter passion, not only with a thankfull mind but with a mind full of purposes to imitate his conversation vpon earth, and his sufferings, thinking in particular in what this day or this weeke I may more constantly imitate him▪ and in the meane time on the day of our receiving, endeavouring to remaine lone with him for our greater profit and satisfaction. The uring of the ten lepers. I.Et um in grederetur in quoddā Castellum &c. ANd as he entred into a certaine ton, there met him ten man that were lepers, who stood a farre of, and they lifted vp their voyce, saying, Iesus aster, have mercy on vs. Whome as h , he sayed, Go shew yourselves to the Priests,Lu. 17  and it came  as they went they were clean∣sed.
According to S.S. Grego▪ Gregorie, leprosie signifies heresie; because as in a leper part of the skim is taynted, and part retayneth the naturall colour, so heretiks mingling fals∣hood with truth doe stayne the right colour of Christian doctrine S.S. August Augustine concurreth in the same, for as lepro∣sie is in the outward skin, so they hide not theyr errours, but boldly vent them for truth; These as lepers out of oune, are shut out of the Church, and must be kept stan∣ding a fare of, least with their breath▪ and stench they in∣fect the rest; and the only way to be cured is to submit themselves to the Priests, and teachers of the Catholick faith. Though in a more generall sense, leprosie may sig∣nifie all kind of imperfections mingled with our vertuous actions ād thoughts. For which we deserve to be delayed the entrance of the heavenly citty; and must lift vp our cryes to God for remission, and have often recourse to the Sacrament of confession that we may have remission, and also receive strength to amend; The very resolution of opening ourselves, as we are going eleeving vs in many molestations which come vpon vs. They were cleansed as they vvent (sayth S.S. August Augustine) by which it is mani∣fest, that God doth accept of the hart, where by necessitie we are hindred from coming to the Priest. II. And one of them, as he saw he was cleansed; returned with a loude voyce, magnifying God, and fell on his face before his feete,S. Bernard. giving thanks, and this was a Samaritan. A hap∣py Samaritan (sayth S. Bernard) in that he acknowled∣ged, that he hath nothing but what he had received; and happy is he vvho for every particular grace returneth to him, in whom is the fullnes of all graces, towards whome while we doe not carry ourselves vngratefull, we make way whereby we may receive more plety of grace.Thom▪  Kemp. l. 2▪ c. 10. n. 5. Be gratefull for the least, and thou wilt be worthy to receive greater▪ let the least be to thee as the greatest; If we have regard to the dignitie of the giver, no gift can be thought little. III. And Iesus answering, sayed, were not ten clean∣sed, and where are the nine? None was found to returne and give, glorie to God but this stranger. And he sayed to him, Rise go thy way,S. Bernard thy faith hath made thee whole. Our Sa∣viour doth with reason aske where the nine were? Be∣cause
farre from Synners is salvation. So also after synne he asked, where our first Father Adam was: and in the last judgment he will professe that he knoweth not the workes of iniquitie, Often, but one returning, and he a stranger, putteth vs also in mind, how few there are who serve God as they ought, in comparison of the multitude who follow their worldly occasions:Eccl. 2. 20. and being domesti∣calls of God (as the Apostle speaketh) buylt vpon the fom∣dation of the Apostles, we ought to take heed that strangers doe not go beore vs in life and manners; bringing con∣fusion vpon vs, that we being Christians, and having so much means to doe well, doe not live accordingly. The woman taken in Advlterie. I.Iesus autē perrexit in moutē Olivet. Io. 8. IEfus went vnto the mount Olivet, and early in the morning agains he came into the temple, and the people came to him, and sitting he taught them. And the Scribes and Pharisees bring vnto him a woman taken in advlterie, and set her in the midst, and sayed to him, Master, this woman was even now taken in advlterie and in the law, Moyses commanded vs to sto∣ne such; what therfore sayest thou? And this they sayed tempting him, that they might accuse him. Our Saviour in the nights went to private places to pray, and the more willingly to the mount Oliver, because it bare the name of mercy, for which he came into this world: The day he spent in the emple reaching,  otherwise doing good to the people. This could not save him from the malice and envie of ill disposed persons, who not finding wherin to accuse him sought by his meekenes and compassion to entrap him as breaker or conemner of the law and of iustice: But he being the eternall wisedome, new how to temper bot so together, as to impeace neither of them; and to this wisdome we must submit in occasions where there doth not appeare to vs how his iustice can be blamlesse, vsing so much mercy and longanimitie towards most grievous synners.Thom. a Kemp. l. 3. c. 8. Sonne take heed of disputing high matters, and the secret iudgements of God, why this man is left, and he assumed to so greate grace. II. But Iesus, owing himself down, with his finger wrot
in the earth▪ And when they continued asking him, he lifted vp himself, and sayed to them. He that is without synne among you let him first throw the stone at her; and againe bowing himself he wrot in the earth; and they hearing went out one by one, be∣ginning from the Seniours; and Iesus remayned, and the woman standing in the midst. What did he write, but that of the Prophet:S. Ambr. Earth, Earth: write these forsaken men. The na∣mes of the faithfull are not written in earth but in heavē. He wrot in the earth with the same finger with which he had written the law.Matt. 7 3▪ Thou seest a moe in thy brothers eye, and the beame which is in thy owne eye thou seest not. Consider also how farre different our synns will appeare vnto vs, when God shall lay them before our eyes, then now when self love doth blind vs.V. Bede O the answer of wisedome itself! How did he turne them, and their thoughts into them∣selves, there to behold what lurked in their owne breast, raked vp out of their sight, and consideration, till he with his omnipotent finger discovered themselves vnto themselves? III. And Iesus lifting vp himself, sayed to her; woman, where are they who accused thee? Hath no man condemned thee? Who sayed, no man Lord; And Iesus, sayed, neither will I con∣demne thee; go, and synne no more.S. August. Our Saviour did also condemne the synne, but not the person. For if he had favoured the synne, he would have sayed; go, live as thou wilt. But he sayth, I have blotted out that which thou hast committed, observe thou that which I have com∣manded, to the end thou mayest find that which I have promised. Iesus the light of the world. AGaine Iesus spake to them,Iterum locutus est eis Ie∣sus dicens Io: 8 12. saying, I am the light of the world;S. August. he that followeth me, walke not in darkenes, but shall have the light of life. Our Sa∣viour is the light; which made this visible light: He was covered with the cloude of his flesh, not to darken him, but to tēper his shining: if thou follow the visible sunne it forsaketh thee at the setting, if thou doest not forsake God his light will never set to thee. The light of the old law
was confined to a smalle compasse, and scarce appeared out of the land of Iury; the light which our Saviour brought by his sacred presence is diffused farre and neere; and excludeth none that will imbrace it. It is vniversall; yet darkenes is not avoyded by only knowing him, but by following his steps, and practising the doctrine which he taught. I am the light: others, who teach not conor∣ably to him, are not to be followed as being false lights, which will deceive vs, and leae vs in the darke. O the wicked world! That chooseth rather to follow their plea∣sures intemperately, then waite vpon this light; and in the meane time they walke, and little think whether. The light which our Saviour bringeth, leads vs to an everlast∣ing light and life; and the very dignitie of the leader might justly intice vs to follow him; for he is God, the same that anciently sayed,Exo.  14▪ Th. a Ke. l. 3. c. 23. n. 8. I am he that is. Inlighten me, sweete Iesus, with the clearenes of internall light, and expell ou of the habitio of my hart all darkenes. II. You judge according to the flesh: I does not judge any man; and if I doe iudge, my judgement is true, because I am not a∣lone, but I,S. August. and he that  me. They saw our Saviour as he was man, and did not beleeve he was God: iudging therfore according to that which they saw with their car∣nall eyes, they erred: he judgeth not man, according to the outside, or according to human affection, but as e and his heavenly Father, being God, knoweth all things. How many to this day judge no otherwise of him, then as man; And even among Christians how many think his wayes none of the best or the wifest, measuring them either by their owne disordered appeits, or by their short vnderstanding and conceits? And concerning one another, we must follow the directions of S.S. August. Augustine. Every one that is bad doth either therfore live that he may a∣mend, or that the good may be exercised by him: so long as they are such, let vs not hate them; for we know not whether they will allwayes be such: and oftimes when thou thinkest thou haest thy enimie, thou haest thy bro∣ther, and doest not know so much: The divell and hi Angels are declared to vs that they are damned, their as∣mendment is alone to be despayred of. III. I go, and you shall
I go, you cannot come; you are from beneath, I am from a∣bove, you are of this world, I am not of this world. Therfore I sayed, you shall die in your synn; for if you beleeve not that I am he, you shall die in your synns. Our Saviour was to go out of this world by death upon the Crosse: the Jewes to this day seeke him, as expecting still thier Messias, and die in thier synn of refusing him when he was vpon earth, because they will not yet beleve that he was the man they expected. They were of the world, and from beneath, still harping vpon wordly freedome, and wealth, and honour, and did not rayse their thoughts▪ to the heavenly things, and heavenly Kingdome which he did preach to them; this was the cause of their blindnes; of which we must also beware least with these things beneath we fall short of the heavenly. A heavy saying to a soule, I go, and you shall seeke me, and shall die in your synne. He doth not de∣part so, vnlesse he be forced away by our obstinacie in synne: yet his parting at all times is heavy, though but for a time of tryall, in regard of our infirmitie; but if we seeke him carefully, and lovingly, we shall find him to our greater comfort.Cant. 3. 4. A little when I had passed the watch, I found whome my soule loveth; I have found him, and will not suffer him to depart.S. August. Where are the bowels of Christian compassion, if bewayling the body that is forsaken by the soule, thou bewaylest not the soule forsakē by its Saviour? He gives sight to him that was borne blind. I.Praeterien Iesus vidi hominean caecum: suas passing by, saw a man blind from his nativitie; and his disciples asked him,Eccl. Io. 9▪ who hath syned, this man or his parents, that he should be borne blind? Iesus answered; neither this man synned nor his parents, but that the workes of God may be manifested in him, and when he had sayed, he spit vpon the ground, and made clay of the spie, and spred the clay vpon his eyes and sayed to him, Go, wa in the pool of Silo; he  and washed, . Iesus his passing by, is never without ; if we attend not more to curiosiies then solde vertue. Out  to knw the reason of things with never be able to di so
deepe to vs to come to the truth, vnlesse our Saviour re∣veale it. And as here he layed clay vpon the blind mans eyes to make him see, however contrarie it might seem to the standers by, so our spirituall eyes are more opened by humbly shutting them to humane reason, and belee∣ving our directours, then by curious questioning. This is the highest and the most profitable lesson,Thm: a Kemp. l. 1. : 2, n. 4. the true kno∣wledge and contempt of thyself. We are durt and ashes, wherfore should we be proude? We are moreover defi∣led with synn: we must wash in the pool appointed by our Saviour, which is the Sacrament of Confession, and doe it humbly, and syncerly, as this blind man did, and with true desire to be cured. II. The Iewes were more blinded in their minds thē he had been in his corporall sight, for to so evident a mi∣racle they gave little credit. Some sayed, this is the man that sat begging; others sayed not; but h is like him▪ They bring him to the Pharisees and they asked him, how he saw? And certane of them sayed, This man is not of God, who keepeth not the Sabboth. And they say to the blind: Thou what sayest thou of him? And he sayed: He is a Prophet: And the Iewes did not be∣leeve of him, that he had been blind, and saw. They called his parents, and asked them▪ They called him againe, And he still affirming the truth ād pleading for ou Saviour, they cast him forth. A passionate man doth construe good to be evill, and doth easyly beleeve that which is ill.Thom. a Kemp. l. 2 c. 3. n: A good peaceable man doth turne all to good. A miserable thing▪ that some should be the more blinded the more they seeme to search after the truh. So long as they did looke that he would have denyed himself to have been blind, they thought him worthy to be beleeved; but fin∣ding him to speake the truth vndauntedly, then they con∣deme him▪ When most of all they should have admired him. III. Iesus heard that they hd cast him forth, and when he had found him, he sayed vnto him, doest thou beleeve in the Sonne of God? He answered who is he, that I may beleeve in him? Iesus sayed▪ Thou hast seen him, and he that taketh with thee, He it is: and he sayed, I beleeve Lord; and falling downe he adored him. Iesus is so farre from forsaking those who suffer, that he seeketh to the  them,
and manifesteth himself more vnto them. The blind man before sayed he was a prophet, but here our Saviour gi∣ves him further light and rayseth him to beleeve that he is really the Sonne of God.S. Ihon Chrisost. They who suffer adversitie, or reproch, for truth; and for confessing Christ, are more honoured by him. We doe not read that he spake so plain∣ly, and directely to any, besides his Apostles, but to the Samaritan, and, when he was apprehended, to the high Priests. And moreover reflect, that mystically according to S.S▪ Br: Bernard. Betwixt the eternall word, and a soule there passeth very familiar conversation, as between two neigbours; state is layed a side, where affectiō growestrōg Our Saviour is the doore into the Kingdo∣me of heaven, and the good shepheard. I. AMen, Amen, I say to you, he that entreth not by the dore into the fold of the sheepe;Amen, A∣men dico∣vobis qui∣non in∣trat per∣otium. Io. 10. but climbeth vp another way,S. August. he is a theefe, and a robber. The theefe cometh not but to steal, and kill, and destroy: I came that they may have life, and may have more abundantly. Many hea∣thens and infidels say, we live well; they discourse sub∣tilly of vertue and vice; they fill bookes with reasoning, and disputing, and say, follow vs, imbrace our sect, that you may be happy. Heretiks say the same; there be innumerable of them who boast that they are not only knowing men, but particularly inlightened by Christ: but they enter not by the doore. They indeavou to steale into mens minds, but the end is destruction: for there is no hope of life vnlesse we acknowledge, and follow Christ, whom these men either out of blindnes doe not know, or out of pride doe contemne him. Christ is a low and humble doore; he that will enter into the fold without hurting himself must stoope, and be humble. He that proudly lifteth himself vp indeavouring to come in any way, rayseth himself to catch a fall. II. He that entreth by the doore, is the Pastour of the sheepe: To this man, the porter openeth, and the sheepe heae his voyce; and he calleth his owne sheepe by name, and le∣eth them forth, and goeth before them, and the shee∣pe follow him, Because they know his voyce. A stran-ger
A stranger they follow not, ut fly from him, because they know not the voyce of strangers▪ I am the doore; by me if any enter, he shall be saved, and he shall go in, and go out, and shall find pasture. See the goodnes of our Saviour expres∣sed in this parable: He is the doore, and he is the Pastour, or Shepheard; he taketh particular notice of every one of his sheepe, he calleth them by name: He doth not send them where he goeth not himself;S. Grego. he goeth before them. Coming in by faith, and going out of this life to the cleare vision, in both they find refreshment. Entring by contemplation, or going out by profitable action, in either they find pa∣sture: And that, not scarce and niggardly, but abundantly. How much hath grace abounded above that which was vnder the law of Moyses?Io. 1. 14. We have seen his glorie, as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. Follow this Shepheard. Harken not vnto the voyce of strangers. His voyce is sweee, however it seeme harsh to sence and self-will; the more we harken to it, the more we shall come to know the sweetnes of it.S. Basil. Behold how they come to know our Saviour: They heare him; they doe not dispute they are obedient, they doe not wrangle. III. I am the good Pastur; the good Pastour giveth his life for his sheepe: No man taketh it away from me, but I yeald it of myself: I have power to yeald it, and I have power to take it againe; This commandment I received from my Father: and ther∣fore my Father loveth me, because I yeald my life, that I may take it againe. For what greater motive can we also have to love him,Rom. 4 25 then that he dyed for our syns, and rose again for our justification. Nothing compelled him; he freely gave his life for vs; he freely offered this sacrifice for vs, and submitted himself freely to be commanded vnto it by his Father. And not barely for remission of our syns, and the avoyding of eternall punishment for them, but that we might rise againe, as he rose, and injoy an eternall and vnconceivable happines with him in life everlasting. The seventy two Disciples choosen by our Saviour. I.Post hae designuit Dominss. Luc. 10. AFter this our Lord designed also other seventy two, and sent them two and two before his face, into every
citty and place whether himself would come. And sayed to them, the harnest is much, but the workemen few; desire therfore the Lord of haruest, that he send workmen into his haruest: Go, behold; I send you as lambs among wolues. Our Saviour, besides his twelue Apostles, provided others to preach to the peo∣ple, ād prepare the way for his coming. He sent thē two and two, that one might be a help to another, both corporal∣ly and spiritually; for by having a witnesse of our actions and speeches, we are the more carefull to cary ourselves well and orderly. And however, in his divine wisedom, he knoweth what is fitting to be done, and hath care to doe it, yet he will have vs concurre with our Prayers to the performance of it: And as in going thus among wol∣ves our confidence can only be in him who sayth. Go: and that he will protect vs; so in all other kinds of life, and in all difficulties (which are not a few) we must re∣ly vpon his goodnes, and power; for nothing can befall vs without his knowledge, and permission, and in all things he speaketh in like manner, Go, I send you this, or the other affliction, or benefit. II. And the seventy two returned with joy, saying; the di∣vells also are subject thvs in thy name: And he sayed to them, I saw Satan as a lightening fall from heaven. Behold, I have given you power to tread vpon serpents and scorpions, and vpon all the power of the enimie, and nothing shall hurt you; but yet rejoyce not in this, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoyce in this, that your names are written in heven. How apt are we to glorie in that in which (if the  were knowne) we have very little: and our Saviour to teach vs to beware of this pride, puteth vs in mind of the fall of Luci, like lightening from heaen, that is, in the incling of an eye; ād so it falls out oftimes with vs; when we think we are at the hight of our glorie, or stedfast in it sudnly we get a fall▪Ps. 29. 7. I sayed in my abundance, I shall not be moved for , thou Lord, in thy will gavest beauty to my vertue. Thou didst  a∣way thy face, and I was trobled. Our glorie must be in our ho∣pe of heaven, and that by Gods goodnes we are in a way towards it; all other thing vayle vs little, but as these are accōpanied with humilitie,S. Gregor. and other vertues. Who∣soever rejoyceth in that which another hath not, by his ve∣ry abundāce he becometh the worse, because his joy is no of the common good, but of his private interest.
III. In that very houre he rejoyced in spirit and sayed, I confesse to thee Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revea∣led them to little ones; and turning to his disciples, he sayed. Bles∣sed are the eyes that see the things that you see; for I say vnto you many prophets and Kings desired to see, those things, which you see, and saw them not, and to heare the things, that you heare, and heard them not. Our Saviour rejoyced not at the synne of those by whose falt, and presuming to be wise, these things were hidden from them; but at the goodnes of his heavenly Father, who did not disdayne to reveale th̄ to those who in the world were cōtēptible. And what are these things? But that by humilitie, and by suffering we must go to glorie, and that in this is the hap∣pines of this life, not in the wealth, and honour, and pleasurs which men so much hunt after, and think them∣selves only then happy when they injoy them at will, and miserable whenever they are bereaved of any of them. Blessed are the eyes which see these things in our Saviours life, and doctrine now, as well, as when the Apostles saw him vpon earth. Many Prophets and Kings before our Savi∣ours coming desired to see and heare them; we have the same blessing according to his owne saying to S. Thomas Blessed are they that have not seen,Io. 0. 29. and doe beleeve. The ninth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. HEre we are to admire the goodnes of God, and of our Blessed Saviour towards vs, who notwithstanding that we are so imperfect, and all the good we do (if we do any) so much mingled with things distastfull to him, that we deserve to be kept al∣oofe of (as the lepers) and oftimes perhaps to be shutout of the citty of heaven, for greater offenses; yet vpon our crying to him for mercy, and shewing ourselves to the Priests, in the Sacrament of confession, he admitteth vs so famili∣arly to his holy table. O with what gratitude should we magnifie him for so great mercy and love! with what hu∣militie should we cast ourselves vpon our faces before his feet, giving thanks, and purposing to be perpetually mindfull of
so greate a benefit:Thomas  Kempis  But where are our thoughs oftimes evē when we should most attend? Our repeditie and neg∣ligence is much to be lamented and pittyed, that we are not drawne with more devotion to receive our Saviour Christ. In whome is all the hope of them that be to be saved, and all their merit. If one in ten of out thoughts be imployed this way, we think it a greate matter, wheras our whole attēdance were indeed nothing in cōparison of that which this greate goodnes of our Saviour deserveth. II. Our Saviour to cure the blind man, and to give him his sight, layed clay vpon his eyes, which seemed quite contrarie to the cure: we also if we will see the truth of this mysterie, must close vp our eyes to humane reason; according to that which our Saviour answered the Iewes vpon this occasion: for they asking him. Are we also blind? He sayed to them,Io. 9. 40. if you were blind, you should not have synne; but now you say, we see, your synne remayneth. S. Lewis of Frāce when his courtiers brought him newes that there was a little child to be seen in the Priests hands as he was lifting vp the sacred host, would not stirre to see it, but answered that he beleeved the reall presēce of our Blessed Saviour vpon better ground then that sight could affoard him. He was truly illuminated with the light of faith, shutting his eyes to curiositie, and opening them to the words of our Saviour, who is true light, and cannot de∣ceive I am the light of the world;Io. 8. 12▪ He that followeth me, wal∣eth not in darkenes, however darke the mysteries of faith seeme to be. III. And if we reflect vpon the other title which he giues himself of good Pastour: In what could he shew his goodnes more then that having once offered that greate oblation of himself vpon the Crosse, and given his life for vs, he resteth not content with that, but dayly would have it offered for vs, yea hourely, through the whole world▪ for our greater comfort, and satisfaction; provi∣ding that his sheepe may never want so fertill a pasture, but vpō all occasiōs may haue such celestiall food at hād. See how they who record the passiō ād sufferings of our Saviour in time of the holy sacrifice,S. Chrisp. drinking of the spi∣rituall fountains springing from that orrent of love, doe delight themselves with sweete teares above all
delicacies: And how much sweetenes they do suck into their soules, inquiring and consdering where their God is, Certainly this one word, and this one consideration, that God is so neere them (not only as to the whole world) but in this particular familiar and constant way, is able to melt the hart of any loving soule, and abun∣dantly to fill it with all delight. This good Pastour gi∣verth his life for his sheepe,S. Gregor in that he delivereth his Body and Blood in this Sacrament, and with the substance of his owne flesh doth feed the sheepe which he redeemed. The parable of the man wounded in his way to Iericho. I. ANd behold a certaine lawyer stood vp, tempting him, and saying,E ecce quidam le gisperitus &c. Master, by doing of what thing shall I possesse life everlasting? He sayed to him, in the law what is written? How readest thou? He answering sayed, Thou shalt love thy Lord thy God, with thy whole hart, and with thy whole soule,Luc. 10. 25 and with all strength, and with all thy mind. And they neigbour as thyself. And he sayed to him, thou hast answered right, doe this, and thou shall live. How many doe say; would to God I knew the direct way how to be saved or how to overcome my passions? And having it before their eyes, they heed it no; the weake resolution, or dif∣ficultie which they have about forsaking either their will, or their companie, or their wonted steps, blinding them; life everlasting when they think of it, is a greate attrac∣tive, and deservedly; but whether they perswade them∣selves thoroughly that it deserves so much paines as they conceive is to be taken; that is the question; and yet as this man confesseth, the way is love, which makes all things in the world easy; for vnlesse worldly people did love their employments, they would find no lesse diffi∣cultie in serving the world, then they apprehend in ser∣ving God. Love God, and they neigbour, and nothing will be hard. II. But e desirous to istifie himself sayed to Iesus, who is my neigbour? Iesus sayed; A certaine man went downe from Hierusalem to Iericho, and fell among theeves who stripped him, and unding him went away, leaving him half dead. It chanced
tht  Priest went downe the same vvay, and seeing him passed by; so did a Levit: but a Samaritan going his iourney came neere him, and seing him was moved with compassion, and going to him, bound his wounds, pouring in oyle and wine, and setting him vpon his owne beast, brought him into an Inne, and took care of him, and the next day he tooke forth two pence and gav to the host, and sayed, have care of him, and whatever shalt bestow above; I at my returne will repay thee. Which of these three in thy opinion was neighbour to him that fell a∣mong theeves? He sayed, he that did mercy vpon him: and Iesus sayed to him, Go, and doe thou in like manner. And thou (sayth S. Ihon Chrysostome)S. Iho Chrysost. if thou see any body needing help for body or soule, doe not say to thyself, why did not such an one, or such an one assist him? But help him thou in his distresse: If thou happen vpon a bag of gold lying in the high way thou doest not aske why another did not take it vp, but makest hast to take it, before any body elscome: So when thou meetest with thy neighbour fallen, think that thou hast found a trea∣sure, to witt, an occasion of helping him. III. This is that which we ought to practise; but in a spirituall sence, as S. AugustinS. August discourseth: The man that fell among theves, was Adam, and in him all man kind▪ The theeves were the divell and his Angels, who stripped him of his innocencie, and of immortalitie; and woun∣ding him, by perswading synne, they left him half dead; for in as much as he hath habilitie to know God, he is alive; in as much as he synneth, he is dead; The Priest, and the Levit signifie the ceremonies of the old law, which could not avayle towards the reliefe of the woun∣ded; the Samaritan is our Saviour, a stranger to this world, as he is God, and coming as it were a long iourney, he tooke our offences vpon his owne body suffering for then, and bringing vs into his Church, takes care of vs, and commends vs with the exercise of the two precepts of charitie, to the governours of the Church, and what ever we doe more then we are absolutely obliged vnto, he will repay it to the full: betake thyself to this Samari∣tan▪ &c.
Martha intertaynes our Saviour. I.actum st autem dum iren Luc. 10. 38. ANd it came to passe as they went, he intrd a certain towne and a certaine woman named Martha,S. Berard received him into her house, and she had a sister called Ma∣rie, who stting also at our Lords feete, heard his word. What is this towne, but the hart of man? which before our Lord resorted to it, was rounded with a deepe ditch of Cupiditie, and disordered desire; inclosed with a wall of ob∣stinacie, having in the midst a babyloniall toure of con∣fusion; victualled with carnall pleasure, and worldly va∣nitie; and armed and mnitioned with arguments of car∣nall wisdome: This towne at the entrance of our Saviour must fall downe, and a new one be buylt, with a ditch of humilitie, and wall of constancie, and toure of circum∣spection, and care of all our actions and thoughts; victu∣alled with spirituall comforts, armed with the armour of faith, hope and charitie. Martha receives him with devou action, and Marie itertaines him with pious contem∣plation. II. But Martha  busy about much service; who stood, and sayed, hast thou no care, that my sister hath left me alone to serve?S. August. speake to her therfore that she help me. Martha was busy ho she should feed our Lord; Marie was busy how she migh  by our Lord: Martha was prepa∣ring a banket for our Lord; Marie was taking delight in the banket which our Lord had prepared for her.S. Bernard But happy is that house or congregation, where Martha com∣playnes of Marie, action of contemplation; for it were an vnworthy thing for Marie to grow into emulation with Martha, contemplation with action; where doe we ever find Marie complayning that Martha hath left her alone sitting in her retirement? Martha must alwayes persuade herself that she needs help by contemplation, and that she is in want of it. III. And our Lord answering sayed to her▪ Martha, Mar∣tha, Thou art carefull and trobled about many things; but ne thing is necessarie; Marie hath choosen the best part which shall not be taken from her. To be neither carefull no trobled at our carelesnes, is a igne of greate neglect of our dutie to God▪ To be carefull and yet trobled is a signe of pusil∣lanimitie,
and little confidence in the mercies of God, or little apprehension of them: To be carefull and yet not trobled is proper to an humble and loving spirit, ac∣knowledging its owne infirmitie and confiding in the goodnes of God, that he will not forsake vs.S. Grego The fer∣vour of our action (sayth S. Gregorie) is then in its best disposition, when we so apply ourselves to our worke, that with a peaceable hart we indeavour to behold him before vs, to whom we have consecrated our labours: excesse of solicitude is but a confounding of our inten∣tions. Marie was occupied in that one thing which our Saviour commended;S. August▪ she sayed with the psalme. It is good for me to sticke to God,Ps, 27. 28▪ She sat at his feete: The more humbly she sat, the more she received, the wa∣ters doe gather in the low vallyes; they leave the pround hills dry. Our Saviour did not find falt with the im∣ployment, but shewed the difference. The multiplicitie of labour passeth away; the vnitie of charitie remayneth: Therfore that which Marie choose shall not be taken from her: from thee, Martha, that which thou hast choose shall be taken away, but it shall be taken for thy good, and a better thing given thee: labour shall be taken away, that thou mayest rest: Thou doest sayle the sea, she is in the haven. He teacheth his disciples to pray▪ I. PART. I. ANd it came to passe when he was in a certaine place praying,Et factun est cum es∣set in quodam loco orans. as he ceased, one of his disciples sayed to him,Luc. : Matth. ▪ Lord, teach vs to pray, as Ihon ought his disciples. And be sayed to them when you pray, say, Our Father which are in heaven; hollowed by the name, Thy Kingdome come, Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. The name of Father is of itself apt to breed in vs thoughts of love and confidence, for it is pro∣per for a Father to provide carefully and lovingly all things necessarie for his Children. The tearming him
our Father, doth add yet more confidence and love, b∣cause as he is the common Father of all, so is he ours in particular, whoever with a childs love and respect doe ac∣knowledge him and obey him; with these affections ther∣fore we should come to our prayers; They who have mis∣demeaned themselves towards him yet coming with due sorrow and submission will also find him a loving Father, easy to forgive the offenses of his children. And with all we must remember that he is our Father which is in heaven, Creatour of heaven and earth, every where present, but chiefly shewing his glorie in heaven above; and consequēt∣ly adoring his Omnipotent power togeather with his love, behave ourselves not carelesly and disrespectfully, but with greate submission and attention, when we pre∣tend to appeare before him in our prayers, representing to ourselves by faith the maiestie of the heavenly court, and the royall attendance vpon him. II. Holowed be thy name; That is, be thou, and thy holy name worshipped and reverenced with all holynes, and puritie of action, and intention. Be thou for ever glo∣rified, and magnified for all eternitie: This he put first in our petition, to give vs to vnderstand that it is the chie∣fest thing which we ought to ayme at in all our actions, and our whole life: It is that for which heaven and earth and all that is in them were created.Ps. 18. The heaven set forth the glorie of God, and the firmament declare his works how wonderfull they are. This is the occupation of the Angels and saints, and of all creatures: and nothing more to be lamented then that they who have most reason every mi∣nute to prayse and magnifie him, because they are made reasonable creatures and capable of his knowledge and love, that they I say, should be the most backward, and most vndutifull above all others, and insteed of ho∣nouring him, and glorifiyng him, doe the quite contrarie, as much as in them lyeth; though he, out of his omnipo∣tent power, turneth all to his glorie, whether they will or no, which at last they will find to their cost, in th punishments which he will most iustly lay vpon them. III. Thy Kingdome come, By the parable which our Sa∣viour delivered to the people, we find that his kingdome is two fold, first, that which he came to establish here o
earth, which is his holy Church; and this we begge may be propagated, and inlarged through the whole world. Secondly that kingdome which he hath prepared in heaven for vs from the foundation of the world,Mah. 2. 34 we desire may come, and we be translated into it, as a thing better then all the happines which we can inioy in this world; which be∣cause those who are wedded to the world (finding the sweetnes which sense taketh in the inioying of temporall commodities) can hardly conceive, therfore he would have vs dayly repeate this prayer, to rayse our thoughts to that which being not only eternall, but superabounding with all contents imaginable, is much more to be desired, then to live here vnder the Princes and Potentates, and greate men of the earth; or to be a Prince or Potentate ourselves; for all this below is vncertaine, perishable, full of troble, full of danger to body and soule, which being immortall it is fitting and necessarie, it should dayly and hourely think more of that who it may be happy for¦ever, then by neglecting it become eternally miserable; for if we be not in his Kingdome by glorie, we shall be eternally subiect to his enimies, over whom notwithstanding he reigneth to punish them. O most blessed mansion of the heavenly citty!Thom  Kempis  O most cleare day of eternitie. IV, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. This is te way to that heavenly kingdome, to doe his will, delivered vnto vs in his commandments and counsels: and though the infirmitie of our nature will not permit vs so perfectly to execute his will, as the blessed doe in heaven, yet the greatnes and the goodnes of God, doth deserve that we should ayme at the best way of doing it, and imitate the heavēs as neere as we can; esteeming it not only the most necessarie busines which we have in this world (as o which depends our eternall happynes or miserie) but the thing in which we must place most content in regard of what God is, and by which we shall receive most con∣tent within ourselves▪ for nothing is so solidly satisfacto∣e to mans mind, as to consider that the will of God is performed, and to take contentment in it, because it is the will of God: for which end his kingdome also is chiefly to be desired, because it is his kingdome: and his me to be anctifyed, because it is his name: wherby we
hall rayse our thoughts and affections from seeking our∣selves even in these things, which so maynly concerne vs, but in all seeke the glorie of God, consisting in that his name be hallowed, his kingdome come, and his will be done. He teacheth his disciples to pray. II. PART I. GIve vs this day our dayly bread.Panem nostrum quotidia num &c. After that which concernes vs most as belonging to life eternall, he teacheth vs to aske our temporall susten∣ance, in order to maintayne ourselves in this life, so long as it shall be his will and pleasure that we should remaine here; and will have vs aske it dayly, to acknowledge the continuall dependence which we have of his omnipotent power and goodnes; for if he blesseth vs not, nothing can prosper;Gen. 4. he can when he pleaseth send seven yeares of famine, as to the Egyptians, and recompense them when he pleaseth with seven yeares abundance: and in an in∣stant send that which shall destroy all our provisions; therfore we must pray to him this day: And yet not be too solicitous about it,xo, 10, 13 but content ourselves with mo∣derate care, and rely vpon his providence, who as this day, he hath mayntained vs, and blessed vs with that which is necessarie for vs, so he will the next, and the next; over much solicitude nothing conducing to the time to come, which to vs is vncertaine, and cannot be by vs mended or pared. II. And forgive vs our trespasses as we forgive them that trespasse against vs. After the care of ourselves, he pleaceth Charitie towards our neighbour, whome we are com∣manded to love as ourselves, and therfore no wonder that he measures his resolution of forgiving vs, by the propor∣tion which we vse in forgiving our neighbour: For he that will not forgive another, who is his equall, at least in nature, a man like himself, subiect to infinite imperfec∣tions and mistakes▪ how can he think that God deales hardly with him in not forgiving him, seeing betwixt God and man there is no comparison at all. The words of the
Text are, forgiue vs our debts as we forgive our debters; for even in temporall debts owing vs, we must not be hard dealers, but consider how ourselves may desire to be for∣borne in occasions which may happen to vs. VVe should rather imitate God, who notwithstanding the distance betwixt him and us, by which our offences are infinite∣ly aggravated, yet is the first that openeth the way to for∣givenes, giving vs motions and helps to repent vs, that vve may be forgiven by him. III. And lead vs not into temptation; but deliver vs from evill. Amen. VVe have spirituall and temporall evills to vvhich in this life vve are subject; the spirituall are temp∣tations, proceeding from our Ghostly enemie, who as S. Peeter expresseth,▪ Pet. 5.  as a roring lion walketh round, seeking whome he may devuore, whome resist yee, strong in faith; Chief∣ly coniding in the assistance of God, vvith out vvhich it is impossible for vs to overcome his temptations; nor those neither which the prosperitie of the vvorld may bring vs into, or the disordered desires, and delights of the flesh: into these vve begge that God vvill not bring vs, by permitting vs to be overtaken by them. As also not by the evills ād adverse accidēts of the world, which push men oftimes into despayre, and not to think so dutifully of God as they ought; from these we begge also to be delivered, as irksome to our bodies, and sometimes in∣thralling our soules: at least vve crave not so farre to be rcised by them, as to indanger our falling from that vvhich is iustly expected at our hands. By all vvhich vve see how providently our Saviour disposed of our prayers; that first vve should begge of him that which is best for our soule and body; and then to be delivered from the hurtful molestations of both: concluding Amen, as much to say, as in truth, let this be done. He teacheth his disciples to pray. III. PART. I▪ ANd he sayed to them, which f you shall have a frend, and shall go to him,Et at ad illos quis vestrum. Luc. 5. at midnight, and say, frend, lend me three , because a frend of mine in his iourney
is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him, and he from within answering sayth, troble me not now, the doore is shut, and my children are with me in bed▪ I cannot rise, and give thee: If he persever knocking, though he will not rise and give him because he is his frend, yet for his importunitie he will rise, and give him as many as he needeth. After our Saviour had taught his disciples what to pray for, he gi∣veth them divers incouragements to pray: And first that God is a frend; for however we cary ourselves towards him he allwayes carieth a frendly mind towards vs,Matt. 5. 45 Ma∣king his sunne to shine over the good, and bad; and ray∣ning over the just and iniust. Secondly that all houres he can heare our prayers: the middle of the night being as much as day to him. Thirdly that there is greate diffe∣rence between God and man; for suters to men are many times troblesome, to God none can be so, and ther∣fore he bids vs confidently Aske, and it shall be given you; seeke, and you shall find, knock, and it shall be opened to you. Fourthly that notwithstanding, we must not think that instantly we shall obtaine what we desire, but must per∣sever knocking.S. Hierom VVhervpon S. Hierome sayth, Great is perseverance, which, though it seeme to be impor∣tune and troblesome, hath more power then the title of frendship. II. For every one that asketh receiveth, and he that see∣keth findeth, and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.S. August Humane sloth and dulnes hath reason to be ashamed, see∣ig, God is more ready to give; then we are to receive; he is more willing to have mercy vpon vs, then we are to be delivered from our miseries; for in that he exhortes vs, it is for our good that he exhorteth vs. Some things which seeme to be, are not denyed, but differred that they may be granted at time convenient. And a powerfull me∣ane to obtaine, is to acknowledge that we have nothing of ourselves:S. August A begger asketh an almes of vs, and we are beggers of God. Consider other folkes necessities, and God will consider thyne: finally we must pray from our hart,Ps. 120▪ as the Psalmist professeth of himself: From the deapth I have cryed vnto thee, O Lord. He did not pray from the teeth outward,S. Ihon. Chrysost. but from the deepest of his hart, with greate application, and greate indeavour:
sch prayers have greate force. III. Which of you, if he doth aske his Father bread, will he give him a stone? Or a fish; will he give him a serpent? Or if he aske an egg, will he reach him a Scorpion? If you then, being naught, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will my Father from heaven give the good spirit to them that aske him?S. August God knowes before we aske what we have need of, and what is good for vs: he will notwithstanding that we pray; not that our desires may be made knowne to him, wo knoweth all thing, but that our desire be exercised and inflamed in prayer, that we may be the more capable of that which he is ready to give: That which he will give, is very greate, but we are little, and little able to receive. Faith is signified by the fish, which the serpent indeavoured to subvert: Hope is signi∣fied by the egg, as contayning in expectation a living creature; Charitie by bread, which charitie stony harts doe reiect. This is the good spirit which the heavenly Father never denyes those who have recourse vnto him. Avarice condemned. I. ONe of the multitude sayed to him,Ait ei quidam de turba uc, 12. 13. Mster, speake to my brother that he divide inheritance with me. But he sayed to him; man, who hath appointed me Iudge or divider over you? And he sayed to them: see and be∣ware of all Avarice: for not in any mans abundance doth his life consiste, of those things which he possesseth. A document for those who have retired themselves from the world, not to put themselves into worldly affaytes: and for them that are in the world, not to vndertake more then they can well come-of with: and for both to beware of all kind of covetousnes.S. August. VVherfore doth he say; all kind▪ Per∣haps thou wouldst iudge him only covetous who in∣crocheth vpon other folks goods: But I say, be not gree∣dy ād pinching even in thy owne: This is a greate charge: for it is not a thing to be flighted, where our Saviour sayth eware: He knowes how dangerous a thing it is, we know not; let vs beleeve him. And he gives vs an excel∣lent motive to beware, and looke to ouselves in it; be∣cause
abundance is not that which advantageth our spiritu∣all life, which most of all concernes every body; nor when vve have scraped it vp (perhaps by none of the best me∣ans) are vve sure vve shall compasse even our tempoall ends with it; as he declares by the example following. II▪ A certaine rich mans field, yealed plentie of fruite: And he thought within himself, what shall I doe, because I know not whether to gather my fruite? And he sayed, this will I doe; I will destroy my barnes, and make greater, and thither will I gather all things, that are growen to me, and my goods. And I will say to my soule, soule, thou hast many goods layed vp for many yeares, take thy rest, eate, drink, make good cheare. But God sayed to him, Thou foole, This night they require thy soule of thee, and the things which thou hast provided, whose shall they be? First he did not consider vvho gave him that plen∣tie, and that it comes more by Gods blessing, then by hu∣mane industrie and labour. Secondly he did not reflect vpon the end wherfore God doth bestow plenty vpon others, to wit, to relieve the needy, and to doe works with it which may turne to Gods glorie, and not only to rest, and eae, and drinke, and make good cheare, or the like meerely temporall ends. O folih words (sayth S. Basill) for if thou hadst the soule of a hog,S. Basil what couldst thou have sayed more like a hog? Thou mights have an∣swered with farre more ease, I will feed the hungrie, I will imitate Ioseph, and relieve a whole countrie. He should have takē into consideration the casualities of the world, and the vncertaintie of his ovvne life; vvherby he might have moderated his intemperate affection to his vvealth, and provided better for an other vvorld, as vvell as for this: we have not one night certaine of either life or goods. Thou foole, this night, vvhen thou doest little think, they vvho have, povver of life and death shall require at thy hands, as a thing depositated for a time, thy soule, vvhich imports thee more then all thy goods, vvhich thou knowest not whose they shall be; and vvhen thou art gone neither thou vvilt care vvhose they are, nor they vvho have them care for thee. III. So is he, who layeth vp treasure to himself, and is not rich to Godward. A generall saying, of vvhich every body
shold take notice, least vvhile he seemes vvise to him∣self, God call him foole, and prove him so. All our thoughts, all our actions, all our endeavours, in what kind soe ever, must have a tincture of Gods service, and be done in some measure for him, or els vvhile vve think ourselves rich, we shall prove poore,Apo: 3. 17 as he in the Apoca∣lips: vve are not forbiden to lay vp treasure, but vve must looke o vvhat purpose vve lay it vp, least insteed of ad∣vantaging vs, it prove our ruine, as it doth to most men who have no other end but themselves. The tenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. IN the most blessed Sacrament we have indeed plenty of fruite not produced by our owne industrie, but sent vs from above, as the celestiall Manna: nor of one yeares growth, but dayly growing from the foun∣taine itself our Blessed Saviour. The barnes are our hart, which though we have cause to inlarge with love, yet vve shall not need to destroy any thing, but vvhat is of it∣self ruinous, and by the very ruine wherof we buyld; Here we may freely and with out danger say to our soule, soule thou hast many goods, layed vp, in this small roome for many yeares; and for thy vvhole life time, and after this life for all Eternitie, take vp thy rest, eate drink and make good cheare; for this is the lambe slayne for vs from the beginning of the world;Apoc▪ 13. 8 This is the fat calfe with which the father of the prodigall child feasted him,Luc: 15. at his repentant returne; This is the hidden Manna pro∣mised in the Apocalips.Apo: 2. 17 to him that overcometh his greedi∣nes of worldly commodities; and feedeth himself with this.Sap: 16. 20 This is the food of Angels, prepared for vs from heaven, without any labour of ours. having in it all delight, and the savour of all kind of sweetenes. O foolish people, who either for worldly cares, care not for ths treasure, or for wāt of due
consideration of the benefit of it, or of the goodnes of the benefactour doe neglect it: wheras after due receiving, though that night vnexpectedly they should require our sou∣le, we should not need to feare, but that we should be eter∣nally his; then which happenes what can we desire more? II. Give vs this day our dayly bread. In the primitive Church when the number of Christians were few, but fervent, they received dayly; S. Hierome sayth of his time; I know that in Rome the custom is:Hier. Ap. ad Pam∣mech. that the faithfull do allwayes receive the body of our Saviour. And S. Am∣brose argueth,S. Ambr. I. 5. de Sacram. If it be our dayly bread, why doest thou stay a yeare before thou receivest it, as the Graecians in the East are wont? Receive that every day which may dayly benefit thee: live so as thou mayest deserve to re∣ceive dayly. Christians being multiplyed, and among ma∣ny, many not being so well disposed or so fervent, the councell of S. IgnaceIgnat: ad phesios. the Martyr is to be imbraced. En∣deavour often to meete and Communion; for when you meete often, the power of Satan is weakened, and his firy darts inciting vs to synne, fly back vpon him with out indamaging vs.S. Cypri. p. 12. He that eaeth of this bread hungers no more, because the grace of this Sacrament is so full, and the vnderstanding of it is so satisfactorie, that who∣ever comes to the notice of this abundance, having found out the vtmost of all perfection, carying Christ about him in his breast, and bearing him in his mind, sounds forth by word and deed his prayses, with greate ioy, and is con∣tinually singing songs of thanksgiving. III. No man can think but that S. Martha▪ and her sister Marie and Lazarus did take exceeding content so oft as our Saviour came to their house, and never thought he came too oft, but indeavoured ever to be ready to re∣ceive him, and to be diligent, and respectfull at his recei∣ving. Martha did not think she did too much, when she desired her sister should help her, but she thought that both of them could not doc enough: she complayned that she was left alone to wayte vpon him, let vs looke, that our Saviour have not reason to complayne of vs, that we doe leave him alone he ministring to vs, and we either doo not come to him, or whe we have received him doe not attend him. Here he presents vs not with a part, but with his whole self, VVho is there among the faith∣full
that can make any doubt, but that at the instant of the consecration, the heavens are opened at the Priests voyce? That at that Sacramēt of our Saviour Iesus Christ, quires of Angels are present; The high and the low are coupled togeather, earth and heaven are ioyned, visible, and invisible are made one thing.S. Ihon Chsost. VVho therfore that is right in his senses will despise, or neglect this reverend and dreadfull mysterie? The watchfull and diligent servant commended. I. LEt your loynes be girded, and candles burning in your hands and you like men expecting their Lord, when he shall returne from the mariage that when he doth co∣and knock forthwith they may open vnto him. It the custome of the Eastren people to go in long garmēt, therfore he bids vs have our loynes girt,rtulia That we ma be free (sayth Tertullian) from the impediments of a loose life, intangling our feete, so that we cannot be quick in walking, but ready at every step to stumble; and bur∣ning lights in our hands, that is, our mind burning with a lively faith, and shining with the light of good workes. Thus we must expect our Lord Iesus when he shall come and knock, that we may be in an instant ready to wayte vpon him.S. Grego. Our Lord cometh, when he hastens to iud∣gement he knocketh when by the sharpenes of sicknes he gives vs notice that death is at hand; we open presently vnto him, if we receive him with love: He is not wil∣ling to open, when the Iudge knocketh, who feares to leave  body, and dreads to see the Iudge whome he re∣members he hath contemned. He that hath confidence by hope and good works doth presently open when he knocks, because he expects the iudge with gladnes, and when the time of death approcheth, doth ioy in the re∣ward of glorie promised. II. Blessed are those servants, whome when the Lord co∣mth he shall find watching. Amen I say to you: that he will gird himself, and make them sit downe, and passing will mi∣niser vnto them. And if he come in the second watch, and if in the third watch he come, and so find, blessed are those ser∣vants.
Blessed are we, who have such a master and Lord, who though his greatenes be infinite, and his glorie so incomprehensible that no diligence of man can deserve it, no capacitie of nature receive it, or looke vpon it, yet to the end to reward them even above their deserts, will gird himself, and accomodate his greatnes to their measure and make them sit downe, with eternall ease and delight at his heavenly table, and there minister vnto them, all man∣ner of deliciousnes:Thomas a Kempis l. 3. c. 48. n. 2 The citizens of heaven know how full of joy that day is; The sonnes of Eve doe lament the bitternes, and tediousnes of their present life. But ô the goodnes of God!S. Gregor His mercy convinceth the hardnes of our hart and leaves it no excuse; for shewing his pa∣tience and his longanimitie, he addeth, and if he come in the second watch, and if in the third, and so finds them then watchfull he doth not reject thē. The first watch is child hood; the second, youth; the third, old age; yet no man must abuse this his longanimitie for he addeth. III. And this know yee, that if the house-holder did know at what houre the theefe would come, he would watch ve∣rily, and would not suffer his house to be broken vp. Be you therfore ready: for at what houre you think not, the Sonne of man will come.S. Gregor Our Lord would therfore have the last houre vn∣knowne to vs that we might allwayes expect it.Thom. Kemp. l. 1. . 13. n. 7. Ah foole! to what purpose doest thou think shalt live long, seeing thou hast not one day certaine? How many have been deceived and sudainly taken away. The punishnent of the vnrepentant. I. IF the sernant say in his hart, dixerit vus ille. my Lord is loag in coming; and shall begin to stricke the servants; and eate, and drink,Luc. 12. 45. and he drunck, the Lord of the servants shall come on a day that he hopeth not, and at an hour that he kno∣weth not, and shall devide him, and apoint his portion with the infidels. And that servant that knew the will of his Lord, and prepared not, and did not according to his will shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few. And every one to whome much is given, much shall be required of him; see the danger of presuming of long life; we are apt to grow proud v∣pon
it, and carelesse of our dutie, insolent towards o∣thers, and to be drunk with ambition, and desire of worldly wealth and pleasure; the punishment is that he shall be devided from his pleasres; and life, and from all hope of his masters favour, and that vnexpectedly so that he shall not have time to repent, but shall be eternally cast of among the vnfaithfull, and branded with the everla∣stiug disgrace of it, a punishment due proportionably to his falt: for that he knew well enough what was to be done and did it not, not out of fraylite, but presuming, and casting of the feare of his Lord. II. When thou goest with thy adversarie to the Prince, by the way indeavour to be delivered from him, least perhaps he draw thee to the Iudge, and the Iudge deliver thee to the exactour, and the exactour cast thee into prison; I say to thee thou shalt not go out thence,S. Gregd▪ till thou pay the very last mite. Our adversarie in the way is the word of God, contrary to our carnall desi∣res in this life; from whome he is delivered who humbly submits himself to the commandments. Otherwise if we differ the agreement, after this life, when we come to appeare before the Prince, there is no redemption, but we must to prison.S. Basil In another sence; Our adversarie is whoever doth endeavour to bereave vs of that to which we have, or conceive we have tight; with such we shall best agree if we observe the precept of our Lord. To him that will contend with thee in iudgment,Mart. 5 and take away thy coat let go thy cloke also to him. III. And there were cortayne present at that time telling him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their sa∣crifices. And he sayed to them; think you that these Galileans: were synners more then all the Galileans, that they suffered such things? No, I say to you, but vnlesse you have repentance, yo shall all like wise perish. And those eighteene vpon whome the towre fell in Siloe and slew thim, think you that they also were debters above all men in Hierusalem! No, I say vnto you but if you have not repentance, you shall all likewise perish. Ther∣fore when you see any perish by shipwarck,S: Ihon Chriso▪ ot by the fall house, or by fire, or by water conceive that God perhaps of a will punish that partie lesse in the world to come, because, he suffered here, and forbeareth other,
that vpon notice of the others punishment, he may repent and mend his life, or if he doe not, but persevereth in his bad couses, most grievous punishment will be heaped v∣pon him.Thmas a Kempls c. 24 n. VVhat other thing will that fire devoure but thy syns? The more thou sparest thy self here and followest sence, the more grievously thou wilt pay it here after. The goodnes of God shewed vs in two examples. I. ANd he sayed also this similutude,Diceha autem & hanc simi∣litudinem. A certayne man had a figtree planted in his wineyards, and he came seeking fruite of it, and he found none: and he sayed to the dresser of the wineyard;Luc. 13 6 lo, it is three years, that I come seeking fruite vpon this figtree, and I find none: Cut it downe therfore, wherto doth it occupie the ground? But he answering sayth, Lord let it alone this yeare also, till I dig about it, and dung it, and if happily it yeald fruite; if not, here after thou shalt cut it downe.S. Gregor. The figtree occupieth the ground with out fruite, when either the covetous, and streight∣laced doe keepe that without profit, which might be vse∣full to many; or when by the shade of sloth a man darke∣neth the place, which another might fertilize with the beames of good workes. And in fine, whosoever doth not comply with his dutie, doth for the time occupie the earth,Ps. 23 4 and seeme (as the Psalmist speaketh) to have recei∣ved his life and soule in vayne; yet God is so mercyfull, that he expected from yeare to yeare, and giveth time that we may reflect vpon the foulnes, and stench of our syn∣nes, signified by the dung; and doe fitting satisfaction ot them,Tomas a Kempis l 1 c. 25 signified by the diging Be watchfull and diligent in the service of God, d think oftē wherfore thou camest. II. And he was teaching in their synagog on the sabboth▪ and behold a woman that had a spirit if infirmitie eighteen yea∣res, and she was crooked, neither could she looks vpward at all: Whome when Iesus saw, he called her vnto him; and sayed to her, woman thou art delivered from thy infirmitie; and he layed his hands vpon her, and forthwith she was made straight, and glorified God. Our Saviour in the former pa∣rable signfied that at the intercession of others he ofti∣times
granteth time of repentance, here he sheweth how ready he is of himself to take compassion of vs, who are so croocked by nature, that nothing but earth and earthly things contents vs, and are continually looking downe∣wards vpon them: seldome or not at all lift our eyes and harts to heaven: and indeed have no naturall knowledge of so high a treasure as God hath there layed vp for vs. Ie∣sus must call vs by faith, and lay his sacred hands vpon vs. that we may be cured. God in the beginning made man vpright; by him we must againe be rectified. Her respect to the Sabboth drew her into the occasion of meeting our Saviour; and vpon vs he will looke with a gracious eye, if we neglect not to doe our devotions. III. And the Archisynagog sayed to the multitude: six day∣s there are wherin you ought to worke: then come and be cured, and not on the Sabboth day. And our Lord answering him sayed; Hypocrite doth not every one of you vpon the Sabboth loose his ox, or his asse from the manger, and lead them to the water? But this daughter of Abraham, whome Satan had bound these eighteen yeares, ought not she to be loosed from this bond vpon the Sab∣both day? And his adversaries ere ashamed, and all the people rejoyced in all things that were gloriously done by him. See the crookednes of our nature in this Pharisee, prone to en∣ie, and pride, and rashly to censure even the most rea∣sonable things. When reason was represented, they were all ashamed, but the holy text doth not say they craved pardon: and so it falls out oft with vs; we are ashamed within ourselves, but to others we will not confesse, or acknowledge a falt, but rather out of pride defend it, or excuse it.Thomas a Kempis l;  c. 22 n. 6 O how greate is the frayltie of man allwayes prone to vice. Of temporall things we have so much care that we will not neglect, nor put of the least of them, but of our spirituall diseases we think slightly, and put of the curing of them frō day to day vpon very shallow motives. Our Saviour bewayleth the vngreatefull and vnrepentant. I. THe same day there  certaye of Phisees vntoIn ips di accesser  ad  qui∣d▪ him saying: dparte, and go from hence, becaus
Herod will kill thee: And he sayed to them; go, and tell that fox: behold I cast out divells, and perfite cures, this day, and to morrow, and the third day I am consummate: but yt I must walke this day, and to morrow, and the day following, because it can∣not be that a Prophet perish out of Hierusalem. Interpreters say that this was a rumour raysed; and a devise either of the Pharisees, or of Herode himself toget our Saviour out of the country: where, with reason; we may reflect how miserable a thing it is to be weary of that which in realitie is our greatest good, it being as much as to say to our Saviour, depart and go hence. VVe are ashamed to say such a thing plainly, but we pretend we are not able to beare, or to doe this or that, it will be our death, and the like. Our Saviour was not moved vvith this reporte, but following his imployment, and relying vpon the protec∣tion of God vvent on confidently, till the time ordayned came. VVhen thou hast Christ, thou art rich and hast sufficient. He vvill be thy Purveyer, and faithfull steward in all things,Thomas a Kempis l. 2 c. 1 n. 2 so that it vvill not be necessarie to confide in men. II. Hierusalem, Hierusalem, which killest the Prophets and stonest them who are sent to thee; how often would I gather thy Children, as the bird doth her brood vnder her wings, and thou wouldest not? VVe doe not cast stones at those who are sent vnto vs for our instruction; vve mst be vvare notwith∣standing that in some proportion vve be not guilty of reiecting the motions of the holy Ghost, of censu∣ring those by vvhome vve are told of our falts, and in∣steed of imbracing their counsell give them ill language; or speake ill of thē behind their backs. How oft hath God endeavoured to reclayme vs, and to prfite his cure in vs, to make vs his children, to have vs neere him and vnder his vving?Thomas a Kempis l. 3 c. 55 n, 3 I know the vvay to perfection, and doe see clearly enough how I ought to demeane myself, but loded vvith the vveight of my owne corruption, I doe not rise to that which is perfect. O how necessarie is thy grace ô Lord?S. August. The hen protects her chickens vnder her wings; how much safer shalt thou be vnder the wing of God? No bird doth so spend herself vpon her brood as the hen. And because we were infirme and weake, the eternall wise∣dome of God became also infirme among vs: the word
made flesh and dwelt among vs, that vve might have hope and confidence vnder his wings. III. Behold your house shall be left desert to you; and I say to you, you shall not see me with you, till it come when you shall say; blessed is he that cometh in the name of our Lord. We reiecting the grace of God, and not making vse of it, he iustly also comes to desert vs;Rom: 1 24 and our soule, which was his house and temple, is turned into our owne hands, and delivered over to the desires of our owne hart. A fearefull re∣turne. How much better is it to welcome our Saviour▪ and his holy inspirations, and blessing him for them, ap∣ply ourselves with alacritie to endeavour to put them in execution?Thomas a Kempis l 3. . 55 My Lord God who hast created me to thy I∣mage and likenes, grant me this grace which thou hast shewed me to be so necessarie for me. Precepts of Humilitie and Charitie. I. WHen thou art invited to a mariage, sit not downe in the first place least perhaps a more honourable then thou be invited by him;Cu invi tatus fu∣ris ad nup∣tias. &c. ād he that bad thee ād him, come to say to thee, give this man place, and thou then begin with shame to take the last place. But when thou art bidden, go, sit downe in the lowest place.Luc. 14  that when he that invited thee cometh, he may say to thee: frend, sit vp higher: then shalt thou have glorie before them that sit at table with thee, be∣cause every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted This generall conclusion was the intent of the former document: for not only in common conuersation we ought to behave ourselves so humbly, but much more towards God, allway∣es thinking humbly of ourselves. Pride doth heighten vs in our owne conceite; and hence rise contentions and quarells, and hart-burnings, and extreame sadnes and deiection, whē we see another preferred before vs. But if it rise so high as to make vs forget that whatever we have, we have it from God, and to valve ourselves as of oursel∣ves; whether doe you think we shall deservedly be cast? we must therfore continually remēber what we are, and that lesson which God gave our first father, must not pa
from our har;Ge. 3 19 Thou art dust, and into dust thou shalt returne. Every good gift cometh from above, from the Father of lights, with whome there is no change; VVe when we are at the best that vve cā imagine of ourselves either in body or mind, are subiect to so sudain changes, that vve have cause to fe∣are least (as it happened to Nabucondonosor) when we think ourselves men,Daniel. 4 30 vve become little lesse then beasts: for vvhat ever God gives, he may sudainly take from vs. II. And he sayed to him that had invited him, when thou makest a dinner, or a supper, call not thy frēds, nor thy brethrē nor kinsmē no thy neighbours that be rich, least perhaps they also invite thee againe, ād recōpence be made to thee; but whē thou makest a feast call the poore, feeble, lame, and blind, and thou shalt he blessed, be∣cause they have not wherwith to recompense thee; for recompence shall be made thee in the resurrection of the just. Our Saviour coming to preach the kingdome of heaven, and to rayse our thoughts from these earthsy things to things eternall vvhich import vs most, taketh occasion of all things to put vs in mind of them; and here he doth not forbid ci∣vilitie to be vsed towards our kindred, and neighbours, though they should be rich, in a measure and proportion conveniēt, but teacheth vs that vvhich is of so much more importance to vs, as temporall recompence is below the eternall:S. Ihon Chrisost. If thou call the poore, God becomes thy deb∣tour; and the lesse and lower thy brother is, so much the neerer doth Christ come to thee in him, and doth visite thee the more lovingly. He that receiveth a greate man, comonly seekes honour and profit by it. The same is in all other Charities towards our neigbour; attending vpon greate people vanitie creeps in: in the poore vve doe more easily behold our Saviour. III. And a certayne man sayed to him; Lord be they few that are saved? And he sayed, strive to enter by the narrow gate, for many I say to you shall seeke to enter, and shall not be able, but when the goodman of the house shall enter and shut the doore; and you shall begin to stand without, and knock saying, Lord open to vs; and he shall say, I knowe you not, whence are you; then you shall begin to saye, we did eate before thee, and drink, and in our streets thou didst teach. And he shall saye to you I know all whence you are, depart from me all yee workers of iniquitie: There shall be weeping ād gnashing of teeth. In regard that the precepts of hu∣militie
ād charitie seeme hard to flesh and blood,V. Bed therfore he bids vs strive, because vnlesse the endeavour of our mind be fervēt ād strōg, the waves of the world in which we swim cannot be overcome: people seeke indeed to co∣me in, because they desire to be saved, but they are not able, because the ragednes of the way doth frighten them; not that the burden of our Lord is heavy, but because they will not learne of him who is meeke and humble. Perfect renunciation. I. ANd a greate multitude went with him; and turning he sayed to them,Ibnt  tem turbae multae cū eo &c. If any man come to me, and hateth not his father and mother, and wife and children, aud brethren, and sisters, yea and his owne life besides, he can∣not be my disciple;Luc. 18 9 and he that doth not beare his crosse, and come after me, cannot be my disciple: first it is to be observed that he speaketh not this to his disciples only, as to those who have nothing to doe in the world; but to all, whether they have father, or mother, or wife, or children, or goods, or wealth,S. Grego▪ or whatever els. Secondly that our hatred must be so tempered that we love in them, that which they are, and hate in them that by which they resiste vs, or hinder vs in our way to Godwards. It imports therfore in order to overcome the difficultie, which nature finds in this hatred, that we ponder seriously, and beare deeply imprinted in our mind, the necessitie, the profit, the dig∣nitie of coming to our Saviour, and of following him; for as we apprehend this more or lesse, our difficultie will be more or lesse; and they alone who either apprehend it not at all, or doe not sufficiently conceive it, or remember it, doe swarve from the right way in occasions of temptati∣ons. But to incourage vs he sets before vs the similitude following. II. For, Which of you, minding to buyld a towre doth not first sit downe, and reckon the charges which are necessarie, whe∣ther he have to finish it? least after he hath layed the founda∣tion, and is not able to finish it, all that see it begin to mock him, saying, This man began to buyld, and could not finish it. First he insinuated that the following of Christ is the Towre,S. August from which we may both discover our enemie,
and put him to flight.S. Gregor A Towre, because the precepts and counsels of the Gospell are high, and sublime, and to performe them we must have high and sublime thou∣ghts. The charges are the strength which we must have to performe that which our Saviour teacheth vs, this stren∣gth, or means is not gotten, as worldly means by heaping worldly wealth, but by disposing of our worldly means according to Christs direction in severall places, as distri∣buting them among the poore (as he sayed to the young∣man)Luc. 18. 22. or in other charitable deeds,Luc. 10. 25. (as to the laywer that asked how he should be saved) or as here in preferring our dutie to God before all worldly means. III. Or what King about to go to make warre against another King, doth not first sit downe, and think, whether he be able with ten thousand to meete him that with twenty thousand co∣meth against him. Otherwise while he is yet farre of, sending an embassage, he asketh those things that belong to peace: so therfore every one of you that doth not renounce all that he possesseth, cannot be my disciple. Before; he spake of a towre for defēce, and also for pleasure; here he puts vs in mind that our life is a warfare: wherin certaynly they who have left all for Christ, have taken the safest course: for they have cut of at once, ten and ten thousand enimies, and occasions of doing otherwise then well; and have ten thousand helps more then vsually men have in the world: yet this very state is to be imbraced vpon good consideration, that we repent not with shame, and also with so much damage, and hurt; as is to make peace with such enimies; who are never at peace with vs, but when we are in their power, and slaverie. And he speakes of siting downe and thinking, not that there is any doubt at all to be made of following the doctrine of Christ in generall, but that we must sttle an immoveable resolution to follow it, watever beco∣meth of our worldly frends or wealth; this resolution being a chiefe part of the charges towards the buylding of our towre;Thom:  Kemp. l. 1. c▪ 19. n, 2. and armour also for the battell According to our resolution, is the course of our profit: if he that purposeth strongly doth often fayle, what will become of him, that seldome and slenderly purposeth?
The eleventh Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. THe reward of the watchfull and diligent ser∣vants was that their Lord and master would gird himself, and make them sit downe, and passing would minister vnto them. This we see verifyed to the eye in the most blessed Sacrament, in which our blessed Savi∣our, doth make vs sit downe at his heavenly table, and doth confine his glorified body to so small a roome as is the sacred host, and by the hand of the Priests doth mi∣nister it vnto vs, so lovingly, and to our so much honour and benefit, that no tongue can expresse it, no thought can reach the greatenes of it: How humble, how chast, how recollected were it fitting we should be, and how much shining with good workes, and all kind of vertue? LetS. Ihon Chrisost. vs therfore have care and watch over ourselves in∣joying so greate a happines: And if any vnseemely thing offer itself to our thought, or tongue, or if motions of anger rise in vs, or of any other vice; let vs call to mind how greate the honour is which our Saviour doth vs, that that thought may quell all vnreasonable motiōs. Let vs consider that we receive him whome the Angels adore sitting at the right hand of his Father. And this know yee, that as they be blessed, who doe stand carefully pre∣pared expecting their Lord, and are highly rewarded by him; so the negligent ervant knowing his masters will and worth, and not regarding it, will be dealt with ac∣cordingly, O my Lord,Thomas a Kempisl. 4 c. 4. my God prevent thy ervant with the sweetnes of thy blessing that I may come wor∣thily and devoutly to this magnificent Sacrament: stirre vp my hart towards thee. &c. II. His patience towards vs is no lesse then his mag∣nificēce; both infinite, expecting vs frō day to day, ād year to yeare, to see whether we will bring forth fruite accor∣ding to the care which he hath of vs, visiting vs so often. O that we did consider rightly how greate he is, who vouchsafeth thus to looke vpon vs.Thomas  Kempis l. 4 c. 14. n. 2▪ O truly ardent, and lively Faith of them, who truly know their Lord, in the breaking of bread! whose hart doth so greately burne in them by Iesus his walking with them. Farre from me is
such affection, and feeling devotion, so greate love and fervour. Be mercyfull to me sweete Iesus and looke vpon me with those compassionate eyes with which thou didst behold the crooked woman after eighteen yeares infirmiie, and lift vp my head and eyes that I may behold thy po∣vver, thy goodnes, thy mercyes, and thy blessed self, in this most blessed Sacrament.Luc. 2. 29 Loose this bond of my dullnes, that I may say with old Simeon. Now thou doest dismisse thy servant, o Lord, according to thy word, in peace, because my eyes have seen thy salvation. III. The master of the Synagog reprehended the woman for coming to be cured vpon the Sabboth: The Pharisees came to our Saviour wishing him to depart; but seeing he is so stupendiously willing to have me even vnder his wing what can I doe better, then correspond with h willing∣nes? or where can I be better then with him?  my soule let not any mans speech, or opposition; let not the consi∣deration of thy owne vnworthynes keepe thee from ac∣cepting this loving offer,Ecel. 21. 2 but as from the face of a serpent▪ fly synne and repayr to this thy protectour, thy nource, thy all things say with old Zacharie: Blessed be our Lord God of Israel,Luc. 1. 68▪ because he hath visited, and wrought the redemp∣tion of his people. &c. The parables of the lost sheepe, And the groate. I. ANd then approched Publians and synners to heare him:Ea t au∣tem apro∣pinquan∣tes i pu∣blicani &c and the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, say∣ing. This man receiueth synners, and eateth with them. Here againe our Saviours goodnes, and mans per∣vernes appeareth;Luc. 15. He giving intertainment to all that are willing to give care vnto him; they out of their pride re∣iecting those whome they thought not to be compa∣red to them: for thinking themselves holy and lear∣ned in the law, they dispised those whome they thought to be wicked, as not worthy of their companie, and con∣demned our Saviour as not doing well in admitting thē into his, or resorting to them: not reflecting vpon the in∣tent for which our Saviour did it, not suspending their
iudgment till they should see the good effect of it. By the proceedings of both we may see, that true iustice hath compassion,S. Gregor. where false iustice is moved with indignati∣on and because the Pharisees vvere so sick that they did not feele their owne disease, to the ēd they might come to know thēselves, our Saviour, like a good Physitian, doth apply an easy remedy to them by the parables following. II. What man of you having an hundred sheepe, if he have lost one of them, doth he not leave the ninety nine in the desert and go after that which is lost, vntill he find it? And when he hath found it, layeth it vpon his shoulders, rejoycing; and co∣ming home, calleth togeather his frends and neighbours, saying, to them? rejoyce with me, because I have found my sheepe that was lost: I say to you, that even so there shall be joy in heaven vpon one synner, that doth penance, then vpon ninety nine just that need not penance.S. Ambr▪ Our Saviour is a rich sheepeheard, among whose sheepe all mankind is but the hundred part. He left the ninety nine, the nine quires of Angels, and came into our desert, seeking vs; and tooke vs vpon his shoulders, when he tooke his crosse; and is ioy full at the conversion of any one of vs. He compares it to the ioy which men find in recovering their losses, but as the losse of one mans soule is incomparably greater then the losse of a thousand and thousand sheepe, so his ioy for the re∣coverie of one of vs is with out comparison. Who would not willingly returne vnto him to give him this ioy? III. Or what woman having ten groates, if she loose one groate, doth she not light a candle, and sweepe the house, and seeke diligētly till she finds? and when she hath found it, calleth together her frends and neigbours saying, reioye with me becavse I have found the groate which I had lost. So I say to you, there shall be ioy before the angels of God, vpon one synner that doth penāce. The ef∣fect of this parable is the same with the former; but more∣over puteth vs in mind how much we must endeavour to recover ourselves or another, begging light of All∣mightie God, and bestiring ourselves in the search of our falts,S. Ihon Chrysoft. and causes of them. Also that as a peece of money hath the stampe of the Prince whose coyne it is, so vpon man the image of God is printed: in consideration wher∣of we ought to use all diligence that it be not lost, and so soyled, and bemired: or when it is lost, that it be found
out againe and brought to its former lustre. Christ also as S. Chrysologus discourseth,S. Chrysol. is the full expression of the deitie; the price of our redemption; he was foretold and figured in the old law, and yet hidden; the Synagog of ehe Ievves had him, and through their obstinate dark∣nes they did not see him; we following the candle which our mother the Church holdeth forth vnto vs, ād walk∣ing in the light of our Saviours coutenance, shall find the groate, which is our Saviour, and reioyce with him in the cō panie of his Angels. Amen. In fie we must be towards our Saviour as sheepe, obedient, tractable, fearefull, and wary of the wolfe, having recourse to him for help and assistance: towards others meeke and harmelesse, moe ready to suffer, then to contend; ād esteeme of our soules as our chiefest substance, which once lost or impayred, as it cost our Saviour infinite paynes and labour, so must we spare no labour to conserve, or recover it. The prodigall Child. I. Acertayne man had two sonnes;Homo quidam habebat duo fii∣os. and the yonger of them sayed to his Father; Father, give me the portion of substance which belongeth to me; and he devided out the substance. And not many dayes after, the yonger Sonne ga∣thering all things together, went from home, into a farre country, and there he wasted his substance living riotously. But after he had spent all, there fell a sore famin in the counrey, and he Began to need: And he went, and cleaved to one of the cittizens of the countrey, and he sent him to his farme to feed swine, ād he would fayne have filled his belly with the huskes, and no body gave vnto him▪ In our paternall house of God, so long as we be dutifull, we have three fountaines of wealth and delight allayes open to vs, so that nothing can be wanting to∣wards our happines. These are expressed in the words with which the loving father did indeavour to appease the elder brother complayning of his debauched brothers intertaynement at his retrne. Sonne thou art allwayes with me, and all my things are thyne; for what greater prefermēt then to be sonnes of God? What greater pleasure then to be allwayes with him? VVhat greater wealth then to have
all that God hath to vse it according to reason? VVhat doth most commonly put vs by this felicitie? A great conceite of ourselves and of our abilitie to governe our∣selves, and an itching desire of disordered libertie: give me the portion of substance: He that had all, confines himself to a portion: O blindnes! But give it me, who now have yeares, and wit enough; why should I be allwayes kept vn∣der? It belongeth to me to order myself, and that which is myne: The eye of my Father is now a troble to me, who see well enough what is to be done. I vvill go see the world, and travell into farre countreyes, vvhere I may enioy the portion of my substance: for what auayleth it me to say that all things are mine, if I cannot vse them but as another will? youth, and age have different wayes. And thus not thinking any thing good, or safe, which was not at his owne dispose, not many dayes after gathering all things together, he went from home into a farre countrey. Farre indeed he goeth who indeavours to fly from God, and from all rationall courses: but what found he? Famin, want, slaverie, beastly life, vnsatiable desires. II. And returning to himself, he sayed how many of my fathers hirelings have abundance of bread, and I here perish with famin? I will rise, and go to my Father, and say to him; Father, y have synned against heaven, and before thee: I am not now worthy to be called thy sonne; make me as one of thy hire∣lings: and rising vp he came to his Father. A happy returne, whē leaving of gazing vpon other folks actions, by which most commonly we take no good, we looke home vpon ourselves; he saw by it that he lay wallowing in beastly pleasures, feeding and delighting the hogs, that is, the d∣vells, but himself voyde of contentmēt; all worldly things being but husks, and of no solide substance or ut timent: therfore he sayth, he will rise frō that dirty kind of life, ād frō want of sustenance and go to his Father, with whome there is abundance of bread for all sorts: and doth not de∣lay his rising and going: knowing that he hath a father to deale with; who, though I be vnworthy to be received in∣to favour, will vpon repentance have compassion of me; and, if not restore me to my former state, which I deserve not, yet will give me sufficient to mayntaine me eerlas∣tingly. Father I have synned against heaven: This is the
chief thing to be considered in our offenses, that they are against God, against that infinite power and good∣nes to whome all subiection is due, and all respect: Then we must consider him as our Father, our benefactour; him by whome we receive our life ād meās; by whome weare protected ād cōserved: all which deserved, in way of grati∣tude quite other corses thē we have takēe. Againe that we have offended beore him, in his sight, vnder his all see∣ing eye, ād have not cōsidered it; ād it is I who have done this; I who am but a worme of the earth. not able to move hand or foote without him; and yet have vsed his owne creatures against him, and the strength and abilitie which I had from him, I have turned to offend him. I am not worthy of any thing, but of punishment, but thy mercyes are greate, to which I betake myself vpon my knees as to my Father. The Prodigall Child. II. PART. I. ANd when he was yet farre of; his father saw him, and was moved with pitty, and running to him, fell vpon his neck and kissed him. And his Sonne sayed to him: Father, I have synned against heaven, and before thee; I am not now worthy to be called thy Sonne. This is the mercy∣full proceeding of God towards vs; he casts his compa∣ssionae eye vpon vs though we be yet farre of from him; and runneth towards vs, with more spd then we to∣wards him; and condescendeth much to our infirmitie; stooping to vs, while we are not able to rayse ourselves so hig as he deserveth; and affoordeth us the loving kisse of peace; how ever we deserve rather to be punished. He doth not say whence comest thou?Chrisolog wherewert thou! Where is thy substance thou caryedst away? Wherfore didst thou change so much glorie with so much basenes? Thes things he leaves to our consideration; but he is all love and mercy. II. And the Father sayed to his servants; quickly bring forth the first stole, and doe it on him, and put a ring vpon his hand, and shes on his feete: and bring the fatned
calfe, and kill it: and let vs eate, and make merry, be∣cause this my Sonne was dead, and is revived, was lost, and is found.Chrisolog And they began to make merry. The loving Father would have him clothed, before he should come in sight; therfore he sayth, quickly: and it expresseth a greate deale of willingns which is in God to see vs not only out of our nastie rags of synne, but clothed with tho∣se vertues which are most pleasing to him: therfore not content to put on him the first stool, that is, the gar∣ment which he formerly vsed, he calleth for a ring to his hand, to beautify his workes, and shooes to his feete, to strengthen his affections against the allurements of the world. Yet the first stools mentioned must put vs in mind: that all the time spent farre from God is lost: and re∣turning we must begin where we left: and happy we, if we be not cast farther back then we were when we parted. In a mysticall sence,Chrisolog The father ranne to vs in his sonne when in him he descended from heaven, my Father (sayth he) who sent me is with me. He fell vpon his neck when in Christ, the whole divinitie rested vpon our flesh; and he kissed him, when mercy and truth have met, justice and peace have kissed each other He also is the faned cal∣fe killed for our entertaynment: to the end we might not only have sufficient to sustaine vs, but abundance, and of the best to delight vs much more in the service of God, then in our former course. III. But the elder sonne was in the field, and when he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard musick, and dauncing, and he called one of the servants, and asked what all that should be: And he sayed to him; thy brother is come, and thy Father hath kil∣led the fatned calfe, because he hath received him safe; and he was angrie, and would not go in. His father therfore going forth, began to desire him. But he answering, sayed to his father: Be∣hold so many yeares doe I serve thee, and I never transgressed thy commandment, and thou didst never give me a Kid to ma∣ke merry with my frends. But after that this thy sonne, that hath devoured his substance with whores, is come, thou hast kil∣led for him the fatned calfe. But he sayed to him, sonne, thou art allwayes with me, and all my things are thyne: but is behoved vs to make merry, and be glad, because this thy brother was dead, and is revived; was lost, and is fond. This expresseth how
consider that we should doe by others, as we would have done to ourselves: secondly how much we value the servi∣ce which we doe, as if God were beholding to vs for it. Thirdly how blind we are in not discovering our owne falts. I never transgressed; as if to envie anothers good were not to transgresse: it was not thy strength, but thy fathers grace which was cause of it. See on the other side the goodnes of God, who goeth forth, and desi∣reth, even the Stubborne Sonne; and learne that to synne against him, is to kill thy owne soule, which is much more to be abhorred then the losse of our life. The vnfaithfull Bayly. I. HE sayed also to his disciples;Dicebat autem & ad disci∣pulosuos &c. There was a rich man that had a Bayly, and he was ill reported of onto him, as he that had wasted his goods. And he called him, and sayed to him, what heare I this of thee? Give account of thy Baylyship,Luc. 16. for now thou canst no more be bayly. Our Saviour Christ as God is the only powerfull King of Kings,. Tim. 6. 15: and Lord of Lords, rich in all things, and chiefly in his mercyes,Eph. 2. 4. to whome we must give account of every thing: for we are ords neither of life nor lim not thought, nor deed, but accountable for all: neither can any thing escape his knowledge;Chrysol. Though here, that which he certaynly knoweth, he reckoneth as heard by report; because he is not rash or hasty in condemning; and will give vs leasure to repēt, while the cause is, as it were, depēding before him. He asketh an account that we may aske pardon; ād happy we, if by remorse of conscience he aske it here, before the time of satisfaction be expired. II. And the Bayly sayed within himself: what shall I doe, because my Lord taketh from me the Baylyship. Dig I am not able, to begge: am ashamed. I know what I shall doe, that when I shall be removed from my Baylyship, they may receive me into their houses.Chrysol A man allwayes desires to doe well when death comes▪ and bereaves him of the time of doing good. This question he should have asked himself before; what shall I doe seeing every houre and every mi∣nute my Baylyship is vpon remouing from me? Be I never
soe rich to the world, and abound in all things for this moment of time; I am most miserable, if for all eternitie I shall be a begger by it: If I be not here able to worke, how shall I there be able to suffer the punishments of the slouthfull? If I be here ashamed to confesse and begge par∣don, what shame shall I vndergo there, where there is no pardon? It is not vnknowne to vs what we ought to doe, that after this life we may be saved; God grant we may take warning, and be wise in time, that we be not removed before we have adiusted our accounts, and be ready to give in our reckoning. III. Therfore calling together every one of his Lords debtors, he sayed to the first, How much doest thou owe to my Lord? He sayeth, an hundred pipes of oyle, and he sayed to him, take thy bill, and sit downe, quickly write fiftie: and to another, how much doest thou owe? He sayed an hundred quarters of wheate; he sayed, take thy bill, and write fourescore. And the Lord praysed the Bayly of iniquitie, because he had done wisely: for the Children of this world are wiser then the Chil∣dren of light in their generation. And I say unto you, ma∣ke unto you frends of the Mammon of iniquitie, that when you fayle, they may receive you into the eternrll Tabernacles. The Bayly of iniquitie is here praysed, not because he did iust things, but because according to the practise of worldlings he shewed himself witty, and at his masters cost made his owne benefit. How much more (sayth S. Hierome)S. Hierom will Christ our Saviour, who cannot be inda∣maged, and is inclined to pitty and compassion, com∣mend his followers, if they be pittyfull, and compassio∣nate towards their brethren, and liberall in relieving or pardoning them? therfore also he doth not say absolutely that the children of the world are wiser then the Children of light, but in their generation, that is, in the affay∣res which passe through their hāds; and as they by their moneyes (most commonly vnjustly, or intemperately taked vp) doe worke out a subsistance to themselves; so must we by contemning the pels of this life, or disposing of it to righteous uses, make frends in heaven, where we may be eternally welcome.
The Rich Glutton. I. THere was a certayne rich man,Homo quidam e∣rat dives. and he clothed in pur∣ple, and silk, amd fared every day magnifically; and there was a certaine begger, called Lazarus, that lay at his gate,Luc. 16. 19 full of sores, desiring to be filled with the crums that fell from the rich mans table, and no body gave him, but the dogs also came and licked his sores. Riches we see in the prodigall Child bred riotousnes; in the Baylie deceite, and vnfayth∣fulnes; here gluttonie, and vnmercyfull contempt of the poore and needy: all three making our Saviours words good;Matth. 19. 23 It is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdome of heaven. The Begger lay without doores, but not with∣out a Master;Fulgētius. naked of cloths, but not of Faith; exposed to the dogs, and fellow to the Angels: who tasted not of the rich mans crums, but received the bread of hea∣ven, refreshing his soule. Marke the diversitie; the rich∣man poore and miserable amidst all his wealth, and he∣alth; the begger rich and happy in his povertie and disea∣ses. For it came to passe that the begger died, and was caryed by the Angels into Abrahams bosome: and the rich man died, and he was buryed in hell. II. And lifting vp his eyes, when he was in torments, he saw Abraham a farre of, and Lazarus in his bosome, and crying, he sayed, father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, to coole my tongue, be∣cause I am tormented in this flame. And Abraham sayed to him; Sonne, remember that thou didst receive good things in thy life time, and Lazarus Likewise evill; but now he is com∣forted, and thou tormented: and beides all this, betwixt vs and you there is a greate gulfe (or Chaos) fixed, that they who will passe from hence to you may not, neither come from thence hither. When he was in Prosperitie he scarce ever lifted vp his eyes to acknowledge from whom he received that plenty, and to thank him; now he lifted them vp to his confusion, and greater affliction; he saw Abraham, but a farre of, he having lived farre from following his beleefe and obedience; and Lazarus now at rest, while himself was tormented, and wanted that help which he had de∣denyed the poore when thy begged. He beggs a drop who denyed a crum; and finds the heate of his tongue
intolerable,Thomas a Kempis 1.  c. 24 n▪ 3 who could not in life time abide the least want of refreshment. In the things wherin a man hath synned, in those he shal be more grievously punished; There the sloathfull. &c. III. And he sayed: Then father, I beseech thee that thou woul∣dest send him to my fathers house; for I have five brethren, to testifie to them least they also come into this place of torment. And Abraham sayed to him; They have Moyses, and the Prophets let them heare them. But he sayed, no, Father Abraham, but if so∣me man shall go from the dead to them, they will doe pennance; and he sayed to him. If they heare not Moyses and the Poophets, neither if one shall rise againe from the dead will they beleeve. This might be seene in the person of our Saviour himself: for the Jewes neither beleeved the Prophets testifying him to be the Messias; nor Lazarus whome he had ray∣sed from death: nor himself raising himself, after he had so publickly suffeted death by them. Neither is the testimo∣ny of one rising from the dead▪ so assured a witnes, as is the holy Scripture, laying downe before vs that which we beleeve by it. An extraordinarie miracle may move admiration, but the ordinarie means by which God doth vse to instruct vs is more solide, and the constantly knoc∣king at the doore of our hart a greater mercy towards vs: if we give not eare, and doe not open vnto him, it is a hazard whehe an extraordinary accident happening will have force enough to breake through those obstruc∣tions, which are so setled in our thoughts and behaviour. The rich man fared every day magnifically; it is not sayed how long he lived so;Thomas 2 Kempis l. 1 c. 23 n. 24 but dying he was buryed eternally in hell, and could have no help: This one consideration is motive enough to take heed. Very quickly will there be an end of thee, see how thou behavest thyself: to day a man is, and to morrow he appeareth not. In all things have regard to the end, and how thou wilt stand before the severe Judge. The Pharisee and the Publican. I. ANd he sayed also to certaine that trusted in themsel∣ves as just,Dixit atem & ad quosdam qui &c: and despised others, this parable Two men went vp into the temple to pray;Luc▪ 18. 9. the one a Pha∣rise,
the other a Publican. The Pharisee standing prayed thus, by himself, God, I give thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, vniust, advlterers, as also this Publican: I fast twice in the weeke; I give tithes of all that I possesse; It was not amisse neither to give God thanks that he was not as other men, vniust, &c. Or to fast, and give the enths of his possessions; but our Saviour insinuateth that this was sayed with a secret pride, as thinking he deserved to be so protected; or that God was as it were beholding to him for his good deeds; contemning also others, whom he thought not so vpright as himself. He might have bet∣ter sayed (sayth S. Augustine) I am not as many men;S. August. what is, as the rest of men, but all besides himself? I am just, the rest are synners. Scan his words, and see what he asked of God: Nothing: he went vp to pray; He asked God nothing: he fell to prayse himself, and moreover to insult over him that Prayed. Art thou so full that thou needest nothing? Is not this life a place of temptation? II. And the Publican standing a farre of, would not so much as lift vp his eyes towards heaven, but knocked his breast, say∣ing;S. August God be mercyfull to me a synner. The Publican stood a farre of, but God was not farre from him: his gilty conscience made him not dare presume to approch; his pietie gave him accesse. God is high, and looketh vpon the humble; but vpon such high people as the Pharisee he looketh a farre of: the Publican did not only stand a∣loofe, but would not so much as lift vp his eyes towards heaven; he thought himself vnworthy to behold, or to be looked on, Heaven had been a long time out of his thoughts: he held it too soone to take the boldnes to looke vp to it, however he desired it: He did reverence it more by humbly looking downe, then by lifting his eyes towards it. And he knocked his breast, doing penance for his synns, and confessing them▪ and asking of pardon: what won∣der is it, if vpon acknowledgment he obtayned remissi∣on. O God be mercy full to me a sinner. III. I say vnto you, This man went downe into his house justified more then he, because every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled, and he who humbleth himself shall be exalted. This is a document, not to judge others easily, accor∣ding to our Saviours rule,0. 7. 14. Iudge not according to the face,
or outward appearance, but iudge iust iudgment, vvhich is easyet to doe of ourselves, then of others; for what doe we know of anothers inward disposition? Yea even of our∣selves A man knoweth not whether he deserve love or hatred.Eccl. 9 1 Secondly, It is a general rule, that humilitie is the only se∣cure way to heaven. Every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled, And even in ordinarie things, a body may obser∣ve, that after pride comes some fall or disgrace. And see∣ing our Saviour, the eternall wisedome of God, choose this way to be exalted, not so much in regard to himself, as for our example and instruction, it were a kind of mad∣nes to seeke to be greate in any other vvay,S. Bernard or in any o∣ther thing then in humilitie. It is a greate and rare ver∣tue to doe greate things, and not to esteeme thy self gre∣ate: that the sanctitie which is manifest to all should be hidden from thyself: to appeare admirable, and to reckon thy self contemptible: This I take to be the most admira∣ble vertue of all the rest. He must needs be a faithfull ser∣vant who suffereth nothing to stick to his fingers of that glorie,Thomas a Kempis l. . 8 vvhich though it proceedeth not from him, yet passeth through his hands shall I speake to my Lord, seeing I am dust and askes? If I esteeme myself better, be∣hold thou standest against me. &c. The twelfth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. THe lost sheepe sought so carefully, the prodigall Child intertayned so lovingly, the humble Pu∣blican iustified so mercyfully, give vs occasion to glorifie our B. Saviour; who in the most B. Sacrament, laying aside his infinite glorie, and leaving it with the qui∣res of Angels, comes into our desert here below, dayly to seeke vs, and moved with compassion, comes running towards vs, and kisseth vs: Quickly put on the best stole thou canst, and a ring on thy singer, in testimony that eter∣nally thou wilt be his: He feasteth thee with the most costly, and most sumptuous banket that can be imagi∣ned; his owne most pretious body and blood, his divini∣tie, and humanitie, his merits, and example, and spared not his owne life, and labour to provide it for thee. O that we could heare the Musick vvhich the Angels
make at this feast, and behold their dauncing, or their reverend behaviour!S. Ihon Chrisost. For that at which the Angels tremble and dare not freely behold, in regard of the splen∣dour which darts forth of it, on that we feed, to that we are vnited, and made one body, and one flesh with Christ, let vs make at least what musick we can; combining di∣vers acts of vertue to intertayne him; say with the Pub∣lican, and with his humble comportment; O God be mer∣cyfull to me a synner: say with the prodigall child; I am not worthy:Ps. . 106 say with the Psalmist I have sworne and resolved to keepe the judgments of thy justice: Say with holy Church: O sacrum convivium in quo Christus sumitur. II. The elder Brother to the prodigall hearing of the feast, would not go in, till his Father came out, and de∣sired him. The Fathers desire must prevayle with vs more then the example of the elder brother;S. Grill. and incourage vs, not easyly to abstaine from this banket. If we desire e∣ternall life, let vs willingly runne to receive this blessing: and beware that the enimie, to hinder vs, lay not before vs, as a snare, some hurtfull scrupulositie. It is written, sayth he, that he that vnwortyhly eareth of this bread, eateth judgmēt to himself: and I trying myself, find myself vnworthy. When therfore shalt thou be worthy? When wilt thou present thyself to thy Saviour (For if by synning thou be vnworthy; and doest not leave to synne (for ac∣cording to the Psalmist, who vnderstands his transgres∣sions? Thou wilt be wholy deprived of this life-giving Sanctisication. Wherfore I beseech the intertayne better thoughts; live vertuously and holily, and partake of this blessing, which (beleeve me) is a remedie not only a∣gainst death, but against all diseases. For Christ our Sa∣viour remayning in vs doth asswage the raging law of Concupiscence, strengtheneth devotion, quayleth the inordinate motions of our minde. III. Lazarus, though never so full of sores, lying at this rich mans gate, will not be refused the croms that fall from this table, begging them with true feeling of his povertie and want, and true desire of being relieved: what are these croms?Io. 6. 50. 59. The promise of neverdying. He that eateth this bread shall not dye, but live for ever. The hope of eternitie; The remayning in Christ and Christ in him; a more intimate participation of his merits; a more constant
separation from the wicked world, and a glorious resur∣rection. What is the bosome of Abrahā to the rest which we may finde in our Saviour, when we have him in out bosome? Would to God by thy presence thou would dest wholy inflame me,Thomas a Kempis l. 4 . 16 n. 3 and change me into thyself, that I may be one spirit with thee. Our Saviour perswads perfection. I. ANd behold one came, and sayed to him; Good master, what good shall I doe, that I may have life everlas∣ting? who sayth to him,E ecce vnus ac∣cedens at illi. &c. what askest thou me of good▪ One is good, God: but if thou wilt enter into life, keepe the com∣mandments. He sayed to him; which? And Iesus sayed: thou shalt not murder;Matth. 19. 16 thou shalt not commit Adulterey; thou shalt not steale; &c. The youngman sayeth to him, all these have I kept from my youth; what is yet wanting vnto me? First he did not reflect that perseverance was yet wanting, which no body can promise himself; but must be continually indeaou∣ring to it, and praying for it, as a gift above all gifts. Se∣condly, he did not perhaps sufficiently reflect from who∣me he had received so much grace as to have kept all the commandments, from his youth, nor did esteeme of that benefit as he ought. Thirdly in our Saviours answer, that only God is good; we may find, both the humilitie of our Saviour, referring all the goodnes, which was re∣markable in him to his heavenly Father, without staying his thougs in himself, though he were equally good. An instruction for ourselves, that all good comes from God, all vertue, all observance; all possibilitie of entring vnto life. Adore him, and extoll his goodnes▪ and begge of him, so much participation of it as he shall please to communicate to thee. II. Isus sayed to him; If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell the things which thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shal have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me, and when the yongman heard this word, he went away sad, for he had many possessions. Perfection consisteth in that coniunction with God which we may attayne vnto in this life, that is, in Charitie, and the love of God; to which perfection all are bound in some degree, so that at least, they never preferre my thing in thought, word, or deed, before the love of God, and observance of his commandments; and to this
perfection it seemes this yong man conceived that he had arrived. But our Saviour shewed him that there was a hi∣gher degree, or a more advantagious way to increase per∣fection, and the love of God, then he had hitherto thou∣ght on. If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell all, &c. Greate things (sayth S. Hierome)S. Hierom are allwayes left to the will, and free choyce of the hearers:S. August. they are not commāded, but coun∣selled. The yong man, when he asked what good shall I doe? Did desire eternall life; God was desirous to give it him in perfection, but he found his hands full; God was ready to give, and found not where to place his gift, Go, and sell, and give to the poore: place those things in heaven, which here on earth doe hinder thee: of what art thou af∣fraid? Thou shalt not leese them: they will be reser∣ved for thee in heaven: Thou art affraid to leese thy mo∣ney, and doest thou not feare least thyself perish? III. And Iesus sayed to his disciples; Amen, I say to you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdome of heaven▪ It is easyer for a Camell (or a cable rope) to passe through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdome of hea∣ven. And when they heard this, the disciples marvelled very much saying, who thē cā be saved? And Iesus sayed to thē, with mē this is impossible, but with God all things are possible: This saying of truth itself is much be to weighed; he doth not say a rich man shall not enter, though he retaynes his riches; but he sayth he shall hardly enter: and in the other Evan∣gelists he expresseth it by way of admiration, How hardly shall they enter who have mony? Esteeming it a miraculous thing, and above the course of ordinarie gra∣ce, without extraordinarie helps. To which purpose, S. AmbroseS. Ambro. sayth, whosoever is puffed vp with honour, inlarged by his treasures of gold, like a beast loden and hampered, will not be able to passe through the narrow way of the Kingdome of heaven. Yet the advise which S. AugustinS. August gives is greately to be taken heed to: that whoever can glorie of povertie must beware of pride, least the humble rich men go before them; and beware of floth; and want of devotion, least the devout rich men be perferred; and take heed of intemperance, least the sober go beyond them: what avayleth povertie, if thou follow not Christ.
The reward of loving all to follow Christ: I. THen Peeter answering sayed to him.Tunc res∣pondens Petrus di∣xit ei Behold we have left all things, and followed thee; what therfore shall we have? And Iesus sayed to them, Amen I say to you, that you who have followed me, in the regeneration,Matth 19 27 when the Sonne of man shall sit in the seate of his majestie, you also shall sit vpon twelve seates, iudging the twelue tribes of Israel. S. Peeter representing to our Saviour that he, and the rest of the Apostles had done that hard thing, of which the rich yong man was afraide, and sad when it was mo∣ved to him, our Saviour did not check him, nor say: thou hast forgotten thy povertie; what is that which thou hast left,S. August in comparison of the whole world, which v∣pon my promise thou art to receive? He leaveth much, who leaves not only what he hath but whatever he might desire to have: for what poore snake doth not swell with the hope which he hath in this world? Who is there that doth not dayly desire to increase that which he hath? This desire, this greedines is here taken away. S. Peeter did also well observe that it was not enough to leave all vnlesse he followed our Saviours vertues and doctrine, neither can he indeed be truly sayed to leave all, who retaynes so much of sense, and self-love, as to draw back from the perfect performance of whatever vertue he is inspired vnto; for though he leaveth all which he had without, he leaveth not that which is with in him∣self, and which is of more importance and more deare into vs, then whatever, we have without vs. II. The answer of our Saviour doth import, that for our leaving all we must not looke for reward in this world but take thankfully whatever doth happen, ād reserve our hopes to the regeneration, that is, to the next world, when rising glorious we shall be regenerated into immortalitie; here we must looke for labour▪ there for reward; and however, though it were reward enough to follow our saviour, and to receive so much grace as perfectly to love him; yet he promiseth, for the honour, which we might in this world by our wealth and possessions, much ore honour in the world to come; and so much as to seated by him; not as people who are to give ac∣count of their actions, and how they have imployed
the goods, which were lent them but as iudges of others actions and pioceedings: VVhat can be more glorious? (sayth S. Bernard)S. Bernard let the sonnes of Pride now iudge▪ and censure at their pleasure; let them sit with their kings; that king, who choose to himself, the northen quarter; let them be exalted as the cedars of Libanus▪ we shall passe to out throne, when they shall not be regarded. III. And every one that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or Father, or Mother, or wife, or Children, or lands for my na∣me-sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall possesse life everlasting Here be promiseth not only a reward in the other life,Luc. 18 6 but also in this life, as it is expressely in S. Luke; which temporall reward, though it be not to be looked for, yet our Saviour out of his superabundant liberalitie, promiseth it, and performeth it partly by the inward con∣tent, and quiet, which those find, who have left all for him; and by the facilitie with which they performe the ac∣tes of vertue; which deservedly is valved above an hun∣dred fold of temporales: partly also he performeth his promise by providing, so as seldome, or never they want any thing, who left all for him; but have within themsel∣ves all the comfort of assistance, which either father, or mother, or brother or sister, or frend, or land could have affoorded them in the world. And in the meane time, from whence-soever this hundred fold doth arise, so it be an hundred fold▪S. Bernard so it be worth an hundred, so it please, comfort, delight, and be to be beloved an hundred times more then other things, what madnes is it, that men are so slow in leaving a single thing for an hundred fold where is the covetous? what is become of the ambitious VVhere are those who trafficke in this world? Doth not he in vayne doe evill who might more advantagiously and more plesantly serve God then serve the world? Workemen hired into the Vineyard. I. THe Kingdome of heaven is like a house holder, who forth early in the morning to hire workemen into his vneyard,Simile est regnum Celorum Patri Fa∣milias &c and having covenanted with the workemen for penny a day, be sent them into his vineyard.. And going forth a∣bout the third houre, he saw others standing in the market pla idle, and he sayed to them,Matth. 20 go you also into the vineyard, and
what shall be iust, I will give you. And againe he wēt forth about the sixt, ād the ninth houre, and did likewise. And about the ele∣venth houre he wēt forth, and found others stāding, and he sayth to them, what stand you here all the day idle? They say to him, because no body hath hired vs: He sayth to them, go you also into the vineyard. The vineyard is the Church, and every ons soule; the market place, is the world, the workemen the Apostles, ād Apostolicall mē, ād every one is worke∣mā to his owne vineyard: wages is promised to the first, the second, and third; to the last nothing is promised, but yet if then they do their worke, God will not be behind hand with them. For any man to say he is not hired, is an excuse of the idle. God is the greate householder, who frō the beginning of the world to the ēd therof; doth not cease, to hire vs to doe his worke, which is ours also, for ours is the benefit, if we performe it, though however his is the glorie of it. VVe have reason to acknowledge his goodnes, who in all ages doth admonish vs of our du∣tie, and is not fayling to send helps to instruct vs, and to set the worke forward; and seeketh our good to the last period of our dayes. II. When the evening was come, the Lord of the vineyard sayd to his Baylie; call the workemen, and pay them their hire, beginning from the last to the first. Therfore when they were come who came about the eleventh houre, they received every one a pen∣ny. But when the first also came, they thought that they should re∣ceive more, and they also received every one a penny: and recei∣ving it, they murmured against the goodman of the house, saying The last have continued one houre, and thou hast made them equall to vs, who have borne the burden of the day, and the heates. This largesse seemed to these men iniust;S. Ambr. but what ans∣wer did they receive; VVhat instruction was given them? The iustice of this distribution was not revealed to them, neither were they admitted to view the hidden secret; but to the end that they should refrayne from scanning Gods iudgements, the goodnes of the mercy-full house∣holder, and the power of him that ordayneth all things, according to his will, was layed before them, as if that of the Apostle had been sayed vnto them; Who art thou that thou doest answer God.Rom. 9 10 III. He answering, sayed to one of them; frend, I doe
thee no wrong; didst not thou covenant with me for a pen∣ny? Take that is thyne, and go: I will also give to this last even as to thee: Or is it not lawfull for me to doe what I will? Or is thy eye naught because I am good? So shall the last be first, ād the first last. for many be called, but few elect. The penny pro∣mised to all is life everlasting, which is cōmon to all that shall be saved: yet in the same life there be degrees of glo∣rie, as betwixt starre and starre in the firmament. If ther∣fore we be admitted to life everlasting,1 Cor 15 41 vve can have no wrong, it being above any thing we can deserve; and they who came later may have equaled the longer time of the former by their fervour, and surpassed it: we are not good iudges in our owne case, it must be left to him who can∣not be vniust: Our eye cannot arrive to comprehend, neither what in goodnes, nor what in justice God may doe. If we will keepe him our frend; let vs not be over curious, but apply ourselves to our vvorke, and for the rest stand to his mercy,S, August which is infinite. Many are called. Take heed thou differre not to come, because thou art assured to receive thy penny, when ever thou comest: say not to thyself; He vvill give every one as much, wherfore should I take more paynes? VVhat he will give, and what he will doe, is locked vp in his owne breast: Come whē thou are called. Equall hire is promised all, but about the houre of working their is greate question. Yong men may say we will come at the elevēth houre; but no body hath promised thee that thou shalt live till the seventh: see that thou doest not by differring bereave thyself of that which he otherwise vpon his promise would give thee. Few indeed are choosen: but those are of the elect, who not despising their caller, follow him; ād beleeve him for men beleeve not, but of their owne free choyce. The raysing of Lazarus. I. PART. 1. THere was a certaine sickman, Lazarus, of Bethania, of the towne of Marie,Erat qui∣dam languens La∣zarus a Bethania &c Io 11 and Martha her sister. His sisters therfore sent, saying, Lord behold; He whome thou lo∣vest is sick: and Iesus hearing sayed to them: This sicknes is not to death, but for the glorie of God, that the Sonne of God may be glo∣risied
by it. And Iesus loved Martha ād Marie ad Lazarus; As he heard therfore that he was sick, he taried in the same place 2. dayes. The faithfull are diversly tried;S Ambro some by losse of frends, others by losse of goods, and severall other vex∣ations: would to God I could see my flesh infirme and weakened; that I lived not in flesh, but in the faith of Christ: for greater oftimes▪ is grace in infirmitie, then in health. Sicknes, and death are no signes of lesse love: but as the sicknes was not to death, because death itself was not to death, but for the glorie of God, so our infirmi∣ties are more for the glorie of God, then our weake nature will give vs leave to imagin: and when God de∣layeth the restoring vs to health, we are so much the more to conforme ourselves, by how much we acknow∣ledge that his wisedome is greater,Ap 3 19 and his love by tax∣ying nothing the lesse; I whom I love, doe rebuke and castise: sayth our Saviour in the Apocalips. II. Then he sayth to his disciples, let vs go into Iewrie a∣gaine: the disciples say to him: Now the Iewes sought to stone thee, and goest thon thither againe? Iesus answered, are not their twelve houres of the day? If a man walke in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of the world: but if he walke in the night, he stumbleth, because the light is not in him: See the love of our Saviour: for our good he doth not stick to venture his life, and in structeth his fol∣lowers, to confide in God, who is the true light of the world, and walking vnder his protection, even that which others may think amisse cannot be to vs amisse; for to them that love God,Rom 8 28 all things cooperate to good. God go∣vernes the houres of the day, and every thing that happēs in them; vpon this his providence, having allwayes our eye, we shall not stumble. They who consider not this, as they ought, doe ever walke in darknes and are diversly perplexed, according to the diversitie of accidents, which must needs befall thē in this world, which is all in chāges. III. After this he sayth to them, Lazarus our frend sleepeth, but I go that I may rayse him frō sleepe. His disciples sayed, Lord if he sleepe, he shall be safe: but Iesus spake of his death: thē therfore he sayed playnely to them. Lazarus is dead: And I am glad for your sake, that you may beleeve, because I was not there, but let vs go to him. Thomas sayed to his cōdiiples; let vs go also ād die with him
first father Adam brought death vpon vs;S. Ihon Chrysost. Christ our Sa∣viour coming into this world tooke away even the name of death. A blessed sleepe which brings vs rest and quiet▪ of which the psalmist sayth; Pretious in the sight of our Lord is the death of his saints.Ps. 115 Consider the difference betwixt the iust and vniust: To the vniust death is eternall, be∣cause though they rise againe, it is not to life, but to a new and vvorse death: the death of the iust is properly a sleepe; because they rise refreshed, and to a better life, then be∣fore they slept; thus we shall sleepe, if vve be his frends. Lazarus our frend sleepeth: here by contemplation and love there by cleare vision and imbracings: here vve must not think, that our sleepe is to be continuall; it is his vvill that vve be raysed from it at convenient times for his glorie in other respects: he comes to rayse vs, vvhen the course of our vocation calls vs to other duties; the vvhich we must obey readily,Cant. 5. 2. and lovingly, knowing that it is the voyce of our beloved that calleth vs. if thus we sleepe we are safe. And if vve be vvholy dead to the world, we have the more rea∣son to be glad, because we shall find that to be true, which vve beleeved; and that Christ will not forsake vs, being imitatours of his death. Blessed is he that can with harty and effectuall desire say, let vs go and die with him. The raysing of Lazarus. II. PART.. I. IEsus therfore same, and found him now having been foure dayes in the grave. And many of the Iewes were come to Martha and Marie, to confort them, concerning their bro∣ther. Martha therfore when she heard, that Iesus was come, went to meet him; but Marie sat at home. It is a mysticall senee of holy Fathers that Iesus when he came into this world, found mankind, four thousand yeares bryed in the stinking grave of synne, and there lying without sense of feeling of that which might concerne the soule, and vvithout motion towards it. Blesse our Saviour, that at last, for the glorie of God, ād to the end vve should more palpably see the necessitie, and vertue of grace, he came himself to rayse vs. S. AugustinS. August more over sayth that; the first day of our buriall in synne, is vvhen vve first consent; the second, when by not repenting quickly, we come to
have an itching desire to commit it againe, and againe, and take pleasure in it; the third day; when we grow into custome; the forth day, when custome brings vpon vs a kind of necessitie of doing ill, and it seemes vnto vs that vve cannot avoyde it.Thomas a Kempis l.  c. 13 n. 5 VVe must watch chiefly towards the beginning of temptations; for then out enemie is more easyly overcome. VVe may find many that vvill go about to comfort vs, not taking the right way; but vve must harken out Iesus, and make hast with Martha to meete him; for in him alone is our redresse. II. Martha sayed to Iesus, Lord if thou hadst been here, my brother had not dyed. But now also I know that what things that shalt aske of God, God will give thee. Iesus sayed to her, Thy Brother shall rise againe. Martha sayth to him, I know he shall rise in the resurrection in the last day; Iesus sayeth to her: I am the resurrection and life, he that beleeveth in me, though he be dead shall live: and every one that liveth, and beleeveth in me shall not die for ever. Beleevest thou this? She sayth to him; yea Lord, I have beleaved that thou art Christ the sonne of God, that art come into the world?Thomas  Kempis l. 2 c. 8 n. 2 If Iesus be with thee, no ene∣mie can hurt thee. Our chiefe care must be not to loose him yet if we doe chance to loose him, we know that he is mercyfull,Ezech 33. 11 and will not the death of a synner, but that he live, by repētāce returning againe vnto him. VVe shall all rise a∣gaine in the last day, but in the dayes of this life vve must labour the more that by good works;2 Pe. 1 1 we may make sure our voca∣tion, and election. He is the sourse and means to life and re∣surrection; every one that beleeveth in him, and liveth ac∣cordingly, though he dye in body, shall live happily, here by grace, there by glorie. This vve beleeve, because he him∣self the sonne of God, hath taught it vs. III. Having sayed these things, she went, and called Marie her syster secretly saying, the master is come, and calleth thee; she, when she heard, riseth quickly, and cometh to him. The le∣wes who were with her, when they saw her rise quickly, and go forth, followed her, saying, that she goeth to the grave, to weepe there. Marie when she was come where Iesus was, seeing him fell at his feete, and sayed to him, Lord if thou hadst been here my brother had not dyed. Marke the expressions of love towards our Saviour; he rose quickly and came as sudainly; she fell at his feete, where first she had received pardon, and loving
intertaynment; she expresseth her beleefe and confidence, that if he had been present he vvould have eased her of that crosse: Yet neither she nor her syster doe require of him, that he vvould rayse their brother to life; either es∣teeming it too greate a request, or thinking that it might best as it vvas; or that if he thought it better, he would have compassion of their very teares without other ex∣pression: In fine however it should happen, it was a com∣fort above all comforts to have him present; vvhich thou must indeavour to make also thy comfort,Thomas a Kempis l. 2 . 8. n. 2. and say. what can the whole world affoord me, vvithout Iesus. The raysing of Lazarus. III PART. I. IEsus therfore when he saw her weeping, and the Iews, who were come with her, weeping, he groned in spirit, and trobled himself, and sayed, where have you layed him? They say to him Lord, come and see. And Iesus wept. The Ie∣wes therfore sayed, behold, how he loved him. But certay∣ne of them sayed, could not he that opened the eyes of the blind man, make that this man should not dye. Observe that teares doe move our Saviour to compassion: we shall not want them, if vve seriously consider, where our soules are layed, and are like to be layed by synne. Come often, and see: most men miscary, because they doe not attend to this; thou∣ghts of the vvorld carry their minds another way, and in the meane time they fall into the lapse and heed it not. How grievous a thing must synne needs be, which caused our Saviour himself to grone and weepe? And not only to vveepe, but to sweate drops of blood, and yeald a whole floud of it from his sacred syde to vvash vs from it? And how greate a token is it that he loved vs, seeing he would vndertake so hard a taske for vs? He could have made that we should not synne at all. But in this vve must submit to his infinite wisedome, who thought it more reason that we should be left to our choyce, that by striving to doe well and overcoming our contrarie inclinations, our reward might be the greater after the victorie. II. Iesus againe groning in himself, sayth: Take away the
stone: Martha sayed to him: Lord▪ now he stinketh, for he is of foue dayes. Iesus sayed to her: did I not say to thee, that if thou beleeve, thou shalt see the glorie of God. They tooke ther∣fore the stone away The very loathsomnes of our synn is too too oft a hindrance of our remedie: we are loth to discover them, we are loth others should know how im∣perfect vve ae or have been; Yet the only remedie is to discover them to those who have power to rayse vs: It is to corrupt nature a hard and heavy stone, yet it must be removed,S Ambro, before vve can come to life. If thou accuse thyself, though thou be dead, thou vvilt revive; he desi∣es to see by this, whether thou be indeed dead to synne. Beleeve this. and thou shalt see the glorie of God. III. And Iesus lifing vp his eyes, sayed, Father, I give thee thanks that thou hast heard me; And I did know that thou doest allwayes heare me, but for the people have I sayed it, that they may beleeve that thou hast sent me, when he had sayd this, he cryed out with a lowde voyce, Lazarus come forth, and fortwith he that had been dead ca∣me forth, bound feete and hands, with winding bands, and his face was tyed with a napkin. Iesus sayed to them, loose him, and let him go. Synne, whē it is growne into custome binds vs, hand, and foote, and fae, that we can neither see our owne heavy case, nor move of ourselves towards any thing that conduceth to our good. God doth thunder out his iudgements with a lowde voyce, to move vs to come forth: He could have bidden those vvho were nigh to take he body of Lazarus forth of the grave, but to signifie that we must cooperate to our owne rising from synne, he cryeth out to him to come forth. VVhat doest thou lye in the darkenes of thy conscience, (sayth S. Ambrose)S. Ambro▪ and in the filth of thy synne, as in a prison of malefactours? Come forth: Confesse thy synne, that thou may be iustified. By true confession thou wilt be loosed, and let go, otherwise thou vvilt remaine still bound. Glorifie God that hath be∣stowed this benefit vpon thee, and bevvare for hereafter. The thirteenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. IF at any time perfection be to be desired, most
of all vvhen vve are to aproch to the most blssed Sacra∣ment; for so it is written.1 Pe. 116 Be you holy, because I am holy; and though it be not necessarie, for the perfect receiving of our Saviour in the Sacrament, to sell all that we have, and give to the poore: it is sitting not withstanding, that vve should for some convenient time lay aside all worldly busines; and retire our thoughts vvholy to the due entertaynment of this Guest, vvho made himself poore for our sake, and here desires a lodging in our breast: The Almes which he most destreth is our hart; (though remporall almes be also a good preparation) vvhich vve must give him, not with sadne,2 Cor. 97 as the yong man; nor so much only, as of necessitie vve must give, or els not be his at all, but vve must give it freely and cheerfully: For God loveth a cheerfull giver: such as S. Peter professed himself to be when he sayed; Behold we have left all, and followed thee, what therfore shall we have? And what answer can we expect from him, Who is able to make all grace abound in vs, but that if we sow in blessing, in blessing also we shall reape, for he is not closhanded: Beold his sacred wounds, and how out of them he is ready to distill vpon thee an hundred fold for one:Thomas a Kēpis l. 4 c. 15 n. 4 Behold, so shall he be blessed, who seeketh God with his whole hart. II. It is not enough to leave all, we must follow him, that is, imitate his vertues. VVhat be the vertues, which here in this Sacrament he doth practise to the end of the world for our sake? Humilitie, in laying a side his glorie and co∣ming to vs in this humble and tractable disguise: Second∣ly, patince, in bearing with many indignities offered by such as receive him, either with little respect or vnwor∣thily. Thirdly, Charitie in affoording himself to all, rich and poore, sick and whole, that he may gaine all. Fourthly, Liberalitie, not contenting himself with what he had done and suffered for vs, while he lived openly vpon earth; but continually renewing the same sacrifice, and affoording vs the same supercelestiall food of life and fountaine of all graces:Matt. vlt. Thomas a Kempis l. 3 c. 57 Perseverance to the end of the world accor∣ding to what he sayed before his Ascension. Behold I am with you every day to the end of the world. Sonne patience, and humilitie in adversitie doth please me more then much comfort and devotion in prosperitie. III. O most sweete and most loving Lord, whome
now I desire devoutly to receive,Thomas a Kempis l. 4 c. 15 n. 4. thou kowest my infir∣mitie, and in how many evills I lye vvallowing Behold whome thou lovest is infirme. And though (as I hope) thi infirmitie is not to death, yet so long as it hangs vpon me I am straightened having a desire to be freed from it as a thing (toPhil. . 23 my thinking) much more better: But I must refere myself to thee, vvho doest best know, what is for thy glorie; for I remember thou didst say to thy Apostle, My grace sufficeth thee;2 Cor. 12 9 for power is prefected in infirmitie, that is, thy power is more illustrious by the infirmitie of our flesh, whilst thou preservest vs that vve may not fall. I can not say to thee, Lord if thou hadst been here, my soule had not dyed: but thou mayest truly, and with shame enough to me, say, sonne, if thou hadst been with me, thou hadst not dyed. For thou art ever present, and ready to refresh me, but I, even when I come to receive thee, where am I? VVherfore doe I not prepare myself to receive these thy holy myste∣ries with more care and diligence? VVherfore doe I so ea∣syly go from thee after receiving, making so little diffe∣rence betwixt this holy table,1 Cor.  30 and other meates? Therfore there be among vs many weake, and feeble, and many sleepe. O sweete spous! let thy voice sound lowde in my eares,Cant. 2 1 that I may rise from this dulnes, and shake of the bonds which hin∣der me from walking to thee; as I ought; and from behol∣ding thy face, and thy greate love, and goodnes in this most blessed mysterie: rise quickly and fall at his feet, with the Magdalen, and poure forth teares of love and sorrow, according as his goodnes, and thy backwardnes doe de∣serve. Christ foretelleth his Passion. I. ANd they were in the way going up to Hierusalem,Erant au∣tem in yi ascende∣ces Hiero∣solymam. and Iesus went before the, and they were astonished, and following were afrayd; and taking againe the twelve, he began againe to tell them the things that should be fall him. The Apostles were afrayd,Matt. 20 17 because they knew the malice of the Iewes against or Saviour; vpon which account they sayed a little before.Matth. 10 32 Io. 11. Master even now the Iewes did seeke to stone thee, and goest thou againe thither? They were astonished to see vvith that speed, and alacritie our Saviour not∣vvithstanding made hast to Hierusalem, vvhere he vvas
most maliced: and to add to their astonishment he began to discourse with them of his sufferings: And certainly he that could foretell what vvas to happen to him, could have prevented it, if he would; but it is an evident signe that he was willing to suffer, seeing he so willingly went to the place, where he knew he was to suffer, and by it he would shew vs, that our way to the heavenly Hierusa∣lem, is by suffering, which we must also in deavour to im∣brace with alacritie. II. Behold, we go vp to Hierusalem, and the sonne of man shall be delivered to the chiefe Priests, and to the Scribes; and they shall condemne him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gen∣tills to be mocked, and scourged, and crucified, and the third day he shall rise againe.Chrysol He did not content himself with ordinarie sufferings, or vvith a private death; the creatour of the world vvould die in sight of the world; that as his patience was singular, so might be his sufferings. He tells them before hand of it, and of his resurrection vvithall, that they might not thinke that those things came vpon him at vnawares, as vpon others, or that by suffering he vvere vtterly destroyed; but continue their beleefe in him, seeing the prediction and event to agree, and his divine power much more evident by his resurrection after so cruell a death, then by all the former miracles vvhich he had wrought. So in all our distresses, he leaveth vs not vvithout speciall comfort, if we attend to his Words: and in no particular shall we suffer, in vvhich we shall not be particularly rewarded; if mocked, we shall be honoured; if scourged, and crucified, vve shall be not only eased of all paine, eternally freed, but shall have particular refresh∣ment, and content proportionable to our sufferings. III. And they vnderstood none of these things, and this word was hid from them, and they vnderstood not the things which were sayed. The Apostles first, beleeved he was God, and could not comprehend how being God, so innocent, and so powerfull, he could come to suffer. Secondly, they had seen by experience that when he vvould, he de∣clined the furie of the Iewes vvith greate facilitie, and ho∣ped he vvould allwayes doe so. Thirdly, Nature shrin∣king at the very name of suffering, they could not con∣ceive, how he should willingly put himself into their hands, who hated him, and sought his distruction. Fourt∣ly,
the love which they bore our Saviour made them the more vnwilling to hare of his sufferings, and lesse capable to vnderstand the reason of it. But our Saviours thoughts and ours are so different that the evangelicall Prophet sayth of them.s. 55. 9 As the heavens are exalted abov the earth, so my wayes are exalted above yours, ad my thoughts above your thoughts▪ And we may justly here bewayle or miserie, that beleeving as we doe, we are notwithstan∣ding so little capable of vnderstanding the benefit of suf∣fering, and so little pliable to it. Hard to many doth this speech seeme:Thomas  Kempis l. 2. 2. 12 dny thyself, and take vp thy Crosse, and follow Iesus: But it will be much harder to heare that last word. Go from me, you accursed into everlasting fire. They who now doe willingly heare, and follow the word of the crosse will not then feare. The Sōnes of Zebedee demand the first places. THē came to him the Mother of the sōnes of Zebede adoringTunc accessit ad um mate Filiorum Zebedaei▪ ad desiring some thing of him: who sayed to her, what wilt thou? she sayed to him; say that these my two sonnes, may sit one at thy right hand, and one at thy left hand in thy Kingdome. By this we see,Matth. 20 how little the Apostles did relish suffering mentioned immediately before by our Saviour, they drea∣me of a worldly Kingdome, and desire promotiō in it, est∣eeming it some thing: wheras it little deserves so much as to be called some thing: but they with their Mother were loth at first to opon their request, fearing the issue, and therfore they spake in generall tearmes, as if our Saviour knew not their thoughts; ād she adored him, according to the custōe of pretēders Se did not apprehēde what it mi∣ght signify to be vpō the left hād of our Saviour,Mat▪ 25.  acording to that passage; he shall set the sheepe at his right hand, and the goats at his left. Rayse thy thoughts to higher preten∣ses, that thou mayest be sure to be seated at his right hand, and heare, com ye blessed. II. Iesus answering sayed; you know not what you desire▪ Can you drink the cup that I shall drink of? Thy say to him, we can: He sayth to them, my cup indeed you shall drink of, but to sit at my right hand and left, is not mine to give ou, but to whome it is prepared by my Father. First, they new not what they asked, because they asked temporall lorie, and our Saviour ever spake of the eternall. Second∣ly, even of temporall glorie, and preferment they knew
not what they asked, because they considered not the dā∣ger, and troble, both to body, and soule, and the vncer∣taintie, and ficklenes of it, and all that vexation which accompanieth it. VVhen our Saviour put them in mind of the cup which he was to drink, before he entred into his glorie: and consequently every one, who will be of his disciples, the desire which they had of preferment, made thē boldly say; they could. But how able they were in rea∣litie it soone appeared in his passion, when they with the rest fled, and durst not in a long time appeare for feare of the Iewes, least they should be put to the like sufferings, or affronts▪ But in fine remayning his disciples they were to suffet, and vpon that account, they might deserve to sit at his right hand, but it was not our Saviours cōmission or intent, to give thē that seate vpon favour, or otherwise, with our deserving it, according to the diuine ordinatio. III. And the ten hearing it were displeased at the two breth∣ren; and Iesus calleth them to him, and sayth, you know that the Princes of the Gentis over rule them, and they who are the greater, exercise power against them, it shall not be so among you, but whoever will be the greater among you, let him be your minister; and h that will be first among you shall be your servant. Even as the Sonne of man is not come to be minis∣tred vnto, but to minister, and to give his life a redempion for many. A powerfull example for all to imitate, and to le∣arne by it to think nothing meane, nothing hard, that is done in the house of God, and to the meanest of his ser∣vants, or to whomesoever for his sake. The very dominee∣ring spirit of secular commanders were motive enough, to hate it, and not to desire to be in the occasion, least we should be debauched by it: and what slaverie doe people oftimes suffer, vnder them? Looke vpon soldiers, looke vpon tenāts, looke generally vpon all servāts in the world: what doe not they vndergoe for a bit of bread, or for I know not what hope of fickle preferment, and oftimes misse of it? The reward of the servāts of God is certaine. The blind man neere Iericho. IT came to passe,Factumest autē cum appropin∣quaret I∣richo Lu 18 3 when he drew nigh to ericho, a cer∣taine blind man sat by the way, begging; and hearing the multitude passing by, he asked what that should
And they told him, that Iesus of Nazareth passed by: Accor∣ding to S. Gregorie, they who beleeve not in our Savi∣our, are the blind mēand with reason they are called so,S. Gregor in regard of the many errours to which they are subiect, and see them not; and not enioying the light of heaven▪ no wonder if they continually stumble, and fall most mi∣serably, full of all iniquitie,Rom. 129 as the Apostle specifies to the Romans They who beleeve are in the way of salvation; but if beleeving they doe not pray they forget they are beggers; and no wonder then if they find not reliefe. Our Saviour passed by vs (sayth S. AugustineS. August) when he was borne, when he preached, when he suffered, and dyed for vs. The multitude of good workes and miracles which he did; the manifold documents and examples which he gave vs must make vs harken after him, both be∣cause he is our only redeemer,Thomas  Kempis l.  c. 25 n. 6. and the only way by which we must come to eternall life; and also because in himself he is all goodnes. O that Christ crucified would come into our heart. How soone and how sufficiently should we be instructed? II. And he cryed saying, Iesus sonne of David, have mer∣yon me. And they who went before rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: But be cryed much more, sonne of David, have mercy vpon me. He was not yet so much inlightened, as to beleeve him to be the sonne of God, yet so farre as he knew he honoured him; more then the proud Pharisees, who would not acknowledge in him any further worth then to be sonne of a carpenter. They who went before our Saviour,Mat. 13 5 and rebuked him, for calling vpon him, signifie our disordered desires, and tumultuous imper∣fections, and vices which will not follow, nor obey what our Saviour orders, but will themselves be masters, and over-rule vs. But we must cry our the more, and the lowder for mercy and help. They have rounded me (sayth the Psalmist) like so many bees to sting me, and have made a myse as the fire among thornes, that my cry should not be heard, but our Lord is my strength, and my salvation, to him I will have the more recourse. III. And Iesus standing▪ commanded him to be brought vnto him and when he was come neere, he asked him, what wilt thou that I to thee? He sayed, Lord, that I may see, And Iesus sayed vnto
him; doe thou see: Thy faith hath made thee whole. And forth∣with, he saw and followed him magnifying God. And a the people, as they saw it, gave prayse to God. God is more compassionate then men; he heareth our prayers, and bea∣reth with our infirmities when they will not; and in this we must imitate him, and disdaine no man, be he never so poore or wretched. He asked the blind; what wilt thou that I doe to thee? VVhē every one might easyly reflect what he would have; but our Saviour doth shew by this, that though he knowes our necessities and desires, he will ha∣ve vs manifest them ourselves, and repeate them over a∣gaine and againe to him; ād multiplie our petition, that we may shew, that we know our owne necessities; for he that ceaseth to pray, ceaseth to esteeme himself needy whervpō our Saviour, by the parable of the iudge, taught vs that it behooveth allwayes to pray,Lu. 18.  and not to be weary But S. Bernard vpon this passage maketh another reflection, both vpon the mercy of our Lord,S. Bernard vouchsafing to aske what his ser∣vant will have him to doe to him; and vpon the blindnes of the mā, who should have rather answered. Lord fare be that from me, say thou rather, what thou wilt have me doe, for so it behooveth me; so it becometh thee. Zacheus receiveth our Saviour into his house. I.t ingres∣sus peram∣bulabat Iericho. Luc. 99. ANd entring in, he walked through Iericho, and behold a man called Zaccheus, Prince of the Public ās ād rich, sought to see Iesus, who he was, and he could not for the multitude, because he was little of stature: and running before he went vp into a sycomore tree; becase he was to passe by it. The same of our Saviours workes, and of the sublimitie of his doctrine spread it self farre and neere; yet can we not arrive to vnderstand the thousand part of what he was, and is;Io. 21▪ 25 we are too litle of stature. S. Ihon in the conclusi∣on of his Ghospell sayth, There are many other thinghs also which Iesus did, which if they were written in particular, nei∣ther the world it self, I think; were able to containe the bookes that should be written. No body can easyly see Iesus (sayth S. AmbroseS. Ambro.) remaining on earth. The sycomore tree (ac∣cording to S. GregorieS▪ Gregor. and S. Bede. Bed) signifies the wisedo∣me of saints, and the crosse of Christ; which our world es∣teemes folly; as to suffer patiently the losse of our goods, and not to looke greedely after them; not to revenge an iniury, but to be ready to beare such another wrong wh
it comes; by imbracing this doctrine we come to discover the wisedome of God, as it passeth by in this life, and there is no other way: by imbracing the crosse we come to be aboue the ordinary strayne of people, not encombred with so many secular cares, not kept vnder by so many vi∣ces and imperfections▪S. Augusti from these we must strive to runne, that we may get ground, before they take hold of vs. The proude multitude, the multitude which glorieth and re∣ioyceth, when it can revenge itself, doth hinder from see∣ing him, who from the Crosse prayed. Father forgive them because they know not what they doe. II. And when he came to the place, Iesus looking vp, saw him, and sayed to him, Zaccheus, come downe quickly, because this day I must abide in thy house:S. August and making hast, he came downe; and received him reioycing. That we might see, we were looked vpon;V. Bde that we might love, we were first be∣loved. And yet that is true also which S. Bede sayth; Ie∣sus saw the man that saw him, and choose him, and loved the man that loved him. For both must go hand in hand, the grace of God preventing vs: and our Correspondence, and cooperation with it. Therfore our Saviour sayth, co∣me donne quickly, because instantly we must close with the grace offered, that we may receive favour vnexpected: Za∣cheus esteemed it a greate benefit to see our Saviour as he passed, sudainly coming downe he deserved to receive him, not passing, bt into his house. This day I must abid in thy house. A blessed day and worthily to be reioyced in. Mane nobiscum Domine. &c. III. And when all saw it, they murmured saying, that he turned in to a man that was a synner. But Zaccheus standing, say∣ed, to our Lord: Behold, the half of my goods, Lord, I give to the poor, and if I have dafrauded any man of any thing, I restore fourfold; Iesus sayed to him, this day salvation is come to this house, because he also is the Sonne of Abraham. For the sonne of man is come to seek,Chrysol▪ and to save that which was lost. He condemnes himself as vnworthy of pardon, who accuseth God for turning in to synners. But Zaccheus remai∣ning constant to his desire of seeing our Saviour, and not vndervaluing him by reason of the meane aspect which outwardly he bare,S. Ambros deserved to prove by his owne exam∣ple that synne is not in riches, but in them who know not how to vse  riches; for as they be a
hindrance to the wicked, so to the good they are a help to vertue; Zaccheus was rich, and one of the elect, but it was by giving to the poore, and restoring what was ill gotten, all rich men are covetous. Behold the efficacie of receiving Christ into thy house; how sud∣ainly is he become a Sonne of Abraham, who was a Child of the divell? The Sonne of man, our Saviour, comes to seeke vs, and doe we fly him? God forbid. Marie Magdalen annoints our Saviour in Bethania. I.Iesus ant sex dies Paschae venit Be∣thanian Io 12 IEsus six dayes before the Passe over came to Bethania where Lazarus was, that had been dead, whome e∣sus had raysed, and they made him a supper there: and Martha ministred, but Lazarus was one of them that sat at table with him Marie therfore tooke a pound of onment of right spike∣nard, pretious▪ and annointed the feete of Iesus, and wiped his feee with her hayre, and breaking the labaster boxe she poured it v∣pon his head,Marc: 14. 3 and the house was filled with the odour of the oynt∣ment. Marie Magdalen never forgot the benefit, which she had received by her first conversion; the memorie wherof was lately renewed and redoubled in the raysing of her brother Lazarus from his grave; therfore as then with teares of repentance, she washed our Saviours feete; here with pretious ointment of thanksgiving she an∣noints both feete and head, acknowledging all from the beginning, to the ending to be his gift; and breaking the boxe she poureth ou all vpon him, thinking nothing too much, though it seeme to be with losse or paine. The two feete of our Saviour.S. Bernard (Sayth S. Bernard) be his mer∣cy, and his judgment. These a soule doth first betake it∣self vnto, with the oyle of Compunction: Afterwards it riseth to the head with the ointment of devotion, com∣pounded of the memoie of his infinite benefits. I. One therfore of his disciples, Iudas Iscariot, he that was to betray him, sayed, whrfore was this waste made hy was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poore? And he sayed this, not because he cared for the poore, but because he was a theefe, and having the
purse, caried the things which were put therin. And now also (sayth S, Bernard) when one is noted t attend to his devotions,S. Bernard there want not those who account it waste and losse of time and talents; not that they envie sanctitie, but would provide for Charitie. And this among people of good life and vpright intentions. Others there be, who out of malice laugh at those who give themselves to prayer, or to the service of God, and as our Saviour say∣ed to the skillfull in the law among the Jewes neither doe well themselves nor suffer others to doe well.Luc▪ 11. 52 But we must imitate the Magdalen in her constancie, and not re∣gard what they say or doe, who are no better then theeves stealing soules from God; and keeping the purse, have thei thoughts more in that, then in what doth more concerne thē. as to eternitie. And what is three hundred pence, in com∣parison of the reward in heaven, or satisfaction in this life. III. But Iesus sayed, let her alone; why doe you molest her? she hath done a good worke vpon me. Poore you have allwayes with you and when you will, you may doe them good? Mee you ha∣ve not allwayes. That which she had she hath done; she hath pre∣vented to annoint my body for the Buryall. Amen I say to you, wher ever this Ghospell shall be preached in the whole world, that also which she hath done shall be told for memorie of her. A small worke which the world would little have regar∣ded, or condemned, our Saviour esteemes so highly as to have it preached through the whole world, and for the honour done to him, doth honour his saynts even he∣re on earth. That which she had she hath done; God regards every ones abilitie and good will, the hart ād not the out∣ward worke.Mar: 12 44 Amōg the rich casting many things into the treasurie, the Poore widow cast in two mites, which makes a farthing, and was esteemed by our Saviour to have cast in more thē all the rest, because others out of their abundance gave some thing, but she out of her povertie gave all she hād, her whole living. The Councell of the Iewes against our Saviour. I.Collegrū ergo Pon¦tifices & Phar. Conc. Io: 11 47 THe chiefe Priests therfore, and the Pharisees ga∣thered a Counsell, and sayed, what doe we? For this man doth many signes: if  let him alone
so, all will beleeve in him: and the Romans will come, and away our place, and nation But one of them, named ayp has, sayed to them, you know nothing, neither doe you consider that it is expedient for vs, that one man die for the people, and the whole nation pesh not. And this he sayed not of him∣self, but being high Priest, he Prophecied that Iesus should for the nation, and not only for the nation,  to ga∣ther into one the Children of God that were dispersed. No man so holy, but he finds opposers; no man so vp∣right but meetes with censures; and from those oftimes who least of all should opppose.S. Augusti These men aske what we  And doe not say, as they ought, let vs beleeve; but fearing to leese their temporalls, tho∣ught not of the eternall, and so lost both of them. O mad∣nes! thou fearest to loose earth, and thou loosest heaven: The signes which should have moved them to beleeve, as others did, through thei pride and malice, they turned to their owne distruction; But God made vse of their ma∣lice to the distruction of Idolatrie,S. Gregor and the redempti∣on of all man kind After a strange manner (as S. Grego∣rie discourseth) working so, that what is done without thee good pleasure of God, comes not to be contrarie to his will; for turning evill deeds to good vse, even those things which are repugnant to his Counsells, doe serve his Counsells. I. Iesus therfore walked no more openly among the Ie∣es, but he went into the country beside the desert, and there he abode with his disciples. And six dayes before the Passe∣over he came to Bethania, where Lazarus also: because many of the lwes for him went away, and beleeved in Iesus. Our Saviour declined the malice of the Iewes both for their good, to give them time of better consideration, and because the time was not come in which he was to suffer: but by their malice, even against azarus, we may see how dangerous a thing it is to give way to passion; and how one synne drawes on another insensibly; and then, when once the enimie hath hold of vs, he blinds vs so, as not to see, or feele, the wickednes of the most enormious acts, Begge grace of God, not to give occasi∣on
that our Saviour depart, or hide himself from thee; for who knowes what will become of the in his absēce? III. And the next day, when they departed from Betha∣ia, he was hungrie;Mar:   and seeing a farre of a fig-tree ha∣ving leaves, he came, if happily he might find any thing on it: and he found nothing but leaves. And he sayed, now no eate fruite of thee any more for ever. And in the evening pas∣sing by, they saw the figiree withered from the root. So could he have done (sayth S. Hierome) by his eni∣mies, and caused them by the same power to wither a∣way▪ but that he expected they should repent▪ in the me, ane time it is fitting we should learne, by this example to feare God Almighties Iudgments, if we beare not frui∣te, but contēt ourselves with the outward shew of vertue. We know not how lōg God will have patiēce with vs, or how soone he will punish vs. The punishment for ever, is a dreadfull thing. Thou thundrest over me thy iud∣gements, o Lord,Thom Kmpis l. 3. c. 1 and with feare and trembling thou dost shake all my bones, and my soule is very much astonied. The fouretenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. HEre most of all, at the receiving of the most Blessed Sacrament, it is fitting we should aske ourselves this question, what doe we? And cer∣tainly we know nothing. neither doe we consider what is expedi∣ent for vs, if we know not, that no diligence is to be e∣steemed too much towards our preparatiō to it, ād fot the entertaynment of his after receiving. Many signes and to∣kens of his love towards vs he hath shewed, both living ād dying, but in this he hath summed thē all vp, taking so much pleasure in dying for vs, that he would in this man∣ner be dayly sacrificed; and so much content in giving, that he would dayly give himself wholy to vs, to gather vs to himself. Let not this passe with out due reflection, but gather a counsell of thy thoughts to ad∣vise vpon it; and doe not let him alone so, as per∣haps heretofore thou hast; for thy enimies will come
and take away thy place. Be not like the withered figtree; But planted so neere this fountayne of water, bring forth thy fru∣its in due season. II. Imitate the Magdalen; annoint his feete, that is, his humanitie, with the oyntment of thanksgiving, com∣pounded of all the mysteries thereof, from his Mothers wēbe to the Ascensiō, remēbred ād repeated with joy ād prayse of so loving a Sauiour: poure out thy whole hart vpō Consideratiō of his divinitie; desire with S. Paul that this vessell may be dissolved, that thou may be wholy ab∣sorpt in his love. Breake in the meane time by mortifica∣tion, thy passions and inclinations, which hinder thee from pouring ou all vpon Christ, that thy whole oule, and the whole house of which thou art a member, may be filled with the odour of thy vertes. O how weake is the sent of them? How little heate is there in me, by which alone their fragrancie is dispersed. III. Imitate Zaccheus desirous to see our Saviour and hearing that in the holy Sacrifice he is to passe by thee, runne to see him;Thomas a Kempisl. 4 - 1 . 13 If this most holy Sacrament were cele∣brated in one only place, and were consecrated but by one only Priest in the world, with what desire doe you think people would apply themselves to that place, and to that Priest, that they might see the∣se divine mysteries celebrated? Let not the commo∣ditie of often seeing him coole thy desire, and in∣deavour of coming to him; for though thou he hold him never so oft, and never so much, thou wil t not be able to discover, throughly what he is; come downe quickly. from thy impertinent thoughts and receive thy Saviour With joy into thy house; he coming to seeke thee, and to save thee, it were greate shame and folly to be backward in receiving so greate a benefit and so bountifull a benefa∣ctour; let not the multitude of the tepide hinder thee; har∣ken not after their checks, or rebukings, but cry out the more. Iesus Sonne of David have mercy on me: Iesus was of another mind then the multitude, he stood, and comman∣ded the zealous to be brought to him. Shall we refuse to co∣me though not commanded,Thomas a Kempis l. 4 c. 13. yet invited? Who will grant me that I may find thee alone, and open my who∣le heart vnto thee, an injoy thee as my soule desireth
that no man now may contemne me, nor noe creature move me. Gentils desire to see our Saviour. I.Eran quidam Gentiles▪ Io: 12 10 THere were certaine Gentils, of them that came up to adore in the festivall day; these came to Philip, saying, we are desirous to see Iesus, Philip telleth Andrew, and Andrew and Philip told Iesus. Iesus answering sayed, the hou∣re is como that the Sonne of man shall be glorified. Amen. Amen I say to you, vnlesse the graine of wheate falling into the ground, die, it self remaineth alone, but if it die, it bringeth much fruite. The fame of the doctine and miracles of our Saviour bred a desire in the Gentils to see him; our Saviour vpon notice of this honour retireth his thoughts to his passion and death. The houre indeed is at hand in which I shall be glorified, by the conversion of the Gentils to me, but it will not fully come till I die: I rejoyce much that I shall be then glorified, but first I must indure the pangs of de∣ath: This is the way to my glorie: and in very truth I say vnto you, that be a body of never so fine a grane, yet if falling to the ground▪ and acknowledging from whence he was taken, he die not to all worldly content, he will not bring much fruite: for he that loveth his life, and maketh too much of it, shall lose it, and he that hateth his life in this world,S. August▪ and vseth it accordingly, doth keepe it to life ever∣lasting. A greate and strange saying; how a bodies loue should turne to his ruine, his hatred to his exaltation. If thou love evilly, thou hatest: if thou hatest well, thou lovest. Happy are they who preserve themselves by hatred that they may not perish by love. II. If any man minister to me, let him follow me, and where I am, there also shall my minister be, if any man mi∣nister to me my Father will honour him▪ Now my soule is trobled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this houre, but ther∣fore came I into this houre; father glorifie thy name. The ha∣tred which our Saviour requireth, is not without com∣fort in this life, and reward in the next. The comfort in this life is that we have our Saviour going before vs, we follow him, who cannot misse of the way; we follow him,
who as he is farre greater thē we, so have we the farre lesse reasō to shrinke frō him, ād the greater incouragement to follow him. The reward is, to be where he is, to be not only rewarded but honoured by God himself. Now our soule is trobled, with the thought of this death, but what shall we say Shall we desire to be freed from it No; it were neither for ourgood, nor for his glorie. Therfore we c̄e into this world. to be ordered as God should see best;Thomas a kempis l. . . 17 to this we wust con∣forme, and we shall find it best for vs also. Sonne suf∣fer me to doe with thee what I will; I know what is ex∣pedient for thee; thou thinkest as man, thou iudgest in many things as humane affection perswades thee. Father, glorifie thy name: for in this is my full content. III. A voyce therfore came from heaven: Both I have glori∣fied it and I will glorify it: The multitude that stood, and heard sayed it thundered; others sayed, an Angel spake to him. Iesus sayed, this voyce came not for me, but for your sake. Now is the iudgment of the world, now the Prince of this world shall be cast forth; And I, if I be exalted from the earth, will draw all things to myself; and this he sayed, signifying what death he should dye. Conformable to our Saviours humilite, the voyce sayed not, I have glorified thee, and I will glori∣fy thee; but I have glorifyed it, that is, my name, which is thy desire, and the desire of all that are perfect: what ever become of me, be thou glorified. The multitude, th∣ough hearing, vnderstands not this language, but is ra∣ther terrified with it, as some people with thunder: but it is the language of Angles,Thomas a kempis l.  and of God himself. Son∣ne, say thus in every thing: If it be pleasing to thee, let this be done thus, ô Lord. If it be an honour to thee▪ let it be done in thy name. This proceeding of God con∣demnes the ludgment of the world and by it the Prince of this world, (who domineers over most part of it, by the synfull life of worldlings) is to be cast forth▪ By the death vpon the Crosse our Saviour drawes mens har after him, even against the naturall inclination which w have to ease and pleasure; and yet so as they doe willingly and joyfully follow him.S. August Doe not think that thou art drawne against thy will: love also draweth the mind. Ha∣ve our corporall senses their delights, and shall not the mind have its delights also? The spowse sayth, draw me,
e will runne after thee in the odour of thy oynements. Our Saviour teacheth that he is not only man, but God. I.Respond  Io. 12.  THe multitude answered him, we have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever, and how thou, the sonne of man must be exalted? Who is this Sonne of man? Iesus sayed to them; yet a little while the light is among you; Walke while you have the light, that the darke∣nes overtake you not. He that walketh in darknes knoweth not whether he goeth. While you have the light, beleeve in the light, that you may be Children of the light. These things Iesus spake, and nent away and hid himself from them. See how necessa∣rie it is, besides the law (which the multitude had heard. and many of them doubtlesse had read) to have a right in∣terpreter of the law. It was very true that Christ was to abide for ever, and yet it was also true that he was to dye, and not to stay here visibly for ever. In like manner there be many things in holy Scripture which seeme to be con∣trarie one to the other, and yet are not, being rightly vn∣derstood; be not therfore easyly moved, or trobled when they occurre, but referre thyself to the Church, and to the teachers therof. The light of the truth was among the Je∣wes for a time; by their obstinate refusing to give full cre∣dit to our Saviour they fell into the darkenes, in which we see them, and they know not (alas) whether they go: with them, that among them beleeved, the light did con∣tinue; and they became the Children of light. Beleeve also that the light may not forsake thee. Our Saviour went away▪ and hid himself▪ partly by reason of the obstinate Pharisees, who sought his destruction, before his time; partly to avoyde the honour, which others were ready to give him vpon the voyce speaking to him from heavaven. II. Wheras he had done so many signes before them, they belee∣ved not in him, yet of the Princes also many beleeved in him, but for the Pharisees they did not confesse, that they might not be cast out of the Synagag: for they loved the glorie of men, more then the glorie of God.Euthym O the miserable captivitie of
people desirous to please men! They contemne God, but stand in owe of men, and will doe any thing to yet their favour. Besides signes, and miracles, there must be a pious inclination to beleeve, otherwise vpon an obstinate hart they seldome worke: good life also helps oftimes, for they who are vnwilling to leave their synns, ate loth to heare any thing that may move then to it. III. But Iesus cryed and sayed, he that beleeveth in me, doth not beleeve in me▪ but in him that sent me; and he that seeth me, seeth him that sent me: I am the light come into this world▪ that every one that beleeveth in me may not remayne in darknes. And if any man heare my words, and keepe them not▪ I doe not iudge him, for I came not to iudge the world, but to save the world.S. Ambro. The world. That I have spoken that shall iudge him in the last day. This high point of doctrine was to be pro∣claymed with a lowde voyce. VVhat is that which he sayth? He beleeveth not in me? But that he beleeveth not in that, which with his corporall eyes he seeth: he beleeveth not, that I am only man. And to the same effect he sayth that which followeth. He that seet me seeth him that sent me, to wit, with the eyes of faith he seeth more then with his corporall eyes he can discover, he seeth God in me▪ which happines we have dayly in the most B. Sacrament: for vnder the formes of bread and wine we see our Savi∣our, his body, soule, and divinitie, we see God. And here in we may rightly observe, the excellencie of faith, by which we see God, so much as the condition of this life will give leave: and that the only way not to remaine in darkenes is to beleeve; for though in the acts of faith there be ever some obscuritie, there is more light, as we may see by comparing the beleefe of Christians, with the most knowing knowledge of those, who are not Christi∣ans, or are fallen from the vniversall beleefe of Christians: for in many things, these will be found to swarve even from common sense: In which notwithstanding they will not be excusable,Rupertus. because the word which they have heard, and which they cannot but know to be true, if they lay aside their perversnes and obstinacie, will iudge them, and convince them. VVhere will this iudge sit? with in vs. In every ones conscience; he will terribly thunder out a iust sentenc.
The parable of the Vineyard hired ou and of the two sonnes. I.Homo  Pater familias. Matth. 21. 34 THere was a man a house-holder, that planted a vine∣yard, ād made a hedge round about it, and digged in it a presse, and buylt a towre, and let it out to husband∣men, and went forth into a strange country; and when the time of fruite drew neere, he sent his servants to receive the fruits; And the husband-men apprehended his servants, one they beate; another they killed; another they stoned: Againe he sent other servants, more then the former; and they did to them likewise. As last he sent his sonne, saying, they will reverence my sonne; But they seeing the sonne, sayed: This is the heyre, come let vs kill him, and we shall have the inheritance: and apprehending him, they cast him forth of the vineyard, and killed him: When ther∣fore the Lord of the vineyard shall come. What will he doe to those husband mē? they say, the naughty men he will bring to naught▪ and his vineyard he will let out to other husband men, that shall render him fruits in their seasons. It is evident that God is this greate House-holder, Who hath planted our soules here on earth to the end to yeald him the choyest fruit; he hath hedged vs round with his divine protection, that we be not tempted above our strength; he hath digged a presse, that is, hath furnished vs with helps sufficiēt for bringing ou fruite to perfection; and buylt a towre, for watch and ward, if we will make vse of it. This vineyard is let out to vs for an vncertaine tearme of yeares. God is every where: and allwayes presēt, but to those, who doe not consider right, he seemes to be in a strange countrey farre of: He sends his servants, at seasons to admonish vs of our dutie: How doe we intertaine thē ād their admonitiōs? He sēds more and more ād never ceaseth to put vs in mind. He sent his only sonne our Saviour; how doe we reverēce him? VVe think by cvill means to inioy this world, to establish an inheritan∣ce, to make to ourselves a kind of heaven on earth, and it will not be: such will be brought to naught before they think of it. Think betime of rendring fruit in due season, least thou be taken tardie. II. Have you never read in the scripture, The stone which the buyldrs reiected, the same is made the head of the corner? By
our Lord was this done, and it is miraculous in our eyes. Therfore I say to you, that the Kingdome of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a nation. yealding fruits therof and he that falleth vpon this stone, shall be broken, and on whome it falleth, it shall all to bruise him. In the end of the last periode he asked the standers-by, what they thought should be done to the wicked husbandmen, to shew that we need no other Iudge then our owne conscience; they answered, as wic∣ked men vse to doe, condemning themselves in another, when they reflect vpon his cvill deserts; for however vi∣ce doth blind them in their owne case, yet in another they condemne that which themselves are doing. Here he tells them directly that this parable concerned them; and that the true faith and means to salvation would be taken from them, and from their observances, and prea∣ched to all nations: That he was the corner stone, which was miraculously reserved for the perfection of the buyl∣ding; They who fall vpon him by contempt, as they did, will but ruine themselves,S. August. Thomas a Kempl l. 1 . 22. n▪ 5 and at the later day, he will fall heavy vpon them, and crush them to peeces  her∣fore wilt thou put of this purpose till to morrow? Rise, and instantly beginne. III. What is your opinion? A man had two sonnes, and co∣ming to the first, he sayed, sonne go, worke to day in my vi∣neyard; and he answering sayed, I will not, But afterwards mo∣ved vvith repentance he vvent: and coming to the other, he sayed likevvise; and he ansvvering sayed, I go, Lord, and vvent not vvhich of the tvvo did the Fathers vvill? They say the first. Iesus saith to them. Amen I say to you, that Publi∣cans, and vvhores go before you in the Kingdome of God: for Ihon came to you in the vvay of justice; and you did not beleeve him; but they did beleeve him, And you see∣ing it, have not had repentance aftervvard to beleeve him. Againe he referres vs to our owne consicence, and judg∣ment, and teacheth vs not to despayre though we have been refractarie, for he doth mercyfully attend our r∣pentauce, and receiveth vs, when we begin to think ourselves. How oft doe we say, I go, and go not? O how greate is the frayltie of man, allwayes prone to vice To day thou confessests thy synns, and to morrow thou doest againe commit them. Our Saviour gives vs here
a good Item, to beware that we be not out stripped by the greatest synners, and even by their example to rouse vp ourselves, we cannot but approve of the way, which is layed before vs, by Gods servants, as they did of S. Ihon Baptist; neither his doctrine, nor their example did wor∣ke vpon him; beware of such hardnes and insensibilitie. The parable of the King that made a mariage for his Sonne. I. THe Kingdome os heaven is likened to a King that made a mariage for his sonne.Simile factum est reg∣uum cae∣lorum homini¦regi Matth: 2 And he sent his ser∣vants to call them, that Were invited to the maria∣ge, and they would not come: Againe he sent other servants, saying; tell them, behold I have prepared my dinner, my beeves and fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, come to the mariage: But they neglected, and went their wayes, one to his farme, another to his marchandise; and the rest layed hands vpon his servants, and spitefully treating them, mudered them. And when the King heard of it, he was wroth, and sending his hostes, destroyed those murderers, and burnt their citty. This happened literally to the Iewes, who being invited, to this spirituall wedding with our Saviour, refused, and were destroyed: but mystically it concernes vs all. For e∣ery living soule is invited to a mariage with our Saviour, by consent to his commandements. Who would not de∣sire this mariage (sayth S. Ihon Chrysostome) invited by a king,S. Ihon Chrysost▪ and to a mariage with his intirely beloved sonne? It is styled a mariage, that we might vnderstand both the love which God doth beare vs, and the galantnes of it, where there is nothing that can contristate, but every thing full of spirituall ioy. All things are ready. Greate ther∣fore must their falt needs bee, who neglect so greate a be∣nefit, so loving an invitatiō, so plentifull a feast, so greate a person, so advantagious a match; and turne to that wherin there is nothing but labour and toyle, and houre∣ly hazard of eternall perdition▪ I have seen all things which are done vnder the sunne,Eccl: 1. 14 and behold all vanitie and affliction of mind. The wicked are hardly corrected, and of fooles the number is infinite.
II. Then he sayth to his servants; The mariage indeed is ready but they that were invited were not worthy; Go yee therfore into the high wayes, and whosoever you shall finde call to the mariage. And his servants going forth into the wayes, gathered together all thy found, bad and good and The mariage was filled with guests. Literally the Jewes refu∣sing, the Gentils were called in to be the Church of Christ; dispersed through the whole world, and in severall wayes of living, but gathered together in vnitie of Faith: good and bad doe beleeve, and make vp a nūber here, but in the se∣quell the bad are rejected; though also for the time the bad become good, for being baptized they are cleansed of their former wickednes:Euthimius in which sence, by the bad tho∣se are vnderstood who were very intēperate, ād wedded to evill customes, by the good such as were lesse vitious. For S. Paul speaking of himself, and all others, sayth, we were al∣so our selves found synners:Gal: 2. 7 and no man can brag of his deser∣ving to be called, but it behoveth vs to think of the way in which we were, and were like to be; and of the mer∣cy of God in calling vs, by his servants, or by his inspi∣rations, or by watever other accident, and to be thank∣full to him. III. And the King went-in to see the guests, and he saw there a man  attired in a wedding garment; and he sayed to him, frend, how camest thou in hither, not having a wedding gar∣ment? And he was dumb; Then the King sayd to the wayters, bind his hands and feete, and cast him into the utter darknes, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.S. Hierom For many be called, but few elect, If any man at the time of judgement (sayth S. Hierome) be found vnder the name of a Christian, not to have the garment of the heavenly man, but the cast clothing of the old man, he will be instantly appre∣hended; neither in that day will there be place for penan∣ce, nor power for to deny the falt. So that faith alone is not sufficient; we must retayne the garment of charitie, and the love of God, in which we were wedded; and not think that in the multitude we can escape the eye of God; one is here mentioned, because not one can be hidden. He is stiled notwithstanding, frend, to signifie that he is not punished out of hatred, but justice so requiring: His ands and fete are sayed to be tyed, because no man
will have power to avoyde the punishment. And though exemplified in one, it will happen to many, because ma∣ny are called, but farre the lesse number doe make good vse of their calling; as appeares by a world of infidels and heretiks, which either have not accepted of the faith of Christ, or have willfully lost it. Tribute to be payed to Cesar, and of the Resurrection. I. THen the Pharisees departing consulted among themsel∣ves to intrap him in his speech;Tunc abeuntes Pharisaei. Matth. 22 15 and they send to him their disciples with the Hrodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art a true speaker, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man; for thou doest not respect the person of men. Tell vs therfore what is thy opinion, is it lawfull to give Tribute to Cesar, or no; These people were malitious hypocrites, and not only in their speech, bu in their outward cariage fained themselves just (as S. Lu∣ke records) and sought to cloke their malice by the He∣rodians, who were of another sect,S. Hierom taking Herode for their Messias,Lu. 20. 20 and so to decline the envie of taking our Saviour out of the way, by geting him apprehended by the Gentils, for denying the duties to the Emperour: but by them we may see both the straine of dissemblers, and how people ought in reason, and honestie behave them∣selves in this world; for what themselves did not practise, they commended in our Saviour, that he had truth in his sayings, vprightnes in his proceedings, respect to God a∣bove all men, fortitude not to care what the wicked world thought or sayed of him, not respecting either power or wealth, or greatnes of men so much as to varie from the truth,Thomas a Kempis l. 3 c. 45 n. 1. or from the way of God in any thing. How oft have I not found faithfullnes where I thought to have had it? II. But Iesus knowing their naughtines. sayed, what doe you tempt me, Hypocrites? Shew me the tribute coyne; and they offered him a penny, and Iesus sayth to them, whose is this ima∣ge and superscription? They say Cesars. Then he sayed to them▪ Render therfore the things that are Cesars, to Cesar, and the
things that are God, co God: ād hearing it they marvelled, ād lea∣ving him went their way. Their dissembling speech ād beha∣viour could not hide their malice from his all seeing eye; and he by his answer turned all to his owne more glorie and repute.S▪ Ihon Chrysost: Coyne, is the tribute due to Cesar; man him∣self is the tribute due to God: In the Coyne, you may see the picture of Cesar, in man, the image of God. As he that falsifyeth the Coyne of Cesar is most grievously punished, so the corrupters of the image of God are eter∣nally tormented. This must be our study and profession in this life, to mayntaine the beauty and due proportion of this image which we beare, that our vnderstandings, and our wills be not blurred with things vnbeseeming: God claymes it as his due, He hath put his owne stampe vpon vs, which can never be razed quite out; so long as we have a soule it will be found to be the image of God, however it be vsed. III. That day the Saducees came to him, who say there is no resurrection, and asked whose wife shall she be that had se∣ven husbands? Iesus sayed to them; you erre, not knowning the scriptures, nor the power of God; for in the resurrection, neither shall they mary, nor be maried, but are as the Angles of od in heaven, And concerning the resurrection, have you not heard that of God, saying; I am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Iacob. He is not God of the dead, but of the living, These men had the Scriptures, but had not the right vn∣derstanding of them, because in the reading of them, they did not take with them the right rule of vnderstanding them, which is tradition, and humble submission to ap∣proved authoritie. they also doe erre, not knowing the Scrip∣tures, nor the power of God, who condemne in this life tho∣se who doe not mary, or doe vow virginitie, which state notwithstanding being approved by our Saviour himself hath by all ancient Fathers, and continuall practise of the Church been esteemed an Angelicall life vpon earth. In like manner is prayer to saints a holy practise; for they are not to be esteemed as dead; but living, and knowing much more by the power of God then by nature they could; and more powerfull to doe good then ever they were in this life, however strange things God was pleased to worke by them even here on earth.
The greate Commandment. I. THe Pharisees hearing that he had put the Saducees to silence,Pharisaei audienes quod imp∣osuisset silentium. Matth. 22 34 came together; and one of them, a doc∣tour of the law, asked him tempting him: Master, which is the greate commandment in the law? Iesus sayed to him; Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God, from thy whole hart and with thy whole soule, and with thy whole mind: This is the greatest and first commandment. It is the first and great∣est commandment; because first in order of promulgati∣on; first in dignitie, by reason of the person whom we are commanded to love; first also in perfection, because love is the chiefe of our passions, and placed vpon so no∣ble an object doth greately innoble a soule; it is the grea∣test, because it comprehends all other vertues, and dra∣weth them after it; ād vpon it dependeth our whole good and salvation; and in regard of the greatenes of God, and his infinite deserving to be loved, it requireth that no part of vs be vacant from being imployed in his love, our whole hart, and affection; our whole soule, and invention; our whole mind, and application must be to his love. I. And the second is like to this; Thou shalt love thy neigh∣bour as thy self: On these two commandments dependeth the whole law and Prophets. Our Saviour answered the doctour more then he demanded; and put him in mind, that he was not to aske such questions by way of tempting, but doe what the law prescribeth, that is, doe by others as we would be done by: Love thy neighbour as thyself. This command∣ment is like the former, because we must love our neigh∣bour also, in his degree, with our whole hart, and soule, and mind, and not suffer hatred to possesse the least part of vs: It is like the first, because as we love God for him∣self, so must we love our neighbour, not for our owne sa∣kes but for his, and for God. It is like the first, because vpon this as vpon the other depends our salvation; and that of S.1 Io. 4 20 Jhon is very true. He that loveth not his brother, whom he seeth; God, whom he seeth not how can he love? III. Then Iesus spake to the multitude, and to his disci∣ples saying, vpon the Chayre of Moyses have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees, all things therfore whatever they shall say vnto you, observe yee, and doe yee, but according to their works doe yee
not; for they say and doe not. To shew vs how truly, and how sincerly we are to practise the love of our neigh∣bour, by this document he giveth vs to vnderstand, that however he misliked the proceeding of the Pharisees, and often reprehended them sharpely, yet he had care of their honourand authoritie; and held with them so farre as was reason. He teacheth vs also not to carpe at superi∣ours, being men as others and subiect to be misled; for in what their authoritie leads them in order to the instructi∣on of others, God hath so much providence over every body, that he doth particularly assist them; besides that every one is more apt to say then to doe well.S. August. The Pha∣risees (sayeth S. Augustin) did that in their life which was their owne, but an others (that is moyseses) chayre, did not suffer them to teach what was their owne: They be∣nefited many by teaching that which they did not; but they would have benefited farre more,Thomas a Kempis l. 3 c. 13. if they had done what they taught, Sonne he that indeavoureth to with∣draw himself from obedience, withdraweth himself from grace. The fifteenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. GEntils desired to see our Saviour: S. Philip and S. Andrew were their mediatours, and brought them to his sight: if we follow the conduct of the Apostle, and Apostolicall men, teaching what they ha∣ve received from hand to hand, we shall be able to see our Saviour really present in the most Blessed Sacrament, and how that graine of wheate comes to die from what it was, and to be transsubstantiated into the body of Christ by the powerfull word of our Saviour, This is my body. This word a multitude of misbeleevers will have to signifie o∣therwise then it is taken by holy Church; but as our Sa∣viour concerning the voyce which came from heaven, de∣clared that it was neither thunder, nor an Angel that spake, but a voyce for our sake; so this word, by which the Sa∣crament is perfected, he commands should, for our sake be spoken in his Church, and that done by it which he then
did at his last supper in perpetuall remembrance, or commemo∣ration of him, and of his death for our sake; so that as he then did really give his Apostles what he sayed, This is my Body; so their descendents, who are commanded to doe the same thing which he did, doe really consecrate and give the same body by vertue of the same words of our Saviour. By this the name ād power, and love of our Saviour is glori∣fied to the end of the world: For what a poore thing had it been, to have left only bread and wine for a memorie of him, and of his vnspeakable love in dying for our sakes? But leaving himself vnder these shapes, and leaving him∣self so as by the consecration of them a part, one from the other, the separation of his body and blood at his death is plainly signified, is truly a very admirable thing, worthy of his former greatnesses, and able to draw the harts of all after him, by consideration of his love: II. We need no other light to see this truth, then the cleare word of our Saviour; yet we have also the consent of all ages, the practise of all Christians, the authoritie of all the devoutest and learnedest, men in the whole world, who are acknowledged by all to have been lights of the world; we have infinite miracles, which to discredit were to belye the eyes of a world of people; Let vs walke in this light, and the darknes in which some are by sticking over much to their owne phancie, and naturall discourses, will not overtake vs: we must walke, from humane apprehensi∣ons, to the power of God, to the love of our Saviour, to the eternall wisedome, to the infallible veritie of his word; walking thus, we shall not walke vpon vncertainties, not knowing whiter we go, but as obedient and dutifull Chil∣dren of God, we shall admire his works, and submit our thoughts vnto him, and gratefully receive the benefit be∣stowed vpon vs.Thomas a Kempis l. 4 c. 18. Thou must beware of curious and vn∣profitable searching into this most profound Sacrament, if thou wilt not be drouned in the deepth of doubtfullnes III. But besides humble beleefe, and profound ado∣ration of this blessed mysterie, we must have the wedding garment of Charitie, being invited, and admitted to so gre∣ate a feast, in which all things are ready to our hand; and to so incomparable a mariage, as is the coniunction of our Saviour to our soule and body. VVho would not desire
this mariage? who would not indeavour to make himself worthy? Cast of the thoughts for the present, of farme, and marchandise, and what ever other thing; and delay not thy coming with frivolous excuses: the bad and the good were admitted, the perfect and imperfect, neither had that one man been reiected, if he had conserved the puritie with which he was admitted: or if he crept in without that pu∣ritie, he was the more iustly punished, as daring to aproch to so greate a mysterie without that, which himself could not but know to be necessarie. VVhen I weigh thy dig∣nitie, ô Lord,Thomas a Kempis l. 4. and my vilenes, I doe greatly tremble, and am confounded within myself: for if▪ I doe not aproch, I fly life▪ if I thrust myself it vnworthily, I doe offend. Signes of the coming of our Saviour. I. PART. I. IEsus being gone out of the temple went, and his disciples came to shew him the buyldings of the temple;Et egress∣us de tem∣ploibat. Matth. 24 And he sayed to them; doe you see all these things? Amen, say to you, there shall not be left here a stone vpon a stone that shall not be destroyed. The ruine of Hierusalem, was a figure of the rui∣ne of the world; that city was glorious in buylding, and specially the Temple, yet for the abuses committed, it ca∣me to vtter destruction, The buyldings, which men had buylt stood for a time;S. hon Chrysost. Holynes, which God had orday∣ned was neglected. Doe you see all these things of this world? They all passe away; if nothing els concurre to their destruction, time itself alone will ruine them; if you will buyld for eternitie, you must buyld in your soules a buylding of vertues; these be stones which may be all∣wayes conserved: Humilitie, and patience, and resigna∣tion, and contempt of worldly pelse in the foundation; fortitude, and courage, and resolution, and magnanimitie in the walls; Constancie, and perseverance, and prayer, ād contemplation in the roofe; Charitie, and beneficence, the love of God, and of our neighbour, through the who∣le buylding from the bottome to the top;Colos: 3. 14 for this is the bond of perfection,Co. 13. 2. and without it we are nothing as the A∣postle professeth of himself: These be stones, that is, hard
to sense, and worldly humours, but once polished, by the example of our Saviour, they become smooth, and so beautifull in their postures, that it is a pleasure to others to behold them and a constant content to them that have them. II. And when he was siting vpon mount Olivet the dis∣ciples came to him secretly, saying, Tell vs when these things shall be, and what shall be the signe of thy coming, and of the consummation of the world? Iesus answering sayed, be∣ware that no man seduce you; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and they shall seduce many: you shall heare warres and bruites of warres; see that you be not trobled: for these things must be done, but the end is not yet. Nation shall rise against nation, and Kingdome against Kingdome, and there shall be pestilences, and famins, and earthquakes in places; And these things are the beginning of sorrowes. Our Saviour having spoken of the ruine of the Temple, his disciples imagined that the world would be quickly at an end, and would fayne have knowne some further signe. He to vn∣deceive them, first exhorts them to costancie in their faith; and that whatever doe happen they stick to him, as their only true Master: They will have many assalts in that kind, many inward doubts, many outward temptations, many that will say, why not thus and thus? Contrarie to what is really true, and solide; but beware, and follow not the many seduced, but keepe yourselves to this one Christ, one Lord, and Master, by whom are all things. Then he fore∣tells them of the severall accidents and miseries which will happen in the world by warre, and famine, by pesti∣lence, and the like; to the end they should not be trobled, VVhen such things happen but conceive of them, as dis∣posed by the providence of God for triall of the iust, or permitted to the malice of men, as the beginning of their for∣rowes, who are cause of vniust quarrells, and vniust dea∣ling. It is good for vs that some time we have some greevances and contratieties;Thomas a Kempis l. 1. c. 12▪ because oftimes they recall a man home to his hart. III. Then shall they deliver you into tribulation, and shall kill you, and you shall be odious to all nations for my names sake: and then many shall be scandalized, and they shall deliver vp one another, and they shall hate one another:
and many false Prophets shall rise, and shall seduce many, and because iniquitie shall abound, the Charitie of many shall wax cold: but he that shall persever to the end shall be saved. Besides all other accidents, which are matter of patience, he foretells them that they shall be persecuted directly for their faith, and doctrine, and vertuous life, and followed even to death, because they are his: which is matter of greate comfort and reioycing:1. Pet. 2. 20 For as S. Peter tells vs, if doing well, you bre patiently, this is thanke before God, soe we must be farre from wondering, or sorrowing, if we chan∣ce to be haed doing well, or betrayed by whom we least mistrust; much farther from suffering our charitie to wax cold vpon it, but rather bend our bow the more against iniquitie, which is the only cause of all this disorder If people did live well and orderly, they would be the nee∣rer their eternall crownes, but living loosely, ad not fol∣lowing the precepts of good life which they know, they wax colder and colder in Gods service, and so by peeces doe fall away from him.Thomas a Kempis l. 3. . 20. n. 4 How can this life be loved ha∣ving so many bitternesses, and being subiect to so many calamities and miseries? Yet the reward of patient perse∣verance is so greate, that it sweetens all these miseries, and breeds comfort in the most discomfortable accidents. Signes of the coming of our Saviour. II. PART. I. WHen you shall see the abomination of desolation (which was spoken of by Daniel the Prophet) stan∣ding in the holy place,Cum vide∣ritis abo∣minationē desolatio∣nis. Mat. 24. 15. he that readeth let him vnder∣stand, then they that are in Iewrie, let them fly to the moun∣taines, and he that is on the house top, let him not come downe to take any thing out of his house, and he that is in the field, let him not go back to take his coate; and woe to them that are with child, and give suck in those dayes. This was literally spoken of the Jewes, and as a signe of the destruction of Hierusalem, when for punishment of their not receiving the holy of holyes, to wit, our Saviour, the holy places of the temple where polluted with things which they did abominate; and were signes foretold them by Daniel the
Prophet of further desolation, from which our Saviour ad∣vised them to make hast to fly, for so they would escape much miserie, which those who remained in Hierusalem would be put vnto Mystically; Abomination of desolation signifies all kind of wickednes, which when we behold practised in the world, without respect to holynes, either of place, or person, it is high time for them, who are the true servants of God to fly to those mountaines, of which the Psalmist speakes: I have lifted vp my eyes to the mountai∣nes, from whence help will come vnto me:Ps. 110 my help is from God, who made heaven and earth.Ps. 75. 5 To those eternall mountaines; from which God doth wonderfully inlighten our harts, and not stoop downe to worldly comforts which will decei∣ve vs.S. Hierom In which times of wickednes and temptation, it is dangerous to be with child, that is still to be purpo∣sing, and not to bring forth our purposes to effect, to be fearefull to professe that openly, which we firmely belee∣ve, to be allwayes giving suck,Hebr. 5. 12 and not feeding out soules with solide vertues. II. Pray that your flight be not in winter, or on the sabboth for there shall be then greate tribulation, such as hath not beē from the beginning of the world, till now, neither shall be; and vn∣lesse those dayes had been shortned, no flesh should be saved; but for the elest the dayes shall be shortened. In winter it is hard to travell, vpon the Saboth the Jewes were forbid to tra∣vell. By these similitudes he adviseth vs to pray, that strong temptation doe not then come vpon vs when we are cold in devotion,S. Gregor. or remisse in our conversation; ād that death doe not rush in vpon vs when, not being prepared for it, we would fayne fly,Thomas a Kemps 1. c. 1 22. n. 5 when we can hardly walke: VVher∣fore wilt thou put of thy purpose till to morrow? Rise and instantly begin. The tribulation of that day will be most grievous, when we shall have before vs another life, be∣hind vs our wicked or epide conversation, within vs pangs of death, without vs a world too much beloved to leave willingly. Blessed is he that hath the houre of his death allwayes before his eyes; and doth dayly dispose himself to dye. Other tribulations also and vexations in the world are many, and grievous, and would be more intollerable, were it not that God hath care of his elect▪ ād doth also heare their prayers towards the mitigatiō of thē
III. For towards our comfort in the most violent per∣secutions even of Antichrist himself (of whome much of this is to be vnderstood) and in what ever afflictions, he tells vs,Luc. 12. 18. that a hayre of our head shall not perish. And doubt∣lesse as to those, who are convented before the Magist∣rates he promiseth to give mouth and wisdome, which all their adversaries shall not be able to resist, and gayne-say, so to every body he will give proportionable graces,1 Cor: 10. 13 and not suffer vs to be tempted above that which we are able. Spe∣cially if we have recourse to him by humble prayer, and reignation to his blessed will.Thomas Kempis l. c. 1 12. n. 2 When a man of good will is afflicted, then he vnderstands that God is more necessarie for him, without whome he perceives he can doe no good. Signes of our Saviours coming. III. PART. I. IMmediately after the triulation of those dayes, the sunne shall be darkened, and the moone shall not give her light, and the starres shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be moved; and vpon earth distresse of nations, for the confusion, of the sound of sea and waves, men withering for feare and expectation of what shall come vpon the world. Our Saviour desirous to find vs prepared for his coming fore∣tells vs what will become of the world, that he may re∣straine vs from loving it. The sunne will be darkened. &c. For the day of judgement being at hand, and men to ap∣peare in another world, the whole fabrick of this world will be dissolved by peeces; the light of the sunne and moone being no more needfull after the end of all flesh on earth, nor the influences of the starres; the bounds of the sea will also be broken vp, and it will come roaring o∣ver the land as its proper place; in which occasion people living at that time will be in huge distresse, not knowing whether to runne to save themselves;1 Thess: 5 and the more be∣cause it will come sudainly vpon them, as a theese in the night, for when they shall say, peace and securitie, then shall sudain destruction come vpon them: as vpon the incredulous in the dayes of Noe in the generall deluge;1. Pe: 3. 20 all which may be ap∣plyed
to the last day of every particular man, for that vpon the carelesse comes also very sudain and very ter∣rible, when neither sunne, nor moone, nor starre, nor any worldly thing will be any comfort to them, but ra∣ther a discomfort, to think how they vsed the benefit of them: and a whole sea of anguish will overwhelme them, and thought after thought, as wave after wave oppresse them. Watch therfore, because you know not what houre the Lord will come. II. Then shall appeare the signe of the sonne of man in heaven and then shall all tribes of the earth bewayle, and they shall see the sonne of man coming in the cloudes of heaven, with much power and maiestie: And he shall send his angels with a trumpet and a greate voyce, and they shall gather together his elect, from the foure winds, from the furthest part of heaven to the ende therof.Euthymiu The signe of the sonne of man is the Crosse, which then will shine clearer then the sunne; and as be∣fore Princes and Emperours their retinue marcheth, and their Guard, so before our Lord the quires of Angels will come in state. And he himself in so much greater Maiestie as he is above them. Then the despisers of the Crosse will weepe and wayle vnprofitably, and be greately sto∣nied with the sound of the trumpet, summoning them to their last reckoning. The elect notwithstanding will heare it, and behold the Crosse with some comfort, as having reverenced it as the standart of their King, and followed him in his warre against the world, the flesh, and the divell so our Saviour saith to his followers;Luc: 21. 28. But when these things begin to come to passe, looke vp and lift vp your heads, because your redemption is at hand. Where the difference betwixt the good and the bad is greatly to be pondered. III. But of that day, and houre no body knowes neither the Angels of heaven, but the Father alone. But this know yee; if the good-man of the house did know what houre the theee would come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be broken vp: therfore be you also ready, because at what houre you know not, the sonne of man will come. Our soule imports vs more then all worldly sub∣stance, be it never so greate and rich; more watchfull therfore we ought to be that it peish not▪ and so much
the more because we are vncertaine of the time when it will be demanded of vs,Thomas 2 Kempis l. . . 23. n. 2 O dulnes and hardnes of mans hart which only thinks of things present, and doth not foresee what is to come. The Parable of the ten Virgens. I. THen shall the Kingdome of heaven be like to ten vir∣gins, who taking their lamps,Tunc si∣mile eri regnum Cxlorum decem Virgini∣bus. Matth. 25: went frth to mee∣te the bridegrome, and the bride; and five of them were foolish and five wise: The five foolish having taken their lamps, did not take oyle with them: but the wise did take oyle with them in their vessels with their lamps. This parable tends in effect to warne vs to be watchfull and provident, and not to mind only things present, not fore∣thinking what will come after: The wise besides the oy∣le which was in their lamps, tooke provision with them in another vessel▪ considering the vncertantie which might be fall them; the foolish were short in this, thinking that what they had might be sufficient. Besides the lampe of this body of ours fed with things present, we have a soule to last for ever, we must have other provision to feed it. Our journey is to meete the Bridegroome, and the Bride (our Saviour, and his glorified companie) it imports vs to beware that this iourney in the world which is intended for our eternall ioy, prove not to our discomfort by our negligence, and carelesnes. The things of this world will not avayle vs, vnlesse we add to them the oyle of a good intention, and of charitie, with these they may bring vs to eternitie of ioy, without them they will fall full short. II. The bridegroome tarying long, they slumbred all and slept; and at midnight there was a clamour made, Behold, the bridegroome cometh, go yee forth to meete him. Then arose all those Virgins, and they trimmed their lamps; and the foolish say∣ed to the wise give vs of your oyle, because our lamps are going out. The wise answered; least peradventure there suffice not for vs and you, go rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves. All doe sleepe; All must die: The clamour after death, awakes vs to life againe, but not to time and means to mend what was wanting while we lived. Then we discover our errours,
when it is too late; and we are denied assistance, becau∣se we neglected it when time was: Then vertue pleaseth vs, and we would fayne have it, finding the want; but e∣very one must answer for himself, and be iudged accor∣ding to his owne workes; then he cannot borrow of o∣thers any thing, not if he would give a thousand worlds for it. Prayer doth nothing avayle then, nor confession, nor sollicitude;Apo 1. 13 all must be done in this life. Blessed are the dead who die in our Lord; from hence forth now (sayth the spi∣rit) that they rest from their labours; for their works follow them. III. And while they went to buy, the bridegroome was come and they that were ready entred with him to the mariage, and the gate was shut. Last of all came the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to vs; but he answering sayed; Amen, I say to you, I know you not, watch yee therfore because you know not the day nor the houre.S. Gregor O that we could relish in our harts the admi∣rablenes of that word. The Bridegroome is come; or the swe∣etnes of that other; They entred with him to the mariage. Or the bitternes of the last, the doore is shut, I know you not. But there he that asketh, can deseve nothing as Gods hands, who here would not heare what he commāded. And they send forth their prayers, and are not acknowledged, be∣cause then our Lord doth forsake those as vnknowne, whome here by their good deserts, he could not know to be his. Whatever thy hand can doe, doe it instantly (sayth the VViseman) for neither worke,Ecc▪ 9. 16 nor counsell, nor wisedome, nor knowledge is in the grave whether thou hastenest. The Parable of the Talents distributed. I. A Man going into a strange countrey, called his servants and delivered them his goods;Homo petegre proficiscēs vocavit servos suos. &c, Matth. 25. 14 To one he gave five ta∣lents, to another two, and to another one, to every one according to his proper facultie: and immediately he tooke his iourney: And he that had received the five talents went his way, and traded with the same, and gayned other five, likewise also he that had received two gayned other two. But he that had recei∣ved the one going away, digged it into the earth, and hid his Lords money. This parable signifies whatsoever gifts of God, for there is no man that is not partaker of his liberalitie.
God therfore resembles himself to a man in a strange coun∣trey, because his hrone is in heaven, farre from where we dwell on earth; for though he be every where, he is not in our sight, but by Faith, as a king is in the knowled∣ge of his subjects though they see him not with their eyes and though he be not in the realme: from God we have all that which we have, and severall talents as severall a∣bilities: with these we must trade in this life, imploying them in the service of God, our Lord and Master; for to that end he doth give them, as in the like parable in S. Luke,Luc▪ 17. 12 he expresseth, saying trade till I come, and he gives vs the tearme of this life to doe it: immediately he takes his journey, which signifies that he leaves vs to our free will and industrie, not pressing vs above our power, nor com∣pelling vs as slaves; assisting notwithstanding ivisibly with his graces, signified by every ones proper facultie or abi∣litie; but yet so, that something depends vpon our dili∣gence and application: which as it was wanting in the last, so the other two increased their, and their masters stocke by it. II. After much time the Lord of those servants came and tooke account of them. He that received the five talents offered other five, saying Lord, five talents thou didst deliver me, be∣hold I have gayned other five besides. His Lord sayed vnto him, well fare thee good and faithfull servant, because thou hast been faithfull over a few things, I will place thee over many things; enter into the ioy of thy Lord: there came also he that had received the two talents, and sayed inlike manner. He doth not say after how much time, the Lord of those servants came: the ti∣me of our life, and of our trading is vncertaine; but how e∣ver short, if it be well imployed, he accounts it much; if it be not well imployed, though not much in itself (for what is an hundred yeares to Eternitie?) Yet it is too much for them that doe so trifle it away, or misspend it. And in fine we shall be called to account, and there is no avoyding it. Happy are they who have their account ready for that day which is so vncertaine; and can shew how they increased their talents, raysing the naturall actions of this life by vertuous application, to a value double to that which they received by nature, and indeed in cōparably above it. And the reward is as incomparable
as of a few to many: where also he doth not say how ma∣ny, but leaves it to vs, to conceive, by the ioy of their Lord, into which they enter, which cannot but be incompara∣ble▪ S. Luke expresseth it by saying, that he that brought five for one was placed over five cittyes, to have the com∣mand, and profit of them.S. August. Enter into the ioy of thy Lord. VVhat kind of entrance is this, from which a body shall never go out? A greate roome, and a sweere retire∣ment O retirement without tediousnes, without bitternes of sorrow and temptation, without interpellation, and disturbance of importune thoughts. III. He also that had received the one talent, came and sayed, Lord I know that thou art a hard man, thou reapest where tho didst not sow, and gatherest where thou strewest not: and being affraide, I went and hid thy talent in the earth; behold, lo her thou hast that which is thyne; and his Lord answering sayed vn∣to him: Naughty and slothfull servant, thou didst know that I reape where I sow not, and gather where I strewed not, thou ough∣test, therfore to have committed my money to the bankers, and co∣ming I might have received my owne with vsuri. Take yee a∣way therfore the talent from him and give it him that hath ten ta∣lents, for to every one that hath shall be given, ād he shall abound, but from him that hath not, that also which he seemeth to have shall be taken from him, and the vnprofitable servant, cast yee out into vtter darkenes, there shall be weeping, ād gashing of teeth People that are worldly given, either of ignorance, or out of too much affection to their worldly wayes, doe take God to be a hard master, and doe think that he requireth more at their hands, then he gives abilitie to performe; but in truth he reapeth no where, where he hath not sowne, and good reason that he should have the profit of it. that is, our service; They who attend not to it, hide hi talent in the earth of worldly actions and cares, and never looke higher; no wonder therfore that they are accounted naught and slothfull, ād be punished for their neglect. They are afrayde of the account which they are to give yet ou of sloth, or malice they doe not apply themselves to that which they know were best.Thomas a Kemps 1.  . 24. . . O miserable and foolish lynner, what wilt thou answer to God?
The last Iudgement. I.Cum autē venerit fili us hominis Mat. 25. 31 WHen the sonne of man shall come in his maiestie, and all the Angels with him, then shall be sit vpon the seate of his Maiestie, and all Nations shall be gathe∣red together before him, and he shall separate them one from the other as a shepheard separates the sheepe from the goates, and shall set the sheepe at his right hand; but the goates at the left: Fiue things are here to be pondered, and lively represented to our thoughts, the Maiestie of the iudge: the retinue of all the Angels; the innumerable multitude of men, women and children gathered together before him: the separation of one from the other; the cause wherof every one will presently vnderstand; and finally the innocency of the sheepe on the one side, and the stench of the goates on the other: VVhat different lookes, what different thoughts will then be? The Maiestie will bee dreadfull to all:S. Thom Chriost. For as here at the co∣ming of a terrible iudge, not only the gyltie, but the gylt∣lesse stander by is afraid; so there: how much more terri∣ble will it be to the gyltie? The Angels even at the separa∣tion (in which they will be actours) will be a comfort to many: the right hand will signifie some good towards thē; those on the left, as forsaken, and haunted by evill spirits, will be in extreame, anguish and confusion. II. Then shall the King say to them that shall be at his right hand; come yee blessed of my father, possesse you the kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was hungrie, and you gave me to eate, I was thirstie and you gave me to drink; I was a stranger ād you tooke me in, naked ād you covered me, sick and you visited me, I was in prison ād you came to met for so long as you did it to one of these my least brethrē you did it to me.Euthimius O desirefull voyce! O vnspeakable ho∣nor! Come yee blessed, who have these things of the world not of the worke,Ps: 143 15 who account these Blessed, in plentie, but blessed of my father, by, and for those graces of which you have made good vse.Euthymi And he doth nor say take, but possesse the Kingdome: possesse it as your inhe∣ritance, possesse it as your due: possesse it as prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And a kingdome of which every one of you shall enjoy as full possession as if it were all intirely your owne to yourselves.S. Ambro. And; behold who∣me grace hath made your debtour: It hath made the hea∣vēly
father. God himself, your debtour, who for the good turne you did the poore, will pay you to the full, as a good debter payes his creditour: It hath made the eternall son∣ne of God your debtour, because he was hungrie &c. And consider that he sayth, so long as you did it to one of the least: that we should make no exception, but doe good to the poorest snake, as challenging brother-hood with our Sa∣viour. III. Then he shall say to them also at his left hand. Go yee away from me you accursed into fire everlasting, which was prepared for the divell, and his Angels. For I was hungrie and you gave me not to eate; I was thirstie ād you gave me not to drink I was a stranger &c. And these shall goe into punishment ever∣lasting, but the iust into life everlasting. A terrible saying: Go yee away from me, who am all happines, all goodnes, all ioy and content; from me, who have spent my hart blood for you, as you see by these markes of my wounds reser∣ved: Go yee away you accursed, not by my fathers privie or∣dinati, but by your owne disorders, which have brought this curse vpon you: goe into fire everlasting, not prepared originally for you, but for the rebellious spirits, whose directions seeing you choose rather to follow then myne▪ it is reason you should rather beare them companie, then mee; and as you were vnmercifull to your companions, looke for no mercy here, but punishment, and that ever∣lasting. If now a little suffering doe make thee so ipa∣tient.Thomas  Kempis 1.  c. 24 n. 6 how wilt thou be able to abide the everlasting tor∣ments? The sixteenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament. I. THe coming of our Saviour at the later day will be very terrible, and the more terrible, the sligh∣ter we make of his loving and gracious coming vnto vs here; as therfore he advised vs to make frends of the Mammon of iniquitie, that when we sayle they may receive vs into the eternall tabernacles. Much more ought we indea∣vour carefully to intertayne his frendship here, that there also we may find him our frend: For if here we think it
tedions to be with him, how can we think that there he can be so very loving towards vs? It is very true, that by acts of trne repentance we purchase his favor; but there is difference in favours, as there is in merits; and it is the token of a meane spirit to be content with the least, when it is in our power to have greater; and also that we have not in our thoughts the right value of such favours; be∣sides the danger of leesing them here by slighting them, and there by iust punishment; The foolish Virgins were once in favour; they had not that care of preserving it as they ought to have had; they were shut out, with, I know you not. Because you did not know mee, nor the greatnes of my favours towards you. The conclusion was, watch therfore: be not carelesse, be not disrespectfull, doe not slumber, when you are to come to this holy banket, nor after it.S. Gregor To slumber before we sleepe, is before death to grow remisse in the busines of salvation. II. Behold the bridegrome cometh, go forth to meete him. In the later end of the Apocalyps when our Saviour had pro∣claymed, I am the roote,Ap: 12. 17 and the stock of David, the bright morning starre, the spirit and the spouse, or bride, sayed come; and it followeth, And he that heareth, let him say come; ad he that thirsteth, let him come: and he that will, let him take the water of life, gratis: That is freely, without cost or charge. As much as to say, as vpon the least notice of our Saviours loving aproch, he that hath spirit and the hart and loving disposition of a bride, will instantly imbrace his coming, and be as ready to invite him, as he inviteth vs: if not, it is a signe that either we are thick of hearing, or dull in vnderstanding his worth, or soe altered with worldly oc∣casions, that we thirst not the true water of life. If we were rightly disposed, what ioy, what content, what com∣fort; what readines and diligence, what care and circum∣spection, what speed, what alacritie would not this newes bring, the bride groome cometh? Beware that because it is not so greate newes, but that dayly this voyce is heard, because dayly he offereth himself, thou be not the lesse taken with it, wheras so greate a benefit, so often offered is so farre from lessening the favour, that it becomes ine∣stimably greater by it.
III. The structure of the Temple of Hierusalem was admirable: nothing but gold and sylver, and pretious sto∣nes was seen in all the furniture of it, though all the sacri∣fices performed in it were but figures of this one sacrifice offered dayly in the Church of God: How rich should in reason our Temples be? Specially that of which the Apo∣stle speaking sayth,1 Cor: 3. 16 doe you not know that you are the temple of God? The honour of God, and the dignitie of him that was worshipped in it, did then require such ornament; much more doe our soules require, seeing we doe really receive the same God, who was in the other represented by faith, and by some extrinsecall relation to it. And can it be thought (sakth Salomon at the dedication of his Tem∣ple) that truly God doth dwell vpon earth? For if heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot receive thee, how much more this house which I have built; And yet here truly he dwelleth▪ Invite the heavens and the dwellers in them to magnifie this greate worke of his, and to supply the want thou fin∣dest in thy house: Begge and imitate the knowledge of the Cherubins, the love of the Seraphins, the quiet of the Thro∣nes, the courage of the Dominations, the noblenes of the Principalities, the fortitude of the Powers, and the pieie of the Vertues, the provident care of the Archangels, the dili∣gence of the Angels, the hope of the Patriarchs, the faith of the Apostles, the constancie of the Martyrs, the reverent respect of the Bishops and Doctours, the humilitie and mor∣tification of the other Confessours, the puritie of Virgins. VVith greate devotion,Thomas a Kempis l. 4. c. 27 and with ardent love, and with the whole affection and servour of my hart I desire, ô Lord, to receive thee, as many Saints and devout per∣sons when they did communicate did desire thee. &c.
SEVEN SEATS OF OVR BLESSED SAVIOVR WHEREIN BY A LOVING AND RESPECTFVLL SOVLE HE MAY BE FOVND IN THE SEVEN DAYES OF THE WEEKE, AND CONVERSATION HELD WITH HIM WITH SPIRITVALL SATISFACTION THE INTRODVCTION. I. THE bride in the canticles addressing herself in a loving way to the Bride▪ groome maketh this request Shew me, o thou whome my soule doth love, where thou feedest, where thou lyest in the mid-day, as much as to say; shewe me how I may come to know thee, how I may come to love thee in perfection: feeding, repre∣senting knowledge; because it is with labour of searching, and ruminating; lying, or resting, representing love, which is a content and satisfaction in the beloved, Knowledge, in the way of spirit (of which we speake) was represented to the Propher Esay in the two wings of the Seraphins with which they did fly;Esay. 6 love, in the foure wings with which they did cover Gods, or their owne face, and feete; for to come to perfection, the acts of the will and of love ought to be double to those of the vnderstanding and knowledge, these being as the steel and stone struck one v∣pon the othe; as the fire and tinder taking: those are the
needle, these ars the thread which remaineth in the wor∣ke: and accordingly that which we call meditation hath more of the knowledge, and vnderstanding, though not without feruent acts of the will and resolution; Contem∣plation hath more of the acts of the will, imploying itself vpon things already known. II. From the morning till Mid-day the sunne is in continuall motion, yet still sending forth its beames with heate proportioned to the height in which it is: At noone it resteth in a manner and hath doble the heate, which at other times it had. So must our soules endeavour to moūt vp by degrees to contemplation, and be still increasing, till we arrive to that posture of altitude, to which God shall be pleased to rayse vs in this life; then we must not think that we are licensed to decline againe, but be rising still as to another world, better, and in which are things stranger, and more admirable, then in this. It being therfore our ayme in this life to cōe as neere the happines of the other as we can; and that happines consisting in the perfect knowledge, and love, and fruition of God, we must be continually vsing means to come neerer and neerer to that fruition, beginning it here, soe farre as is possible. III. The practise of Meditation is the high way to it; yet as travellers cannot so continually walke, but that they must have their resting places, to refreth themselves, and gather new strength; and those resting places are so fare from hindering their journey, that they doe much advance it; so in this our spirituall journey, besides Medi∣taeion by which we increase in knowledge, and besides tho∣se heates which that knowledge breedeth, still carrying vs along with good purposes, and actions sureable; if we ta∣ke vp our rest now and then at some principall station, we shall find so much refreshment, that we shall not so much feele the wearynes which oftimes may come vpon vs in our journey, as be lightened (as after an houres, or a nights rest) and be fresher then when we first set forth. IV. According therfore to the seven dayes of the weeke I have disgested seven resting places▪ or Seates, wherin siting downe without much discourse, we may looke, vpon our beloved in them, and take that content
and profit, which may be for our advaucemēut; for as a green field sowed all through with severall Kinds of flo∣wers doth recreate the eye, and refresh the brayne with∣out labour, and if there be varietie of hills and plaies about it, it is the more pleasing; so will the sight of our beloved delight our soules, and refresh our wearyed vnderstan∣ding; and the severall positions in which we find him, may make the sight of him the more delightfull not that he is not allwayes exceeding delightfull but because seve∣rall people are of severall humours; and the same partie is not allwayes of the same; and varietie doth naturally both please and ease vs; for which cause also that which is he∣re set downe at every station or seate, may serve as a short declaration of the intent of this discourse, but is no wayes meant, as a paterne for any body to follow; much lesse to consine himself vnto, for as vpon a ground in musick severall artists doe make severall Kinds of division, and the same man doth varie as his phancie leads him, much mo∣re doth the holy Ghost in every body suggest diversitie of loving expressions towards the beloved of our soules, of whome he is the infinite love.Sap. 7. 22 O Blessed spirit allwayes one, and allwayes manifold, being one, I beseech thee, by thy many graces to that one love of my Saviour, which I ought only to have; that being one vvith him in this life, I may inioy him in the life to come, with the many who∣se multitude being but one hart and one soule, cannot di∣vide me from him, but increase my love towards him, by their never divided affection to him. Amen. The first Seate, the Seate of Puritie. I▪ HIs seate of Puritie, is in the armes of the blessed Virgin his mother: for she was immaculate from the first instant of her Conception, and did not only preserve, but increase that Puritie to her dying day: that of the Canticles being verifyed in her;Cant: 4. 7 Thou art all beautifull my love, and there is no spot in thee: And againe; How beauti∣full art thou and how comely,Cap. 7▪ 6 my deerest in delights? Or spiri∣tuall delicacies bestowed vpon thee. Salomon is reported to have made for himself a greate throne of Ivoris, and to
have adorned it with the finest gold;Reg: 10 18 there was not such a thrne in all the kingdomes of the world. Our Saviour did no lesse for our Blessed Lady, adorning her puritie with all kind of vertues, and chiefly with as much charitie and love to∣wards her blessed sonne, as could be found among Crea∣tures; and there was not such a creature, not only in the world below,Cant: 6. 9 but not in the kingdome of heaven itself. Admire this Puritie with the Angels, and say, Who is this that cometh forth, and advanceth as the aawning of the day when it first riseth, fayre as the moone, choosen and cleare as the sunne.Cant. 3. 7 This is the bed and seate of the true Salomon, which threescore valiant men doe compasse of the most valiant of Israel; to defend it from the beginning to the end, from all in∣cursions of whatever enemie; she is beautifull, and sweete, and comely as the heavenly Hierusalem,Cant. 6. 3 and there is not a cittizen of it among vs that is to be compared to her. How truly might she say of herself, my soule doth magnifie our Lord and my spirit exult in God my Saviour, because he hath done greate things for me, even he that is powerfull; for if there be any greatenes in heaven or earth it is to be found in her in measure incomparable. The moone is fayre, but not fay∣rer then shee; the lilly is white, but not whiter then shee: as a lilly among thornes,Cnt: 2. 2 so my love among the daughters. All are but as thornes to her. If thou knowest it not, by reason of thy humilitie, o fayrest of women, go forth after the foote steps of all the companies of heaven,Cant: 1.  and earth, and thou wilt find that neither Cherubins, nor Seraphins, not Principalities, nor do∣minations, nor any of the quires of Angels, or Saints will contend with thee, but reverence thee, and admire thee, and love thee as a well ordered armie of all excellencies within thyself.Cant: 6.  How beautifull are thy marches, o daugh∣ter of a Prince? And mother of the Prince of Princes.Cant: 7. II. But as a tree is much more beautifull, when it hath the proper fruite hanging on it, and a vine when it is full of ripe bunches of grapes, so is the blessed Virgin with her blessed sonne in her armes. A sonne who alone is to her as a thousand sonnes, having all the perfections in him of which the world is capable. A sonne who did nothing prejudice her puritie, but raysed it to a value inestimable, the remayning a perpetuall Virgin, both before and after he was borne, and in conceiving him. A sonne who beautifi∣ed her soule, as the sunne doth beautify the moone, when
it is at full, and leaveth no part of it which doth not spar∣kle with heavenly light.Cat 1. 15 O mother. O sonne. How pleasing are those doue-like glances, which you cast vpon one ano∣ther? How doe they inflame both your harts with the pu∣rest love, and set your affections on fire with mutuall cor∣respondence? How sweete are those cheeks saluted with each others lips,Cant. 5. 3  5 13. as a bed of sweete spices, and followers; and as a pomegranat when it is broken. How pleasing are those imbracements, and a thousand expressions of love and es∣teeme, which it is not for pe to vndertake, but a devoue soule may imagin; and yet fall short, because the sonne is infinite and the mother hath been capable of that infinite of which no other creature hath been thought capable. O blessed mother: May I be so bold as to salute those little hands of thy greate sonne; or to kiffe his feete? I am not worthy; give me leave at least to put my head vnder thē, acknowledging him to be my Lord my God, my soveraig∣e and commander, whome I will eternally obey. O sacred feete! tread downe the pride of my hart; give me grace to treade the steps of thy humilitie, and thy patience, and thy meeknes and thy obedience: O blessed feete, why are they so ae but that thou lovest Puritie? How come they so war∣me, but that thou lovest Charitie? And nothing can make them cold, but my want of love of thee; O love! give me grace to love thee. III. Love Puriti that thou mayest be welcome to this payre of turtles. VVash thy hands, and feet (thy works, and they affections) from all filth and dust, 8. 71 let thy lips bre∣ath nothing but the prayses of this mother and this sonne, and of whateuer hath relation to them; let th eyes bee mo∣dest, Cat▪ 2. 3. thy comportment humble thy thoughts respectfull; and sit vnder the shadow of this most fruitfull tree; for the shade will be delightfull, and the fruite sweete to thy tast. Passe from branch to branch, and see whether h b more lovely in his cralde, or in his mothers armes; comforting old Simeon, or incouraging good S. Ioseph in his flight to gypt; in the Temple preseted, or found in the midst of dostours; working at his trade, or praying vpon his little knees, lifting vp his sweete hand, and eyes for thee, to his heavenly Father: O esus, have mercy vpon me a synner: I put mysel into thy hands, and begge that thou wilt ha∣ve me in thy thoughts.
The second seate, the seate of Authoritie. I. HEre we are to represent vnot vs our Saviour as he was preaching in the Synagoges of the Iewes,Marc. ▪ 22 with power and Authoritie, and not as the Scribes; at which, and at his doctrine they were grea∣tely asonished.Act 22. 18 Sit downe therfore at his feete, as S. Paul at the feete of Gamaliel; behold his countenanc, his gesture, his comportment, his fervour in reprehending, tem∣pered with vnwonted mildnes; his zeale of Gods glorie, and the good of every particular▪ The Prophecie of Esay being fullfilled in him according as himself declared.. 4. 18 The spirit of our Lord is vpon mee, for that he hath annoin∣ted me; to evangelize to the poore he hath sent me; to he∣le the contrite of hart, to preach deliverance to captives▪ light to the blind, remission to the bruised; to denounce the acceptable yeare of our Lord, and the day of retribution. And the more thou findest want in thyself of spirit, and spirituall oyntment, of contrition, of sight, of freedome, ap∣ply thyself with the more attention to heare his words; for the words which he speakes are spirit and life:Io. 6. 64: Begge that he will open thy eares, and say thou as followeth in the Prophet, But I doe not gayne say,Esay. 50.  I have not gone back. Stirte vp thy affection not only to imbrace his doctrine with courage, and love, because a greater, a wiser, a more con∣srderate, a more infallible teacher thou canst not have, as in whome are all the treasures of wisdome,Colos. 2. 3 and know∣ledge hidden. And really they are treasures of wisedome which only can inrich a soule, and affoord it plntie and content for all eternitie: They are hidden vnder the out∣ward shape of an ordinarie man,Mat. 13. 55 a Carpenters Sonne, from the eyes of worldly given thoughts, but not from the eye of faith, which enters further th corporall eyes cān reach: andZThomas  Kempis 1. 1 e. 1 n. 2 he that hath spirit will find hidden Manna in him. II. From the Synagoges passe with him to Mount Oli∣vet, where he often preached, but chiefely give care to that prime sermon of his when opening his sacred lips, he proclaymed those eight blessings, which the world ac∣counteth rather follie and miserie. Blessed be the poore of spirit, Blessed the meke; Blessed they that mourne; Bles∣sed they that hunger and thirst after instice. Blessed be th
mrcyfu; Blessed the cleare of har; Blessed the peace-ma∣kers; Blessed they who suffer persecution. And inlarging himself vpon this last point, declared what Kind of per∣ecution, we ought to account happines, to wit when they shall revil you▪ and speake all naught of you vntruly for my sake. Be thou ever praysed Lord God of heaven and earth, who hast hidden these things from the wis and prudent, and re∣vealed them to the little ones.: 11. 25 Doe not pae these steps lightly over, but see how he did not only preach, but practise thē and made thē steps to his eternall glorie, ād the glorie of all his saincts.Thom as a Kempis 1. 1 . 3 Happy is he whome truth doth teach by himself. III. Then follow him with multitudes of people round about the Countris,Matt 9. 3 sowing his celestiall doctrine, and curing all disceases▪ commanding the winds and the sa, and the euill spirits;Lu. 8. 25 Heare the people with admiration saying,Io: 7. 4 never man spake as this man speaketh. what word is this? For with power and actoritie, h commandeth th vncleane spirits,Luc. 4. 36 and they go forth. See how he enters the Temple,Io. . 15. and casts out the traffickers there, with is majesticall countenance and a small little whip of cords: Magnifie him with his disciples,Kuc. 18. 40 for if thou hold thy pea∣ce, the very slones willcry him vp▪ O stony hart of myne that is so hard, so covered and incombred with earth, so much inclined allwayes downewards, that this heavenly Master cānot find  into it. Soften it I beseech thee, with thy most  blood; hold it vp with thy po∣werfull hand;  from the earthly thoughts which clog it; and if it , strike it with thy heavenly Chariti, that som  at least may fly out of it, and take in the tinder  doctrin, to inlighten and inflame my soule, which, without it, will be eternall darknes, frō which sweete Iesus dliver me. Amen. Exercise thy po∣wer and authoritie over my passions, as thou didst o∣ver the winds and sea saying, Peac, be still; Teach me to doe thy will in all things;are, 5. 39 instruct me how to performe the particular obligtions of my state, and calling with perfection. Teach me, above all, how I may prepare my self for thy loving presence here in the most blessed Sacram∣ent, and there wher thou art in glorie, when it shall ple∣ase thee to call me to hee. Amen.
The third seate. the seate of Majestie. I VVHen the Sonne of man shall come in his majestie ād all the Angels with him,Mt. 25  thē he shall sit vpō the seate of his majesty, and all nations shall be gathered together before him. If his countenance were terri∣ble when he tooke outhoriti vpon him in this world▪ what will it be when mounted on high vpon the Clou∣des, he shall have all the World before him at once, and come with thousands of attendance,Iud 15 to doe justice against all, and covince all the impious of all the works f their impieie, and shall thunder out, that terrible sentence against those who shall have deserved it: Go yee accursed into fire everlasting. Art thou able to looke vp to that terrible seate? Or rather looke downe into thy hart, and wash it quickly with reates, that that fire may not find where to take hold of thee. That day is a day of rat, day of tribulation,Sophor,  15 and anguish, a day of calamitie and mi∣serie, a day of darkenes and mist, a cloudy and stormy day: a day of trumpt, and alarme, against the strongest and hi∣ghest, that people hall even wither away with feare and ex∣pctation of what will come vpon them.Luc 1 16 He preached here an acceptable day, if here we receive what he preached, we may be there accepted of; if we neglect here, that day will be little wlcome to vs; a dismall day to those who have here spent their dayes vnprofitably. I▪ S. Ihon in his Apocalyps describeth this seate, saying▪ I saw a greate white throne, and one siting vpon it, from whos sight earth and heavn fled,Ap. 0  and there was not plce found f them, and I saw the dead, greate and little, stand in the ight of the throne, and bookes were opened; and anothr booke was opened which is of life: and the dea were d∣ged of thos things hich were written in the bookes, a∣cording to their workes: and the sea gave th dead that were in it; and death and hell gave their dead that wre in them, and it was idged of every one according to their wor∣kes. And death and hell were cast into the poole of fir. This is the second death▪ And he that was not found in the book of lif, was cast into the poole of fire. Behold againe and againe this grete seat, of the judge and his As∣sessours behold the inhabitants of , decli∣ning,
as much as they can, this sight, but that they found no place to fly from him: behold the dead of all sorts greate and little, rich and poore, Kings and slaves, and no difference to be seen among them, but by their workes: Behold the bookes of every ones conscience, layed open, not only to the iudge, and to every one of his Assessours, but to all the standers by; so that thousands, and millions will be looking into thy secretest thoughts and actions, and see that which thou wouldest not have God to have seen if it had been possible: and not only thy actions, but thy in∣tentions, so oft dissembled, ād laboured to be cloked with I know not what. Cast thou abide these lookes? Now thou canst not; then of force thou must to thy vtter sha∣me and confusion; no wonder that the wicked are descri∣bed to begin to say to the mountaines,Cc: 23. 30 fall vpon vs, and to the hills cover vs. For it will be an intollerable disgrace to be thus looked on. How willingly would the allready dam∣ned have remained where they were, and not have here appeared? But death and hell must of force give vp their dead; and the sea, and the earth, and wherever they were concealed. Finally looke, if thou canst for feare and trembling, into that poole of fire, so vast, that it is capable of a whole world of corpses as stinking, and as filthy as they are; see how it gapes vpon thee; see the vggly smo∣ke that riseth from it: Go downe into it living that thou mayest escape it dying. III Doe not mistake thyself, and think that this day so dreadfull, is farre of: it will be represented vnto thee, as the greate world in a little mal,Mat. 24. 29 at whatever houre thou shalt come to dy; then the sunne will be darkened, as to thee, and the moone will not give the light: all thy pretenses will fall to ground, as so many starres, on which thou wert gazing, and the powers of those heavens, in which thou hast placed thy hopes, and thy felicitie will all fayle thee: Anguish, and confusion, and troble, and feare will eise thee, if before hand thou hast not▪ provided so, that when the signe of the sonne of man shall appeare,S. Andrew thou mayest say with S. Andrew. O good Crosse, long desired, and now prepared for my loving soule: I come vnto thee secu∣re, and ioyfull; receive me also ioyfully, who am the dis∣iple of him who did hang vpon thee, O mercyfull Savi∣our,
who art to be my Iudge; by thy infinite mercy, I'be∣seech thee, that thou wilt now protect me, that I may be, then protected; delivet me from evill now, that I may then be delivered in that evill day: If thou be good to me here,Rom: 8▪ 3 it will be then well with me: for if God be for vs, who will be against vs? and he delivered thee for vs all, as a pledge of his love, and mercy towards vs, as a mediatour for vs be∣twixt his mercy and his iustice: Who then shall separate vs from the Charitie of Christ (With which either he doth love vs, or we him) I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,Apoc. 46 nor things presnt, nor things to come shall separate vs. &c I reioyce with the multitude of Angels and Saints at thy victorie over thy eimies, and at thy iust iudgements o∣ver them: Give me grace to ovbercome them here, that with thee, Lord, God, Omnipotent, we may reigne for ever and ever. Amen. Allelui. The fourth seate▪ the seate of love. I. HIs seate of love is the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar: For what can be more lovely then Christ in our hands, in our mouths, in our breasts, in our soules? Here he doth act all the parts, which possi∣bly love can expresse, he desireth to be continually with vs he accomodateth himself in a way, that he may be wit vs, and within vs, with out all manner of offence, becau∣se in the shape of bread, and wine; he beareth wtih our in∣fintie, and hourely imperfections, and doth not avoyde vs for them: He is continually giving vs himelf, in whome are all treasures: And because it is neither necessarie nor fitting that he should againe die for vs, yet he is so pleased with his death for vs, that he will have it dayly comme∣morated, and in a divine kind of manner, acted, and re∣presented in this blessed Sacrament. The bread, and the Calice being consecrated severally into his body and blood, as if one were separted from the other. He acts the part of a father in providing such sustenance for vs; of a mother and nurse in feeding vs at his owne breast; of a frend i comforting and assisting vs: All these kindnesses require loving corespondence on our part; let vs leare oursel∣ves
of as many imperfections as ws can, that we may be lesse troblesome▪ accommodate ourselves to his will and pleasute in all things, and be continually giving oursel∣ves even to death for his sake, if he so require; and be sure never to be from him by any grievous offence. II It is sayed in the first of king that the soule of Io∣nths was ioyned fst to the soule of David, Reg 18 and Ionathas lovd him as he owne soule; and they entred aleague: and Ionathas striped himself of the coate where with he was clothed, and gave it to David, and thee rest of his garments, vnto his sword and bow, and vnto his belt. Such ought to be our love towards our blessed Saviour in this most blessed Sacrament; not only to be able to say with S. Paul, Who shall separate vs from the Charitie of Christ?Rom 8 35 Tribulation? or distresse? or famine? or nakednes? or danger? or persecution? or the sword? But we must indeavour to have so tender a love towards him, that we be as it Were one soule, and one body; for this is the in∣tēt of this his loving and familiar communication of him∣self vnto vs; forS Grill as melted waxe if it be poured into o∣ther waxe, they are throughly mingled one with the o∣other; so he that receiveth the blessed body and blood of our Saviour is ioyned vnto him, so that Christ is to be found in him, and he. in Christ. He▪ being sonne to the king of heaven striped himself of his glorie to cloth vs with glorie▪ and gave vs the rest of his garments▪ that is his ver∣uous life, and example to imitate; of what should not we strip ourselves to offer vnto him? Specially our passi∣ons of Anger, and spln, and revenge▪ so contrarie to this Sacrament of lve, and lay them at his feete never to take them vp▪ but in his defence: and purely in his cause. III Our everlasting happines consisteth in our ever permanent vnion with God in celestiall blesse: Of this happines this blessed Sacrament is a beginning, and a pledge: who would not be ever greedy to inioy it? Entring into the ioy of his Lord, so oft as e could; and because know∣ledge is the greatest sput to love, who would not be ever minating, and ever loving his perfections? and with the Cherbins and Seraphins saying. Holy, holy, holy. Tho art my God, my Crator, my Redeemer▪ infinite in power, in Wisedom, in goodnes, in mercyes, in liberaliti, in patiene, i humilitie, in all things imaginable: Thou art the giver of all
good gifts, and fountae of living watrs, the tidot a∣gainst all evills, my strength, o Lord, and my refuge; with thee I wll dwell, because thee have I choosen; pos∣sesse thou I beseech thee my hart: Absorbeat quaeso meam ignita ac melliflua vis amoris ui, vt more amoris tui moriar, qui amor amoris mei dignatus es mori. Amn. The fift seate: the seate of Compassion. I. THe seate of Compassion is the Cross on which he hung. At the foote wherof finding the Magdalen I will first with her bewayle my synns, which have been cause of so painefull, and so disgracefull a de∣ath, of so happy and so worthy a person. O synne what can setforth thy enoritie more, the that to get pardon for thee,Luc: 24, 26 and to deface thee, it behoved th sonne of God o suffer? No blood could wash the away, but the blood of this lambe of God. O stayne in grayne! no mdecine cure thee, but the sacred flesh of this immaculae body thus brused.Hier: 19 O venome intollerable. Who will give to my head water, and to my eyes a fountine of ters▪ and I will eepe, ment day and night the death of this King of all ations▪ slaughtered for my synns; a King crowned with thornes, which ought every one of them to pearce my hrt, and puish in me the pride and sensualiti, of which he never was guyltie. O nayles in his hands and feete! You have mitaken the place, where you should have been struck; They are my hands and feet which have synned▪ this man wht harme hath he done?Luc; 23 22 I find no cause i him. O God, my God, wherfore hst th thou forsaken him, a given him over to such a cruell death? O death, I will be thy d∣th, I will be thy mortall bit, 13. 14  Hell. For ioyning myself With his powerfull grace, and by the merits of this victorious death. I will synne no more, and die rather a thousand death then offend him. II. Sorrow full  my soul vnto death. And what wonder? For if I follow thee from the place where thou didst ma∣ke thy last supper to the rosse,Mat. 26▪ 38 I find nothing but teares or blood, nothing but tants and scffs, nothing but blos nd stripes, othing bt wouds and trments, nothing but
and  against thee, my God, my Saviour▪ my love. What doth this thy Prayer signifie; Father if it be possibl, let this Chalicepasse from e. O bitter Chalice? Which so much sweetnes as was in thee would not alay. I doe not say it could not, for certainly the request thou didst make was possible to be granted, but thou wouldest not. Thou didst offer thyself ūto it becaus thou wouldest. Yet this doth not excuse me from compassionating thee▪ for however,Esay. 53. 8. there was a Kind of necessitie put vpon thee. O hard necessitie!Hebr 9 16 O that from my eyes there could trickle downe such drops of blood, as then from thy whole bo∣dy! O drowsie head of mine! Why doe I sleepe in this oc∣casion? Behold the Traytur sleepeth not. What doe these clubs, and saves, and swords about this mild and innocent lambe▪ He was dayly in the Temple among you, what did you heare from him but good? Their eares are stopped; they hale him away by night; they buffet him; they mis∣vse him▪ they condemne him to dye, as guiltie; of what? What ccustion bring you inst this man? I am the mlefac∣tour▪ I m e that hah synned, I have done wickedly, this lambe what hath he done?Io▪ 18 20 Let this and, I bsch thee▪ be turned vpon me, and vpon the house of my soule which hath harboured so many vnlawfull, Reg. 24 17 tumultuos, and iotou guests against the law of God and man. III. Harken what a sound the lashes give, which we∣re loded vpon his tende skin, perhaps for houres toge∣ther: behold the urroes which they hve made in his sacred flesh; and hold thy eyes from weeping, if thou be so stout, and thy hart from faynting, if it be so hard. O shame! O confusion! Behold the mn. Is this the man so cryed vp, not long ince, and now so much cryed dow∣ne as to be set behinde a murtherer and a thf, and a sedi∣tios fellow▪ O sencelesse change! Take him away, him away, cruciie him. O cry vnmercyfull! Take him into thy armes and into thy hart, and help him to beare this Crosse, for he is ready to fayt vnder it, as powerfull and as stroug as he is otherwise▪ O mount! wherfore art tho so cragy to him, whose steps are so wholesome? But see∣ing he is pleaed to choose thee for th stage of this his last▪ action,  shl  my resting place for ver, hr
I will dwell because I have choosen it.P. 11 14 and the noyse of those which struck in those cruell nayles shall sound perpetually in my res; my eyes shall be fixed vpon this laentable spectacle, which the heavens are sory to be∣hold; my hart shall be nayled to his Crosse with him; I will stand with our blessed Lady, and S. Ihon weeping; I will say in part with the Scibes and Pharisees. H hath saved others; He will also saue me. Lord have mercy vpon me a synner. Lord remember me now thou art in thy Kingdome: my God, doe not forsake me: Father forgive me. The sixt Seate, the Seate of Miserie. I. THe seate of Miserie, is my poore hart and soule, compassed with a body, as poore and miserable. What is man that thou art mindfull of him? Or the Sō∣ne of mn̄ that thou doest visit him?Ps. 8. 5 A leafe tossed with every wind▪ to day alive to morrow dead; to day green,Io 13. 23 to morrow withered; to day set forth with borrowed favours, to mor∣row abominable by its proper stench. What is beauty but the cover of a dunghill? What proportion, but the plea∣sure of a other bodies eye? VVhat is strength but a lau∣ghing stock to thousands that are stronger? And when a body should have all, what certaintie? The soule is in a māner in as much vncertaintie; for though the body decay by nature, and accidents come vpon it not possibly to be prevented; and the mischiefe which happens to a soule is volntarie, yet so much weakenes doth often oppresse it, so many enimies doe assalt it, so many crooked inclina∣tions ae leading it into darke, and crooked wayes, that so long as i is in this world it is in danger; and no man can absolutely say, I will not fall. For what is my strength that I should bar,Io 6  and go through with so many hard things? Or what will be my end, that I should have pa∣tience enough to persever vnto it? O my God! Thou must be my strength, and my patience. Thou didst vouchsafe to take vpon thee my , that I might be the stron∣ger; thou wert pleased to dwell in my nature, that by thy grac it might overcome atur, have compassion of this
rthen vessell, that it be not put to more stresse, then tho knowest it will beare; for of myself I am very frayle and miserable, and know not what will be my end II. O infinite goodnes. This the goodnes I must be ever clayming: for what but thy goodnes could move thee to cast thy thoughts so much vpon me, as to have mercy vpon me most misereble wretch, leaving those rebellious spi∣rits in their iniquitie? VVere not thy mercyes greate e∣nough to have pardoned them as thou didst me? It were blasphemie to think otherwise:Heb. 2. 16 Yet no where doth he ta∣ke the Angels; but the seed of Abraham h taketh, and vouchsafeth to suffer miseries with vs, and to die for vs, that this misrie and this death, which we either dayly indure, or hourely expect, might of miserie become a happines, being borne patiently, re∣signedly, joyfully. They in nature doe so farre excell vs a it is not to vs now comprehensible; we are the least, and lowest of rationall creatures; we made ourselves lo∣wer by our owne beastly wayes, and became very slaves of thedevill,Prov. 8. 3 How came it then to be thy delight to be with the sonnes of men, but by thy owne infinite goodnes which deligteth to be doing wonderfull works,Ecc. . 4 which thou alone canst doe, works glorious, and hidde, and vn∣knowne to all but by thy own infinite wisdome. III. The distance betwixt heaven and earth, is in all respects greate▪ but nothing to the distance betwixt God and me. He must be more then an Angel that can mea∣sure it: Yet I not being able to rayse my self from dirt and dust, he stoopes to me: I myself that spake, Lo I am pre∣sert:Esay. 52. 6 5▪ 12 I myself will comfort you. Shall I fall downe at his knees with S. Peeter, and say, Go forth from m, bcause I am a synfull man,Luc. 5▪ 12 Lord? Or with the humbl Cen∣tution;Match. 8. 8 Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter vndr my roofe. Or with the en lepers retire. and keepe a loo∣fe, crying alowde, Iesus, Master, have mercy on me. Or rather with that one Samaritane fll on my face before hi giving thanks, ad with a lowad voyce magnifying his greate, greate goodnes, that vouchsafeth thus not only to looke vpon this miserable creature, but to be with him, nd within him many, many wayes. O Lord! nothing is due to me but confusion for my poorenes in all
respects, and more confusiou for my many synns withou respect. To thee Blessing, and honour, and glori▪ and po∣wer,Apoc. 5. 3 and thanksgiving for ever and ever▪ for who is sufficient to declare his works?Ecel.  Or who shall add to declre his mercyes? When a man shall have done, then shall h begin. what man, and what is grace? And what is his grace? And what good? or what is his evill? God is patient towards him and port out his mercyes upon him, he hath seen the presumption of hart, that it is naught; therfore he hath fullfilled his propiti∣tion towards them, and hath sevved them, the vvy of . Grant me grace that I may follow it, and bring this mi∣serable carkas, and wretched soule of myne to that glorie which tho hast prepared for me from the beginning of the world. Amen. The seventh Seate, the Seate of Glorie. I. HIs seate of Glorie, is at the right hand of his Fa∣ther, where, equall to him in all things as he is God, and neerest to him in glorie, as he is Man▪ as farre above all the Celestiall spirits, as the hand in honour is above the foote, he possesseth the Kingdome of his Father with full power, governeth the world at his pleasure and in the plesatnes of his countenance is the lie of all the heavenly Court;Pto. 16▪ and the lamp (or light) is the lambe:Ap. 21. 2 for infinite glorie doth shine out even fro that glorifyed body of his, able to astonish the highest Che∣ubs, as much as the three Apostles at his transfigurati∣on, were it not that they are strengthened above their nature.Es. 33 7 Hither if we lift vp the eyes of our Soule, we may see the King in his beauty, his throne, his scepter, his crow∣ne, his footestoole of gold, his garments as vvhe as snovv his face resplendent as the sunne; His retin in array pro∣portionable to his owne most bountifull magnificence and their deserts:Ap. 17. 16. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Fall downe before this throne, doing homage nto him▪ and reioying at his exaltation▪ more then at any thing in this world, or in the next; because he alone is worthy: all other creatures, if you take from them, what they ha∣ue from hi, what are they? He alone is holy. He alone i
powerfull. He alone hath immortaliti, Tim. 6. 15 and incorruptibilitie within his owne absolute power, and of himself, and th∣re resit his hand,Da. 4. 3▪ or strength. II. In the Apocalyps it is related that thousands of thosands of Angles made ioyfull acclamations to this ambe of God▪Ap 13. 14 this King of Kings, saying that he was worthy, that his power and divinitie, his wisedome and strength, his honour and glorie should be praysed and renowned by all and every Creature that was in heaven, or on earth, or vnder earth acknowledging the same? and that the foure and twentie elders (that is, the Patriarchs, and athers, and Sain∣s of the old, and new Testament, signifyed by the per∣fect nūber of twelue twice told) did fall downe before his throne, and adored him, and tooke the crownes which they had vpon their heads, and layed them before his throne, acknowledging all from him, and all due to him againe. Behold therfore this spectacle with greate ioy and congratulation. Attend every Angel, and every saint in his rank: The Angels with their prompnes; the Archangels with their cre, the Thrones with their desire he should rest in them, the Dominations wih their courage in his service; the Principalities with their heroicall acts: the Po∣wers with their pietie and devotion; the Cherubins with their wisdome and discretion; The Seraphins with their ardent love and affections. The Patriarchs with thir ex∣pectation fullfilled, and figures demonstrated. The Apo∣stles with the cleare sight of that which they beleeved and preached▪ The Martyrs with their particular laurell and content, for every thing that they suffered; The Bishops and Doctours, with their knowledge infinitely augmen∣ted; the other Confessours with the hundred fold reward of all their labours increased; the Virgins, and VVidowes. with their puritie and synceritie in following him wherever he went; and if there be any particular among them with whome we have speciall acquaintance, that partie will do vs the favour to conduct vs, and shew vs more then can be here expressed, and chiefely the singular honour which the Blessed Virgin his Mother doth him, for the singular favour received in being choosen to so high a dignitie, ād in all respects fitted for it.
III. O ever blessed Saviour▪ two things I behold i this glorious sight, thy infinite worth, and my infinite obligations: where shall I find thoughts sufficient ▪ presse them; all these which I have rehearsed doe no re∣ach the ten thousand part of them: Yet O that I had them all, and the concurrence of all that are, and have been, and shall be! my demand seemes greate, and is lie∣le, as all that I have done or am able to doe is (god ot) little. O miserable littlenes! Accept notwithstanding sweee Saviouur, of this little, all that is: The two of the VVidow were little; but ô that I had that greate hart with which she offered all. Accept of it, sweete Ie∣sus as it is. I blesse thee with all thy creatures in heave and earth; I ioy with them at thy glorie, with them I of∣fer my perpetuall service vnto thee my God, my Savou, my all things: with them I hope to inioy thee more per∣fectly, when thou shalt be pleased with it, that I may give thee ioy though not sufficiently, yet world without end. Amen. FINIS.
Introductiō to our following Meditatiōs. 3 THe Baptisme of our Saviour. 5 His fast, Temptation and victory. 7 S. Ihons testimonie of him. 9 He gathereth Disciples. 11 He turned water into wine. 13 Application to the most B. Sacrament. 15 He casteth Marchants out of the Temple. 17 He instructs Nicodemus. 19 The conversion of the Samaritan Woman. I. Part. 21 II▪ Part. 23 He cures a noble mans Sonne. 24 He teacheth from S. Peeters ship. 26 Second Application to the most B, Sacrament. 27 His fervour in preaching and divers cures. 29 Three pretend to follow him. 31 He calmes the Sea. 32 He casteth our a Legion of evill Spirits. 34 He cureth one sick of a palsey. 35 He call's S. Matthew. 37 Third Application to the most B. Sacrament. 38 He rayseth lairus his daughter 40 He cureth the sick man at the Poole. 42 He cureth a withered hand. 44 He chooseth Apostles. 45 The eight Beatitudes. 47 Other documents. 49 Fourth Application to the most B. Sacrament. 50 The narrow way. 52 He cureth the Centurions servant. 54 He rayseth the widowes Sonne. 55 S. Ihon sends his disciples to be instructed. 57 The conversion of the Magdalen▪ 58 He casts out a dumb devill. 60 Thefift Application. 62 The Parable of the Seed. 64 Of the Cockle. 65 The Mustard seed and treasure. 67 He is misused in Nazareth. 68 Instructions given to his Apostles▪ 70
The death of S. Ihon Baptist 7 The sixt Application. 73 The multiplying of the five loaves 75 He walketh ād biddeth Peete walk vpon the waves▪ 77 He cureth the daughter of the Canancan. 7 He cureth a deafe and dumbe man. 8 Peeter confesseth Christ to be the Sonne of God▪ 8 Christ foretelleth his Passion. 8 The seventh Application. 85 The Transfiguration. 8 He casts out the devill hich his discipl could not. 88 Humilitie commended, and the avoyding of scandall. 90 The Parable of the King taking account of his . 9 He goeth privately to Hierusalem. 94 Officers sent to appreh end him. 95 The eight Application. 96 The ten lepers. 9 The VVoman in Adulterie, 100 Christ the light of our world. 101 He gives sight to one borne blind. 10 Our Saviour the doore and good sheep eard. 10 Seventy two disciples. 106 The ninth Application. 10 The parable of the ounded ma. 110 Martha intertaines our Saviour. He teacheth to pray. I. Part. 11 II. Part. 116 III. Part. 11 Avarice condemned. 119 The tenth Application. 12 The watchfull servant. 123 The punishment of the vnrepenta. 124 The goodnes of God shewed iu two ▪ 12 He bewayleth the vngratefull. 127 Precepts of humilitie and Chariti. 12 Perfect enunciation. 131 The eleventh Application. 13 Parables of the lost sheepe and the  13 The Prpdigall Child. I Part. 13 II. Part. The vnfaythfull Baylie. 14
The rich glutton. 142 The Pharisee and the Pblican. 143 The twelfth Application. 145 He perswades perfection. 147 The reward of them who leave all. 149 VVorkemen hired into the Vinyard. 150 Lazarus raysed. I. Part. 152 II. Part. 154 III. Part. 156 The thirtenth Application. 157 He fortelleth his Passion. 159 The Sonues of Zebedeus demand. 161 The blindman neere lericho. 162 Zaccheus. 164 The Magdalen annoyts our Saviour. 166 The Councell of the Iewes against our Saviour. 169 The Fourtenth Application. 167 Gentils desire to see our Saviour. 171 He teacheth that he is God. 173 The parable of the vineyard hired ou. 175 Of the King marying his Sonne. 177 Tribute payed to Cesar. 178 The greate Commandment. 181 The fiftenth Application 182 Signes of the coming of our Sauiour. I. Part. 184 II. Partt. 186 III. Part. 188 The ten Virgins. 190 Talents distributed. 191 The last Idgment. 194 The sixtenth Applicatio. 195 Seven Seates of our Blessed Saviour. INTRODVCTION. THe first Seate; of Puitie: 200 Seate of Auctoritie. 201 Seate of Majestie▪ 205 Seate of love. 207 Seate of Compassion 209 Seate of Miserie. 211 te of Glorie. 213 FINIS.
Errours of the Second Part. Such, as is hoped will not troble the vnderstanding reader, are omitted▪ Pag. Lin. Err. Corr. 9 1 mind winde 9 9 vs more more 1 10 to thou 15 28 it turne it to turne 16 31 spuore savorie 17 then their   30 the to 52 32 of dele 54 25 soldeers soldiers 55 8 God go 61 21 diffnsion dissension 62 11 oftentation oftentation 35 sped spred 31 O of 4 25 not reflect not to reflect 9 22 we we if we, if we 0 41 which with 4 ff all shall 95 4 in in the   34 then thou 100 33 impac impeache 104 1 to vs as 117 27 ercised exercised 122 18 and at 125 39 house of a house   40 of a del 130 39 all not 140 1 consider we consider 149 1 loving leaving 156 6 best be best 168 2 ayp has Cayphas 174 2 owe awe 184 20 say I say 202 7 followers flowers   10 per pe 206 29 mal map
