M3027A 99834803 39340
THE USE Of the ASTRONOMICAL Playing-Cards, Teaching any Ordinary Capacity by them to be acquainted with all the STARS in HEAVEN, To know their Place in Heaven, Colour, Nature, and Bigness. As also the Poetical Reasons for every CONSTELLATION, Very Useful, Pleasant, and Delightful for all Lovers of INGENIETY. By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. LONDON: Printed by J. Moxon, and are to be Sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Atlas in Warwick Lane. 1692.
OF THE Stars in HEAVEN. THE Stars are divided into six sorts or si∣zes called Magnitudes, (which are you may see) distinguisht with six several sizes of Asterisks made like Stars, as sēt down in a Table on the Card over Dorado, whither I efer you. Astronomers have computed the sizes of these Stars by comparing them either to the Diameter, or lse to the whole Globe of the Earth. The Diame∣er of the Earth is 6872 of our common Miles, viz. uch Miles, as the whole Circumference of the Earth nd Water makes 21600 Miles; allowing for every egree of the greatest Circle 60 Miles. Now the Diameter of a Star of the first Magnitude compared with the Diameter of the Earth hath such proporti∣n to it as 19 hath to 4; therefore it containeth he Diameter of the Earth 4 times and ¾. The Diameter of a Star of the second Magnitude s unto the Diameter of the Earth as 269 is to 60: herefore it containeth it 4 28/90 times. The Diameter of a fixed Star of the third Magni∣ude is unto the Diameter of the Earth as 25 unto 6: herefore it containeth it 4 ⅙ times. The Diameter of a fixed Star of the fourth mag∣itude is unto the Diameter of the Earth as 19 unto : therefore it containeth it 3 ⅘ times. The Diameter of a fixed Star of the fifth Magni∣tude
is unto the Diameter of the Earth, as 119 unto 36, therefore it containeth it 3 11/36 times. The Diameter of a fixed Star of the sixth magni∣tude is unto the Diameter of the Earth as 21 unto 8 therefore it containeth it ⅝ times. As for the proportions of the cloudy and obscure Stars, they are not expressed, because they are but few, and of no great account in respect of their smal∣ness. The proportions of the fixed Stars compa∣red with the Globe of the Earth, are as follow. A Star of the first Magnitude is to the Globe o the Earth, as 6859 to 64, therefore it containeth the Globe of the Earth 107 ⅙ times. A Star of the second Magnitude is to the Globe o the Earth, as 19465109 is to 216000, therefore i containeth it 90 ⅛ times. A Star of the third Magnitude is to the Globe o the Earth▪ as 15625 is unto 216, therefore it contai∣neth it 72 ⅓ times. A Star of the fourth Magnitude is to the Globe o the Earth, as 6850 is unto 125: therefore it contain¦eth the Globe of the Earth 54 11/12 times. A Star of the fifth Magnitude is to the Globe o the Earth, as 1685159 is unto 46656, therefore i containeth the Globe of the Earth 36 8/1 times. A Star of the sixth Magnitude is to the Globe o the Earth as 9261 is unto 511, therefore it contain¦eth the Globe of the Earth 18 1/10 times.
I confess all this may seem matter of incredulity to those whose understanding is swayed by their visual sence, because they cannot perhaps conceive it possi∣ble that the Heaven which appears so small to the bare eye should be able to contain so great a number of such great bodies as is here spoken of; yet if those be capable to consider the vast distance of this Hea∣ven, and consequently of the Stars placed in it from the face of the Earth, and also the Diminutive quali∣ty of distance, their reason will be rectified, and their incredulity turn'd into an acknowledgment of the unspeakable wisdom of Almighty God; and they will say with the Psalmist, Great is our Lord, Great is his Power, his Wisdom is Infinite, Psal. 147.5. The distance of the Stars therefore from the Earth, is according to Mr. John Dee's computation, 2008 1 ½ semidiameters of the Earth. The semidiameter of the Earth containeth of our common miles 3436 4/11, such miles as the whole Earth and Sea round about is 21600: allowing for every degree of the greatest cir∣cle 60 miles, so that the distance of the Stars from the Earth is in miles 69006540, a distance so vastly great, that were there a path for a Footman to walk in of that length, he must have set forth 9452 years 347 days ago, and have travelled 20 miles every day to have been just now at his Journeys end. Now as Mr. Dee saith (almost in the same words) if you weigh well with your self this little parcel of fruit Astronomical, as concerning the bigness and distance of the Stars, &c. and the huge massiness of the Starry Heaven, you will find your Consciences moved with the Kingly Prophet to sing the confession of Gods Glory; and say, The Heavens declare the Glo∣ry
of God, and the Firmament sheweth the works of his Hands. Of the Constellations in Heaven. A Constellation is a certain number of Stars placed by God Almighty neer one another in Heaven, and by Astronomers circumscribed in one Figure depi∣cted about them, as Aries the Ram is a Constellation. Taurus the Bull is another Constellation, &c. Astro∣nomers brought them into these figures, for instru∣ctions sake, things cannot be taught without names▪ to give a name to every Star had been troublesom to the Master, and for the Schollar, for the Master to devise, and for the Schollar to remember; and there∣fore the Astronomers have reduced many Stars into one Constellation, that thereby they may tell the bet∣ter where to seek them, and being sought, how to express them. And they brought them into these fi∣gures, and none other, being moved thereto by these three Reasons: first these figures express some pro∣perties of the Stars that are in them; as those of the Ram to be hot and dry, Andromeda chained beto∣keneth imprisonment: the head of Medusa cut off, signifieth the loss of that part: Orion with his terri∣ble and threatning gesture, importeth tempest, and terrible effects: The Serpent, the Scorpion, and the Dragon signifie poyson: The Bull, insinuateth a me∣lancholly passion: The Bear inferreth cruelty, &c. Secondly, the Stars (if not precisely, yet after a sort) do represent such a figure, and therefore that figure was assigned them: as for example, the Crown, both North and South; the Scorpion and the Triangle, re∣present
the figures which they have. The third cause was the continuance of the memory of some notable men, who either in regard of their singular pains ta∣ken in Astronomy, or in regard of some other nota∣ble deed, had well deserved of mankind. The first Author of every particular Constellation is uncertain; yet are they of great antiquity; we receive them from Ptolomy, and he followed the Platonicks; so that their antiquity is great. Moreover we may perceive them to be ancient by the Scri∣ptures, and by the Poets. In the 38 Chapter of Job there is mention made of the Pleiades, Orion, and Arcturus, and Mazzaroth, which some interpret the 12 Signs: Job lived in the time of Abraham, as Syde∣rocotes maketh mention in his Book de Commensuran∣dis locorum distantiis. Now besides all this, touching the reason of the invention of these Constellations the Poets had this purpose, viz. to make men fall in love with Astro∣nomy: And to that intent have to every Constellati∣on invented strange conceited stories, (as you may read hereafter, therein imitating Demosthenes, who when he could not get the people of Athens to hear him in a matter of great moment, and profitable for the Common-wealth, he began to tell them a tale of a fellow that sold an Ass; by which tale he so brought on the Athenians, that they were both wil∣ling to hear his whole Oration, and to put in pra∣ctice what he exhorted them to. The like intent had the Poets in inventing of those stories: they saw that Astronomy being for its commodity singular in the life of man, was almost of all men utterly negle∣cted: Hereupon they began to set forth that Art un∣der
Fictions, that thereby such as could not be per∣swaded by commodity might by the pleasure be in∣duced to take a view of these matters; and thereby at length fall in love with them. For commonly you shall note this, that he that is ready to read the sto∣ries, cannot content himself therewith, but desireth also to know the Constellation, or at leastwise some principal Star therein. All the Constellations formerly notified by the Antients, were in number 48, because no more were seen in our Hemisphere, though in this latter Age there are 12 more discovered about the South Pole, which because it may be somewhat more pleasant for reading, and much more helpful for your memo∣ry, I shall give you their Names in plain English Rhythmes. The Constellations of the Fixed Stars. THE Army of the Starry Skie Declares the Glory of God most high; Seen and perceived of all Nations In eight and fourty Constellations. First near unto the Northern Pole The Dragon and two Bears do role; Whose hinder parts and Tails contain The lesser and the greater Wain. The Hair, the Bear-ward, and the Crown, And then comes Hercules kneeling down. And next below a place doth take Great Serpentarius with his Snake.
Under the Harp of Orpheus The Eagle and Antinous. The Silver Swan her Wings doth spread Above the Dart and Dolphins head. Then Pegasus comes on amain, Andromeda follows in her Chain. The Triangle below her stands; And at her feet in Perseus hands The Gorgon's head. Above are seen Her Parents Cepheus, with his Queen Cassiope. Not far below Heniochus his Goat doth show On his left shoulder: in his hand He doth the stormy Kids command. Of the Zodiack. Here in the Zodiaque begins The Ram, the Bull, the Loving Twins; The Crab, the Lyon, and Virgin tender, The Ballance, Scorpion, and Bow-bender; Goat, Waterman, then Fishes twain Shall bring you round to th' Ram again. Fifteen Images appear In the Southern Hemisphere. The Monstrous Whale before the rest, Eridanus scarce wets his brest: Over the Hare Orion bright Sparkles in a Winters night. Then comes the Great Dog, at whose tail The famous Argo spreads her sail. Above the Little Dog doth flame, For whom the Latines had no name: Long Hydra on her tail allow Carries the Pitcher and the Crow.
The Centaure holds the Wolf by th'heel. The Altar, and Ixions Wheel Are never seen of us: but here The Southern Fish brings up the rear. Southern Constellations. About the Southern Pole there be Twelve Constellations we can't see, Which Frederick Houtman did survay Upon the Island Sumatrae: They'r call'd the Crane, the Phoenix, and The Indian, with three Darts in's hand, The Bird of Paradice, the Fly, The Peacock, the Camelion sly, The South Triangle, and South Snake, The Toucan Goose with its long Beak, The Flying Fish and Dorado: Two Magellanick Clouds also. Of the Nature of the Stars. To many of the Principal Stars there is in planeti∣cal Characters prefixed their Planetical Natures. The Astrologers make great use of them for knowing the nature of the Stars; for those Stars that have the character of ♄ adjoined, are said to be of the nature of ♄; those that have ♃ adjoyned, are of the nature of ♃, and so of the rest. If a Star have the characters of two Planets adjoyned, that Star participates of both their Natures, but most of that Planets whose character is first placed. The use Astronomers make of those characters, is for knowing the colour of any Star; as if a Star have ♄ adjoyned, it is of the colour of ♄; if ♃, it is the colour of ♃, &c.
The fixed Stars are known from the Planets by their continual twinckling, for the Planets never twinckle, but the fixed Stars do. How you may learn to know all the Stars in Hea∣ven by these Playing Cards. To each of these Cards I have set down the day of the month that the Constellation in it rises at the Time of Sun-setting, as also the point of the Com∣pass it rises on, so that if you will observe it, when the Sun sets, you will see the Constellation rising upon that point of the Compass set down on the Card with the letters of the point of the Compass. For Example. If you would know when the Little Dog rises in the Evening, look in the bottom of the Card, and you will find Jan. 11. E. by N. which shews that on the 11th. of January at Sun-set the Constellation of the Little Dog rises East and by North; therefore looking into that part of Heaven, you shall see the Constellation rising, and the Stars placed in Heaven, just as you find them placed on the Card. But if the Constellation be risen some considerable time, you must know the time since it rose, and estimate how high it may be above the Earth, by allowing about the twelfth part of Heaven for every hour since Sun∣set, and about that esteemed height look for it, and when you find a number of Stars placed in Heaven like those on your Card, you may conclude that to be the Constellation, and to your great delight and satis∣faction. See in what part of the Constellation each
particular Star lies, and of what Nature, Colour, and magnitude it is. These Cards are divided into four Suits, as other Playing Cards are, viz. Spades, Hearts, Diamonds, Clubs: And Astronomers have divided the whole face of Heaven into four Colures, viz. The Vernal Colure, or Spring, The Aestival Colure, or Summer, The Autumnal Colure, or Autumne, The Hyemnal Colure, or Winter. Because when the Sun comes to any of these Colures, the Season of the year alters into Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter; and so have I divided these Cards; for all the Constellations that are in the Vernal Colure are known by the suit of Spades, in the Aestiral Colure are Hearts, in the Autumnal Colure Diamonds, and in the Hyemnal Colure are Clubs, which are placed on the top at the left hand of every Card; and the number of each suit is marked on the top of the Card close by it with Numerical Letters thus, I, II, III, IV, V, &c. to X, and the Kings, Queens, and Knaves of each suite are also depicted on the top in the mid∣dle of the Card. Of Via Lactea, or the Milky-way. This Circle is not set down on the Cards, because it takes up the whole compass of Heaven, but it is so plain to be seen every clear night, that it needs no pi∣cture:
Yet I shall tell you what Constellations it pas∣seth through, so that you may easily find any part of it that is above the Horizon when you please. VIA LACTEA, or Circulus Lacteus by the Latines so called; and by the Greeks Galaxia, and by the English the Milkey way. It is a broad white Circle that is seen in the Heaven: In the North Hemisphere, it beginneth at Cancer, on each side the head thereof, and passeth by Auriga, by Perseus, and Cassiopeia, the Swan, and the head of Capricorn, the tail of Scorpio, and the feet of Centaur, Argo the Ship, and so unto the head of Cancer. Some in a sporting manner do call it Watling-street, but why they call it so, I cannot tell, except it be in regard of the narrowness that it see∣meth to have, or else in respect of that great High∣way that lyeth between Dover and St. Albans, which is called by our men Watling-street. Concerning this Circle as there are sundry opini∣ons, so there is great difference among some writers, both touching the place, matter, and efficient cause thereof: Aristotle dissenteth from all other, both Phi∣losophers and Poets, in the place, matter, and cause of this Circle; saying that it is a Meteor ingendred in the Air, made of the vapors of the earth, drawn up thither by the heat of the Sun, and there set on fire. But his opinion is of all men confuted. First, touching the place, it cannot be in the Air, whatsoever is in the Air, is not seen of all men, at all times, to be under one and the same part of Heaven; If we see it in the South, they that are in the West shall see it under the East side of the Heaven; and they that are in the East, shall see it in the West part of the Heaven, but this Circle is of all men seen always
under the same part of Heaven, and to be joined with the same Stars: therefore it cannot be in the Air. Again, for the matter, it cannot be made of that which Aristotle nameth (i. e) the vapours of the Earth because of the long continuance of the thing, and that without any alteration: for it is impossible that any Meteor made of vapours drawn up from the Wa∣ter, or exhalations from the Earth, should last so long; as may be seen in Blazing Stars; which though they have continued long, as namely 16 months, some more, some less; yet at the length they have vanished away; whereas this Circle hath continued from the beginning unto this day. Besides, put case it were made of these exhalations; whence will they infer the uniformity thereof? The Comets do alter diversly, both in the fashion of their Blazing, and also in their several quantities, whereas in this Circle there is nothing but the same part, always of one form, and of one bigness. In the efficient cause thereof he must needs erre: for if it be neither in the Air, nor made of the exhalations of the Earth, it cannot be caused by the Sun; for the one is the place, and the other the matter, wherein, and where∣upon the Sun sheweth his power. All other (besides Aristotle) agree in the place, but differ in the efficient cause thereof: and rhey are either Philosophers, or Poets. Both these affirm that it is in the Firmament, (i. e.) in the eight Sphere; but they disagree in the cause thereof. The Philosophers, (and chiefly Democritus) affirm the cause of the thing, to be the exceeding great number of Stars in that part of Heaven, whose beams meeting together so confusedly, and not coming di∣stinctly
to the eye, causeth us to imagine such a whiteness as is seen. But the best opinion is this, that this Milkey way is a part of the Firmament, nei∣ther so thin as the other parts thereof are, nor yet so thick as the Stars themselves. If it were as thin as the other parts of the Heaven besides the Stars, then could it not retain the light, but the light would pass through it and not be seen; if it were as thick as the Stars, then would the light be so doubled in it, that it would glister and shine, as the Stars them∣selves do: but being neither so thin as the one, nor so thick as the other, it becometh of that whiteness we see. Thus far Dr. Hood. But Our modern Philosophers conceive this Lactean whiteness ariseth from a great number of little Stars constipated in that part of Heaven, flying so swiftly from the sight of our eyes, that we can perceive no∣thing but a confused light; this the Telescope (more lately found out) doth evidently demonstrate to us: by the benefit of which, little Stars (otherwise in∣conspicuous to our eyes) are there clearly discern∣ed. About the Southern Pole are seen two white spots, like little Clouds, coloured like the Via Lactea. One of which is trebble the latitude of the other; some Mariners call them Nubeculae Magellani.
Here follows the ANCIENT STORIES Of the several Stars and Constellations. Shewing the Poetical Reasons why such Various FIGURES are placed in HEAVEN. Collected from Dr. HOOD. And First, Of the Northern Constellations. URSA MINOR, This Constellation hath the preheminence, because it is nearest of all the rest unto the North Pole; and is called of the Greeks Arctos, whereupon the Pole is called the Pole Artick, for that it is near unto this Constellation. It is also called Helice minor, because of the small Revolution which it maketh round about the Pole: or rather of Elice, a Town in Arcadia, wherein Calisto the great Bear, and Mother to the less, was bred. It is called
Cynosura, because this Constellation, though it car∣ry the name of a Bear, yet it hath the tail of a Dog: Last of all, it is termed Phaenice, because that Thales, who first gave the name to this Constellati∣on, was a Phaenician: And therefore the Phaenicians being taught how to use it in their Navigations, did call it by the name of the Countrey wherein Thales was born: It consisteth of Seven Stars, which the Latines call Septentriones, because by their continu∣al motions those Seven Stars do as it were wear the Heaven. The Spaniards do call them all Bo∣sina, that is an Horn; because they may be very well brought into that form; whereof that which is the end of the Tail is called the Pole-Star, by reason of the nearness thereof unto the Pole of the World; for it is distant (according to the opinion of most) from the true Pole, but 3 degrees 30 mi∣nutes. The Arabians call it Alrukaba. And of the Scythians it is said to be an Iron nail, and is wor∣shipped by them as a God. The two Stars that are in the shoulders of the Bear, are called the Guards, of the Spanish word Guardare, which is to behold; because they are diligently to be looked unto, in regard of their singular use which they have in Navigation. The reason why this Constellation was brought into the Heavens is diversly set down, and first in this manner; Saturn having received of the Oracle that one of his Sons should banish him out of his King∣dom, determined with himself to kill all the Men-children that he should beget; whereupon he gave command to Ops his Wife, being then great, that she should shew him the Child so soon as ever it was
born: But she bringing forth Jupiter, and being greatly delighted with his hair, gave the Child unto two Nymphs of Creet, dwelling in the Mount Dicte, whereof this was one, and was called Cynosura, the other was Helice. Jupiter, after that (according to the Oracle) he had bereft his Father of his Kingdom, in recompence of their pains and curtesy, translated them both into the Heavens, and made of them two Constella∣tions, the lesser Bear, and the greater Bear. Other-some say, that it was Arcas the son of Ca∣listo, and they tell the Tale on this manner; Calisto a Nymph of singular Beauty, Daughter to Lycaon King of Arcadia, induced by the great desire she had of hunting, became a follower of the Goddess Diana. After this, Jupiter being enamoured with her Beau∣ty, and out of hope, by reason of her profession, to win her love, in his own person, counterfeited the shape of Diana, lay with Calista, and got her with Child, of whom was born a Son which was called Arcas. Dia∣na, or rather Juno, being very much offended here∣with, turned Calisto into a Bear. Arcas her Son at the age of fifteen, hunting in the Woods, by chance light∣ed on his Mother in the shape of a Bear, who know∣ing her Son Arcas, stood still that he might come near unto her, and not be afraid: but he fearing the shape of so cruel a Beast, bent his Bow of purpose to have slain her: whereupon Jupiter to prevent the mischief, translated them both into Heaven, and of them made two several Constellations: unto the Lesser Bear there belongs but one Star unformed. 2. VRSA MAJOR, the Greater Bear, called also of the Greeks Arctos, and Helice, consisteth of
27 Stars; Among the which, those seven that are in the hinder part and tail of the Bear are most observ∣ed; the Latines call them Plaustrum, and of our met they are called Charles Wayn; because the Stars do stand in such sort, that the three which are in the tai resemble the Horses, and the other four which are in the flank of the Bear, stand (after a manner) like the Wheels of a wagon, or Chariot; and they are sup¦posed by some to be greater than the Sun. The reason of the translation of this Constellation into the Hea¦ven, is at large set down in the other Constellation and therefore needs not here to be repeated. This Constellation was first invented by Nauplius, the Fa∣ther of Palamedes the Greek; and in great use among the Grecians; and this is to be noted both in this and the former Constellation, that they never set under the Horizon in any part of Europe: which though it fal out by reason of their scituation in the Heavens; Ye the Poets say, that it came to pass through the displea¦sure and hatred of Juno, who for that she was by Ca∣listo made a Cuckquean, and they notwithstanding (as she took it) in despight of her' were Translated into Heaven, requested her brother Neptune, that h should never suffer those Stars to set within hi Kingdom, To which request Neptune condescended so that in all Europe they never come near unto th Sea, or touch the Horizon. If any one marvel, tha (seeing she hath the form of a Bear) she should have a tail so long; imagine that Jupiter fearing to come too nigh unto her teeth, laid hold on her tail, and thereby drew her up into Heaven; so that she of her self being very weighty, and the distance from the Earth to the Heaven very great, there was great like∣lyhood
that her tail must stretch. The Unformed Stars belonging to this Constellation are Eight. 3. DRACO, the Dragon, of some named the Ser∣pent; of others the Snake, by the Arabians, Aben, and by Junctinus Florentinus, Vrago; because he windeth his tail round about the Ecliptick Pole; it contain∣eth 31 Stars. This was the Dragon that kept the Golden Apples in the Orchard of the Hesperides, (now thought to be the Islands of Cape de Virde) and for his diligence and watchfulness, was afterwards Translated into Heaven: Yet others say that he came into Heaven by this occasion; when Minerva withstood the Gyants fighting against the Gods; they to terrifie her, threw at her a mighty Dragon, but she catching him in her hands, threw him pre∣sently up into Heaven, and placed him there, as a memorial of that her resistance. Others would have it to be the Serpent Python, whom Apollo slew, after the Deluge. 4. CEPHEVS, containeth in him 11 Stars, and hath two unformed. This was a King of the Aethi∣opians, and Husband unto Cassiopeia, and Father of Andromeda, whom Perseus married: He was taken up into Heaven, with his Wife and Daughter, for the good Deeds of Perseus his Son in Law, that he and his whole stock might be had in remembrance for ever. The Star which is in his right shoulder is called by the Arabians Alderahiemin (i. e.) his right Arm. 5. BOOTES, the driver of the Oxen (for so I sup∣pose the name to signifie, rather than an Herdsman, for he hath not his name because he hath the care of any Cattel, but only because he is supposed to drive
Charles his Wain, which is drawn by 3 Oxen) he is al∣so called Arctophilax, the keeper of the Bear, as tho' the care of her were committed to him: This Con∣stellation consisteth of 22 Stars. Some will have Bootes to be Arcas, the Son of her who before was turned into the Great Bear; and they tell the Tale thus: Lycaon the Father of Calisto, receiving Jupiter into his house as a Guest, took Arcas his Daughters Son, and cut him in pieces; and among other Servi∣ces, set him before Jupiter to be eaten; for by this means he thought to prove if his Guest were a God, as he pretended to be Jupiter perceiving this heinous fact, overthrew the Table, fired the house with lightning, and turned Lycaon into a Wolf: but gathe∣ring, & setting together again the limbs of the child, he committed him to a Nimph of Aetolia to be kept: Arcas afterwards coming to mans estate, and hunt∣ing in the Woods, lighted at un-awares upon his Mo∣ther, transformed by Juno into the shape of a Bear, whom he pursued into the Temple of Jupiter Lycae∣us, whereunto by the Law of the Arcadians, it was death for any man to come. For as much therefore as they must of likelihood be both slain, Calisto by her Son, and he by the Law, Jupiter to avoid this mischief, of meer pity took them both up into Hea∣ven. Unto this Constellation belongeth but one Star unformed, and it is between the legs of Bootes, and by the Grecians it is called Arcturus, because of all the stars near the great Bear named Arctos, this star is first seen near her tail in the evening. The Poetical invention is thus. Icarus the Father of Erigone, having received of the God Bacchus a Flagon of Wine, to declare how good
it was for mortal men, travelled therewith into the Territoires of Athens, and there began to carouse with certain shepheards, they being greatly delight∣ed with the pleasantness of the wine, being a new kind of Liquor, began to draw so hard at it, that er'e they left off, they were past one and thirty; and in the end, were fain to lay their heads to rest. But coming unto themselves again, and finding their brains scarce in good temper, they kil'd Icarus, think∣ing indeed that he had either poysoned them, or at the least-wise made their brains intoxicate. Erigone was ready to dye for grief, and so was Mera her lit∣tle dog. But Jupiter to allay their grief, placed her Father in Heaven, between the legs of Arctophi∣lax. 6. CORONA BOREA, the Northern Gar∣land, consisteth of Eight Stars; yet Ovid saith, that it hath nine. This was the Garland that Venus gave unto Ariadne, when she was Married unto Bacchus, in the Isle Naxus, after that Theseus had forsaken her: which garland Bacchus placed in the Heaven; as a token of his love. Novidius will have it to be the Crown of the Virgin Mary. 7. ENGON ASIS; This Constellation hath the name, because it is expressed under the shape of a man kneeling upon the one knee, and is therefore by the Latines called Ingeniculum It containeth 29 Stars and wanteth a proper Name, because of the great diversity of Opinions concerning the same. For some will have it to be Hercules, that mighty Conqueror who for his 12 Labours was thought worthy to be placed in the Heaven, and nigh unto the Dragon whom he overcame. Others tell the tale thus: That
when the Tytans fought against the Gods, they for fear of the Gyants, ran all unto the one side of the Hea∣ven: whereupon the Heaven was ready to have fal∣len, had not Hercules together with Atlas, set his neck unto it, and stayed the fall: and for his Desert he was placed in Heaven. 8. LYRA, the Harp, it containeth 10 Stars, whereof thus goeth the Fable. The River Nilus swel∣ling above his banks, over-flowed the Country of E∣gypt; after the fall whereof there were left in the fields divers kinds of living things, and amongst the rest a Tortoise; Mercury, after the flesh thereof was consumed, the sinews still remaining, found the same, and striking it, he made it yield a certain sound; whereupon he made an Harp like unto it, having Three strings, and gave it unto Orpheus the Son of Cassiopea. This Harp was of such excellent sound, that Trees, Stones, Fowls, and Wild Beasts are said to follow the sound thereof. After such time therefore that Orpheus was slain by the Women of Thrace the Muses by the good leave of Jupiter, and at the request of Apollo, placed this Harp in Heaven. Novidius will have it to be the Harp of David, where by he pacified the Evil spirit of Saul. This Constel∣lation was afterwards called Vultur Cadens, the fall∣ing Grype: and Falco the Falcon; or Timpanum the Timbrel. 9. OLOR, or Cygnus the Swan, called of the Chaldaeans Adigege, it hath 17 Stars: of this Con∣stellation the Poets Fable in this manner. Jupiter being overtaken with the love of Laeda the wife of Tyndarus King of Oebabia, and knowing no honester way to accomplish his desire, procured Venus to turn
her self into an Eagle, and himselfe he turned into the shape of a Swan. Flying therefore from the Eagle, as from his natural Enemy that earnestly pursued him he lighted of purpose in the lap of Laeda, and as it were, for his more safety crept into her bosom, The Woman not knowing who it was under that shape, but holding (as she thought) the Swan fast in her arms, fell asleep. In the mean while Jupiter enjoyed his pleasure, and having obtained that he came for, betook him again unto his wings; and in memorial of his purpose (attained under that form) he placed the Swan among the Stars. Ovid calleth this Constellation Milvius, the Kite and telleth the Tale thus. The Earth being greatly offended with Jupiter, because he had driven Saturn his Father out of his kingdom, brought forth a mon∣strous Bull, which in his hinder parts was like a Ser∣pent; and was afterwards called the Fatal Bull, be∣cause the Destinies had thus decreed, that whosoever could slay him and offer up his Entrails upon an Al∣tar, should overcome the eternal Gods, Briareus that mighty Gyant, and ancient enemy of the Gods, over∣came the Bull, and was ready to have offered up his Entrails according to the decree of the Destinies: but Jupiter fearing the event, commanded the Fowls of the Air to snatch them away: which although to their power they endeavour'd, yet there was none of them found so forward and apt to that action as the Kite, and for that cause he was accordingly rewarded with a place in Heaven. Some call this Constellation Orvis, that is the Bird: others call it Vultur Volans, the Flying Grype: It is called Gallina, the Hen. Unto this Constellation do belong two unformed Stars.
10. CASSIOPEIA, She consisteth of 13 Stars. This was the Wife of Cepheus, and the mother of Andromeda, whom Perseus married, and for his sake was translated into Heaven, as some write. others say that her beauty being singular she waxed so proud, that she preferred her self before the Nereides, which were the Nymphs of the Sea: for which cause, unto her disgrace, & the example of all others that in Pride of their hearts would advance themselves above their betters, she was placed in the Heaven with her head as it were downwards; so that in the revoluti∣on the Heavens she seemeth to be carried head-long. 11. PERSEVS, he hath 26 Stars. This was the Son of Jupiter, whom he in the likeness of a Golden-shower begat upon Danae, the daughter of Acrisius. This Perseus coming unto mans estate, and being fur∣nished with the Sword, Hat, and Wings of his bro∣ther Mercury, and the Shield of his Sister Minerva, was sent by his Foster-father Polidectes, to kill the Monster Medusa, whom he slew; and cutting off her head, carried it away with him: But as he was hasting homewards, flying in the Air, he espied Andromeda the daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopea, for the pride of her mother, bound with a Chain unto a Rock, by the Sea side, there to be devoured by a Whale: Perseus taking notice and pity of the case undertook to fight with the Monster, upon condition that Andromeda might be his Wife, to be short, he deliver'd Andromeda, married her, and returning homeward unto the Isle Seriphus, he found there his Grand-father Acrisius, whom by mischance and unadvisedly he slew with a quoit: (or as Ovid reporteth) with the terrible sight the horrible head of Medusa not knowing that it was
his Grand-father: but afterwards understanding whom he had slain, he pined away through extream sorrow whereupon Jupiter his father pitying his grief took him up into Heaven: and there placed him in that form wherein he overcame Medusa with the Sword in one hand, and the head of Medusa in the other, and the wings of Mercury at his Heels. This Constellation because of the unluckiness thereof, is called by Astrologers Cacodaemon (i. e.) Vnlucky, and Vnfortunate. For (as they say) they have observed it that whatsoever is born under this Constellation, ha∣ving an evil aspect, shall be stricken with Sword, or lose his Head. Novidius saith that it is David with Goliah his head in one hand, and his Sword in the other. The unformed Stars belonging unto this Constellation, are three. 12. AVRIGA, the Wagoner, or Carter: he consisteth of 14 Stars: the Arabians call him Alaiot; the Greeks Heniochus, (i. e.) a man holding a bridle in his hand and so is he pictur'd. Eratostenes affirmeth him to be Ericthonius King of Athens, the son of Vulcan: who having most deformed feet, devised first the use of the Waggon or Chariot, and joyned horses together to draw the same, to the end that he sitting therein might the better conceal his defor∣mities. For which invention, Jupiter translated him into the Heavens. In this Constellation there are two other particular Constellations to be noted; whereof the one con∣sisteth but of one Star alone, which is in the left-shoulder of Auriga, and is called Hircus, or Capra the Goat; the Arabians call it Alhajoth: The other consisteth of 2 little Stars a little beneath the others,
standing as it were in the hand of Auriga; this Con∣stellation is called Haedi, the Kids. The tale is thus; Saturn (as you heard before) had received of the Oracle, that one of his Sons should put him out of his Kingdom, whereupon he determined to devour them all: Ops by stealth conveyed away Jupiter, and sent him to Melissus King of Crete, to be nourished. Melissus having 2 daughters, Amalthaea, and Melissa, commit∣ted Jupiter unto their Nursery; Amalthaea had a Goat that gave suck unto 2 Kids, so that by the milk of this Goat, she nourished Jupiter very well: To requite this her care and courtesie, Jupiter (after he had put his Father out of his Kingdom) translated her Goat and her two Kids into Heaven, and in remembrance of the Nurse, the Goat is called Capra Amalthaea. Novi∣dius saith, that when Christ was born, and his birth made manifest by the Angels unto the Shepherds, one of them brought with him for a Present, a Goat and two young Kids; which in token of his good will, were placed in Heaven. 13. OPHIVCVS, or SERPENTARI∣VS, That is the Serpent bearer. This Constellation hath no proper name, but is thus entituled, because he holdeth a Serpent in his hands. It containeth 24 Stars. Some say that it is Hercules, and report the Tale on this manner. Juno being a great enemy to Hercules, sent two Snakes to kill him as he lay sleeping in his Cradle: but Hercules being a lusty Child (for Jupiter had spent two days in begetting him) without much ado strangled them both: In memorial of so strange an event, Jupiter placed him in the Heavens, with a Serpent in his hands. 14. SERPENS, the Serpent of Ophiuchus, which
consisteth of 18 Stars. Some say that it is one of the Serpents that should have slain Hercules in his Cra∣dle. Novidius saith, it is the Viper that bit Paul by the hand. Others deliver the Tale in these words; Glaucus the son of Minos King of Crete, was by mis∣fortune drowned in a Barrel of Honey: Minas his Father craved the help of Aesculapius the Physician: and that he might be driven perforce to help the Child, he shut him up in a secret place, together with the dead Carcass: whiles Esculapius stood in a great maze with himself what were best to be done, upon a sudden there came a Serpent creeping towards him, the which Serpent he slew with the Staff which he had in his hand. After this there came another Ser∣pent in, bringing in his mouth a certain herb, which he laid upon the head of the dead Serpent, whereby he restored him unto life again. Esculapius using the same herb, wrought the same effect upon Glaucus. Whereupon (after that) Esculapius (whom some af∣firm to be Ophiucus) was placed in the Heaven and the Serpent with him. 15. SAGITA, or Telum; the Arrow or Dart. This was that Arrow wherewith Hercules slew the Eagle or Grype that fed upon the Liver of Prometheus being tyed with Chains to the top of Mount Caucasus, and in memorial of that deed, was translated into Hea∣ven. Others will have it to be one of those Arrows which Hercules at his death gave unto Phyloctetes, upon which the Destiny of Troy did depend. The whole Constellation containeth five Stars. 16. AQVILA, the Eagle, which is called Vultur Volans, the flying Grype. It hath in it 9 Stars. The Po∣etical reason of this Constellation, is this; Jupiter
transforming himself into the form of an Eagle took Ganimedes the Trojan Boy, whom he greatly loved up into Heaven, and therefore in sign thereof: (because by that means he performed his purpose) he placed the figure of the Eagle in Heaven. There belong unto this Constellation 6 Stars (before time) unform∣ed, but now brought into the Constellation of Anti∣nous. But whereupon that name should come, I know not, except it were that some man devised it there to curry favour with the Emperour Adrian, who lo∣ved one Antinous Bithynicus so well, that he builded a Temple in his honour at Mantinea. 17. DELPHINVS, the Dolphin: it containeth 10 Stars; yet Ovid in his second Book de Fastis, saith that it hath but nine. Neither did the ancient Astro∣nomers attribute unto it any more, according to the number of the Muses; because of all other Fishes the Dolphin is said to be delighted with Musick. The Tale goeth thus concerning this Constellation. When Neptune the God of the Sea greatly desired to match with Amphitrite, she being very modest and shame-faced, hid her self; whereupon he sent many messengers to seek her out, among whom, the Dol∣phin by his good hap, did first find her; and per∣swaded her also to match with Neptune: For which his good and trusty service, Neptune placed him in the Heavens. Others say, that when Bacchus had transformed the Marriners that would have betrayed him, into Dolphins, he placed one of them in Heaven, that it might be a lesson for others to take heed how they carried any one out of his way, contrary both to his desire, and their own promise. Novidius referreth
this Constellation unto the Fish that saved Jonas from drowning. 18. EQVICVLUS, is the little Horse, and it consisteth of 4 Stars. This Constellation is named almost of no Writer, saving Ptolomeus, and Alphon∣sus who followed Ptolemy, and therefore no certain Tale or History is delivered thereof by what means he came into Heaven. 19. EQUUS ALATUS, the Winged Horse, or Pegasus, it containeth 20 Stars. This Horse was bred of the blood of Medusa, after that Perseus had cut off her head, and was afterwards taken and tamed by Bellerophon, whiles he drank of the River Pirene by Corinth, and was used by him in the conquest of Chi∣mera; after which exploit Bellerophon being weary of the earthly affairs, endeavoured to fly up into Hea∣ven. But being amazed in his flight, by looking down to the earth, he fell from his Horse, Pegasus notwith∣standing continuing his course (as they feign) en∣tred into Heaven, and there obtained a place among the other Constellations. 20. ANDROMEDA, She consteth of 23 Stars; but one of them is common both unto her and Pe∣gasus. This was the daughter of Cepheus and Cassio∣peia, and the Wife of Perseus; the reason why Mi∣nerva or Jupiter placed her in the Heavens, is before expressed. Novidius referreth this Constellation unto Alexandria the Virgin, whom S. George through the good help of his Horse delivered from the Dra∣gon. 21. TRIANGULUM, the Triangle, called also Deltoton, because it is like the fourth Letter of the Greek Alphabet Δ, which they call Delta; it con∣sisteth
of four stars. They say it was placed in Hea∣ven by Mercury, that thereby the head of the Ram might be the better known. Others say, that it was placed there in honour of the Geometricians, among whom, the Triangle is of no small importance. O∣thers affirm, that Ceres in times past requested Jupiter that there might be placed in Heaven some Fi∣gure representing the form of Sicily an Island greatly beloved of Ceres for the fruitfulness thereof: now this Island being triangular (at her request) was re∣presented in the Heaven under that form. Thus much concerning the Constellations of the Nor∣thern Hemisphere. Now follow the Poetical Stories of the Constellations of the Southern Hemisphere. Secondly, Of the Southern Constellations. 1 CETUS, the Whale, it is also called the Lyon, or Bear of the Sea. This is that monstrous Fish that should have devoured Andromeda, but be∣ing overcome by Perseus, was afterwards transla∣ted into Heaven by Jupiter, as well for a token of Perseus his manhood, as for the bigness of the Fish it self. This Constellation consisteth of 22 Stars. 2. ORION, this hath 38 Stars. The Poetical reason of his translation into the Heavens, shall be shewn in the Scorpion amongst the Zodiacal Constel∣lations. The Ancient Romans called this Constella∣tion Jugala, because it is most pestiferous unto Cat∣tel, and as it were the very cut-throat of them. There
are bright Stars in his girdle, which we commonly call our Ladies yard, or wand. Novidius, applying this sword of Orion unto Scripture, will have it to be the Sword of Saul, afterwards called Paul, where∣with he persecuted the Members of Christ: which af∣ter his Conversion was placed in Heaven. In his left shoulder there is a very bright Star, which in Latine is called Bellatrix the Warriour, in the Faeminine Gen∣der. I cannot find the reason except it be this; that Women born under this Constellation shall have mighty tongues: the reason of the Ox hide which he hath in his hand, may be Gathered out of the next story. 3. FLUVIUS, the River; it comprehendeth 34 Stars: It is called by some Eridanus, or Pagus; they say that it was placed in Heaven in remembrance of Phaeton, who having set the whole Earth on fire by reason of misguiding his Father Phoebus his Chariot, was slain by Jupiter with a thunder-bolt, and tumb∣ling down from Heaven, fell into the River Eri∣danus, or Padus, which the Italians call Po. Others say that it is Nilus, and that that figure was placed in Heaven because of the excellency of that River, which by the Divines is called Gihon, and is one of the Rivers of Paradice. Others call it Flumen Orionis the flood of Orion; and say that it was placed there, to betoken the off-spring from whence Orion came: for the tale is thus reported of him. Jupiter, Neptune, and Mercury, travelling upon the Earth in the likness of Men, were requested by Hyerus to take a poor lodging at his house for a Night: they being overtaken with the evening, yeild∣ed unto his request; Hyreus made them good cheer,
killing an Ox for their better entertainment: The Gods seeing the good heart of the old man, willed him to demand what he would in recompence of his so friendly cheer. Hyerus and his Wife being old, re∣quested the Gods to gratify them with a Son. They to fulfil his desire, called for the hide of the Ox that was slain, and having received it, they put it into the Earth, and made water into it all three toge∣ther, and covering it, willed Hyreus within ten months after to dig it out of the Earth again; which he did and found therein a Man-child; whom he cal∣led Ourion, ab Urania, of piss; although afterwards by leaving out the second letter, he was named Orion. At such time therefore as he was placed in Heaven, this flood was joyned hard to his heels, and the Ox hide wherein the Gods did piss, was set in the left hand, in memorial of his Off-spring. 4. LEPUS, the Hare, which consisteth of 12 Stars. This Constellation was placed in Heaven between the legs of Orion, to signifie the great delight in hunt∣ing which he had in his life time: but others think it was a frivolous thing, to say that so notable a fel∣low as Orion would trouble himself with so small and timorous a Beast as the Hare; and therefore they tell the tale thus. In times past there was not a Hare left in the Isle Leros; a certain youth therefore of that Island, being very desirous of that kind of beast, brought with him from another Country thereabout, an Hare great with young; which when she had brought forth, they in time became so acceptable unto the other Coun∣try men, that every one almost desired to have and keep a Hare. By reason whereof, the number of them
grew to be so great, within a short space after, that the whole Island became full of Hares, so that their Masters were not able to find them meat: where∣upon the Hares breaking forth into the fields, de∣voured their Corn. Wherefore the Inhabitants being bitten with hunger; joyned together with one con∣sent, and (though with much adoe) destroyed the Hares. Jupiter therefore placed this Constellation in the Heavens; as well to express the exceeding fearfulness of the Beast, as also to teach men this les∣son; that there is nothing so much to be desired in this life, but that at one time or another bringeth with it more grief than pleasure. Some say, that it was placed in Heaven at the request of Ganimedes, who was greatly delighted with hunting the Hare. 5. CANIS MAJOR, the Great Dog, it consisteth of 18 Stars. It is called Sirius Canis, because he cau∣seth a mighty drought by reason of his heat. This is the Constellation that giveth name unto the Canical or Dog days; whose beginning and end is not alike in all places, but hath a difference according to the Countrey and time: as in the Time of Hippocrates the Physitian, who lived before the time of Christ 400 years, the Canicular days began 13 or 14 of July. In the time of Avicenna, the Spaniard, who lived in the year of Lord 1100. the Canicular days began the 15, 16, or 17 of July. In our Country; they begin about St. James-tide, but we use to account from the 6 of July, to the 17 of August; which is the time when the Sun beginneth to come near unto and to depart from this Constellation. Novidius will have it to be referred to Tobias Dog which may very well be, because he hath a tail; To∣bias
Dog had one; as a certain fellow once concluded, because it is written that Tobias his Dog fawned up∣on his Master, therefore it is to be noted (said he) that he had a tail. The Poets say, that this is the Dog whom Jupiter set to keep Europa, after he had stolen her away, and conveyed her into Creet, and for his good service was placed in Heaven. Others say, that it was one of Orion his Dogs. There belong unto this Constellation 11 Stars unformed. 6. CANIS MINOR, the Lesser Dog; this of the Greeks is called Procyon, of the Latines Anteca∣nis; it containeth but two Stars. Some say, that this was also one of Orion's Dogs. Others rather affirm it to be Mera the Dog of Origone, or rather of Icarius her Father, of whom mention is made in the Con∣stellation of Bootes and Virgo. This Dog of meer love to his Master, being slain, as aforesaid, threw himself into the River Anygrus, but was afterward translated into Heaven, with Origone. Among the Poets there is great dissention which of the two should be the Dog of Origone, some saying one, and some the other, and therefore they do many times take the one for the her. 7. ARGO NAVIS, the Ship Argo which com∣prehendeth 41 Stars; this is the Ship wherein Jason did fetch the golden fleece from Colchis, which was afterward placed in Heaven as a memorial, not only because of the great Voyage, but also, because (as some will have it) it was the first Ship wherein any man sailed. Their reason why this Ship is not made whole is that thereby men might be put in mind not to despair, albeit that their Ship miscarry'd in some part now and then: some avouch it to be the Ark of
Noah. Novidius saith it is the Ship wherein the Apostles were, when Christ appeared unto them walk∣ing on the Sea. In one of the Oars of this Ship there is a great Star, called Canopus, or Canobus, which the Arabians called Shuel, as it were a bone-fire because of the greatness thereof. It is not seen in Italy, nor in any Country on this side of Italy: Some say that Ca∣nobus the Master of Menelaus, his Ship was transfor∣med into this Star. 8. HYDRA, the Hydra, that hath 25 Stars and two unformed. 9. CRATER, the Cup, or Standing-piece; that hath seven Stars, some say that this was the Cup where in Tagathon, that is the chief God, ming∣led the Stuff whereof he made the Souls of Men. 10. CORVUS, the Crow; this hath seven Stars. These 3 Constellations are to be joyned toge∣ther, because they depend upon one History, which is this. Upon a time Apollo made a solemn feast to Ju∣piter, and wanting water to serve his turn, he deli∣vered a Cup to the Crow (the bird wherein he chiefly delighted) and sent him to fetch water therein. The Crow flying towards the River, espied a Fig-tree, fell in hand with the Figs, and abode there till they were ripe: In the end when, he had fed his fill of them, and satisfied his longing, he bethought him∣self of his errand, and by reason of his long delay, fearing a Check, he caught up a snake in his bill, brought it to Apollo, and told him that the snake would not let him fill the Cup with water, Apollo seeing the impudence of the bird, gave him this gift, that as long as the Figs were not ripe upon the
Tree so long he should never drink: and for a me∣morial of the silly excuse that she made, he placed both the Crow, Cup, and Snake, in Heaven. 11. CENTAURUS, the Centaure, which comprehendeth 37 Stars. Some say, that this is Typhon, others call him Chiron, the Schoolmaster of those three excellent men, Hercules, Achilles, and Es∣culapius: unto Hercules he read Astronomy, he trained Achilles in Musick, and Aesculapius, in Physick: and for his upright life he was turned into this Constella∣tion, Yet Virgil calleth Sagittarius by the name of Chiron. In the hinder feet of this Constellation, those Stars are set which are called the Crosiers, appearing to the Marriners as they sail towards the South Sea, in the form of a Cross, whereupon they have their name. The four Stars which are in the Garnish of the Centaurs Spear, are accounted by Proclus as a pe∣culiar Constellation, and are called by him Thyrsilochus which was a Spear compassed about with vine leaves: but they are called by Copernicus, and Clavius, and other Astronomers, the Stars of his Target. It should seem that they were deceived by the old translation of Ptolomy, wherein Scutum is put for Hasta (i. e.) the Target, for the Spear, as it is well noted by our Country-man Mr. R. Record, in his Book entituled The Castle of Knowledge. 12. LUPUS, the Wolfe, or the beast which the Centaur holdeth in his hand, contaneth 19 Stars; the Poetical reason is this, Chiron the Centaur being a just man, was greatly given to the worship of the Gods: for which thing, that it might be notified to all posterity, they placed him by this beast, which he seemeth to stick and thrust through with his
Spear (as it were) ready to kill for Sacrifice. 13. ARA, the Altar, it is also called Lar, or Thuribulum (i. e.) a Chimney with the fire, or a Censor. It consisteth of seven Stars, and is affirmed of some Poets to be the Altar whereon the Centaur was wont to offer up his sacrifice. But others tell the tale thus. When as the great Gyants called the Ty∣tans laboured as much as might be to pull Jupiter out of Heaven, the Gods thought it good to lay their heads together, to advise what was best to be done: Their conclusion was, that they should all with one consent join hands together to keep out such fellows, and that this their league might be confirmed, and throughly ratified, they caused the Cyclops (which were workmen of Vulcan) to make them an Altar: about this Altar all the Gods assembled, and there sware, that with one consent they would withstand their enemies; afterwards, having gotten the Victo∣ry it pleased them to place this Altar in Heaven as a memorial of their League, and a token of that good which unity doth breed. 14. CORONA AUSTRINA, the South Gar∣land, it hath 13 Stars. Some say that it is some tri∣fling Garland which Sagittarius was wont to wear, but he cast it away from him in jest, and therefore it was placed between his legs; others call it the Wheel of Ixon, whereupon he was tormented for that great discourtesie he would have offered unto Juno, thinking indeed to have gotten up her Belly: but Jupiter seeing the impudency of the man, tum∣bled him out of Heaven (where by the license of the gods he was sometimes admitted as a guest) into Hell there to be continually tormented upon a Wheel:
The Figure of which Wheel was afterwards placed in Heaven, to teach men to take heed how they be too saucie to make such courteous proffers unto other mens wives. The Greeks call this Constellation by the name of Vraniscus, because of the Figure there∣of: For it representeth the palate or roof of the mouth, which they call Vraniscus. 15. The last is PISCIS AUSTRINUS, or Notius, the South Fish, which comprehendeth 11 Stars, be∣sides that which is in the mouth thereof, belonging to the water, which runneth from Aquarius, and is called by the Arabians Fomahant. The reason why this Fish was placed in the Heaven, is uncer∣tain: yet some affirm, that the daughter of Venus going into a water to wash her self, was suddenly transformed into a Fish the which Fish was after∣wards translated into Heaven. The unformed Stars belonging unto this Constellation are six. Thus much concerning the Constellation of the Nor∣thern and Southern Hemispheres; now follow the Poeti∣cal Stories of the Zodiacal Constellations. Thirdly, Of the Zodiacal Constellations. 1. ARIES, the Ram, it is called by the Greeks Criot, it containeth in it 13 Stars, which were brought into this Constellation by Thyestes, the son of Pelops, and brother of Areus. This is the Ram, up∣on which Phrxus, and Hlle his sister, the children of Athamas did sit, when they fled from their step-mo∣ther
Ino, over the Sea of Hellespont: which Ram was afterwards for his good service, translated to Heaven ven by Jupiter Others say, that it was that Ram which brought Bacchus unto the spring of water, when through drought he was likely to have perished in the desert of Lybia. Novidius will have this to be the Ram, which Abraham offered up instead of his Son Isaac. The Star that is first in the head of the Ram, is that from whence our later Astronomers do account the Longitude of all the rest, and it is distant from the head of Aries, in the tenth Sphere, 27 degrees 53 minutes. The unformed Stars belonging unto this Constellation, are five. 2. TAVRVS, the Bull, which consisteth of 23 Stars. This was translated into Heaven in memorial of the Rape committed by Jupiter on Europa the daughter of Agenor, King of Sidon; whom Jupiter in the likeness of a white Bull stole away, and transport∣ed into Candia. Others say, That it was Io the daugh∣ter of Inacus, whom Jupiter loved, and turned into the form of a Cow, to the intent that Juno coming at unawares, should not perceive what a part he had played: Jupiter afterward in memorial of that crafty conveyance, placed that Figure in Heaven; The rea∣son why the Poets name not certainly whether it be a Cow or a Bull, is because it wanteth the hinder parts; yet of the most of them it is called a Bull. In the Neck of the Bull there are certain Stars standing together in a cluster, which are commonly called the seven Stars; although there can hardly be discerned any more than six, these are reported to be the seven daughters of Atlas, called Atlantiades, whereof 6 had company with the immortal Gods, but the 7th.
(whose name was Merope) being married unto Sysi∣phus a mortal man, did therefore withdraw and hide her self, as being ashamed that she was not so fortu∣nate in matching herself as her sisters were. Some say that that star which is wanting is Electra, eldest Daughter of Atlas, and that therefore it is so dim, be∣cause she could not abide to behold the destruction of Troy; but at that time and ever since, she hid her face. The reason why they were taken up into Hea∣ven, was their great pity towards their Father, whose mishap they bewailed with continual tears. Others say, that whereas they had vowed perpetual Virgi∣nity, and were in danger to lose it, by reason of Orion, who greatly assailed them, being overtaken with their love; they requested Jupiter to stand their friend; who translated them into Stars, and placed them in that part of Heaven. The Poets call them Pleiades, because when they rise with the Sun, the Mariners may commit themselves to the Sea. Others will have them to be so termed a pluendo, because they procure rain. Others give them this name, of the Greek word Cleiones, because they be many in num∣ber; they be also called Virgiliae, because they rise with the Sun in the Spring time: likewise Athoraiae, because they stand so thick together. Our men call them by the name of the seven Stars, or Brood Hen. The Astro∣nomers note this as a special thing concerning these stars, that when the Moon and these Stars do meet to∣gether, the eyes are not to be medled withal, or cu∣red if they before: their reason is, because they be of the nature of Mars and the Moon. Moreover, there be five stars in the face of the Bull, representing the form of the Roman letter V, whereof
one (which is the greatest) is called the Bulls Eye, They be called Hyades, and were also the daughters of Atlas, who so long bewailed the death of Hyas their Brother, slain by a Lyon, that they died for sor∣row, and were afterwards placed in Heaven, for a memorial of that great love they bare to their Bro∣ther. The ancient Romans call the Bulls Eye Parilici∣um, or Palelicium; of Pales their goddess, whose feast they celebrated after the conjunction of this Star and the Sun. The unformed Stars belonging unto this Constellation, are eleven. 3. GEMINI, the Twins consisteth of 18 stars. The Poets say, they are Castor and Pollux, the sons of Leda, brethren most loving, whom therefore Jupiter translated into Heaven. Some say that one of them is Apollo, and the other Hercules: but the most affirm the former. The unformed Stars of this Constellati∣on are seven, whereof one is called Tropus, because it is placed next before the foot of Castor. 4. CANCER, the Crab, it hath 9 Stars. This is that Crab which bit Hercules by the heel as he fought with the Serpent Hydra in the Fen Lerna, and for his forward service, was placed in Heaven by Juno, the utter enemy of Hercules. In this Constellation there are Stars much spoken of by the Poets; although they be but small, whereof one is called the Crib, other two are the two Asses, whereof one was the Ass of Bacchus, the other of Vulcan, whereon they rode to Battel, when as the Gyants made War with the Gods; with whose braying and strange noise, the Gy∣ants were so scared upon the sudden, that they for∣sook the field, and fled. The Gods getting the Victo∣ry, in triumphing manner translated both the Asses,
and their manger into Heaven. The unformed Stars of this Constellation are four. It is called animal Re∣rrogradum, for when the Sun cometh into this Sign, he maketh Retrogradation. 5. LEO, the Lyon; it hath 27 Stars, this is that Lion which Hercules overcame in the wood Nemaea, and was placed in Heaven in remembrance of so notable a deed. Novidius saith, this was one of the Lyons that were in the den into which Daniel was cast, and was therefore placed in Heaven, because of all other he was most friendly unto Daniel. In the breast of this Constellation is that notable great Star, the light whereof is such, as that therefore it is called by A∣stronomers Bazileus or Regulus (i. e.) the Viceroy or little King among the rest. The unformed Stars be∣longing to the Lyon are eight, whereof three make the Constellation which is now called Coma Berenices that is, the hair of Berenice. This Constellation was first found out and invented by Canon the Mathema∣tician, but described by Calimachus the Poet. The occasion of the story was this. Ptolomeus Euergetes having married his sister Berenice, was shortly after enforced to depart from her, by reason of the Wars he had begun in Asia: whereupon Berenice made this Vow, that if he returned home again in safety, she would offer up her hair in Venus Temple. Ptolomy returned safe; and Berenice, according to her Vow, cut off her hair and hung it up. After certain days, the hair was not to be found; whereupon Ptolomy the King was greatly displeased; but Canon, to please the humor of the King, and to curry favour with him, perswaded him that Venus had conveyed the Hair into Heaven. Canon attributeth seven Stars unto
it, but Ptolomy allotteth it but three, because the other be insensible. 6. VIRGO, the Virgin, it hath 26 Stars. This is affirmed to be Justice, which among all the Gods sometime living upon the Earth, did last of all for∣sake the same, because of the wickedness that began to multiply therein, and chose this place for her seat in Heaven. Others say, that it was Astrea, the daughter of A∣streus, one of the Gyants that were called Titans, who fighting against the Gods, Astraea took their parts against her own Father, and was therefore after her death commended unto the Heavens, and made one of the 12 Signs. Others say, that it was Origone, the daughter of I∣carius, who for that her Father was slain by certain drunken men, for very grief thereof hanged her self: but Jupiter taking pity of the Virgin for her natural affection, translated her into Heaven. In her right wing there is one Star of special note, which by the Astronomers is called Vindemiator, (i. e.) the gatherer of Grapes. This was Ampulos the son of a Satyr and a Nymph, and greatly beloved of Bac∣chus unto whom in token of his love, Bacchus gave a singular fair Vine, planted at the foot of an Elm (as the manner was in old time.) But Ampelos in Har∣vest gathering Grapes, and taking little heed to his footing, fell down out of the Vine, and brake his neck. Bacchus in memorial of his former affection, translated him into Heaven, and made him one of the principal Stars in this Constellation. There is a∣nother great Star in the hand of the Virgin, called of the Latines Spica, of the Greeks Stachus, of the Ara∣bians
Azimech (i. e.) the Ear of Corn: whereby they signifie, that when the Sun cometh to this Sign, the Corn waxeth ripe. Albumazar the Arabian, and No∣vidius, take this Constellation for the Virgin Mary. The unformed Stars in this Constellation are six. 7. LIBRA the Ballance, it containeth eight Stars, Cicero calleth Jugum the Yoke, and here it is to be no∣ted, that the ancient Astronomers that first set down the number of the Constellations contained in the Zodiack, did account but eleven therein, so that the Sign, which now is called Libra, was heretofore cal∣led Chelai, that is to say, the Claws of the Scorpion, which possesseth the space of two whole Signs. But the latter Astronomers, being desirous to have 12 Signs in the Zodiack, called those eight, whereof the Claws of the Scorpion do consist, by the name of Libra, not that there was any Poetical Fiction to induce them thereto, but only moved by this reason, because the Sun joyning with this Constellation, the Day and the Night are of an equal length, and are (as it were) equally poized in a pair of Ballances. Yet (as I re∣member) some will have this to be the Ballance, wherein Justice, called also Astraea, weighed the deeds of mortal men, and therein presented them unto Jupiter. It hath 9 unformed Stars appertaining unto it. 8. SCORPIO, the Scorpion, called of the Ara∣bians, Alatrab; of Cicero, Nepa. It consisteth of 21 Stars. The Fiction is thus; Orion the son of Hyreus greatly beloved of Diana, was wont to make his boast: that he was able to overcome what Beast soe∣ver was bred upon the Earth: the Earth being moved with this speech brought forth the Scorpion, whereby
Orion was stung to death. Jupiter thereupon (at the request of the Earth) translated both the Scorpion and Orion into Heaven; to make it a lesson for ever, for mortal men not to trust too much unto their own strength; and to the end he might signify the great enmity between them, he placed them so in Heaven, that whensoever the one ariseth, the other setteth; and they are never both of them seen together above the Horizon at once: Gulielmus Postellus will have it to be the Serpent which beguiled Eve in Paradise. The unformed Stars about this Scorpion are three. 9. SAGITTARIVS, the Archer. It hath 31 Stars. Touching this Sign, there are among the Poets ma∣ny and sundry opinions. Some say that it is Crocus, the son of Paphene, that was Nurse unto the Muses. This Crocus was so forward in learning of the Libe∣ral Sciences, and in the practice of feats of Activity, that the Muses entreated Jupiter that he might have a place in Heaven. To whose request Jupiter incli∣ning, made him one of the 12 Signs: And to the end that he might express the excellent qualities of the Man, he made his hinder parts like unto a Horse, thereby to signifie his singular knowledge in Horse∣manship: and by his Bow and Arrow, he declared the sharpness of his Wit. Whereupon the Astrolo∣gers have this conceit, that he that is born under Sagittarius, shall attain to the knowledge of many Arts, and be of prompt wit, and great courage. Virgil affirmeth this to be Chiron the Centaur, who for his singular Learning and Justice was made the Master of Achilles. At which time Hercules coming to visit him (for he had heard both of the worthiness of the School-master, and of the great hopes of the Scholar)
brought with him his quiver of Arrows dipped in the blood of the Serpent Hydra; but Chiron being desirous to see his shafts, and not taking heed of them being in his hand, let one of them fall upon his foot, and being greatly tormented, not only by the anguish of the Poyson working in the Wound, but much more because he knew himself to be immortal, and his wound not to be recovered by Medicine, he was enforced to make request unto the Gods, that he might be taken out of the World, who pitying his case, took him up into Heaven, and made him one of the 12 Signs. 10. CAPRICORNVS, the Goat, it consisteth of 28 Stars. The Poets say, that this was Pan the God of the Shepherds, of whom they feign in this manner: The Gods having War with the Gyants, gathered themselves together into Aegypt, Typhon the Gyant pursued them thither, whereby the Gods were brought into a quandary, that well was he that by changing his shape might shift for himself. Jupiter turned himself into a Ram: Apollo became a Crow: Bacchus a Goat: Diana lurked under the form of a Cat: Juno transformed her self into a Cow: Venus into a Fish: Pan leaping into the River Nilus, turn∣eth the upper part of his body into a Goat, and the lower part into a Fish. Jupiter wondring at the strange device, would needs have that Image and Pi∣cture translated into Heaven, and made one of the 12 Signs. In that the hinder part of this Sign is like a Fish. It betokeneth that the latter part of the month wherein the Sun possesseth this Sign, inclineth unto Rain. 11. AQVARIVS, the Waterman: it hath 42 Stars,
whereof some make the Figure of the Man: other∣some the Water-pot; and some, the stream of wa∣ter that runneth out of the pot. This is feigned to be Ganimedes the Trojan, the son of Oros and Callirhoe, whom Jupiter did greatly love for his excellent fa∣vour and beauty, and by the service of his Eagle car∣ried him up into Heaven, where he made him his Cup-bearer, and called him Aquarius. Others not∣withstanding think it to be Deucalion the son of Pro∣metheus whom the Gods translated into Heaven, in remembrance of that mighty deluge which hapned in his time; whereby mankind was almost utterly ta∣ken away from the face of the earth. The unformed stars belonging unto this Sign are three. 12. PISCES, the Fishes: these together with the line that knitteth them together, contain 24 Stars. The Poets say, that Venus and Cupid her son coming upon a certain time unto the River Euphrates, and sitting upon the bank thereof, upon a sudden espied Typhon the Gyant, that mighty and fearful enemy of the gods coming towards them; upon whose sight, they being stricken with exceeding fear, lept into the River, where they were received by two Fishes, and by them saved from drowning. Venus for this good turn, translated them into Heaven. Gulielmus Postel∣lus would have them to be the two Fishes wherewith Christ fed the 5000 Men. The unformed Stars of this Constellation are four. Thus have I briefly run over the Poetical reasons of the Constellations: It remains now that I speak of the Milky Way. VIA LACTEA, or Circulus Lacteus▪ by the Latines so called; and by the Greeks Galaxia; and
by the English the Milkey Way. It is a broad white Circle that is seen in the Heaven: In the North He∣misphere, it beginneth at Cancer, on each side the head thereof, and passeth by Auriga, Perseus, Cassiopeia, the Swan, and the head of Capricorn, the tail of Scorpio▪ the feet of Centaur, Argo the Ship, and so to the head of Cancer. Some in a sporting manner do call it Wat∣ling-street, but why they call it so, I cannot tell; except it be in regard of the narrowness that it seemeth to have; or else in respect of that great high way that lyeth between Dover and St. Albons, which is called by our men Watling-street. Ovid saith, it is the great Causey, and High-way that leadeth unto the Pallace of Jupiter, but he alledg∣eth not the cause of the whiteness; belike he would have us imagine that it is made of White Marble. Others therefore alledg these causes: Jupiter having begotten Mercury of Maia the daughter of Atlas▪ brought the child when he was born, to the breast o Juno lying asleep: But Juno awaking threw the child out of her lap, and let the milk run out of her breast in such abundance, that (spreading it self about the Heaven) it made that Circle which we see. Others say, that it was not Mercury, but Hercules; and that Juno did not let the milk run out of her breast, but that Hercules suckt them so earnestly, that his mouth run over, and so this Circle was made. Others say, that Saturn being desirous to devour his children, his wife Ops presented him with a stone wrapped in a clout, instead of his Child: This stone stuck so fast in Saturn's Throat as he would have swallowed it, that without doubt he had therewith been choaked, had he not been relieved by his wife▪
who by pressing the milk out of her breasts saved his life: the milk that missed his mouth (whereof you must suppose some sufficient quantity) fell on the Heavens, and running along made this Circle. Dr. Hood Commenting upon Constellations saith; the Stars are brought into Constellations, for Instruction sake, things cannot be taught without names; to give a name to every Star had been troublesome to the Master, and for the Scholar; for the Master to devise, and for the Scholar to remember; and therefore the Astronomers have reduced many Stars into one Con∣stellation; that thereby they may tell the better where to seek them; and being sought, how to ex∣press them. Now the Astronomers did bring them into these Figures, and not into other, being moved thereto by these three reasons: first, these Figures express some properties of the Stars that are in them; as those in the Ram to be hot and dry; Andro∣meda chained betokeneth imprisonment, the head of Medusa cut off signifieth the loss of that part: Orion with his terrible and threatning gesture, importeth tempest and terrible effects. The Serpent, the Scorpi∣on, and the Dragon, signifie Poyson: The Bull insinu∣ateth a melancholy passion: The Bear inferreth cru∣elty, &c. Secondly, the Stars (if not precisely, yet after a sort) do represent such a Figure, and therefore that Figure was assigned them, as for example, the Crown, both North and South, the Scorpion and Tri∣angle, represent the figures which they have. The third cause was the continuance of the memory of some notable Men, who either in regard of their singular pains taken in Astronomy, or in regard of some other notable deed, had well deserved of Man∣kind.
The first Author of every particular Constellation is uncertain; yet are they of great antiquity; we re∣ceive them from Ptolomy, and he followed the Plato∣nicks; so that their antiquity is great. Moreover, we may perceive them to be ancient by the Scriptures, and by the Poets. In the 38 Chapter of Job there is mention made of the Pleiades, Orion, and Arcturus, & Mazzaroth, which some interpret the 12 Signs: Job lived in the time of Abraham, as Syderocrates maketh mention in his Book de Commensurandis locorum di∣stantiis. Now besides all this, touching the reason of inven∣tion of these Constellations, the Poets in setting forth those Stories, had this purpose, to make men fall in love with Astronomy: When Demosthenes could not get the people of Athens to hear him in a matter of great moment, and profitable to the Common-wealth he began to tell them a Tale of a fellow that sold an Ass; by which Tale he so wrought on the Atheni∣ans, that they were both willing to hear his whole O∣ration, and to put in practise that whereunto he ex∣horted them. The like intent had the Poets in these Stories: They saw that Astronomy being for com∣modity singular in the life of Man, was almost of all men utterly neglected: Hereupon they began to set forth that Art under these Fictions; that thereby such as could not be perswaded by commodity, might by the Pleasure be induced to take a view of these matters, and thereby at length fall in love with them. For commonly note this, that he that is ready to read the Stories, cannot content himself therewith, but desireth also to know the Constellations, or at least wise some principal Star therein. FINIS.
A Catalogue of GLOBES Coelstial and Ter∣restrial, Spheres, Maps, Sea-Plats, Mathe∣matical Instruments, and Books, with ther Prizes, Made and Sold by J. Moxon at the Sign of Atlas in Warwick Lane. GLOBES 26 Inches the Diameter. The price 20 l. the pair. GLOBES near 15 Inches Diameter. The price 4 l. GLOBES 8 Inches Diameter. The price 2 l. GLOBES 6 Inches Diameter. The price 1 l. 10 s. CONCAVE HEMISPHERES of the Starry Orb, which serves for a Case to a Terrestrial Globe of 3 Inches Diameter, made portable for the Pock∣et. Price 15 s. The English GLOBE, invented by the Right Ho∣nourable the Earl of Castlemain, 12 Inches Diame∣ter. The price ordinary made up 40 s. and with the Projection at bottom 50 s. Best made up 5 l. SPHERES, according to the Copernican Hypo∣thesis, both General and Particular, 20 Inches Dia∣meter. Price of the General 5 l. of the Particular 6 l. of both together 10 l. SPHERES, according to the Ptolomaick System, 14 inches Diameter. Price 3 l.
SPHERES, according to the Ptolomaick System, 8 Inches Diameter. Price 1 l. 10 s. Gunter's Quadrant, 13 Inches Radius, printed on Paper, and pasted on a Board, with a Nocturnal on the back-side. Price 5 s. Gunter's Quadrant, 4 Inches Radius, printed on Paper, and pasted on Brass, with a Nocturnal on the back-side, and a Wooden Case covered with Leather fit for it: A new Invention contrived for the Pocket. Price 6 s. A large Map of the World, 10 Foot long, and 7 Foot deep, pasted on Cloth and coloured. Price 2 l. A Map of all the World, 4 Foot long, and 3 Foot deep, pasted on Cloth and coloured, Price 10 s. in Sheets 2 s. 6 d. A Map of the English Empire in America, descri∣bing all Places inhabited there by the English Nati∣on, as well on the Islands as on the Continent. Price 15 s. Six Scriptural Maps, 1. Of all the Earth, and how after the Flood it was divided among the Sons of Noah. 2. Of Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, with the Countreys circumjacent inhabited by the Patriarchs. 3. The 40 years travel of the Chil∣dren of Israel through the Wilderness. 4. Of Ca∣naan, or the Holy Land, and how it was divided among the twelve Tribes of Israel, and travelled through by our Saviour and his Apostles. 5. The Travels of St. Paul, and others of the Apostles, in their propagating the Gospel. 6. Jerusalem, as it stood in our Saviours time; with a Book of expla∣nations to these Maps, entituled, Sacred Geography.
Price of the Maps 6 s. useful to be bound up with Bi∣bles. Price of the Book 1 s. 6d. A New Map of the Kingdom of Ireland, in one Royal sheet of Paper, price 1 s. by J. Moxon. A New Map of England, shewing the Roads from Edinburgh to London, in 2 sheets; price 1 s. By J. Moxon. A New Map of Scotland, in one Royal Sheet, price 1 s. by J. Moxon. A Sea Plat, or Map of all the World, according to Mercator, in two large Royal Sheets of Paper; set forth by Mr. Edward Wright, and newly corre∣cted by Joseph Moxon, &c. Price 2 s. Sea-Plats for Sailing to all parts of the World. Price 6 d. the Sheet. The famous City of Batavia in the East Indies, built and inhabited by the Dutch, curiously Engra∣ved, and Printed on four large Sheets of Royal Pa∣per. Price 2 s. 6 d. A small Map of all the World, with Descriptions, on one Sheet. Price 6 d. BOOKS. A Tutor to Astronomy and Geography, or the Use of both the GLOBES, Coelestial and Terre∣strial; by Joseph Moxon, A Member of the Royal Society, and Hydrographer to the Kings most Ex∣cellent Majesty. Price 5 s.
The Vse of the English Globe, by the Right Hono∣rable the Earl of Castlemain. Price 5 s. The Vse of the Numbring Nines. By the Right Honourable John Lord Naper. Price 1 s. The Vse of the Copernican Spheres, teaching to salve the Phaenomena by them, as easily as by the Ptolomaick Spheres; by Joseph Moxon, &c. Price 4 s. Wright's Correction of Errors in the Art of Na∣vigation. Price 8 s. New and rare Invention of Water-works, teaching how to raise Water higher than the Spring. By which Invention, the Perpetual Motion is proposed, many hard Labours performed, and varieties of Mo∣tions and Sounds produced. By Isaac de Caus, En∣gineer to King Charles the First. Price 8 s. Practical Perspective, or Perspective made easy Teaching by the Opticks how to delineate all Bodies, Buildings, and Landskips, &c. By the Catoptricks, how to delineate confused Appearances, so as when seen in a Mirrour or Polish'd Body of any intended Shape, the Reflection shall shew a Design. By the Dioptricks, how to draw part of many Figures into one, when seen through a Glass or Christal cut into many Faces. By Joseph Moxon, &c. Price 7 s. An exact survey of the Microcosm, being an Anato∣my of the Bodies of Man and Woman, wherein the Skin, Veins, Nerves, Muscles, Bones, Sinews, and Li∣gaments accurately delineated. Engraven on large Copper plates, Printed and curiously pasted toge∣ther, so as at first sight you may behold all the parts of Man and Woman; and by turning up the several Dissections of the Papers, take a view of all their In∣wards;
with Alphabetical References to the names of every Member and part of the Body. Set forth in Latin by Remelinus, and Michael Spaher of Tyrol; and Englished by John Ireton, Chyrurgeon; and lastly, perused and corrected by several rare Ana∣tomists. Price 14 s. Vignola, or the Compleat Architect; shewing in a plain and easy way, the Rules of the five Orders in Architecture, viz. Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Co∣rinthian, and Composite; whereby any that can but read and understand English, may readily learn the Proportions that all Members in a Building have to one another: Set forth by Mr. James Ba∣rozzio of Vignola, and Translated into English by Joseph Moxon, &c. Price 3 s. 6 d. Christiologia, or a brief but true Account of the certain Year, Month, Day and Minute of the Birth of Jesus Christ. By John Butler, B. D. and Chaplain to his Grace James Duke of Ormond, &c. and Rector of Lichborough in the Diocess of Peter∣borough. Price 3 s. 6 d. A Tutor to Astrology, or Astrology made easie; being a plain Introduction to the whole Art of Astrology; whereby the meanest Apprehension may learn to Erect a Figure, and by the same to give a determinate Judgment upon any Question or Nativity whatsoever. Also new Tables of Hou∣ses, calculated for the Latitude of 51 degr. 32 min. Also Tables of Right and Oblique Ascensions to 6 degr. of Latitude. Whereunto is added an Ephe∣meris for three years; with all other necessary Ta∣bles that belong to the Art of Astrology. Also how to Erect a Figure the Rational way, by the Ta∣bles
of Triangles, more methodically than hath been yet published; digested into a small Pocket Volume for the conveniency of those that erect Figures a∣broad. By W. Eland. Price 2 s. The Use of a Mathematical Instrument called a Quadrant, shewing very plainly and easily to know the exact Height and Distance of any Steeple, Tree or House, &c. Also to know the time of the Sun-Rising and Setting, and the Length of eve∣ry day in the year, the Place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, the Azimuth, Right Ascension, and De∣clination of the Sun: with many other necessary and delightful Conclusions: performed very readi∣ly. Also the use of a Nocturnal, whereby you may learn to know the Stars in Heaven, and the Hour of the Night by them; with many other de∣lightful Operations. Price 6 d. A brief Discourse of a Passage by the North-Pole, to Japan, China, &c. pleaded by three Experiments and Answers to all Objections that can be urged a∣gainst a passage that way: As 1. By a Navigati∣on into the North Pole, and two Degrees beyond it. 2. By a Navigation from Japan towards the North-Pole. 3. By an experiment made by the Czar of Muscovy, whereby it appears, that to the Northward of Nova Zembla is a free and open Sea as far as Japan, China, &c. With a Map of all the discovered Land nearest to the Pole. By Joseph Moxon, &c. Price 6 d. Regulae Trium Ordinum Literarum Typographica∣rum; Or, the Rules of the three Orders of Print-Letters, viz. the Roman, Italica, and English, Ca∣pitals and Small; shewing how they are compound∣ed
of Geometrick Figures, and mostly made by Rule and Compass. Useful for Writing Masters, Paint∣ers, Carvers, Masons, and others that are lovers of Curiosity. By Joseph Moxon, &c. Price 5 s. Geographical Playing Cards, wherein is exactly described all the Kingdoms of the Earth, curiously engraved. Price Plain 1 s. Coloured 2 s. best Co∣loured and Gilt 5 s. the Pack. The Genteel House-keepers Pastime; or, the Mode of Carving at the Table, represented in a Pack of Playing Cards. By which, together with the Instru∣ctions in this Book, any ordinary Capacity may ea∣sily learn how to Cut up, or Carve in Mode, all the most usual Dishes of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and Bak'd Meats: and how to make the several Services of the same at the Table; with the several Sawces and Garnishes proper to each Dish of Meat. Set forth by several of the best Masters in the Faculty of Carving, and published for publick use. Price 6 d. Carving Cards. By the best Carvers at the Lord Mayors Table. Price 1 s. Compendium Euclidi Curiosi. Or, Geometrical O∣perations, shewing how with one single opening of the Compasses and a straight Ruler, all the Propositi∣ons of Euclid's first five Books are performed. Translated out of Dutch into English. By Joseph Moxon, &c. Price 1 s. An Introduction to the Art of Species. By Sir Jonas Moor. Price 6. d. Mechanick Exercises: Or, the Doctrine of Han∣dy-Works, in Fourteen Monthly Exercises. The first Three, viz. Numb. I. Numb. II. Numb. III. teaching the Art of Smithing. The second Three,
viz. Numb. IV. Numb. V. Numb. VI. teaching the Art of Joynery. The third Three, viz. Numb. VII. Numb. VIII. Numb. IX. teaching the Art of House-Carpentery. The fourth Five, viz. Numb. X. Numb. XI. Numb. XII. Numb. XIII. Numb. XIV. teaching the Art of Turning. Accommoda∣ted with suitable Engraved Figures. By Joseph Moxon, &c. Mechanick Exercises, the Second Volume appli∣ed to the Whole Art of Printing, being 24 Exercises. By Joseph Moxon, Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and Member of the Royal Soci∣ety. Price of each Monthly Exercise 6 d. Mechanick Dialling; Teaching any man, though of an ordinary Capacity, and unlearned in the Ma∣thematicks, to draw a true Sun-Dial on any Given Plane, however situated; only with the help of a straight Ruler and a pair of Compasses; and with∣out any Arithmetical Calculation. By Joseph Mox∣on, &c. Price 1 s. 6 d. Mathematicks made easie: Or, A Mathematical Dictionary, Explaining the Terms of Art, and Diffi∣cult Phrases used in Arithmetick, Geometry, Astro∣nomy, Astrology, and other Mathematical Sciences, wherein the true Meaning of the Word is rendred, the Nature of things signified Discussed, and (where Need requires) Illustrated with apt Figures and Di∣agrams. With an Appendix, exactly containing the Quantities of all sorts of Weights and Mea∣sures: The Characters and meaning of the Marks, Symbols, or Abbreviations commonly used in Al∣gebra. And sundry other Observables. By Joseph Moxon. Price 2 s. 6 d.
At the place aforesaid, you may also have all manner of Maps, Sea-Plats, Drafts, Mathematical Books, Instruments, &c. at the lowest Prizes. FINIS.
