S644 12376559 60632
AN ANSVVER TO A Scurrilous Pamphlet, INTITVLED, Observations upon a Compleat History of the Lives and Reignes of MARY Queen of Scotland, and of her Son King Iames, of Great Britain, France and Ireland the Sixth. The Libeller without a Name, set out by G. Bedell and T. Collins two Booksellers: But the History Vindicated by the Authour WILLIAM SANDERSON Esq. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by George Sawbridge and Richard Tomlins. 1656.
AN ANSWER TO A Scurrilous Pamphlet, &c. Page first. Paragraph first. THe first line names me, [One Mr. Sanderson (saith he) who hath lately written a Book, which hee calls a Compleat History of Mary Queen of Scotland, and Iames her Son, the Sixth of Scot∣land and first of England.] He is false in his first Page; not vouchsafing to recite the truth▪ or to afford him the Title, K. Iames; and goes on [that it is not a History, but a Libell, against all good Men, and good actions, and with most servile flattery, prayseth and exalteth the bad, both Men and matters: That this whole Booke is a Rapsody of Notes, and scattered papers, without order or method, exceedingly defective, both in time, place, and Nomination; unseem∣ly and disjoynted▪ a stile without understanding, &c. The language darke, harsh and intelligible.] Thus, his first page fills, and is fals in all▪ In reciting my Tile which is, A Compleat History of the Lives and Reignes of Mary Queene of Scotland, and of her Sonne and Successor Iames the sixth, King of Scotland, and (after Queen Elizabeth) King of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland the first, of ever blessed memory. And in all and every one of the rest▪ his scandalls, as to every particular, I submit to to the sensure of wiser men than my selfe, and honester than he the Ob∣servator, or these, his Book-sellers, Bedell and Collins. Page 2. [But (saith he) that you may the better know the Ware,Page  out of this mans shop, I shall give you his Character, and trace him from his Pa∣rents.] His Father was a Gentleman, though poore; he was of kinn
to Sir VValter Raleigh, and in the time of his prosperity and great∣nesse, was his servant, intrusted with his Moneyes, by which he became in Arreares in great summes, which Sir VValter (after his troubles) sent for▪ But he pretended, that Sir VValter should owe him 2000l. where∣upon Sir VValter commenced a Suite against him, and Sanderson be∣ing overthrown, and found in Arreares to Sir VValter, in very great summes, was cast into prison, and there dyed a poore contemptible begger: And hence originally sprang all the spleen and malice of this man to Sir VValter.] His second Page wholly containes a scurrilous false scandall on my Father. My Father now dead 25. yeares since, and then about 90. yeares of age, whose extraction and discent antiently from Robter, Lords of Bedic in the Bishoprick of Durham, and as appeares by his Pedegree inrowled in the Office of Armes, without craving advantage of kinne to Sir VValter Raleigh: the other a Gentleman of greater Antiquity, and just and worthy memory; which might be sufficient for the dead, but not for me now living to vindicate from slander, I having no ambition to repeate his merits, as an advantage thereby to the dead, or to me, no otherwise than in duty I am bound, thus farre to proceed therein, and farther to say, That my Father was bred up in the City of London under Tutelage of Mr Allen, Queen Eliza∣beths Merchant, (one so called for his Maritime affaires) the most part of his youth beyond Seas: His elder brother dying, hee became heire to 700. pound per annum, land of Inheritance, in se∣verall places, viz. In London, at Layton in Essex, (being his Country house and land, of retyring,) at Tunbridge in Kent, at Barstable in Deavon; in Ireland, of great value, untill the Rebellion of Tyrone, and then sold for 1500. pounds; at Lambeh, in Surry. At his returne home, he setled himselfe in a faire house, now the Hoope Taverne in St Mag∣nus Parish London, his Inheritance there with other Tenements, His Cote, Armes, and Name, with the yeare of our Lord fixed in conveni∣ent places of that house doe now evidence. And in this condition he wa intrusted soly, to negotiate at Court▪ concerning the Queens Part in all the Spanish prize goods. In which he was made Commissioner, and thereby to attend the then Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and often times to speake with the Queen, by favour of such as had relation to Her. Where he, at 30. yeares of age, married Margaret the Daughter of Hugh Snowdale, aliàs, Snedale, a Commander in the Queenes Navy-Royall. In all this time, Sir Walter Raleigh not qualified to keep
other then ordinary Attendants, his condition (a younger Brother, and unsetled) enforced him, like a gallant Gentleman (I confesse) and honourably, into Forraigne parts, France, Ireland, and severall ex∣peditions at Sea, to raise his fortunes by the Sword: and certainly San∣derson was never his Souldier and disdained to be his Servant. But, Sir Walter returning home to his Center the Court, his Sisters Daugh∣ter (Mrs. Snedale) married to Sanderson, who was become the Queens Customer and Farmer, for the Over-lengths of Broad-cloaths; was pleased to descend so far, as to be a continuall guest at Sanderson's House, then in London, and Layton in Essex, and his best friend, it seemes; whither he brought his Wife a Guest, himselfe then in disgrace concerning her, (I will be civill.) And as Sir Walter's occasions had need, (ourtiers not being over-nice to make them often) he enga∣ged Sanderson for him in 16000l. and was indebted besides to Sander∣son, in severall summes of mony, as his Cash-books do yet evidence, amounting to 4000l. (the Observator sayes, but 2000l.) And Sir Walter, in his journey towards his Arraignment at Win∣chester, Sanderson with other Gentlemen being in sight upon Houn∣slow-heah, Sir Walter was pleased to stop his Coach, and said Ne∣phew Sanderson, upon my soul, I am more grieved for my engage∣ments and debts to you, then for any other sufferings that may befall me▪ And good Mr. Leivtenant (of the Tower, sitting beside him) what ere becomes of me and mine, I beseech the King to be good to this worthy Gentleman: Both of them weeping, upon my oath, that was present. And after Sir VValters reprieve, became Suites in Law between Sanderson, about Sir VValter's debts, and Shelbury the Solicitor: But, that Sanderson was then indebted, or ever Arrested, or sued for debts of Arrears to him, or cast in Prison, or dyed in Prison, a poo con∣temptible beggar,Page 2. is most untrue and scandalous; for Sanderson lived some years in the Strand, where he dyed, and was embalmed many months, untill his Sons came over from beyond Seas, and buried him in the Parish Church of Savoy, leaving Lands of inheritance to his Children, that live without begging; and so o originall cause of malice, in my Father or Me, to Sir Walter Raleigh, with whom, in the Tower my Father and Mother,Page 2. my Selfe and Brethren, were very often, in visits of civility, and respect to each other; and afterward, even at his Chamber dore, the night before he suffered▪ For after Sr VValters Sentence, and Reprive to the Tower close Prisoner,
(and friendlesse, he saies) only Mr. Lessells, my Ladies friend, did not leave her. This Gentleman can tell, that Mr. Sanderson, by his interest with the Lord Treasurer Salisbury, procured the effect and prayer of her Petition, to visit her Husband, and to be close Prisoner with him; and but time, for it was said, she suddainly conceived. But to evidence, that Mr. Sanderson's condition, was not likely to seek his Fortune, by serving Sir Walter, I am put upon the Readers patience, for my excuse and pardon, to add something more. For ver∣tues consist not in Negatives. My Father was not wanting in the commendable mysterie of the Merchant Adventurers; witnesse those long since printed Tractates, and many Manuscripts and Papers, which I have of his (and one Malynes his Assistant) for the discovery of the secret mysterie of Bullion and Monies the exchange and rechange, single and double usance of Mo∣nies amongst Mechants; the Cambio Regis, of which the Treasurers, Burleigh and Sackvile, would say, That Sanderson understood the Theory and Practick more, then most English Merchants. Sir Abra∣ham Dawes did professe, that he knew Mr Sanderson a worthy Mer∣chant; and certainly, (said he) in comparison of him, many of us are but Pedlars. And being very well seen in the matter of Monies and Oar, he Farmed of King Iames the Mines Royall of England, and so set hundreds of men at work, to his great expence and losse, in Darby-shire, VVorcester-shire, Devon, &c. where abouts I have been often with him. He would complain of his deficiency, but was highly affected to Learned men and Arts; witnesse his own words, which so pleased Camden, that famous Schollar, and his friend, that he put them into Latine. Non me suscepit gremio divina Mathesis, Nec studiis, (agnosco dolens) stellis ve doceri▪ &c. They are fully exprest and graven upon the English great Globes; which Globes, when that excellent Mathematician VVright, and the rare Artizan Molineux, could not finde any other person, willingly to disburse above 1000l. to perfect them, my father did: They are yet in being, great and small ones, Celestiall and Terrestriall, in both our Uni∣versities, and in severall Libraries (here, and beyond Seas:) The In∣scription and Dedication to Queen Elizabeth, with Sanderson's Coat
of Armes and Name upon them, do manifest; for which, Garter, then principall K. of Armes, (by the Queenes command) advanced the bea∣ring of Sanderson's Crest, antiently the Talb, and his Motto, Rien sans Dieu, with an addition of a Globe Terrestriall, affixed to the Sun in lustre, proper, with this Motto, Opera Mundi, to him and his hires for ever. The Terrestriall being first presented to Queen Elizabeth, at an en∣tertainment at my Fathers house (then Newington-Butts) upon which she was pleased to descant, The whole eath, a present for a Prince; but with the Spanish Kings leave, she said, alluding to his Emblem, a Spanish Genet, in speed upon the Globe of the Earth; his fore-feet over-reaching, with this Motto, Non suicit Orbis. At her second en∣tertainment there, she receiving the Celestiall said, Thou hast presented me with the Heavens also: God guide me, to Govern my part of the one, that I may enjoy but a mansion place in this other. And afterwards, he imployed VVright and other Mathematicians, to compose and frame, that then admired double Sphear, presented by Sanderson to Prince Henry, with a Manuscript of the use thereof; not long since remaining in the Library of Saint Iames. He knowing my Fathers affection to Arts, commended Bloys, a man of skill pretending to the perpetuall motion, which was endeavoured at my Fathers house, then at Islington, and brought to excellent observation, and at his cost and charges. A mighty Wheel it was, of large Circumference, erected upon Beams, with massy bolts of Iron, fastned to each spoke, which being set on going, in their very declining & descending of each in turn, shot their Bolts from the Center to the out-Circle, with such force in the fall, as raised the next spoke and bolt from his Center, who performed his part as the last before; and so in course: which at the first motion was of that might and swiftnesse, as, with horrour and noise of clattering the bolts, affrighted the Prince and company, the first that saw its motion: But then in an hour, lessening by insensible degrees, the force weakned and wasting, the Motion at last stood still. It was framed and set up in a very large Barn, no other room being ca∣pable of the Circle. What need I number up his affection to the Art and uses of Na∣vigation, to finde out the Longitude and Variation, of the Variation of the Needle; as may appear by the work, the various intricate Maze, and Labyrinth of Lines and Circles, drawn upon severall superficies of Bodies, do demonstrate the endeavour. His extraordinary sole expence and charge, with his own two Ships, the
Sunshine and Rainbow, set out by him under command of that famous Navigator, Iohn Davis, for the North-West passage, called by him Fretum Davis; where he named sundry places in reference to his Under∣taker, as, Sanderson's Tower, Hope Sanderson, in honour of his Me∣mory, and incouragement to others; They are so mentiond upon all Globes and Maps, here and beyond Seas, that ever I saw since. The particulars of all these, you may read in Hackluits Voyages and Discoveries, with Letters, Dedications, and other passages, to confirm what is here said. And at the return of Drake and Cavendish from com∣passing the Earth, in honour to them, and their Memory, which he de∣sired, and in favour to him, they performed, Baptizing two of his Sons after their Sirnames: Drake died in the West Indies at Saint Dominica; but another Brother returned, both of them in pursuit after Sir VValter Raleigh, in his last unfortunate Voyage. Another Son cast away on the Coast of America; called then Norombega: Another, in discovery of the North-west passage, with Captain VVeymouth: Another, in the East-Indies▪ Another, of some note, first, in the West Indies, and afterwards eight years a Commander with the Dutch a∣gainst the Portingalls in the East-Indies; then in Ireland, Scotland, Swethen, Germany; and lastly, (but the first Colonell) that ever car∣ried a double Reigment of 2000. men by Sea, about the Norway ape, to the Emperor of Mosco, in service at Smolensco, against the Pole, where he was basely murthered by that Scot, Sir David Lesl, as you may finde mentioned and enroll'd upon Record, in the Office of Armes. So much for my Father and them, and now, with favour, also for my selfe. Page 3. [For this man himselfe (saies he) he lived, for ought I could ever hear (he hath enquired) at first, very obscurely, and studied He∣rauldry.] I never durst presume to the knowledge of that noble Science and Study, Herauldry, other then an admirer of that, and such like, ho∣nourable Studies, becomming a Gentleman, not to be wholly ignorant of, in some proportion; nor am I, in this particular, so far profici∣ent, as to distinguish a Barr in Bearing, to signifie a Bastard. And so much acquainted I have been with Littleton, as to be Se∣cretary to the Master of the Wards and Liveries, untill his death, who succeeded Cicell, the Earl of Salisbury. [He tells us (saies he) that he was servant to the Lord Rosse,Page 3. in his Spanish Embassie; a fit Servant no doubt for such a Master;
for what that Lord was is notoriously known to most men, yet living.] I tell you so now, but never before, that I was secretary to the Lord Rosse, being Ambassador extraordinary, to the King of Spaine, who though well known to many men, whilst he lived, yet I beleeve (by your favour Sir) Not notoriously known to most men yet living. You notoriously, are mistaken; a million to one, that is odds enough. How ever, expect not of me, to ravell into your meaning, what that Lord was? In my returne homewards from Spain, and after some stay in France, I came to Court; where it pleased that very reverent Prelate Iames Mountague, Lord Bishop of VVnchester, to receive me neer his Person, during his life; He having the honour to be admitted into King Iames Bedchamber (never any Church man so, before or since:) Pre∣late of the Garter, and Privy Councellour▪ & some have since observed his power with that King and great interest in Ecclesiasticall affaires, (an Observator, concerning him therein, must amend his mistaken notes) his vertues and learning, I did reverence; my poor indeavours could merit but little, though I had the meanes and occasion to im∣prove, and so much of his esteem, which continued me in grace and favour which his right Honorable Brother the Earle of Man∣chester, Lord Privy seal; and the Lord Mountague: Who were pleased to own me, a professed servant (as I am) to all that noble family. He was at the siege of Breda under the Earle of Oxford,Page 3. to whom he gives the title of debost Lord. Not to be wholly ignorant of war, and a fair occasion offered, I was at the siege of Breda with the Earle of Oxford; secretary and paymaster to the Regiment▪ and very often upon duty; and the Ensigne being hurt, I bore his colours in the march into Cleveland & at the taking in of the Town of Cleve, but a volunteer in arms: being often sent over into England, to attend our Councell of Warr here, who disposed the English, in reference to that designe, of assisting the Dutch, against the house of Austria. And in my Book, taking occasion to answere the calumnies throughout the History of great Brittain, wherein the Au∣thor, Page 161. [Oxford (sayes he,) was of no reputation in his youth, being very deboshed and riotous, & having no meanes, maintai∣ned it by sordid and unworthy wayes] In answere to whom, I derive that Earles high extraction, & descent from his first Ancesters & their Creations; this man (say I) was now returned home from travell, to recover his former debaucheries, &c. And my observator suffering the
other words from One printed 1653. quarrells now with mine, which rebukes the other, but modestly as to the truth. And certainly, Sir, these imployments of mine, are not over contemp∣tible,Page 3. nor masked, unlesse to your obscure condition, [That can not learn (as you say) that this man, meaning me, had ever any relation to the Court, more than at large; untill he became secretary to the Earle of Holland, when he was Chancellor of Cambridge (which he never was (wise aker) but of the University) where he behaved himselfe (you say) so corruptly, that he was in great disgrace and scorne, tur∣ned out of his place, for taking bribes of divers Scholers, to make them Doctors and Batchelors of Divinity, when the King came to an Inter∣tainment at Cambridge, (With the Maior he meanes) so that for a long time after, those men were by every boy, called Sandersons Doctors.] How this Scandall doth trench upon the University in generall, and upon the worthy Graduates, then Commencers, in particular, I submit to their wisdomes; not minding to mix so grave an Accusa∣tion, with petty single Interrest of other things, in this place; but, to refer the Vindication as an Appendix to this Discourse, being of some consequence to be considered by it selfe, and that not briefly neither: For, untill this Libeller without a Name, no other Calumni∣ator durst ever be so impudent, as once to tax those proceedings upon them or me. [A pretty while after, he saies (which was many years before) he married the late Queenes Landresse, and so mght perchance creep (again) into her chamber below stirs.] A scandall upon her, of double sense, as if I had crept thither before Marriage; to which her self makes answer, That she is a Gentlewo∣man tender of a scandall, and of the antient Family of Tyrrill, and Sister to the now Sir Edward Tyrrill of Thornton, in the County of Buckingham, Knight and Baronet. That by her Office and Title, (Mrs. Landresse to the Queenes Body) and by her birth besides, was alwaies a Companion above stairs, for a better woman then a Libellers Wife, were he of more fame then him we suspect; and as for her hone∣sty, she never had a Damarah to her Daughter, before she had a Hus∣band. And Mr. Sanderson was able with above a 1000l. to buy her this place, and not to beg it. That she never falsified her Oath▪ nor was perfidious to her Soveraigne. This is somewhat sharp Sir (a wo∣mans honour is concerned) 'tis her own inck I'le assure you, without any gaul of mine Sir; and you are well that it is no worse.
[And now (saies he) I shall proceed to examine some particulars in his Book,Page 4. and decline any thing concerning the Queen of Scot, or that part of the story.] It is the first part of my History (the whole containing above 600. large folioes) to which his Reading hath not reached so far before, being 128 folio, and not a fault to be found. [Only he will observe some passages of Queen Elizabeths Raigne, that I give a harsher censure upon Essex and his offences, then any Writer heretofore.] Not by a hundred. He loves Traitors with his heart, it seems, and b no means would have them, nor their Treason harshly censured. I I thought it were not dangerous for his health, I could turn him to the Authors; for so he finding the truth, might despair and hang himselfe. Then he traverseth back again, and but a word. [He seemes (saies he) to intimate out of some discourse, between Secretary Davi∣son and Queen Elizabeth, that she would have had the Queen of Scots poysoned by Pawlet and Dury, which they refused.] All Authors herein, English, Scotish, Latine, French, Spanish, do intimate a cunning unwilling willingnesse in Queen Elizabeth, to stain her honour in the blood of the Queen of Scots, her Kinswoman, and next to succeed to this Crown; and yet desirous to be rid of her one way or another, she treats with Davison, out and in, what to do. He to be quit of the mischiefe (by example of Burleigh, for the hasty execution of Norfolk) advises with Hatton, and utterly refuses to en∣gage any further, untill the Councill encouraged him. Davison watch∣ing her doubtfull humour▪ asked her plainly, if her minde were al∣tered? No, (said she) but some other course might be taken: And de∣manded if Pawlet had returned his answer, whose Letters directly refusing to undertake it, as neither honourable nor just, she, in a chafe, said▪ That there were many amongst them, that would do more in their own cause. But Davison told her of the infamy, injustice, and hazard to Pawlet and Drury: For Madam (said he) if you allow the fact, you draw upon your selfe danger and disgrace; and if you dis∣allow it, you ruine them and their Posterity. Upon all these dissemblings, I concluded. Hereby (said I) appears foul play, intended by another (no doubt) wicked way, which Pawlet and Drury boggled at to perform; and yet we see what daubing there was on all sides, to cast the blame and
after-shame on any, to keep the stain and blot from the eminent actours, Folio 128. But to all the other stuffe, his nonsence, Tua non mordet; I pitty his ignorance, and disdain to answer, but refer to the History, Folio 127. Page 5. He hath skipt over the first Book of my History, 262 Folioes, with∣out any other faults then as before. He threatned much matter amisse: Is this all? [A History (you said, page 1.) a Libell against all good men, all good actions, servilely exalting the bad, both men and mat∣ter.] to be hitherto only insisted upon in Essex Treason, and he the good man, and his, the good matter? But let us see the second Part, where he inists upon Sir Walter Raleigh, and begins his Observations upon King Iames, whom he lamely commends, the better to abuse him, and basely to calumniate after. For he tells us [that King Iames failed in King-craft,Page 5. being over∣reached (sayes he) in his treaties by all Princes and States▪ his spen∣ding more in frivolous Embassies than would have raised an army to to have settled his childrens Inheritance.] Simply said! [That he re∣fused to be head of all the Protestant Princes in Christendome, whereby he might have given Law to this World.] What an oversight was this? [But he inclined to their enemy the Papist, and so ruined the one, and advanced the other.] How prove you that Sir? [That his acces∣sion to England was thought the greatest happinesse▪ but hath proved the greatest misfortune to both.] And why? [for, after a miserable and wasting civill Warr, we see his posterity overthrowne, and cast out of their inheritance very unlikely to repossesse it.] And was King Iames the cause of these calamities? [No not altogether] who then? He hath found the onely cause. [The secret predetermination of the all see∣ing God, other reason no man knowes.] The guilty will not acknow∣ledge, til the last dreadfull day of accompt, when the sentence shall say, Go ye cursed, &c. All this while he is busied with Kings, but talks to himselfe, and so I escape his censure; not a word of me or mine. Page 6. But now, oh now! How pittifully he payes the poore Scots, [A people (sayes he) once famous for Warr, and high reputation; now the most despicable conquered people upon the face of the whole earth (bate me an ace, quoth Bolton worse then the Jewes?) their model∣ling all reformed Kirk, hath now no where a being; and the nation subjugated to a forraigne power? &c. This is the Lords doing and marvellous in our eye.] And after his pittifull search into humane
Judgment [Much of this he attributes to the greatnesse, power, & prodi∣gality of that Nation in their accesse to England, insolent and proud.] And is this all Sir, that you can find out, to be the efficient cause of their great miseries? Nay he hath met with more. [perchance (sayes he) for some falshood and treacheries, even to their own Princes] Is it even so, Sir, the Lord have mercy upon all other such sinfull soules? But how [conquered and subjugated to Foraigne power] is past my comprehension, or how can he hold forth all this, without publique Censure? Page 7. But enough of this (he sayes) now have at my Book and me. [I now will take notice (sayes he) of such aspersions as this Author bestowes on particular persons of honour and worth, through his whole Book, he makes it his business to rail at good men and defend the bad.] He being come to Folio 284 of my History, finds no other aspersi∣ons then as you have heard. And now you may wonder who these good men are? why, who but traytors? He meanes them in the very next line, Cobham and Raeigh the men, and Treason the matter. But Raleigh sticks most in his stomack: and truly it regrets upon mine, for me now againe, to re-rip up the mis-actions of the dead: but I am challen∣ged, he accuses me▪ I do but defend my selfe. VVhere,Page 7. in the Character of Raleigh (he sayes) I allow him a grand enemy to the Spaniard, and opposer of the peace; yet immedatly after beleeves him a conspirer with the Spaniard, but tells us not in what particular. Folio 284. You have forgot ten lines before Folio 283. Where I say, that at the entrance of the King, he was presented by Sir VValter Raleigh with a manuscript of his making, against the peace with Spaine, it was his Ta∣ble-talk, to beget more esteem, which took accordingly (this answers my first assertion) and the way to unbend him was the work of the Spanish faction, either to buy him out of that humour, or to abuse him into worse condition, which was effected by this way, Folio 283. And so, I enter instantly, upon the plot of treason, and conspiracy, with VVatson and Clark; two Spansh Priests; Cobham and Brooks with others; Grey and Raleigh, &c. Fol: 283. And there I tell you and afterwards [In what partcular he should have served him.] And I proved the particulars by Cobhams confession Fol▪ 285. That Raleigh had agreed that he should treat with Aremburg the Spanish Ambassa∣dor for 600000▪ Crownes, to advance the title of the Lady Arabella to
this Crown: That Cobham, under pretence of travelling, should prose∣cute this designe in the Low-Countries, Flanders, France, and Spain; and to carry three Letters from her to the Arch-Duke, Duke of Savoy, and King of Spain. To meet Raleigh at Iersey, the place of his command, and there to agree, &c. and Raleigh to have 7000 Crownes for his expence, Fol. 285. You are now satisfied. [That Raleigh's Iury was called at the Bar, being of Middlesex Iury,Page 7. against whose persons he did not except.] Nor could (said I) for they were his Peers, the most able sufficient of Middlesex, where the fact had its Scene, Folio 284. Nor did (saies he) for Raleigh knew them not, being a packt Iury, wanting honesty and understandng.] Any Theefe at Newgate may say so, and refuse their Verdict. It is a scandall upon the Proceedings to say [That the intended Iury was changed over night.] For these were of Middlesex, and ordered long before to attend at Winchester; many of them Justices of the Peace, Sir Ralph Coniby, Sir Thomas Fowler, Sir VVilliam Roe, Sir Edward Peacock, and others, the most able for estates, worth, and knowledge; a fairer Tryall was never afforded in Treason, with fa∣vour of the King, who took off the Assistance of three of his own Councill, Sergeant Crook, Mr. Solicitor, and Sir Francis Bacon, as not to overcharge the Prisoner with too much Pleading: And three things more therein I observe in the whole proceeding before; not to be used rigorously, for no torture was forced upon any Exami∣nant; nor inordinately, none pressed to accuse another; and yet here was Brook against his Brother Cobham, and he against his deer friend Raleigh: Not precipitately, for it was a long time ere they came to Tryall, and Raleigh allowed to sit down with pen, inck, and paper. Page 8. [The Arraignment is in Print, he saies,] where those Authors speak more against him say I. [But he will yet demand of me, 1. Why Cobham was not brought face to face? 2. VVhat it was that ever Cobham accused Raleigh of. 3. VVhether ever any man was condemned by a single witnesse?] 1. I answer to the First, The Court and Judges gave it for Law and Reason, that it was not necessary in Treason: So the Prisoner may outbrave any Witnesse, and cause him to change his Confession, as might be suspected Cobham would do, in compassion to Raleigh, being himselfe condemned, and willing no doubt now to save the other.
3. And to the Last, I say, That it was most usuall and Legall, where many Circumstances, as here, do conduce to the truth. It was Raleighs policie to have but one Witnesse in the Conspiracie; thereby he meant to escape, either that Cobham must accuse him, or none can, and he but One, Raleigh might be safe. If A. conspire a Treason only with B. and he with C. and he with D. who can prove this Trea∣son, if not by One of them, and Circumstances also? If any one of these confesse it, need we more Witnesse to accuse himselfe and the other? A▪ Murtherer is met with a bloody sword, comming forth of the Kings Chamber, and he kill'd: is not one Witnesse sufficient? Cobham accuseth Raleigh, and he denies it: In Star-chamber, then, and Chancery, now; for matters of Tittle, his Deniall or Oath does not acquit him, in propria Causa, much lesse in Treason. 2. And to the Second, see Brooks, and Cobham's, and others Con∣fessions, which confirme him a Traitor throughout; concluding, that Raleigh was the instigator to the Treason, Fol. 285. The first of Edward the sixt, which requires two Witnesses, was repealed by the first and second of Philip and Mary, reducing all to the Common-Law, which is by one Witnesse. [But he assures us of a Letter of Cobhams,Page 8. written to Raleigh the nght before his Tryall, to clear him from Treason; which Letter, he saies, was produced at a Committee of Parliament, by Mr. Cary Raleigh.] I answer, That all the severall Letters were read contradicting themselves, and each the other (as Delinquents in Treason use to do) and therefore were adjudged not satisfactory, as to acquit either of them then. And for this pretended Letter shewed to the Committee, you should have inserted here, if not ashamed of it: But to do you Justice, I will set it down, as it was offered in the Tryall, which was not needfull in my History; nor now, but to convince your ignorance. Seeing my selfe (saies Cobham) so neer my end, and for the dis∣charge of my owne Conscience from the blood, which else would cry for vengeance against me: I protest, upon my salvation, I never pra∣ctised with Spain by your procurement. God prosper me in this my affliction, as you are a true Subject, for any thing that I know. I will say with Pilat, Purus sum à anguine hujus: So God have mercy on my soul, as I know no treason by you. This is somewhat satisfactory untill you hear more: But, you are mistaken▪ to say▪ it was the last Letter, the night before the Tryall: I will clear your intelligence with a truth, and with the very last Letter
indeed, which he writ to the Lords Commissioners, the night before Ralegh's tryall. I have thought it (saies Cobham) to set down this to my Lords; wherein I protest; on my soul, to write nothing but the truth. I am now to come neer the period of my time, therefore I protest the truth before God and his Angells. Raleigh, four daies before I came to the Tower, caused an Apple to be throwne in at my window, the effet thereof was, to intreat me, to right the wrong I had don him, in saying, that I should come home by Jersey, which under my hand to him, I have re∣tracted. His first Letter which was throwne in, in the same manner, wherein he prayed me write to him a Letter, which I did. He sent me word, that the Iudges were at Mr. Aturney's house, and there was good hope, that the proceedings against us should be stayed. At Arem∣burgh's comming, Raleigh deat with me, to procure a Pension of 1500l. a year, for which he promised, that no action should be done against Spain, but he would give knowledge before hand. He told me, that the States had audience with the King. He hath been the Origi∣nall cause of my ruine, for I had no dealing with Aremburgh, but by his instigation. He hath been the cause of my discontentment. He ad∣vised me not to be overtaken with Preachers, as Essex was, and that the King would better allow of a constant deniall, than to accuse any. And now Raleigh being asked what he could say to this last Let∣ter, writ with his own hand over night, from a dying condemned man; He answered, I say, that Cobham is a base, dishonorable, poor soul. I have been told, that Mr. Cary upon some pretence, was a suitor to the Parliament for somwhat of Sr. VValters (no matter now for what: I shall have time to tell him that, and more also, in another place hereafter) and Mr. Cary was like to carry it, when a worthy Member stept up, and laid in his way a Bar in Law, That Treason taints the Issue: upon which, came out a Letter to the Committee, which could never clear him, nor the Treason: If I be mistaken, let him help me hereafter, when he shall hear more of that in due place and time. But wherein [may one perceive my spleen against Sir Walter Ra∣leigh.] For I remember, the first time that Mr. Cary Raleigh came to Court, commended by Mr. Lessells, and called mostly Mr. Cary; to whom I was very civill; for Mr. Lessells called him my Cosin: And afterwards, an occasion was offered for me to do him kindenesse:
One Saintravy, a Frenchman, had affronted him at Court, which by means of my noble friends, was examined, where Saintravy utterly refused to submit, about the boxing. It was urged besides, that Saint∣ravy called him, The Son of a Traitor: The Lords laughed (for Mr. Lessells was by, who was said to be like him) and Saintravy being rounded in the ear▪ smiled, and said, That he was sorry to be mistaken; and so made it the worse, and the wound wider, to those that were told the meaning: However, my respects and service appeared to Sir VValters Kinsman, which approves me without spleen. Page 9. [That Cook the Atturney (he saies) beng retired from the Bar, whlst Sir Walter was sentenced or Treason,Page 9. tod his man, that he accused him but of Misprision:] And swears, [Upon the word of a Chrstian, Sir Edward Cook's own mouth told him so, since.] Cook, that had both charged him home with direct Treason, & indeed very unseemly, and often, called him Traito, thou Traitor Raleigh, to his face, should but turn his back from the Bar, and in an instant, af∣ter Sentence, mince his Treason to misprision, is most unlikely: [And to tell it since] to one without a name. But, we see how he swears, [as he is a Christian;] perhaps he is none: No body, who will give him credit? [Having (he saies) done wth his Treason, he descends to his Tra∣vells, 14 years after,] which he accounts in my Hstory, to be Foli 459. and as yet, no other faults to be found. Page 10. [That King James (he saies) forbad Sir Walter's Book,Pag. 10. for some passages in it, which offended the Spanad, (a far-fetch'd reason) and for being to plain with the faults of Princes.] I answer, Certainly King Iames, and all other Princes, had cause of complaint: For, his whole Book sets out the Eastern Monarchs with much glory, & exclaims against Chrstian Princes, as most inhu∣man, tracing all the English Soveraigns from the Conquest, espcially Henry the Eighth, whom, for his Daughters honour, (Queen Elza∣beth) Sr. VValter might have spared from gall and bitternesse she raising him from nothing who rewards her with ignomy of her Father; Nor could he love the child, whose Sire he hate: and King Iaes perhaps might observe more, to represse the wickednesse of such a person, who under pretence of tking a vice in the Father, intended cunningly to stain the whole Race: He covertly leaving the Reader in great doubt of Queen Elizabeths merit, whom he had reason to set out, not in
silence; whether in fear, or in fraud, I judge not. He saies,Pag. 10. [That the Lord Chancelor Verulam told Sir Walter, that his Commission from the King, under the great Seal of England, to be Generall of his Forces by Land and Sea, and Marshall-Law over his people, was as good a pardn for all offences, as the Law of England could make him.] It was without example, that the Lord Chancellor of England should give his opinion and counsell against the King, and in case of Treason too, and tell it to the Traytor himselfe, convict, after Ex∣amination, Tryall, Verdict, Sentence, and but Repreved? No Sir, no man of judgment will give you credit; a scandall upon his discre∣tion, if not more, his alleagance: If you be mistaken, amend it in your Reply, I expect it. But I answer, how oft this was urged by Sir Walter, and the other Argument, Singularis Testis, I refer to the Relation of his Tryall; wherein I say again, (as other Authors professe) He tired the Court and Iury with impertinencies, as to those two points especially. And in earnest, I have collected from the most, even from that Manuscript intituled, Sir Walter Raleigh's own writing, and from the best Records that I could meet with, besides the Reports of divers hea∣rers and all conclude, and expresly mention (except that of his own) that he tired the Court with impertinencies, as to the matter: His Di∣vinity, Law, and Reason were answered, and over-ruled by the Judges opinion, which is the certain rule to all Iuries, as to matter of Law. And yet this my Libeller fathers all upon me▪ as if I only meant to make him gilty. He saies,Ibid. [That Raleigh and Kernish did truly believe in the Mine, not with Chymicall tricks, as this trifling lyar (saies he) would intimate.] The Frenchman saies none but a Bastard-Gentleman gives a True Gentleman the lie. But Sir, to returne your lye with a truth, I shall say more concerning your chymicall Mine. Mr. Cary Raleigh your voucher, writ a fawning clawing Epistle to a worthy Gentleman Mr. Iames Howel▪ to recollect what he had writ of Sir Walter. To which he replies, and not to recant, but to rechant what he had said before. May 1645▪ For he again calls it, an ayrie supposititious Mine which turned to reall beliefe in his un∣dertakers of that voyage to their undoing. And ells Mr. Cary, that Sir Walters onely son, VValter Raleigh, at the storming of Saint Tome said as much in effect: Come on my noble hearts (said he) this is the
Mine we come for, and they who think there is any other, are fools. His own Father was none. Nay, you shall find Sir Robert Baker his His∣toricall Narrations say so too, and King Iames his Declaration makes it evident to be but a deceipt. But I find what this Libeller would have of me, as was bestowed by that ingenuous Author upon Mr. Cary: who advised him to let Sir VValter rest quietly in his grave, that his vertues may live in you (Mr. Cary) as he (to abuse him) saies they do, no doubt; and ever since to this counsell it seems he hath been silent, at least in publique, and serviceable to Mr. Howell. As no doubt this Li∣beller also, may in time become so serviceable to me. Page 11 12. And, for all his Apologie and pretences in this whole Page,Pag. 11. filled up with scurrilous language, I mean not now to meddle with, any further. My duty to the truth was to relate the narrative of the Trea∣son, sufficiently proved, and all those passages in reference to that, and Kemih death, and my observations upon all, necessarily condu∣cing; I refer the Reader to my History, being too too large to insert here again. He is troubled [That I should say,Pag. 11, 12. that Sir Walter had but a mean estate, which he meant to make up by his voyage.] And saies, [That he may thank King James for the meannesse of his fortune, who took away Sherborn from him; but when King James came into England, Raleigh was Lord VVarden of the Stanneries, &c. all which he lost for his supposed Treason.] He may thank King Iames, he saies, for the meannesse of his For∣tune and reckons up his Offices under Queen Elizabeth (not a foot of Land his Father left him.) All which he got (with your favour) by free grace of Queen Elizabeth, and might have kept that, and de∣served more (King Iames was bountifull) which himselfe lost and for∣feited, for unfaithfulnesse to his Soveraign Lord and King, her Sc∣cessor; and thereby had left him but a mean fortune, which he de∣signed to advance, by his Voyage: And were he innocently executed, why was Mr. Cay Raleigh's pretensious, and claimes in Parl aent, in reference to Sir VValter, laid aside, before himselfe was cleer'd of taint in blood, and so lost his claim by Parliament; which concludes also Sir VValter guilty, without dispute; when Mr. Cary had all ad∣vantage of his friends by Parliament to help him to it. Page 13. To confirm what I have said,Pag. 13. [They had matter eough to take
away his life, n this his last businesse, since his first Tryall.] Sir VValter was bound, not to infest the main Land of the West-Indies, and so he promised the King, who assured Gondoma so much; and to satisfie their jealousie, Sir VValters Letter (if any such) might be sent to Sant Tome for his security; which therefore aggravates the fault of Sir VValter. Besides, his biting jests upon all, not sparing his dread Soveraign, for admitting them, the more true, the wider skar: Many such of his, like the wound of a chewed bullet, the ruggednesse makes the hurt incurable. And besides, that which the Frenchman Manwaig con∣fessed of him to the King, as he reported since to Mr B. . a Gentle∣man of woth, who will justifie his report to be so foul so treasonable against King Iames, that may satisfie any good subject he deserved. death: Not that I take upon me to reveal it, being unwillingly enfor∣ced to speak thus much against the dead, who hath paid the debt due for his offences here, and no doubt enjoyes his pardon and forgivnesse hereafter, with my Christian zeal and charitable affection for ever. Page 14. And now my Libeller skips back again,Pag. 14. to Folio 365. and to pick out some scandalous passage there, he meets with the Earle of Pem∣brok, and his Brother Montgomery, whom I did but mention, and that justly, [That they were men of considerable Descents, though of no great fame in their Merits.] And he concludes, [That my passage in the main parts of i, is true, and cannot be denyed.] Yet, he saies, [That I confesse the King was kinde to Montgomery▪ hich he fetch∣eth out of Folio 592.] Not worth the turning over so many leaves, to prove his false Quotations and matter. Page 15. Then in a moment,Pag. 15. [He takes notice of the poisoning of Overbury▪] which is in the beginning of the History of King Iames; I list not search the folio, & he tells me not where [Overbury and Essex's Wife: that I extenuate that foul murther:] not with any exception to the truth of the story, but with his own selfe-pride, to make us believe he knew somewhat of the matter, and repeats only what I have said. But he regrets upon Sommerset, for begging from Raleigh, Sherborn, which he got by begging from an other before. Indeed Sherborn sticks in his stomack: It is the Note of another, not of me, That the seat of Sherborn had been the successive Inheritance of Traitors.
Our Libeller hath a mighty minde to it; he may in time, no doubt, deserve it, and more, upon the same score. As for [Overburies Character, of pride &c. Thrasonicall &c.] which he denies, let him read Sommersets Arraignment, where Sir Francis Bacon sets him out in the same termes, and mentioneth the most of all my matter, and what I said of Overburies pride. Pag. 16. [Haply (saies my Libeller) Overbury might have some tin∣cture of pride in him,Pag. 16. as indeed who would not, &c.] You seem to be a pert, proud, dandy-prat indeed. But ah! out upon his simplicity [That haply (saith he) Over∣bury had threatned this Gentleman in some illegall proects,Ibid. of which, they say, he had alwaies store, which he offered to So∣merset; and therefore he is not only contented▪ his Body should have been poysoned, whilst alive; but he will, as far as in him lies, if any would believe such a fellow, murther his fame too, after his death.] I protest religiously, that I read this his simple scandal over and over again, ere I could imagine the man meant it by me; so much I professe Christianity, so little I am guilty of projects, and was so young then, and unacquainted, that I scarce knew Overburie's face: Surely he means another, his best friend, the grand Court-projector, and so stiled; I never was any. Page 17, 18. He hunts counter, hook here,Pag. 17, 18. and fetches a freak out of Folio 429. [A scandall he calls it upon the Lord Kensington &c. for imitating the Earle of Carlile in his fine cloths, and calling him the naturall son of the Earle of Warwick.] And so he ravells Into the reason of his Birth and Parents, which I had no minde to med∣dle with; but for satisfying any mistakes therein, I stiled him the Naturall Son▪ Let him consult the reason, why the Parliament of Hen. 8. stiled the Princesse Elizabeth, Naturall Daughter to King Henry the eight▪ The rest not worth the answer, nor the foo∣lish flirt that followes. Then he falls again upon my mistakes, from whence would you think? Out of my Preface,Page 18. where he finds, [That King Henry the eighth was a Lutheran, when he lived (saies he) and died a Papist.] And to prove it, [He cites the Execution of More and Fisher▪ for being Papists, and multitudes more, for not subscribing to the six
Articles, which were rank Popery.] So then, he concludes for me, That Henry the eighth had been a Papist, and a Puritan, and, as Sir Walter saies in his Preface, died an Atheist. And indeed, VVill Somers, the Jeaster, on a sud∣dain very sad, told them the reason, That he had been at Tiburn, where Priests were hanged for being Papists, and some others at Smithfield burnt for Protestants; but, was resolved to save him∣selfe, and no way better, than to be of King Henrie's, Religion, which is (said he) none at all. Page 19. [He tells us, (saies he) Folio 487. that all our Marriages with Spain have been unfortunate to this Crown,Pag. 19. and then ravells into the story of the Black Prince (as if he had Married in Spain) this is his own inference, not mine. No lesse then 487. Fol. from the Preface▪ where we left him; it seemes I must skip thither too. I speaking of Prince Charles his Treaty with Spain, However (said I) the ill successe of our former marriages and medlings with that Nation, being malignant to us; witnesse the Black Prince his Voyage into Spain, to settle Don Piedro, &c▪ his body either corrupted by the aire, or by their Drugs impoysoned. What is this to any Marriage? But then indeed▪ I in∣stance our ill successe in Prince Athurs suddain death, with Ka∣tharine of Austra; and Mary of England, with Philip of Spain. Now, said I, to paralell those abroad with others at home to our own Subjects, the first, with Edward the fourth; the last, with Henry the eighth, from them there proceeded two Queens, Eliza∣beths, as never could produce greater examples of happinesse to Eng∣land. But our Libeller hath a malice to our French Matches, and comparatively gores them through the Spanish sides▪ It may be so, both have been bad enough, what's that to me? Yet, in this, I de∣sire to satisfie another, not you. Page 20. My mistakes, [That the Duke and Yelverton had no communi∣cation in the Tower.]Pag. 20. And why? [Because Belfore that said so, was not Lieutenant then, but after Moor, which was since.] and could not Belfore be acquainted with what was done before, and so a suf∣ficient Author to report it? [The like of Ree and Ramsey's Duell.] Discoursing of Combats, tempore Iacobi, I mention many before
and since, in reference to time, and give a hint of these (of late) two Scots, meaning the year (lately) when I write this History, 1655. for all men may know▪ it was in King Charles his time, and so to be understood from my own words. To carp at me, [He cleers Chelsey house, that the Duke did not buy it, but had it for nothing; and bids me ask the Countesse of Mid∣dlesex, whether she did not tell him so?] A pretty employment to enquire of a Lady, whether No-body does bely her? The like of Copt-hall, [And that my mistakes, ignoranc, and errors are infiite, in language and matter.] Page 21. And concludes with the like counsell to me, as to one Sir Ed∣mond [Read more,Pag. 21. and write lesse.] For which I shall give him a fee, as no doubt Sir Edmond did, who turn'd his back to his advice and bad him busse his bum. Not to die in your debt, I return my counsell to boot: In your Reply (if you please) belie not the dead, nor abuse the living, lest the dirt of both bedaube your selfe, and you deserve the finall sen∣tence; your first Libell to the fire by the Hadgman's hands; your next about your neck: Beware the Gallowes.
Three Letters from Doctor Samuel Collins, Regius Professor, and Provost of Kings Colledge in the University of Cambridge, concerning the Commencement; and Mr. Sanderson. To the Right Honorable, the Earle of Holland, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge. RIght Honorable, my very good Lord, and our only Patron, &c.—I might take occasion of your Honours late bounty to the University, but wanting no such occasion at any time, I make bold to open my mouth in the cause of such extremi∣ty, as the wisest amongst men charges us not to be silent in: The ra∣ther, because it may be my words of triumph, in such late plenty of Commencers (as the fashion is of Fathers when they create) hath given some occasion of misreporting the Action. Truly, tender of your Honours inviolatest reputaton; yea, and the indemnity of the meanest of them, that belong to your Honour: for your Honours own sake, I may boldly affirme, not any one unworthy, that I know, either Doctor or Batchelor in Divinity, or Commencer, in any kinde; but sundry of them rather Paragons; only One, the most suspected for insufficiency, yet, offered to give Caution to keep his Acts; then which, nothing could be more required at the strictest. When we consulted about them in the Consistory, the Names of sundry were set down in Paper, for most allowable, even by them of the Heads, that held backward most. Lack of Time, and lack of Living, are too slender exceptions in my opinion, not only against his Majestie's Largesse at his coming, and glorifying of his Tri∣umphs all we could (The glory of the King, being the multilitude of his people) but against worth and sufficiency, wheresoever such at any time fail of Time or Living. If your Honour had seen what past in this kind under other Chancellors, and namely, in conferring the Master of Arts Degree; yet, that Degree opens way to holy Or∣ders in men, perhaps not otherwise worthy (a perilous conse∣quence) Here, few Masters of Art, nor any unworthy; And for the Graduates in Divinity, they were all Ministers afore, and so no
danger of the foresaid ill consequence. We had but two Doctors now, more then we had in the last sicknesse time, or rather three lesse, as that number encreased soon after; yet then, his Majestie came not at all amongst us. Now, both King and Queen, and all, deserves more and more Schollars by far, than that time, which had nothing but wofull necessity to excuse it. This for the generall, that your Lordship con∣ceive no regret upon Rumors, I have presumed (one of many) yet, in my zeal to your Honour, wherein I come behinde none. For Mr. Sanderson in particular, a man of most usefull abili∣ties: That he hath not wronged your Honour, whatsoever some may suggest, I am not only told, but do verily believe, that he never com∣pacted with any for that courtesie; and one of them at the instant afore these flashes broke forth, told me as much of his own accord, Doctor Grant by name; and, I think, the rest will say no lesse, if they were deposed, as many have been: If afterwards they made him any vo∣luntary requitall for his service, which is more then I know, (yet, the most that can be surmized) yet, neither any fee abated to the University thereby, and the parties, in escaping other charges, think themselves no doubt well dealt with, as well they may. So with my prayers for your Honour, &c. Your Lordships Beadsman, and most humble Servant▪ Samuel Collins. Cambr. Kings Coll. 4th. April. 1632. To the right Worshipfull, my very good friend, Mr. Doctor Bing, in London, Chancery lane. SIR, FOr your wonted good News, &c. For our number of Doctors and other Commencers; Why? could there be lesse, to glorifie such a Triumph, as his Majesties vouchsafed Presence, and that with his Queen, and all, so full of honourable courtesie, of all sides? Remember, how many of late in the sicknesse, no such cause as now, and far more of kin to pre∣tence. Neither do I coneeive, but that the Gentleman you speak of,
whom I had the good luck to know of late, Mr. Sanderson, our No∣ble Chancellor's Secretary, hath both kept his word to the Doctors, and increased beholdings to his Lord, without any the least blemish to reputation. This you may avouch, that I was in the Consistory at the debating, and no man in the Paper, to whom just exception lay, that I can now remember. The worst was, that one was short in living, by which reason, I had never been a Doctor; for, I was bare Fellow of a Colledge, and my Father charged me on his blessing, not to alledge Poverty a∣gainst taking my Degree. Doctor Caesar only lackt time, for I dis∣puted on him my selfe, and he woon so much approbation then, as he might as easily have been Doctor, as Bachellor of Divinity, if he had had time: But he is a Noble-mans son and of Oxford, and so merits the more▪ As likewise Doctor Gray, a rare Scholar, one of them that commenced now by the King. I must leave you, I see: only know, that which bred all, or most, of the Scruples, which was intended, for more satisfaction, viz. To defer it till next Tearm. God keep you, Amen. Your assured poor friend, Sam. Collins. Kings Coll. Camb. 2d Aprill, 1632. To the VVorshipfull, my very good Cosin, Mr. Prinn, these, by the Wardrobe in London. SIR, IN much heavinesse, &c. Now concerning your question of the Doctors, whereof our friend is One: Sir, I know not what they can say there, as I said be∣fore; but, for my part, as I acknowledged publickly before them all in the Regent-house, when it was my turn to speak loudest, I see not how we could do his Maestie lesse honour, for so great grace as he had don Us. If you had seen when Bishop Harsnet was Vice-Chancellor, or heard what was said of it, when they went out by Clusters, and every body that would be, was consecrated Priest, (as the Scriptures say of Ieroboam's times I think) where it was so much the worse▪ because Masterships of Arts, which is an intro∣duction to Orders, was bestowed so commonly; but not one Mini∣ster
made the more, for all the Doctors and Batchellors in Divi∣nity, that Commenced by the King now. I confesse, I presented ma∣ny▪ whom I know not by face: but I am much assured of their suf∣ficiency, and have good grounds, either all, or most of them, ome in the Superlative, these are the Batchellors of Divinity that I speak of: As for the Doctors, I can say more of them, and more ground∣edly. I was first in the Constory, where the Agitation was freshest, and not so hot, perhaps, as afterwards, when it came to younger mens handlings: But sundry of them were approved then by all, even by such as held back most; and their names taken, and set down in writing, for men meet to passe; nor any just exception, that I can remember, to any of them all. As for lack of Living, let them look to it that affect that Degree: My best friend, that drae me to Com∣mence, almost with a curse, unlesse I obeyed him, was wont to say, That Degrees were the reward of Learning, not of Living. I had not a penny more, then a bare Fellowship of a Colledge, when I Com∣menced. As for lack of Time, truly if that be not fit for his Maje∣sty to dispence with, what is fit? Doctor Caesar lackt time, but first, he is a Privie-Counsellors son and, an Oxford man, and had time more then enough there; and satisfied so well in his Disputa∣tion here of late (whereof I am witnesse, because I disputed upon him) that but for lack of Time, he had gaine his Doctorship with the same facility, that he did his other Degree in Divinity then. Other exceptions I remember none. Mr. Sanderson hath, in my opinion, done neither the University discredit, nor the Church disparagment, nor his Lord, our Chan∣cellor, disservice or disreputation, nor swerved from his word given to the Doctors, which was, that we should have sufficient men, and to passe by head, as I take it they did, or in effect did, by most, or all. Acts indeed we lack, and Cautions were not given for them; but are they kept when given, as of late in the sickness? does it not end in a forfeit to the Proctors and Bedles, &c? So then, it is all one for the manifestation of the worth of the parties, or the young Schollars profiting by their Acts, whether they had given Caution or no, if it may end in forfeit, as it hath usually. One of the Commencers, whose sufficiency was most suspected, offered Caution to keep his Acts. Having much to say, taking leisure and pleasure to satisfie your
good minde, and clear the fame of our University, and her fiend, in a word or two, I commend you to God. Your assured loving friend, Samuel Collins. April 3d. 1632. VVe whose names are hereunto subscribed, being clear from any relation or interest, to any persons herein concerned, have perused the severall Bills of Commencers names, corrected, & after ingrossed; and also the Letters, Papers, Certificates, and Testimonies, concerning the said Commencement, at the University of Cambridge, and the proceedings therein, abundantly satisfactory: And we do unanimously believe them to be the Originalls, and some of us do know divers of them to be so; especially, those of Doctor Collins. And we do agree and conclude, that Mr. Sanderson, then Secretary to the Earle of Holland, Chancellor to the said University of Cam∣bridge, is clear from any the least blemish, corruption, or disre∣pute therein. And according to the expressions in sundry of the said Testimonies, so in particular, and in the words as Do∣ctor Collins hath attested, so say we: That Mr. Sanderson hath not wronged the University, Nor the Church, Nor the Chancellor. Nor are the Commencers insufficient, but rather most worthy. Nor hath he done amisse herein: But rather increased beholdings unto all. Math. Brooks. D. D. Tho. Swadling. D. D. Tho. Bird. L. L. D. Pel: Salmon. D. M. Coll. Med. Lond. Soc. Amias Reading. B. D. 20th. Iune. 1656. FINIS.
