W823 99863739 115953
A Philosophicall ESSAY Towards an Eviction of The Being and Attributes of God. Immortality of the souls of men. Truth and Authority of Scripture. TOGETHER With an Index of the Heads of every particular Part. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, and are to be sold by John Adams and Edward Forrest, 1652.
To the READER. THE Author of this Book al∣though he had never suffered it to be published, had he not been assured that it is not (for the main) much liable to just exception, and al∣though he hath no further care of the reception & entertainment of it, then the consequence of it may deserve (whereof the Reader and not him∣self must be the Judge.) And so he is not moved by the common passions of such as use to make Epistles and Prefaces, to their Readers, yet some thing although but for custome only he was wil∣ling to premise, and to acquaint the Reader with thus much by way of Apology for himself. That this was written divers years since without any purpose of ever letting it go abroad,
that the chief end of it was to cleer to himself who is a lover of rationall knowledge, an ac∣count of the grounds of his own belief, and to that end to lay in order his scattered notions concerning that subject; and this he intends as an Apology for the homelinesse of the stile. That at the same time when it was written, it was also delivered in a private course of re∣ligious exercise, and that will be the excuse for such repetitions as might otherwise seem ill-favoured in the severall Sections of it. That at the time of his composing it, he was destitute of the assistance of his Bookes, which is one cause that it is not adorned with Testimonies and citations out of Authors, but comes out naked, being supported onely by the order and plainnesse of reason that it trusts to. That since the composing of this he knows that divers Bookes of the same Argument have been written by men farre more knowing then himselfe, but that he hath not yet read any of them, nor knows whether he doe agree with them or not, which abstinence hath been caused part∣ly for that he is himselfe satisfied by what is here delivered, and partly for that he had no leisure or minde to alter this which he had done, though possibly it might be for the better.
That whereas he speakes of Epicures, Ma∣chiavelians, and the like, he makes use of those names onely in a popular way as they are names of Characters well known amongst us, and that he intends not to traduce those Authors or cast any contumely upon them. Lastly, He must needs acknowledge, that before the edition of this he hath seen M. Hobs his Leviathan, and other Bookes of his, where∣in that which is in this Treatise intended as the main Foundation whereon the second Discourse (Of the Souls Immortality) insists, is said to imply a contradiction, viz. That there are any such things as Immateriall or Incorporeall substances. Upon which oc∣casion he thought good onely to say, That he hath a very great respect and a very high esteem for that worthy Gentleman, but he must inge∣nuously acknowledge that a great proportion of it is founded upō a belief & expectation concerning him, a belief of much knowledge in him, and an expectation of those Philosophicall and Ma∣thematicall works, which he hath undertaken; and not so much upon what he hath yet publish∣ed to the world, and that he doth not see reason from thence to recede from any thing upon his Authority, although he shall avouch his dis∣course to proceed Mathematically. That he is
sure he hath much injured the Mathematicks, and the very name of Demonstration, by bestow∣ing it upon some of his discourses, which are exceedingly short of that evidence and truth which is required to make a discourse able to bear that reputation. That in this case M.H. is onely a negative witnesse, and his meaning in denying incorpo∣reall substances, can rationally import no more but this, that he himself hath not an apprehen∣sion of any such beings, and that his cogitation (as to the simple objects of it) hath never ri∣sen beyond imagination, or the first apprehen∣sion of bodies performed in the brain; but to imagine that no man hath an apprehension of the God-head, because he may not perhaps think of him so much as to strip off the corporeall cir∣cumstances wherewith he doth use to fancy him; Or to conclude every man under the sentence of being non-sensicall, whosoever have spoken or written of Incorporeall substances, he doth con∣ceive to be things not to be made good by the Au∣thority of M. Hobs. That whereas very many men do professe an apprehension of such beings, and he in the mean time professes this to be impossible, this Author is hard put to it to excuse this from much inci∣vility, and conceives the import of it to amount
to thus much, that he conceives himself in the highest and utmost bound of humane apprehen∣sion, and that his reason is the measure of truth, and that what he sees not is invisible, I con∣ceive the case in this to be alike, as if whilest two men are looking at Jupiter, one with his naked eyes, the other with a Telescope; the former should avow that Jupiter had no atten∣dants, and that it were impossible he should have any: the reason why M.H. denies those beings whilest other men apprehend them, is for that he lookes at them with his Fancy, they with their minde. Many more things he had to say for himself, but he understands not fully the use or benefit of Apologies.
The Contents. PART. I. SECT. I. Preface. SECT. II. OF the designe ad definition of Re∣ligion, the prejudices and pre∣tences against the Christian, the sum of what is in controversie deduced to three Questions. 1. Of the Being of God. Attributes 2. Of the Immortality of the Souls of men. 3. Of the Authority of Scriptures.
SECT. III. Of the being of God evicted by way of Demonstration from the Creatures. pag. 11. SECT. IV. Of the Attributes of God, those like∣wise evicted from the Creatures. pag. 17. PART. II. SECT. I. A Proposall of the Argument for the Immortality of the Soule, and a ma∣nifestation of the major proposition, that incorporeall substances are im∣mortall. pap. 33. SECT. II. A Proof of this Proposition, that the Souls of men are incorporeall sub∣stances, by comparing the affections
of bodies with those of souls. p. 38. SECT. III. A further proof of it by the generall way of apprehension. p. 43 SECE. IV. The same further demonstrated from the severall acts of the Soule, from simple apprehensions. p. 51. SECT. V. From Judgment and Discourse. p. 58. SECT. VI. An Application of the former Propo∣sitions to the inference of a Religi∣on in generall, and a proposall of the third in order to the Christian p. 67.
PART. III. Concerning the truth and Au∣thority of our Scripture. SECT. I. Petitions and Cautions premised to the Question. p. 75. SECT. II. The Assertion resolved into two Pro∣positions, the former undertaken, that whosoever beleeves the Histo∣ricall part of the Scripture must be∣leeve the Doctrinall. p. 81.
SECT. III. The kinds and degrees of the causes of Historicall Faith in generall. p. 89. SECT. IV. An Application of those generall grounds to the History of the New Testament, and a proof of this Asser∣tion, That there is as great reason to beleeve the New Testament, as to beleeve any other History in the World. p. 97. SECT. V. That there is much greater reason to beleeve the History of the New Te∣stament, then any other History. p. 206. SECT. VI. That the Old Testament is the Word of God. A Proposall of three sever∣all
assertions, whereby it is conclu∣ded. p. 119. SECT. VII. The first Assertion proved, That the Books of the Old Testament which we now receive, are the same which the Jews doe now re∣ceive. p. 124. SECT. VIII. That the Books, which the Jews doe now receive, are the same which they have received ever since the Consignation of their Canon. p. 128. SECT. IX. That in our Saviours time these Books were true, and consequently were the Word of God. p. 135.
SECT. X. That there is no reason to disbeleeve the Scriptures. Objections briefly proposed and answered: first gene∣rall Objections against the whole. p. 138. SECT. XI. Objections against particular parts, briefly proposed and answered. p. 149.
PART. I. Preface. SECT. I. ALthough I am not with∣out apprehension, that the discourse which I design may be prejud∣ged unprofitable, as pretending to lay a∣gain that foundation which hath long since been layed in the mindes of all that will be readers of it; yet when I consider those scandals which the loose∣nesse of our times have offered even to the religious, and the bold and horrid
pride and presumption of Atheists and Epicures, which by a prophane and confident asserting the uncertainty of all things (undervaluing the abilities of our Natures to raise an opinion of their personall excellencies) have la∣boured to introduce into the world a generall Athiesm, or at least a doubt∣full Scepticism in matters of Religion: And when we consider the nature of our mindes, which is upon any ill sug∣gestions apt still to receive some im∣pression (those things being of like o∣peration with Calumny, which if it be confidently and boldly charged, will be sure to leave some scarre behinde it.) When we observe this use and inclina∣tion in our selves which is in things where we have not a belief of what is spoken, or do not give perfect credit to an accusation, yet to admit of a sus∣picion that things may be as they are spoken; and although the strength of our contrary beleef do keep us from a full assenting to the thing in question, yet if it happen that the things concern our selves, and we have happened to crosse our opinions, or our beleef in
our way of practise, such is the per∣versenesse of our hearts, that in such cases they will make use of the beleef of others (especially if they have the reputation of knowing men) to op∣pose against their own belief, and in∣terpose betwixt the lashes of their con∣sciences and themselves. I say the pre∣sent condition of Religion, and the cor∣rupted nature of our hearts being such, I cannot think it uselesse, nay not un∣necessary, to raise a discourse of Religi∣on even from the common Elements and Fundamentals, and for a while, neglecting the more knowing party of men, to undertake, so far as the argu∣ment will bear, to follow the way of demonstration, and leade on the weak∣est from such things as they themselves cannot deny, to the acknowledgement of the mysteries of our faith, and to the practice of the laws and injun∣ctions of our Religion.
SECT. II. Of the designe and definition of Religion, the prejudices and pre∣tences against the Christian, the sum of what is in controversie deduced to three Questions. 1. Of the Being of God. Attributes 2. Of the Immortality of the souls of men. 3. Of the Authority of Scriptures. WE may begin with the conside∣ration of the definition (and the design of our selves in the matter) of Religion; however the practise of the world may contradict it; I hope we may take this definition of Religion as one that is agreeable to the appre∣hension which all of us have of it. Re∣ligion is a resignation of our selves to God, with an expectation of reward; The designe indeed of Religion, howe∣ver it ought to be meerly obedience to the pleasure and the will of God, and height of it is barely terminated in his
glory, (so that the highest act of it is Adoration) yet I say the designe of mens Religion is that it may be well unto themselves, and to bring them to an estate of happinesse. The very defi∣nition of Religion supposeth a God∣head, according to that of the Apostle, He that cometh to God must believe that God is. The very designe of it supposeth that both the party worshipping is capable of rewards, and that God likewise doth not neglect his services (in the follow∣ing words of the Apostle) that he is the rewarder of those that diligently seek him. Again, the resignation of our selves supposeth the resignation of our su∣preme faculties, those are our under∣standings and our wils, viz. our wils to an obedience to his will, to a perfor∣mance of his injunctions, to a submis∣sion to his providence; and a resigna∣tion likewise of our understandings to his truth. Now it is agreeable to rea∣son, as well as to the Apostle, that we cannot practise the will of God, un∣lesse we know it, and that we cannot know it unlesse it be discovered to us.
So then in our profession of Religion, there are these supposals. That there is a God; and That he is a rewarder of those that seek him (and that suppo∣seth that they are capable of his way of rewarding;) That the dili∣gence of our seeking must be exerci∣sed in a way conformable to his will; and That to this purpose we want not rules for this conformity. These are I say the generall suppositions of every Religion under Heaven. You see that the being of Religion is in self-resigna∣tion, but the end of that resignation it is reward (still retaining in minde that caution, that mercenarily to labour for reward is not the supream exaltation of Religious acts, but that it is the or∣dinary degree of mens Religion, and an allowable and commendable step, and a degree unto the other; it being the strong powerfull motive to Moses to neglect the momentany pleasures of Pharaohs Court, because he had respect unto the recompense of reward:) I say it is the naturall way of reason in every act to look at some or other end, and to undertake no labour without an eye
upon reward. Now so it is, that some men who account themselves the wi∣sest, observing as they think the design and issue of Religion, and comparing the labour and the wages, they with much wisedome as they think, conclude that all the businesse of gain which comes by Religion is no way worth the pain and labour. They see that all things come alike to all, there is but one issue to the just, and to the unjust; nay, they think they see that the suc∣cesse of things it is not equall to the re∣ligious and irreligious; but that besides the pleasures and enjoyments which religious men doe fondly deny them∣selves, besides that melancholy life which they by their strictnesse and pre∣cisenesse bring upon themselves, they often anticipate and hinder the thri∣ving and successe of their own designes by a dangerous and prejudiciall scru∣pulosity: whereas the other party be∣sides the pleasure of their lives in pri∣vate, they carry matters of state, and either by force or fraud they circum∣vent and overcome the narrow and fee∣ble spirits of the others; and the suc∣cesse
of things they oft observe to be answerable to this Hypothesis, ready they are to say with those in Mal. 3. 14. Surely it is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it to keep his Ordinances, to walke mournfully before the Lord of Hosts, whereas we see the proud happy, and they that work wickednesse are set up, and they that tempt, God are even delivered? Upon such observa∣tions upon the reward, they conclude clean contrary to the suppositions of Religion, God is no rewarder of those that seek him; such as deny themselves the most for him, they have no other reward but sadnesse of soul and debili∣ty of body, and exility of fortune: surely if he were a God, he would not thus desert his party, and give them o∣ver to the scorn and derision, and mise∣ries of the world: surely therefore there is no God, or surely he sees it not, or tush God cares not for it, and so these mens Religion is vain: or else these men they have not hit upon the true way of worship, the rules they go by they are uncertain, that which they pretend to be the word of God, it is not so, but some bundle of Impostures,
devised by some body, and put upon these simple people to delude them, they indeed flatter themselves with ex∣pectations when they are dead, but those are but vain, for who knows that the spirit of a man goes upward, and that the spirit of a beast goes down∣ward? as a man dies, so dies a beast, wherefore let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. These are the sub∣stance of those allegations which by A∣theists, Epicures, and Machivillians are set in competition with Religion: these are those Engines by which the devill hath prevailed to the seduction of ma∣ny, and to the entertainment of a suspicion by men, otherwise prudent and sober-minded: the main foun∣dations upon which we differ they are these. 1. The Being and providence of God. 2. The Immortality of the soul. 3. The Authority of the holy Scri∣pture. Before we come therefore to the par∣ticular mysteries of faith, it is necessary that these be cleared before we come to settle in particular differences of Re∣ligion,
that we justifie our selves against the petulances of those men that would laugh and scoff us out of all Religion; crying to every party (as they see the variable chances of the world to give occasion) where is now their God? Indeed if there were not a God to worship, or if God did not see, and regard, and reward our worship, or had we no rule to work by, we should have none encouragement to Religi∣on: Nay, upon all that happens to men in this life, we cannot but allow, that, upon their supposition, they con∣clude not irrationally. Concurre we must with our Apostle, that If in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most miserable; But we know assuredly that thou God seest, and that thou hast gi∣ven us thy holy Word to be a light to our feet, and a lanthorn to our paths; and that though now we see but through a glasse darkly, yet the time is coming when we shall see thee face to face. The state of the controversie then is this, which of the parties is in the wisest way; The Atheist thinks that the Religious is a fool; the Religious,
that he is a fool that saith in his heart there is no God: The Athiest that the souls of men are mortall as the souls of beasts; the Religious, that the A∣theist is a beast to say so, &c. But such kindes of contests are vain, wherefore let's see where the truth lies. SECT. III. Of the Being of God evict∣ed by way of demonstrati∣on from the Creatures. THe Question is, Whether or no there be a God? And here first I must entreat that it may be remembred what that party is which defends the negative, and what is the designe that we are upon, that so the following discourse be not thought uselesse or industriously set out of our ordinary road. Our enemies are Atheists: and that which is to be con∣vinced
is the Atheisticall pronenesse of men; so that in the controverted que∣stions it will not be a sufficient way of answering, to say that the Scriptures and the Spirit of God make it evident that there is a God; and again that the Scriptures are evinced to be the Word of God by the Spirit of God bearing witnesse with the heart of man. It is true, that the Scriptures clearly deliver that there is a God, and as true it is that God by his grace doth work the heart of man to a beleeving of the Scri∣ptures: these things they are really true to those who already are beleevers, and each of them conduceth to a con∣firmation of each other: but to a man that doubts of the Godhead, and de∣nies the Scriptures, to use those argu∣ments for satisfaction, were to minister a scandall to him, and by circular way of reasoning and assuming gratis the matter of the question (for they doe no otherwise who only say, We must beleeve the Scriptures to be the Word of God, because God saies so, and a God we must beleeve because the Scri∣ptures say so) to make them think we
have no more to say but this, it is so be∣cause it is so: and so confirm them in their Atheism and irreligion. It was a certain observation of Aristotle, that  in every acquisition of knowledge, the understanding doth proceed from pre∣mises which were known, to the infe∣rence of a new conclusion, which was before unknown: and so was that o∣ther Aphorism of his, that there is no disputation unlesse upon principles, which are confessed on both sides, and such only are the common principles of intelligence, and the plain discoveries of the senses there where the mysteries of faith are questioned; it will not be sufficient therefore in the present case, to alledge that saying of the Apostle, Rom. 1. 20. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternall power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: but we must clear, and demonstrate the truth of that al∣legation, by reasons taken from things visible: however, it may be lawfull for us to make use of the direction of this
place, as a canon for our enquiry, al∣though not of the authority of it, as a sufficient argument to enforce a belief from the gainsayer. I say therefore that an eternall power may beevinced from the creation of the world, and that the creation of the world may be demon∣strated from the consideration of things visible, so that by Reason as well as Faith (though not so readily) we may be brought to understand that the world was made of things which dis∣appear. I say, that the world was not eternall but created, is demonstrable from things that are visible; our argu∣ment shall be from generation: What∣soever is begotten was begotten of some other, for nothing can possibly beget, or make it self, otherwise it will follow that the same thing is and is not both at one instant, seeing it is both the produ∣cer and the thing to be produced: it is to be produced, and so it is not yet, it is likewise a producer, and that supposeth that it is in being: It is therfore in being, and it is not in being, that's a manifest contradiction: Wherefore nothing can generate, or make, or produce it self:
Wherefore every thing that is begotten, is begotten of some other, and then the other which begat it either was it self in the same manner begotten, or it was not, if it was not, we are already come to the first principle which was unbe∣gotten, and so have discovered a God∣head: If it was begotten, either we must follow up the course of successive gene∣ration to some first production from a cause eternal, or else we must necessarily say that the course of generations had no beginning, and consequently that in∣finite successions are already past, which is as much as to acknowledge that an infinite number of successions are past, and if past, then they are at an end; so we have found an infinite which hath had an end, that is another contradi∣ction. Again, if any shall affirm that the course of generation had no begin∣ning, but that the number of them hath been infinite, let us put a case and reason with him: we will imagine the generations of Abraham for example, and of Joseph, the sonne of Jacob, the son of Isaack, the sonne of Abraham. I demand therefore whether before the
birth of Abraham, there had past an in∣finite series of generations or not? if the series was finite, the work of gene∣ration had beginning, which is the con∣clusion I contend for, if the series past was infinite, then at the birth of Ioseph 'tis evident that more generations were past, so we have found a number grea∣ter then that which was supposed to be infinite, and consequently that was not infinite, so it was both infinite and not infinite, a manifest contradiction: but if we say that Abrahams series was infinite, and that so was Iosephs also, then it will follow that the number of Abrahams was equall to the number of Iosephs, but Abrahams was but a part of Iosephs, wherefore the part is equall to the whole. Else admit that Abrahams was finite, but when it came to Ioseph, that then the number was infinite, it fol∣lows then that a finite number added to a finite shall make an infinite, which likewise is against the common light of reason. We see therefore that supposing the eternity of the world, or the infi∣nity of generations doth force the minde to contradictions, and conse∣quently
the fiction is vain, and utterly impossible; and as we have argued in the way of generation, so we may like∣wise in every thing where there is mo∣tion or mutation, that is in all the parts of the visible world, the creation therefore of the world from the visible things thereof, is manifest, which was to be demonstrated, and from the cre∣ation of the world we may infer those invisible Attributes of the Eternity and Power, and wisedome, and Providence of God, that which rests yet to be de∣monstrated. SECT. IV. Of the Attributes of God, those likewise evicted from the Creatures. THat which we are yet upon, it is a generall introduction to Religi∣on, and a demonstration of the Neces∣sity
of it against Atheists and Epicures, and such as are the despisers of it: that which we pretend is that their rejection of Religion cannot proceed from any considerate solid reasoning of their un∣derstanding, but from an evill disposi∣tion of their affections, which makes them, we beleeve, rather wish, and so give out that their assertions are true, then that themselves beleeve them to be so; particularly in that grand princi∣ple and fundamentall of a God, and of a Providence, from whence the rest will freely and naturally follow: We have by plain and easie demonstration evin∣ced, that from the visible things of this world, the creation of it may be evict∣ed: and that the Apostle, although to such as were initiated in Christianity, he did propose it upon the well attest∣ed authority of the Spirit of God, by many mighty signs and wonders decla∣red to be with him: although to them he thought it needlesse any more then to referre them to the naturall princi∣ples of their understandings: yet that he was not wanting to the infidels, but by designing to them so ready a topike
or medium; from whence to beginne their argument hath not deserved of the unbeleeving that slender estimation which they have been pleased to afford him: there is no action or mutation in any thing visible whatsoever, but it is performed by motion, nor any moti∣on followed home successively through it's causes, but will force the minde of man to a first mover, which is it self unmoved, and though for some rea∣sons I did propose the argument in the name of generation, yet if in the place of it you should have been pleased to substitute motion in generall, or bo∣dily action (for either they are formal∣ly the same, or consequent at least to one another) the variation of the terms of the argument would no way have changed the substance of the conclusi∣on: which I intimate to give notice of the sufficiency of that argument, which in it self comprizes a multitude of others more particular, lest any ad∣vantage might possibly be made against the want of number in my argument. Well, having concluded the creation, and beginning of the world, we see it
follows that thence we conclude the eternall power and God-head, that is, the eternity and power of the God∣head: to which that we may fully convince our Atheist, we will likewise adde the wisedome, and providence, and the immensity, and other attributes of God. And first for Eternity,Eternity. we have by undeniable consequence resolved all motions in the world into the bosome of a first mover, and if we suppose him a first mover, this supposition will evi∣dently conclude, that he is eternall, that is that he is without beginning of es∣sence, or without any term or limit of duration; for if it had any beginning of essence or duration, that beginning of being presupposeth a priority of not being (that is, that actuall being is not of the essence of it) and so that we may without any contradiction, suppose it not to be yet in being, that is we may bring our understanding without error to the apprehension of it as being yet in the state of power only, or potentiall being, so as things are in their causes: so then let us conceit it in this state, and
compare this state with the other when it hath a being, and it evident that this passage or transition from want of be∣ing to a being cannot be without a mo∣tion, nor motion without an actuall mover: but that which moves a thing from not being to a state of being is ne∣cessarily a precedent mover to that which from it receives its being: so then that which we supposed to be the first originall mover, it will have a mo∣ver which shall of necessity have gone before it, and consequently it will be both a first and not a first mover, that is a plain and evident contradiction. Instead of multiplying Arguments without necessity, we will only return by the footsteps of our analysis, and so from the being of a first mover con∣clude the Eternity: If it be a first mo∣ver, then it had no former mover, and if so, then it never was produced from not being unto being; and if so, then it never had any beginning of its being, then it is Eternall: therefore whatso∣ever is the first mover it must of necessi∣ty likewise be Eternall. But from the common affections of things visible we
did before demonstrate an originall and first mover, wherefore the visible things of this world they likewise do evict the Eternity of the Godhead. Having demonstrated the Eternity of God, the rest of his Attributes, such as we are able to comprehend in this life, they all of them will follow, his Neces∣sity, Independency, Infinity, Unity, Om∣nipotency, Omniscience. And first for his Necessity:Necessity. whereby I mean his Necessity of being, not his Necessity of operation, so as it is oppo∣sed to freedom of will and power to act, or to forbear. I say then, that the Godhead is a necessary being, that is, that it is impossible it should fail, and implies a contradiction, that it should not be, that is it which Divines mean, when they say it is eternall, à parte post, as well as à parte antè: for if it be not a necessary being, that is, if necessity of being be not included in the essence of the God-head, then it is not impossible that it should lose his being, that is, it is possible that it should lose his being, that is, it is in the power of something to cause it to lose his being: but no∣thing
can passe from being to not be∣ing without a change or motion, so then the motion of it is in the power of some other, and consequently this is not the first originall of motion, but that other; but we supposed this to be the originall of motion, and conse∣quently, It is not possible it should be deprived of its being, that is, it is a ne∣cessary being in respect of others, and as impossible it is that it should lose its being of it self. Indeed it is a manifest contradiction, that any thing should have a power over its own essence, and needs no further conviction or opposi∣tion, seeing the active power of any thing is founded in the essence of it, and consequently cannot exceed the es∣sence or bring it not to be: However the necessity of the existence of God will be evinced from the SimplicitySimplicity and uncompounded property of his nature, and that from his Eternity; for ima∣gine him to be compounded, then it must be of some principles of Compo∣sition, and if so, then those principles must be presupposed to his being, and precede him in a priority of nature: so
then there will be somewhat in nature before that which was before evinced, and now supposed to be eternall: and if he be a simple essence and eternall, he must be purely actuall and nothing potentiall, for if in his essence be any thing potentiall, that is, if it be in any possibility, that possibility relates to some superiour and former cause: Whereas we have all this while been reasoning about the first cause and su∣preme: Simple he is therefore and pure, and a simple act out of the bounds of possibility, and of suffering, and so again we have concluded his ne∣cessity of being. Now as we have demonstrated his Necessity, so likewise we may thence collect his Independency.Indepen∣dency. We are in∣deed in a great deal of blindenesse in the contemplation of the God-head, and most humbly crave leave of God to be admitted to enquire and speak af∣ter the manner of men: God doth not exact that we should exceed the mea∣sure of our understandings in our con∣templation of him, or that we should deliver him as he is in himself, or o∣therwise
then he is pleased to reveal himself to our weak and feeble under∣standings, and so we hope his Majesty will not be offended at us, if after the manner of men we labour to deduce one attribute out of another, if withall we take this caution, that upon our dependency of inference, and the pre∣cedency and following in our dis∣course, we doe not conclude that suc∣cession or dependency of attributes in God, and imagine that to be in the object which is only in the Organ. I could not but take this advantage for this caution now, that from his Eter∣nity, Simplicity, and Necessity I am concluding his Independency; this, to our understanding and discourse may well enough (as concerning us) depend upon those other, that is, the supposition of those will force the minde to an acknowledgement of this, but to imagine that order to be in God, were to imagine a contradiction, by putting a dependency upon the attri∣bute of Independency: If he be a sim∣ple act and pure, it is impossible he should at all depend upon another for
his being: for suppose his being to de∣pend upon another, then that other must necessarily be presupposed, and he the cause likewise of his being; for if it depend upon another for his be∣ing, his being cannot be without that other, and so it is presupposed, and therefore it is before this in order, and as in order so in causality, for we speak of a reall and essentiall dependency, not of a Logicall or notionall; wherefore this other, and not the God-head will be a cause and a former cause; and con∣sequently the God-head, unlesse it be independent, will neither be the first cause, nor eternall; contrary to that which was before demonstrated. Again the Simplicity and the Impas∣sibility of God will necessarily evict him to be incorporeall,Incorpo∣reality. seeing that eve∣ry body is compounded and passible, nay we may go so farre as to say that corporeity is passibility, for corporeity is quantity, and in the last abstracted notion consists in three dimensions, but quantity is nothing else but divisibility, that is, an aptitude to suffer division, that is passibility; whatsoever there∣fore
is impassible, that likewise is in∣corporeall which was to be demon∣strated. And if it be incorporeall, then like∣wise it is unbounded and unlimited by place, for whether place be taken for the surface of some ambient body, or for a space, the very essence of a place consists in relation to a body enclosed; but that which is no body cannot ad∣mit of an enclosure, therefore that which is incorporeall is free from the limits and terms of place, so then it is euident that the first cause is free from the limits and restraints of place, be∣fore we proved that it was free from any limits of duration, but in the free∣dome from time and place consists the notion of immensity,Immensi∣ty. and so the im∣mensity of God is now demonstrated (or, which is all one, his Infinity.) But if the God-head be infinite, then likewise it is but one, and so we may demonstrate the UnityUnity. of the essence of the God-head. Now that there cannot be two infinite essences we will demon∣strate. But first for the help of our ima∣gination, and to render that servicea∣ble
to our understandings, we will i∣magine two bodies infinite, then thus, either the one of those bodies is in all the space wherein the other body is or it is not: if they be both together in the self same space, then that which is the longitude of the one is the longi∣tude of the other, and their latitude is the same, and so likewise their profun∣dity the same, I say not only equall: for as from filling equallity of spaces we must inferre equality of dimensions, so from identity of space we must con∣clude them to have the same dimensi∣ons, but the last and most abstracted notion of a body is mathematically re∣solved into those dimensions, where∣fore those which fill the self same space are the self same body, and so two bo∣dies they will be but one body, which is a manifest contradiction: but if we shall say that where one of these infi∣nite bodies is, the other is not, then there will be some space where one of these bodies is excluded, and conse∣quently it will be limited and finite, which yet we supposed to be infinite; so then, it will be infinite and not infi∣nite,
which is a manifest contradicti∣on: We have demonstrated therefore that there cannot be two infinite bodies, the truth is we ought to demonstrate that there cannot be two infinite essen∣ces, but the notion of being and essence is so abstracted and high, that it would strein our understanding to keep it so long intent upon its abstracted object, as were required to goe through a de∣monstration where infinite simple being should be the subject, and unity the af∣fection to be demonstrated, but if we shall proceed but to other degrees, as for example, of power, or wisedom, or the like, the demonstration will run as clear to the minde, as in the case of bo∣dies it did to the fancy: for either those infinite powers are the same, or not the same; if they by the same, then it is but one power which was vainly imagined to be two: but if the pow∣ers be not the same, then one power is where the other power is not (not meaning in ubi of place, but of case) and consequently a case where one of the powers is not, and consequently the power is limited, which yet is sup∣posed
to be infinite, there can be there∣fore but one infinite power, nor any more then one infinite essence, and so we have demonstrated the Unity of the God-head. It remains that we demonstrate the Omnipotence of God, and his Omni∣science:Omnipo∣tence. and first for his Omnipotence, That God was a God of power it was demonstrated then when we found him to be the first cause, and originall mo∣ver and the creator of the world, a∣gain we demonstrated that he is sim∣ple, and free from all manner of Com∣position, purely actuall, and conse∣quently doth not consist of subject and accidents: his power therefore is no accident to his being, but his power is his being, and his being having been demonstrated to be immense and infi∣nite, his power likewise must be illimi∣ted, and infinite, and conseqently he is Omnipotent. The same argument will prove him likewise to be Omniscient,Omnisci∣ence. for as he is the first cause of every thing created; so likewise of all the created know∣ledge, and consequently all know∣ledge
is derived from him, wherefore it is primitively in him, and then it follows that his knowledge and his es∣sence is the same as well as his power, and his being; therefore as that is in∣finite, so is this likewise: and so we have evicted his Omnisciency, that is an infinite knowledge, which includes in it the knowledge of all particu∣lars, for if any particular in the world were excluded it were not in∣finite, but limited; so then the thoughts of the heart are open to the the view of his Omniscience: And thus ac∣cording to that Canon of direction, which we took from the Apostle, we have proceeded, and that strictly and warily, according to the laws of de∣monstration, and from the visible things of this world, enforcing our selves first to an acknowledgement of the creation of the world we have thence; taking in only the common principles and common notions () of intelligence, pro∣ceeded higher, to a demonstration of the eternall power and God-head: that is, of those Attributes of the
God-head, which by the irreligious and Atheists have been pretended not to be; and actually manifested that the invisible things of God may be discouered by those things which doe appear.
PART. II. SECT. I. A Proposall of the Argu∣ment for the Immortality of the soul, and a manife∣station of the major pro∣position, that incorporeall substances are immortall. THe second thing which we pretended to demonstrate as a generall ground-work whereon to build a necessi∣ty of Religion in the gene∣rall, it is the Immortality of the souls
of men; for if in this life only we have hope, then in the judgement of the Apostle, we are indeed of all men most miserable. Now the truth is that we have no absolute necessity of much endeavour to clear the Immortality of the soul, after so clear and demonstrative a discovery of the essence and the attributes of the God-head, seeing that a bare reflexion either upon the generall way of rea∣soning, whereby we came to those conclusions, or upon those simple ob∣jects of the minde, which were the sub∣jects of every particular enquiry, must necessarily prompt us with undeniable arguments, of the spirituall and in∣corporeall nature of our minde, from whence will necessarily follow the na∣turall incorruptibility of it, that which is all that we pretend to when we say, that it is immortall: (for it is not our meaning, that in the notion of Im∣mortality is included a necessity of be∣ing, such as relating to the power of God should put it out of a capacity of Annihilation.) Yet considering the darknesse of our mindes, and that inability towards a
strict and vigorous reflection, which even in those who are most practised in the contemplation of themselves, and in the scruting of the waies of their own internall operations is over∣frequent; and considering how little reason there is to expect it of those who by their way of living are more deeply engaged among things no way exceeding the affections and circum∣stances of bodies, and bodily motions, and perhaps may think themselves un∣concened to be busy in the knowledge of themselves: It will be requisite that we insist more particularly upon it; that so the matter may be cleared even to the most vulgar apprehensions, sup∣posing only that they can but obtain so much of themselves as wrily to attend to that which is to be delivered. Now the substance of all that I shall speak towards the demonstration of the souls Immortality shall be summarily comprised in this one Syllogism. Whatsoever substance is incorpore∣all it is immortall. But the souls of men are incorporeall substances, Ergo, The former of these Propositions is
indeed in it self undemonstrable, as be∣ing a principle evident to a considering minde, and so not resolvible into any former principles, so that all that can be done to a further clearing of it will only be to examine and follow home the terms, to their first originall noti∣ons, which they are assigned to repre∣sent. Indeed the word mortality, as it is usually apprehended, hath alwaies reference to a compounded substance, or to a body which hath in it self some principle and cause of motion, and signifies no more but a capacity of the materiall and passive part, to be depri∣ved of that inward active principle of its motions, as is evident by those things which we use to say may die, or are dead, as men, and beasts, and plants: but when the question is only of that active principle, it cannot so justly be put in the terms of mortality, as of corruptibility, or a naturall ten∣dency to a corruption: so then that which we are to strive for is the true and accurate notion of corruption, and when we have driven it to the highest, we shall finde that corruption
is nothing else but a dissolution of things joyned together, and that this dissolution is nothing but a separation, and that separation is nothing but di∣vision, and that division is an immedi∣ate and â formall act of quantity, and quantity is nothing else but a mode of corporeity, so as you see that corru∣ptibility doth even in the notion of it include corporeity: whatsoever there∣fore is incorporeall it is incorruptible, which was to be demonstrated.
SECT. II. A Proof of this Proposi∣tion, that the souls of men are incorporeall substan∣ces, by comparing the af∣fections of bodies with those of souls. BUt the souls of men are incorpo∣reall substances. That they are substances is evident, seeing that they are subjects of certain properties and affections, which is the very formall notion of a substance. It remains only therefore that we demon∣strate them to be incorporeall. Now for the clearing of this it is re∣quisite that we consider wherein con∣sists the being of a body, and wherein consists the being of an humane soul: nor can we use any possible means to
come to an apprehension of their be∣ing, but by considering those primary passions and properties whereby they make discovery of themselves: the first and primary affection of a body is that extension of parts whereof it is com∣pounded, and a capacity of division, upon which as upon the fundamentall mode the particular dimensions (that is the figures) and the locall motions doe depend, the figure being nothing but a particular and determined ex∣tension of the matter, towards such and such parts, and locall motion be∣ing nothing but division, so that what∣soever may possibly be performed by any body, it must have its originall ground-work in divisibility, and its a∣ctuall being in division towards which the situation and figure and determined quantity of parts must make the dispo∣sition. Again for the being of our souls if we reflect upon our selves we shall finde that all our knowledge of them resolves into this, that we are beings conscious to our selves of severall kindes of cogitations, that by our out∣ward
senses we apprehend bodily things present, that by our Imaginati∣on we apprehend things absent, that we oft recover into our apprehensions things past and gone, that upon our perception of things we finde our selves variously affected, sometimes with pleasure or pain for things present, sometimes with hope or despair of things absent, and the like: Nay, we are conscious to our selves of objects, which could not by any bodily im∣pressions be wrought in our fancies or our brain; and of superiour passions answerable to those objects. In one word, we finde that our souls are a kinde of essences which are conscious (or having a sence) of things. Now then we are to compare toge∣ther these two properties of a body and a soul, and so conclude either an agree∣ment or a disagreement in the natures of those subjects. And here upon the very first view of a considering minde it will appear that divisibility is not apprehension, or judgement, or desire, or discourse, that to cut a body into severall parts, or put it into severall
shapes, or bring it to severall motions, or mix it after severall waies, will not serve to bring it to apprehend or de∣sire; it is not the hammering and fi∣ling, and fitting of the wheels of a watch; which can make it apprehend the end for which it serves, or compre∣hend the motion of the sun which it is made to measure, nor is it materiall whether we take an example in things naturall or artificiall, or upon what principles of mixture we proceed, the conclusion will be still the same; for sence and perception, and apprehensi∣on, and desire, &c. they are as great strangers to the obscure notions of heat and cold, and moisture, and drought, and of those elements to which they are assigned, to fire, and air, and earth, and water, as they are to quantity, and scituation, and figure, and motion, and the like, there is no man certainly that can clearly appre∣hend, that combining any proportion of fire, and air, and water, and earth, should make the lump of it to know or comprehend what is done to it or by it: we see not then any the least
inducement in our notion of bodies simple or mixed, or howsoever varied to bring us to an apprehension of cogi∣tation. Nor yet will our reflection upon our cogitation bring us to any apprehensi∣on of corporeity or divisibility: the truth is our sense and apprehension of bodies cannot infallibly assure us that there are any bodies in the world; but we must be forced to an higher principle, whereon to ground that as∣surance, so farre is cogitation, and ap∣prehension, and the like, from invol∣ving in its being any corporeity; nay, we see manifestly, that upon the divisi∣on of the body the soul remains entire, and undevided: it is not the losse of an hand, or foot, or eye, that can maim the understanding or the will, or cut off the affections: so that we have not any the least inducement under the no∣tion of cogitation to involve division, or under the subject of cogitation to include the subject of division or divi∣sibility, to come then to a conclusion: it doth evidently appear that corporeity consists in divisibility, and that the es∣sence
of the soul consists in being a con∣scious essence, or a cogitative being, to be cogitative is farre different from being divisible or extended: Where∣fore the essence of the soul is far diffe∣rent from the essence of a body: Wherefore the souls of men they are incorporeall essences, SECT. III. A further proof of it by the generall way of ap∣prehension. NOw although the truth and cer∣tainty of propositions depends not upon the multitude of arguments whereby they are concluded, and so we have already sufficiently dischar∣ged our undertaking; yet something shall be further added towards the dis∣covery of the spirituality of the soul, to shew that it doth farre exceed the sphere of corporeity, and is not confi∣ned
by the streightning boundary of sense: this will appear from all the kindes of apprehension of the souls; that is, from 1. Way of apprehending. 2. Simple apprehension. 3. Judgement. 4. Discourse. And first of all from the very way of our apprehensions in the ge∣nerall, from our apprehensions even of sensible objects, for however we are apt to imagine that those may be per∣formed by bodies, upon an exact scru∣tiny we shall finde it otherwise: That this may appear we shall do well to ob∣serve and take off an errour, which even from our childehood we have ta∣ken in: it is a common beleef of ours, that sence is performed in the outward organs, touching, for example in the hand, seeing in the eye, and so of the rest: (In them, I say, and not only by them) and then we put our selves to no further trouble, for to know how sence is made, then only to thinke that something hot toucheth the hand, and so the hand feels heat, that the i∣mage
of some body appears in the eye, and so the eye sees the body; briefly, that sence is performed either by an im∣mediate contact, as in touching and tasting, or by a resemblance, which by the object is wrought in the organ, and that in the matter of sensible per∣ception there is no exceeding the pow∣er of these two bodies, the object, and the organ; nor any superiour operati∣on to that which may be performed by the application of severall bodies: but to take off this imposture of the sences, I shall need to doe no more, but to demonstrate that all our sense is immediatly performed in the brain, and not in the limbs or organs: We will instance only in the sences of feel∣ing and sight. And first that our feeling is perform∣ed in the brain by the mediation of the nerves it is made manifest by our observation of such diseases as take a∣way the sense of feeling, how that the seat of those diseases, it is not in the limbs but in the head, Palseys, Epilepsies, Apoplexes, and the rest: the seat of them is in those parts
of the brain from whence doe spring those nerves by which our operations are performed, and the way or reme∣dy for restitution of our feeling, it is to take away those obstructions from the brain, whereupon the effect doth fol∣low; now all this were needlesse, if sence were performed immediatly in the limbs themselves: Indeed it may possi∣bly be imagined, that in those cases we are therefore deprived of sence, be∣cause our motion is intercepted, that there is some activity towards sence de∣pending upon the motion of the limbs: although there be no visible strength in this objection, yet there are suffici∣ent instances to take it off, seeing there either are or lately were examples li∣ving of such as had no sense at all of feeling, and yet performed their locall motions perfectly. Moreover many un∣questionable experiments have been made of such as have affirmed that they have felt in such a finger, and such a toe, and after their hands or their legs have been cut off. Many other in∣stances and arguments may be brought to prove, that the sense of feeling is not
performed in the outward limbs. And secondly, for the sense of see∣ing, that that likewse is not performed in the eye, it is as evident, the cause why it would seem to be so, is because it is very evident that the images of things do indeed passe thither, and are conveighed after diverse refractions and reflexions through the coats and hu∣mours of the eye, to the bottome of that tunicle which is called retiformis. Hence it is obvious to conclude that vi∣sion is therefore performed within the eye. But if this were so, beside that no reason could be given why with both our eyes and two images of it, we see but one thing: it would necessarily follow that we could not see any quan∣tity bigger then our eye in its naturall scituation, for if Images were seen in the eye, they would be seen as they are in the eye, but in the bottom of the eye the images of things are inverted, and consequently the things themselves would seem to be inverted, men would seem to us with their heads below and their feet above, that which is on the right hand would seem to be on the left.
Now that the Images are there in∣verted, besides the demonstrative rea∣sons that so it must be, we may at any time make experiments to attest to those demonstrations. It is impossible but that the visuall beams of larger ob∣jects must intersect each other in the eye, and by that cutting one the other, the scituation of the parts must be in∣verted, and thus much hath ever been apprehended, and confest by all those that have understood the laws of radi∣ation, but some conceiving that by an inverted species an object could not be seen upright, have with mighty indu∣stry devised most ingenious errours concerning waies of refraction, where∣by the coats and humours of the eye should come to reerect the image be∣fore it comes to the nerve, whereby vision is performed, but time and ex∣perience have evicted all those witty speculations to have been nothing but snbtile and fine impostures of the fan∣cies of their authours, aery reasons of a vain and ungrounded supposition: for it is evident to him that will take the pains to take off all the muscles
and tunicles, which serve for the feed∣ing and motion of the eye, and clear that part only where the visuall nerve is fastened, then darkening a room, and only leaving an hole sufficient to re∣ceive this eye, and will stand behinde it, and look through it; to such an one it will be evident, that the images of things without are inverted in the bot∣tome of the eye, at the place where is the passage of the visuall nerve, and consequently as feeling was not per∣formed in the hand, so neither is see∣ing in the eye, but both of them in the brain. But before things are con∣veighed to the brain all the corporall similitude will quite be marred, the image of a man cannot be carried whole, through the optive nerve into the hollow of the brain, nor the fi∣gure, or other quality of that we touch be carried quite along the nerves, from the fingers ends unto the head, and ori∣ginall of the nerves: but all that can be imagined to be done in the brain, it is some motion and alteration made ei∣ther by a vellification of the nerves, or by a vaporous and spirituous substance,
passing through them which retains no sig∣nature or naturall sculpture of those things which are apprehended by them; all that is done by the bodies, the ob∣ject and the subject it is utterly of ano∣ther kinde: there is no naturall simili∣tude betwixt a motion in the forepart of the head, and betwixt an horse which it represents, our apprehensions of things they are farre beyond those means by which they are occasioned, and consequently the subjects of these apprehensions do far exceed the subjects of those poor and grosse productions, that is, the nature of souls is far other and better then that of bodies, which was to be demonstrated.
SECT. IV. The same further demon∣strated from the seve∣rall acts of the Soule, from simple Apprehen∣sions. HAving demonstrated the souls of men to be incorporeall substan∣ces, from the comparison of their pro∣perties with the affections of bodies, and therein finding no agreement or correspondency, and moreover from the generall way of our operations, which could not possibly proceed from variety, or subtilest applications of bodily substances. It remains that at this time we consider the severall kindes of the cogitations of men, and from the Simple apprehension, Judgement, Discourse,
conclude the immortality thereof. First of all from simple apprehensi∣on, which is the first operation of the understanding of man both in nature and time, and is the taking in of sim∣ple objects into the minde, and so fur∣nishing it with materials for judgement and discourse; we shall finde then the souls incorporeity if we shall but re∣flect upon such simple Ideas in it self which represent things in themselves incorporeall, for a corporeall thing can neither be the Idea of an incorpo∣reall being, neither can an incorpore∣all, immateriall be subjected in a ma∣teriall or corporeall: we found be∣fore that the application of bodies could not perform that which we call the sense of bodies, much lesse then can that produce in us Ideas incorpo∣reall, yet such and very many such we finde to be within our souls. We finde in our selves Ideas of spi∣rituall substances, as of God and Angels and of their simple and incorporeall properties and attributes, it is but re∣turning back and recalling into our re∣membrances those demonstrations of
the severall Attributes of the God∣head, to which we did arise, even from the visible things of this world, and they will satisfie us in this particular: our endeavour there was to demon∣strate the truth of them in themselves, here to consider the way and manner of their objective existence in our ap∣prehensions, and the truth of demon∣stration which satisfies the souls of men: it is that clear agreement be∣twixt the understanding and the ob∣ject, that is, that things be in the un∣derstanding as they are in themselves. We clearly then demonstrated God to be an immateriall substance, where∣fore we gained an apprehension of a substance immateriall and incorporeall, and of immateriall properties, and consequently the notions of the God∣head, and his attributes were in our un∣derstandings incorporeally, and so they are incorporeall. It cannot here be denied but that in our ordinary and transient thoughts and discourses, we are very apt toge∣ther with spirituall beings to draw in∣to our fancies the images of things cor∣poreall;
for example, when we speak of God we are very apt to have in our fancies the visible heavens, and a re∣presentation of something sitting or acting in them: when we think or speak of Angels we are apt to call to our remembrances the shapes of beau∣tifull winged, aery bodies, and so when we meditate upon Eternity, we are apt to reflect upon the image of time, of the revolution of the Sun and Starres, which are the usuall measures of it, at leastwise of a successive dura∣tion of things, and there are diverse of us which terminate our thoughts in these images, and never obtain a flight beyond them, nor ever come to ob∣serve in our souls the difference be∣twixt imagination and intellectuall ap∣prehension; but yet notwithstanding when we have the patience to stay up∣on the consideration of these objects, and warily attend to that inward light which we bear about us, we presently reject these images from the essence of God, and Angels, and Eternity, and by discourse we strip off these materi∣all and grosse representations, and
finde that the causes why upon such occasions as these they come into our mindes, is, because we commonly hear of them together, and because of those symbolicall expressions of these beings which have delivered to us the know∣ledge of these. God Almighty cals himself the ancient of daies, and it is not our custome to imagine any thing but cloathed with circumstances, in some place, and the place that is usu∣ally mentioned with God, it is the hea∣vens, and those heavens which are the object of our senses and imagination, it is the place of the Sunne, and Moon, and Starres; and so we are apt to form to our selves an image of God, or at least through incogitancy to let slip in∣to our thoughts a fancy of some reve∣rend image sitting above the Firma∣ment. Thus likewise the descriptions of the Angels, they are usually made to us in Scriptures by such representations: we see nothing fairer then our own kinde, and so we conceive of them in the fairest shapes we can imagine, (and contrariwise of the devils in the most
ugly) assigning to them wings, be∣cause under such forms the notion of of them is veiled to us. And yet at the same time we know, and can perhaps demonstrate evident∣ly, that if God were a body, he could not be a God, that is, that the proper∣ties of a bodily substance can no way agree with that notion of the God-head, which is immoveably fastened in the very essence of our souls. We know habitually that the nature and essense of the Angels that stood, it is the same with those that fell a∣way; however we have fair and plea∣sant imaginations usually when we speak of those of light; and foul, and ugly, when we think of those that are in chains of utter darknesse: however the name of Michael and his Arch-An∣gels recall into our mindes the images of the fairest of the children of men, and that of Beelzebub the Image of a Dragon. So likewise the common measure of the duration of things, wherewith we usually converse, they are hours and daies, and moneths, and years, and these are made by the revolution of the
sun, and of the starres, and those are attended with severall positions of them in respect of themselves, and us with light and darkness, cold and heat, Winter and Summer, and those other vicissitudes, and speaking of Eternity we presently think of a long continu∣ance, and so call into our imaginati∣on a long continued series of these re∣volutions and vicissitudes; whereas yet we know that where there is a vicissi∣tude there is a priority, and where there is a priority there must be a beginning, and where there was a beginning that was not eternall: 'tis plain that if in eternity there were such parts as daies and years, there must be as many millions of years, as minutes, and so that a minute were equall really to a thou∣sand years, and so it follows clearly that Eternity even in our notion is an infinite and undivided unsuccessive du∣ration. These examples are sufficient to shew the difference betwixt the intelle∣ctuall apprehension of things, and the imagination which accompanies
our superficiall thoughts, our slight and cursory taking them to our mindes and to illustrate that, however in our fancies we may have corporeall repre∣sentations, attending upon these spiri∣tuall beings, yet the Idea's whereby the understanding apprehends those simple essences, are incorporeall, and conse∣quently the understanding part of man is incorporeall. SECT. V. From Judgement and Dis∣course. ANd now whatsoever of perfecti∣on may be evinced to be in the souls of men, from the simple appre∣hensions of single objects, may much more strongly be concluded from those more perfect operations, exercised in comparing severall things together, and working out the truths, striking forth the light from those collisions. A judgement takes in two severall sim∣ple
terms, and upon them passeth the sentence of their agreement or disa∣greement. A discourse takes into consideration two of the judgements already past and decided by the soul, and from those two draws forth a third, and so brings into act those truths which fold∣ed in their causes lie in the secret pla∣ces of the soule concealed from it self. Now as the souls of men are consci∣ous to themselves of certain essences within themselves, which neither in their being nor in their operation upon the soul are any way mixed with ought that is corporeall; and so from thence the incorporeity of the soul was imme∣diatly concluded, so here in these se∣cond and third operations of the soul, we have this further advantage, that however the simple objects which are the terms in the matters of judgement may be bodies, yet the acts of judging and discerning and reasoning, they are no bodily acts, nor come within the compasse of bodily motions to be per∣formed, and that even in those things
which are most obvious to the outward sences or the inward, the understand∣ing part is yet carried away farre be∣yond the bounds and territories of the sences, and raises it self into the contemplation of causes of the things it either sees or hears, or otherwise perceives and frames to it self conse∣quences and corrolaries, such as are not sensible but are only discoverable by a diviner light, by this diviner fa∣culty it is that seizing upon any thing whatsoever, and fixing it self steddily upon the contemplation of it, it pas∣seth from the most contemptible of creatures up to the incomprehensible creator, it climbs up by degrees, and passing through the continued chain of causes till it comes to that link which is fastened to the chair of God, it rests not in things below, but soars up sted∣dily to immensity and eternity. It is by this faculty, that upon sight of the cau∣ses of things, it doth foresee the ef∣fects and consequences: and seeing the effects it makes to it self a conclusi∣on of what must be the causes, and by frequent exercise in these contemplati∣ons
attains to a kinde of mastery over the works of nature, and produceth things strange and wonderfull in ope∣ration, it applies the active powers un∣to the passive (as the Schoolmen speak) and so imitates God and nature in great and marvellous conclusions. He observes the properties of a de∣spicable stone, and is carried so farre in the contemplation of the consequen∣ces of those properties that he dares adventure himself vpon the huge unru∣ly ocean, under the conduct and dire∣ction of it, and he findes experience to answer to his contemplation, he gets the mastery of that unruly boiste∣rous element: he rides securely upon the back of the dark waters: he makes a needle touched with a stone to supply the place of the stars of heaven: when the eyes of heaven are veiled from him amidst the darke waters and thicke clouds of the skey; he examines all the chambers of the sun, and imitates him in compassing the world, he goes out from the East, and returns again from the West; returns, and that load∣en with the treasures of the world,
with the blessings which Moses did assign to Joseph, Deu. 33.13. the precious things of heaven for the dew, and for the deep, that coucheth beneath, the pre∣cious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and the precious things put forth by the Moon, the chief things of the an∣cient mountains, and the precious things of the lasting hils, the precious things of the earth, &c. he settles a correspondency betwixt the utmost di∣stants of the world, and opens a traf∣fique betwixt nations opposite in place, in manners and affections, such as had lien concealed from the knowledge of one another, even almost from the time of the Ark that floted upon the waters, but what do I speak of these things? he displays the banner of Christ in the regions of death and hell; he sheds forth the glorious light of the Gospel to the people that sate in dark∣nesse and in the shadow of death: what sensible analogy or correspondency is there betwixt the scituation or motion of a stone, and the salvation of man∣kinde, and yet by various consequen∣ces he discovers how by the means of
that, this likewise may be effected; he discovers it, and puts it in a successefull and happy execution. What is there more contemptible then a stone? hardly any thing that is a substance, and yet it is much lesse con∣temptible then a shadow, he observes a shadow, and that carries him aloft to a contemplation, and a discovery of that most glorious creature which comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and rejoyceth as a Giant to runne his course: From the shadow he riseth to the Sunne in the Firma∣ment, and to a perfect understanding of his course in the Ecliptique, and then brings back again his understand∣ing to the shadow, he makes thereby an instrument that shall designe to the eye the daily circuits of its motion: his eye that gave occasion to his minde to discover them in contemplation, and now his minde is impregnated with the light of knowledge, and re∣turns with usury to the senses that oc∣casionall advantage which they affor∣ded it, and gives them the pleasure of the viewing of its practise it gives the
eye and hand directions for drawing of lines, which by the regular applicati∣on of a stick, or wire, stone, or any o∣ther body shall discover not only the divisions of the day, the hours that are past, or else to come, but even all the mysteries of the Sunnes motion: how it measures out the night, and in what quantity it dispences out the day: how near are his approaches at noon, and how farre distant he is from us at midnight; by what degrees he draws towards us, and how by eqnall measures he retreats; how he riseth from his greatest southern declination to the North, and from thence returns again to his chambers in the South, ha∣ving touched the boundaries that he cannot, he must not passe; and how in this his continuall progresse he dispen∣ses the severall seasons of the year, what time he enters into every sign, when he beginnes to rejoyce the hearts of any of the nations by his presence, and what time he leaves them in the darknesse: these are but some few and lesse considerable of those wonders which are performed by that which hath no being.
To insist upon it how the reason and wit of man hath found out severall Arts and Sciences, from principles most contemptible, how it ariseth to most admirable speculations, and upon poor beginnings to what issues it brings; how it can give the height or distance to which it never can approach, how by the application of a piece of wood or other matter to the eye, it can assigne the distances and places and motions, and appearances of the starres of hea∣ven, and foretell the positions and combinations of the Planets, the Ec∣clipses of the Sunne and Moon to the generations to come: how it corrects the judgements of the senses, and de∣monstrates that to be farre greater then the world, which the eye presents no bigger then a bushell, nay, no big∣ger then the rowell of a spurre: to in∣sist upon such things as these, were to be prodigall and superarrogate in proving the incorporeall nature of the souls of men, and yet all these are nothing to those more ordinary things which it performs when it assignes and prescribes to it self laws of mutuall
signification by things which have no similitude, when it designes notions to sounds, and sounds to letters, and upon hearing the voice Soule, or seeing the word Man, we call into our mindes the things which I have spoken of him, things which cannot be performed by the collision of atomes, the motions or dispositions of parts or quantities, but must be the issues of spirituall essences: such therefore are the souls of men, and so they are immor∣tall.
SECT. VI. An Application of the former Propositions to the inference of a Re∣ligion in generall, and a proposall of the third in order to the Chri∣stian. THe third thing which I propound∣ed to speak of by way of prepara∣tion to the entertainment of the prin∣ciples of our Religion, it was the au∣thority of the holy Scriptures, that which we have already demonstrated was of a more generall designe, this comes to be more particular, that was against Atheisme and irreligion, this against superstition, and the false
religions of the world, the will-wor∣ships of the Heathen and the Jews, and of a party of those that do professe the name of Christ. Out of what hath al∣ready been delivered, a necessity of Religion in the generall will result, for it is the first consequence of reason from the consideration of the attributes of God, and the condition and pro∣perties of the souls of men, for having by necessary force of argument drawn up the vast number of mankinde to one originall cause, even to God as their Creatour, we cannot chuse if we will insist upon that consideration but fall upon a necessity of Religion. For if God have created man he must have done it for some end and purpose, see∣ing he is an intelligent agent, and such agents as work with understanding, they alwaies work upon designe, and propound some good to themselves in all their actions, for they cannot be supposed to work but upon desire, and the object of desire is only goodnesse; if now we employ all our wit and our invention to discover what good can accrue to the God-head by the Crea∣tion
of man, we can finde none that is imaginable in the way of profit or of gain: that which the Psalmist hath layed down is a conclusion following from the light of reason as well as from the speciall revelations of the ho∣ly Scripture that our goodnesse extendeth not to God, and it was a question, which might with good congruity fall from Eliphaz the Temanite, Job 22. 1. Can a man be profitable to God, as he that is wise may be profitable to himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it any gaine to him that thou makest thy way per∣fect? And the matter of gain being excluded from the end of God in our creation, if we runne over all the ob∣jects of pleasure which come within the spheres of the souls of men, we shall finde no pretence of reason for a∣ny thing of ours to please the Almigh∣ty, and so to be assigned as an intelli∣gible cause of our creation, but the de∣light which the God-head might take in the communication of his goodnes, in the explication or unfolding of those glories which lay enwrapped within it
self, in having something (if I may so speak) without and besides it self, which might be apprehensive of the excellencies of it, might be subject and conformed, and might perform to∣wards it the acts of glorification and praise. So then the glorifying of God is all the end that can be found out why God should ever have created us: and the next thought to this conclusion of our reason must be of the waies and means whereby he may be glorified by us: and there again when we shall have run over all the waies imaginable, we can fasten upon none other then the ad∣miration of his excellency, the adora∣tion of his Majesty, the obedi∣ence to his will. And these are the acts and performances of Religion, so that the consideration of the God-head and his Attributes, doe natural∣ly cast us upon a necessity of Reli∣gion. Now as the consideration of the God-head doth naturally enforce a Necessity of Religion, so doth likewise the consideration of the Immortality
of the souls of men: for if we shall but consider, that our souls shall never fail of their existence, but continue in being to all Eternity, we can hardly avoid the thoughts of the shortnesse of our duration in this world, or the comparison of the time of our durati∣on here, with that other continuance which doth abide for us hereafter: and if we will have the patience in our thoughts to insist upon the proportion of a few years unto an unlimited, and unmeasurable Eternity, we shall una∣voidably fall upon this judgement, that our condition here is no way compa∣rable to that which shall be: that mo∣mentany pleasure bears no proportion to eternall happinesse or eternall mise∣ry: that these light afflictions which are but for a moment, are not to be compared either to the joys or miseries which are to be expect∣ed, and consequently that our care for this life ought not, nor cannot in com∣mon prudence equall our care for eter∣nity. So then whatsoever befals us here we shall conclude it requisite to pro∣vide that we be not miserable hereaf∣ter,
and consequently that we make our selves a friend of him that hath the issues of death in his power, and moderates and dispenses the rewards of Eternity: but there is no way to have him propitious to us, but by obe∣dience, no reason to expect that he should satisfie our longing, or fulfill our will to all Eternity, unlesse we fulfill his will for our time of triall in this life, and that is by the exercise of Religion only attainable. So that the consideration of the Souls Immortality will likewise enforce us to a necessity of Religion. Thus farre the common principles of naturall reason will force us, even the first and most common principles of intelligence, such as are grounds of clear, evident, and perfect demonstra∣tion; so that it must be the Fool alone, as the Psalmist speaks, which can be an Atheist, so that they are without ex∣cuse whoever glorifie him not as God: thus farre those poor remains of sight which yet is left to the corrupted off-spring of our degenerate Parent will
serve to leade us, to the generall ne∣cessity of Religion: but here indeed it Jeaves us destitute of the certain waies of pleasing God: and consequently destitute of clear and solid grounds of hope of attaining to eternall happi∣nesse. And here it is that the Scoffers and irreligious men take occasion to reason themselves and others to destruction: seeing that nature hath here deserted us, and left us no infallible Rules of particular waies of devotion, they contend that ther are none such, and conse∣quently that our Religion is vain and uncertain, uncertain in the issue because uncertain in the grounds and principles. And here now a∣gainst them we pretend that where∣in our naturall light hath fail∣ed us, the mercy of God hath been pleased to supply us, that God hath not left us without a certain rule and Canon of Reli∣gion, not without a light shining to us in this dark place, parti∣cularly that he hath given to us
his holy Word to be a Light to our feet, and a Lanthorn to our paths, and that the books of the holy Scriptures are that Word of God.
PART. III. Concerning the truth and Authority of our Scripture. SECT. I. Petitions and Cautions pre∣mised to the question. YOu will doe me the favour to consider that our present controversie is against those that deny the Authority of the holy Scriptures, so that we cannot have the advantage of those
Arguments which in every other con∣troversie of Religion are the most va∣lid: I mean Arguments drawn from the Authority of the Scriptures them∣selves, which is the best, if not the only authentike rule of decision of such dif∣ferences as doe arise; such as doe in∣deed arise in the Church of God, who all doe agree in a profession of that faith which is delivered in these holy Books, this I say they agree upon in these generall tearms, however with wonderfull heat and distance they vary in their judgements whether or no some particulars be of the recommen∣dation of the Scripture. It is then the common principle of Christians, and the ultimate rule for the judgement of those that are within: but as for them that are without the Church they ae likewise out of the jurisdiction of this Canon, or Judge, and to give over their incredulity (or rather infidelity) as some of our Divines have done with this ill-interpreted axiome for rejecti∣on, that they deny our principles, and so are not worthy to be disputed with, or to referre them only to the
of the Scriptures, and to the spirit wor∣king with the reading and hearing of them, it might be to prove a scandall to them without; and to such as are weak and wavering within, it were ta∣citely to imply, that we have no way to gain the question, unlesse our of cour∣tesie the adversary be pleased to yeild it to us, to resolve the motives of our Catholique Faith into private impulses and particular dictates of the Spirit (arguments of very great credit and reputation due to our selves as particular favorites of the holy Spi∣rit, but such as being deserted by the tenor and regiment of our lives, ren∣der us dishonourable to that holy Spirit whereto we pretend, whilest in the ap∣prehension of men we doe at least ob∣liquely entitle it to such actions as are inconsistent with it, professing we hold our faith by private revelation, and consequently have our understan∣dings taken up by the holy Ghost at such time as our wils are guilty of en∣ormous sinnes.) A fancy that is the mother of diverse prodigies lately bro∣ken into the Church, as that either
God sees no sinne in beleevers, that Murther, Adultery, Incest, Sacrilege, (any thing) may be committed, and that these are no sinnes in beleevers, arguing thus, that they which have the holy Spirit are free from sinne, such as do beleeve the Gospel they have the ho∣ly Spirit, because there is no other mo∣tive sufficient besides a private illumi∣nation, so then they cannot be guilty of sinne, but yet they may, and doe commit such things as those we men∣tioned; wherefore those are no sinnes. Thus doth Satan transform himself in∣to an Angel of light, and act his Tra∣gedies in the likenesse of the holy Spi∣rit: Nay we say, and doe beleeve that the Devils also beleeve and tremble, that the Kingdome of Heaven is like a Net which drew to shore fishes of all sorts, some to be put into vessels, and others to be thrown away. We say and doe acknowledge to the glory of God, that the internall light of the holy Scri∣ptures is sufficient to make the man of God perfect to salvation, and that in some it is the means of generating faith in men, but that the most of those be∣leevers
who have the happinesse to be trained up from their infancy in any part of the Christian Church; by ob∣serving the esteem which in their Church is had of those holy Bookes, they doe betimes upon the reputation of their Church receive them with a kinde of veneration, that upon this motive they receive the faith; and that others doe upon other inducements en∣tertain it, and once for all we say, that besides the secret and free illumi∣nations of the holy Spirit, these want not Arguments to enforce the reason of unbvassed men to entertain the Scri∣pture as the Word of God, and that all such as without the engagement of per∣verse affections shall admit those Argu∣ments in their apprehensions must ne∣cessarily be of that belief. Before I betake my self to the proof of this assertion, I must premise that by the books of the holy Scripture, I mean such books of the old and new Testament as in the Church of Eng∣land have been accounted Canonicall, and that I intend not here to take up the controversie which is betwixt the
Church of Rome, and us concerning the books which are Apocryphall, the drift of my discourse being against those who beleeve too little, and not those who beleeve too much. Secondly, I must premise that we are not here to expect the necessity of demonstrations, but must content our selves with such arguments as the na∣ture of our subject will admit: there can be no true and perfect demonstrati∣on, unlesse the property to be demon∣strated do naturally flow from the sub∣ject of the demonstration. In matters then depending upon the free election of causes there cannot possibly be any perfect demonstration, and such is the giving of a rule of life in respect of God, so that there cannot be a perfect demonstration of it. So then we must content our selves with arguments fal∣ling short of the necessity of demon∣stration, but such as no man shall be a∣ble to deny, without denying some such principles as all men doe acknowledge to be true.
SECT. II. The Assertion resolved into two Propositions, the former undertaken, that whosoever beleeves the Historicall part of the Scripture must beleeve the Doctrinall. 1. TO beleeve that these Books of Scripture are the Word of God, there are very great and important rea∣sons. 2. To disbeleeve it there are no rea∣sons, or not any sufficient reasons. And first of all, to prove that those bookes of Scriptures are the Word of God, it is sufficient if we prove the truth of them, because themselves pre∣tend to be of divine inspiration. All
Scripture is of divine inspiration, the tenor of the Old Testament runnes ge∣nerally so, The Lord spake unto Moses or other of the Prophets, such as were the Penmen of the holy Scripture, in∣deed the generall pretence of those that wrote both Testaments, is, that holy men did speak and write, as they were inspired by the holy Ghost, so then, if this pretence of it be true, it must be true, that it proceeded from the holy Ghost, and consequently to prove the truth of it will conclude that it is the Word of God. Now as concerning the truch of those writings we have 1. The same Argu∣ments or as great as for the truth of any writings in the world. Nay 2. We have Arguments (morall Arguments) to evince the truth of them, such as no other writings can pretend to. That we may shorten that we have to perform, you may consider that the things deli∣vered to us in the holy Scriptures are either matters of History or Doctrine, and that these are frequently interwo∣ven in the Scripture, so as when Saint Matthew doth in an historicall narration
bring in our Saviour preaching in the Mount, and delivering there a summa∣ry of his Doctrine, so that it will ap∣pear that if the historicall part of the Scripture be undoubtedly true there cannot rationally be any doubt made of those doctrinall rules and precepts which there are delivered. As for the doctrine of any party whatsoever con∣cerning God there is not imaginable a∣ny argument so ready to evince the truth of it as God himself, freely at∣testing to the deliverers of it by migh∣ty signes and wonders, by great and un∣deniable miracles, such as are instan∣ces of the immediate hand of God; such as by skillfull and knowing men are acknowledged to be no way per∣formable by the praestigatory act of Magicians, or by the power of evill spi∣rits. Such were the miracles which are delivered to us by Moses all along the course of Gods bringing the children of Israel out of Egipt to his own land; and afterwards wrought by the Pro∣phets. And such were the works of our blessed Saviour all along the course of his Ministry before his passion, and
such and more admirable was his re∣surrection and ascention. Whosoever doth beleeve, that there was such a man as Moses, that this man Moses did pro∣fesse himself to have received from God a Law, which was to be delivered to a people, he may hitherto very well doubt, whether or no he was not de∣ceived, in imagining that he had recei∣ved such a law. But if withall he shall be assured or stedfastly beleeve, that this man Moses, to make good his pretences to Gods revelations, could obtain so much of God as, to the eyes and sen∣ses of millions of gainsayers and op∣posers of what he did deliver, to shew great and palpable miracles: whoso∣ever doth beleeve that he did turn a rod into a serpent, and that back again into a rod; that by stretching forth that rod upon the River Nilus he turned their waters into bloud, and slew their fish: how afterwards he brought frogs upon all the land of Egipt, even into their Kings chambers; how he brought flies, and caterpillars, and lice, and thunder, and lightning, and mighty hail-stones; how he brought botches
and murrain amongst men and cattell; how he brought upon all the land of Egypt a darknesse that might be felt, and slew their first-born; afterwards how he divided the Red Sea for the people to passe through it, and when he had served the turn of his party, how the flouds returned and overwhelmed his enemies; he that shall beleeve that after this he brought water out of the rock, sweetned the waters of Marah, brought Quails into the wildernesse, procured Manna to fall about their tents all the week, and none upon the Sabbath; how the fire from Heaven consumed Nadab and Abihu, only for adventuring to of∣fer strange fire, otherwise then he had prescribed them; that the earth open∣ed and swallowed up Korah, and cover∣ed the Congregation of Abiram; that at the time of the promulgation of his Laws, God himself appeared visibly, that the glory of his presence oversha∣dowed the Mount, how there were thunder and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the Mount, Exo. 19. how Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoak, because the Lord descended
upon it in fire, and the smoak thereof ascended as the smoak of a furnace, and the whole mountain shaked exceeding∣ly. Whosoever beleeves these works to have been done by the same party that professed a revelation from God, cannot avoid the beleif of his professi∣on, unles he can beleeve that God by so great miracles would attest to Blas∣phemy and Sacrilegious impostures, a thing which is palpably mad to be beleeved, and is against the light of common sense and reason. So likewise whosoever doth beleeve that in the daies of Augustus Caesar there was such a man as Jesus of Nazareth, commonly called Christ, and that this man did professe himself the sonne of God, and pretended to deliver to all the world a way of Religion, a Cove∣nant of life eternall, an abrogation of the ceremonies of the former law, and those other things which he pro∣fessed, there is no necessity that he should beleeve that either he was the Son of God, or that his doctrine was infallible. But if together with these professions he shall take into beleif
those things which Jesus did, though for his owne sake he see no reason to beleeve him, yet at least he will be∣leeve for the works sake, if he shall beleeve that God himself did attest to these professions, he will likewise be∣leeve those professions of his to have been true, and Gods attestation he will beleeve, if he shall beleeve that a little before his birth a company of Angels appeared to Shepherds and told them of it; that presently after it a starre appeared to wise men in the East, and conducted them to the place of his Na∣tivity: that in his life time he did such works as never man did: how he turn∣ed water into wine, commanded the windes and the sea: how he cured all manner of diseases with his Word, how he gave sight to such as were born blinde which was never known since the world began, how he cured most obstinate diseases of long continuance meerly by the touching of his gar∣ment: how he cast out devils from such as were possessed: how he raised up the dead to life, and every way de∣monstrated the power and presence of
the God-head, how at the time of his crucifixion the frame of Nature seem∣ed to be dissolved; how the vail of the Temple rent, and the graves opened, and many bodies of the dead, which slept, arose, and came into the holy city, and appeared to many; how there was darknesse over all the earth, the Sunne eclipsed at the time of the Jewish passe∣over, when the Moon was at the full; and lastly how after three daies he a∣rose again, appeared severall times to his Apostles, gave them power to per∣form the miracles which he had done, and visibly ascended up into heaven: Whosoever doth beleeve these matters of fact, must of necessity beleeve the do∣ctrines which he beleeved; unlesse he will accuse God of bearing false wit∣nesse, or own some such other detesta∣ble and odious incongruity. You see then, how the matters of fact being cleared, and the historicall narrations being asserted to be true, the doctrinall parts will follow of their owne accord: and that if we can clear such things to have been performed by Moses, and Jesus of Nazareth, and that
such doctrines were delivered by them; it follows that those doctrines are true, and are the Word of God. SECT. III. The kindes and degrees of the causes of Historicall Faith in generall. IT remains therefore, that we make it appear that the sacred Histories are true, and that no man, pretending to reason, can justly refuse to admit that principle into his beleef; there being 1. The same reason to beleeve those Histories, that there are to beleeve any Histories. 2. More reason to beleeve them then any other. First then, Whosoever doth delibe∣rate with himself, about that question, whether or no he should give credit to any History propounded, can possibly
finde no other considerations to sway his judgement, then such, as either are taken from the thing it self that is deli∣vered, or from the persons which have delivered the relation, and from such qualifications of them as upon the grounds of reason he can discover, if the matter it self doe involve a clear and evident contradiction to some na∣turall principles, it is not the assevera∣tion of all the men of the world that can work a beleif in the understand∣ing: it not being in the power of man to entertain a beleif contrary to his knowledge, although it may produce in him a doubting, whether or no he have not suffered any fallacy to be im∣posed upon him, and so be wrought to runne over the matter again unto him∣self, and follow it with strict and wa∣ry attention backwards and forwards in reference to his principles. But if the thing it self be not incre∣dible, however difficult or strange it be, that which then he doth consider is, the qualities of the relators, and the manner of the relation, and there is not any improbability proceeding from
the difficulty or the rarity of the acci∣dents, which may not be outweighed by the known disposition and proper∣ties of the Relators. Those things which men doe consi∣der in the Relators of things in order to yeelding of their belief, they relate either to the of the Relators, Understanding or Will and concern either their Sufficiency, or Integrity. Men usually consider whether or no the things be such as may be certainly and evidently known, and whether these parties had sufficient means to come to the certain knowledge of them, and whether they contain them∣selves in their relations within the bounds of things liable to certain knowledge: thus then those things which may be certainly known they are the outward events of things, whereas the secret causes may lie con∣cealed, the former are such as are the objects of common sence, and come
within the cognizance of all: the later are such as are indiscoverable by any man, they being oftentimes made up of a complexion of actions and dispo∣sitions of multitudes of men; or things perfectly to be known, onely of him that sees all things in speculo aeterni∣tatis. If the History (or Relation) con∣taine it selfe within the bounds of evi∣dence and certainty, the next thing to be considered is, whether or no the party that is Author of the Relation had sufficient meanes of knowledge; whether himself were an eye or eare-witnesse of the things which he relates; or whether the things were so publike∣ly acted and knowne, that he might certainely, and particularly informe himselfe, without any danger of de∣ceit. If the party be of known ability, both in himself, and in reference to the things, the next question will be of his Integrity, and whether there be suffi∣cient reason to beleeve, that he would not voluntarily deliver a falshood, in stead of truth, and because it is not
reason to beleeve that men will lye, un∣lesse they either be known to be cor∣rupt or some end be visible of gain to them from their lying. Men use to con∣sider these things likewise before they settle upon beleef. These are the grounds and conside∣rations, and inward discourses where∣upon men doe proceed to the receiving of historicall beleef, even of any rela∣tions whatsoever: and accordingly as all of these conditions be clear or ob∣scure, doubtfull or certain, such is the strength of his belief; if all of them concurre there remains no reason at all of doubting: if some of them fail, there will follow a debility, answerable in the belief; seeing that the belief of the conclusion can never exceed the force and evidence of the premisses. That there is or lately hath been such a City as Rome, or Hierusalem, or Paris, there are none of us that doubt, although we have not seen them; be∣cause they are things very easily known, as being the objects of the eyes, be∣cause the reporters have been there to see them, and because no end or rea∣son
can be imagined why or how men should combine to abuse those that have not travelled. That there have been formerly such Cities as Corinth, and Philippi, and Lace∣demon, &c. we make even as little doubt as of the former, because the things in their nature are evidently to be known, and they have all of them been men∣tioned in the Books of Polybius or Plu∣tarch, or a multitude of Historians that knew them. That the History of Caesars warre a∣gainst the Gaules is true, though written by himself, it is beleeved, because of his abilities to know, and because it makes not things appear to be strained in his behalf, because it might have been contradicted if it had been otherwise, and because he is delivered to us in the complexion of Histories as a man of honour that would not write a lye. That the Histories of Salust are true, it is beleeved because he wrote of things done within the compasse of his time whereof he might well informe himself, he was a man of knowledge
and could not gain by any thing that he hath delivered if it were un∣true. That all of these Histories were written by those that bear the name of them, there is hardly any man that doubts, because there is no improba∣bility in reason: they have been con∣stantly so received in the world, and mentioned successively in Authors fol∣lowing one another from their severall generations down to ours. We see the various degrees of qua∣lifications (some of them) upon which we build an historicall beleif, that this beleif comes short of the clear∣nesse of our assent to a Mathematicall demonstration is evident, because there is an absolute impossibility that things should be otherwise, there being a con∣tradiction involved in the very tearms, and in adjecto: but here is no impossibi∣lity but only an exceeding difficulty which makes up (not indeed a Mathe∣maticall but) a morall impossibility; it is possible that all men may combine together to say that they have seen such things as they have not seen, because e∣very
man is a lyar: but how they should come to doe it, or to what end is so in∣visible and inconceivable, that the mat∣ter, taken in the grosse, is altogether in∣credible. It is absolutely possibly that all those writings which we receive as delivered down from ancient times, may have been of late devised by some men to abuse the world, rnd put upon other names: but to what end, any men should ttke the pains, and how they should fit them with circumstances, and make them all depend upon each other, in a constant succession, agreeing in the men∣tion of persons, places, and actions, is a thing so difficult, as that it would argue madnesse to beleeve, and conclude him to want the use of reason, that should reject the light of all antiquity.
SECT. IV. An Application of those generall grounds to the History of the New Testament, and a proof of this Assertion, 'That there is as great reason to beleeve the New Te∣stament as to beleeve a∣ny other History in the world. SUch madnesse then, and no lesse it were to reject the Histories of the ho∣ly Scriptures; no lesse madnesse? nay, it is much greater, and that not only be∣cause they are of more concernment to
us then the acts of men of former times, but even because of the advantages of the delivery of those Histories. We will beginne with those of the New Te∣stament. And here first, The Books of the New Testament were written by those whose Names they bear; that the four Go∣spels were written by the four Evange∣lists, and that the Acts of the Apostles were written by Saint Luke, &c. Now that these Books were written by these men, it is impossible affirma∣tively to demonstrate; all that can be said is, that there is as great evidence of it as of any other writing in the world; that by whatsoever argument it can be made appear that any Books have been written by those who are reputed for their Authours in antiquity, (that the works of Homer, or Plato, or Aristotle, or Tully are theirs) by the same it may be made evident, that these have pro∣ceeded from our Authours. Have they been successively deliver∣ed? so have these: have they been con∣tinually mentioned under those names? so have these: have they been acknow∣ledged
by all parties? so have these: those that in the primitive times did oppose the doctrine of Christ, yet did it not under the pretence that their Books were spurious, neither Jews nor Pagans had the impudence to make that objection. Julian the Apostate doth freely acknowledge (Cyrill. 10. Grot. 3. ver.) that the Books which by the Christians were received under the names of Peter, Paul, Mathew, Marke, Luke; they were the writings of those Au∣thours. It is true, that there are some Book received of the Canon of the New Te∣stament, whose Authors are unknown; as the Epistle to the Hebrews, and some others: but concerning them I hope to speake in answering those objections which are made against the Scripture. In the mean time we may justly assume it for granted, that those whereof no question hath been made in ancient times they are the writings of those to whom they are ascribed. And now this being supposed, which cannot with any pretence of reason be denied, it follows clearly that the
things they have related are to be be∣leeved: for first, the things which they have delivered they were matters easily to be known; in respect of the things themselves, they were matters of fact and speeches performed by our Saviour or by themselves: Secondly, the acts were acted publiquely in the face of the world; and the speeches which they de∣liver as spoken by others, they were for the most part spoken publiquely, either in the Synagogue, or in the Tem∣ple, or to the multitude somewhere ga∣thered together, on a mountain, by the sea-side, in publique places: so as they might have easily been contradict∣ed if they should have delivered a false∣hood: Thirdly, the parties which have delivered them had all the opportuni∣ties in the world to know the truth of things; they were things done either by themselves, or within their owne sight, or hearing for the greatest part; or at least wise in the times and places where the reporters lived. Mathew and John the two Evangelists which wrote the History of Christ, they were two of his Disciples: two
that were intimately acquainted with his actions, and his words, more famili∣ar with him then the rest; the one was the disciple that Jesus loved, and used to lean in his bosome, as they lay at meat; the other was usually taken with him when most of the rest were left be∣hinde; and hence it follows that they themselves were present at almost all the acts, and speeches which they have delivered. Marke and Luke the other two Evan∣gelists, they lived in the same territories, at the same time, where and when our blessed Saviour bestowed his conversa∣tion; and moreover Saint Marke was (as 'tis very probable) first a Disciple of Saint Paul, who was miraculously chosen to deliver the doctrine of Christ: Afterwards he was undoubtedly a dis∣ciple and companion of Saint Peter, who was an Apostle of our Saviour, did live familiarly together with him, was present at almost all things which Marke hath written: and besides whatever is delivered by Saint Marke is to be found in the writings of the Apostles. Luke was an individuall companion of Paul,
and so he might learne of him such things as he delivered; besides that he saith, that he spoke with those that were eye-witnesses of the things which he delivered, he was borne near hand, he travelled through Palestina, might converse with those very men, upon whom Jesus had wrought his miracles, such as had seen the life of Jesus, his death and resurrection. The Acts of the Apostles were likewise written by Saint Luke; and that Book containes some things done by the rest of the Apostles; but the most of it is concerning the actions of Paul after his miraculous conversion: the former it was easie for him to know, either from the Apostles themselves or others: of the latter he could not be ignorant, be∣cause he was continually with Paul in all his labours and his journeys, even from the time of his conversion to his imprisonment at Rome. As for the matters of fact which are delivered in the Epistles of Paul, and Pe∣ter, and James, and John, and Jude, they are such, as either were done by them∣selves, and so they could not possibly
be ignorant of them, or by others with whom they held a correspondence, or by our Saviour whose Apostles they were, all but Paul; or else they are things done by others, publiquely and notoriously known. Lastly, As for the Epistle to the He∣brews and the Revelations, though the authours of them be not certainly known in the Church, yet thus much is plain, that the Authour to the He∣brews saith, that the Gospel of Iesus was preached at first by Christ, and con∣firmed unto him (Us) by them that heard him, 2. v. 3. and so that he could not be ignorant of that; nor yet was it possible that the Authour of the Re∣velations should be ignorant, whether or no he had those visions which he hath delivered. Now these are all the Books of the New Testament, and it appears, that the Authours of them had as much op∣portunity to know the things which they delivered as is possible to be had: wherefore the businesse is clear in re∣spect of their Sufficiency of knowledge; and all the Question which remains,
it must be in regard of their Inte∣grity. Whosoever challengeth or questions the Integrity of an Historian, and up∣on that cause refuseth to receive his Testimony, it is requisite that he pro∣duce the reasons of his suspition, that he charge the Authours of corruption, and prove the charge which he hath objected; or that he discover and manifest the ends, which he might propound to himself, as the reward of his imposture; that he shew the gain that might accrue, or the losse, or perill, or ignominy that he might avoid; and manifest that his accusa∣tion hath not proceeded from ma∣lice, but from judgement, from some grounds of reason, and not from per∣versenesse, or spight, or any inhumanity. Here then it is that we challenge men or Devils to produce the crimes, to de∣tect and prove the villanies of these Writers; nay, to assign the ends which they might have in relating falshood, the gain, the pleasure, the glory, the safety, or whatsoever it is that prevails upon the appetites and lusts of men:
and let their infidelity and jealousie out-doe the malice of the grand Apo∣state. Indeed I think scorn to stand up∣on this argument, it was the contem∣plation of these things chiefly that gained from me that second assertion. That there is greater reason to beleeve the Scripture then any other writings in the world: the first Proposition being already demonstrated That we have as great.
SECT. V. That there is much great∣er reason to beleeve the History of the New Testament, then any o∣ther History. HAving already demonstrated, that considering the qualifications of the persons who have recorded unto us the New Testament of our Saviour; there is as great reason to give cre∣dence to their Histories as to any other ancient Histories in the world, by rea∣son of their means of knowledge, and opportunities for discovery of the truth of those matters of fact, which they have delivered. It follows now that we make good that, which in the se∣cond place we propounded concerning them, which was, That we have greater
reason to beleeve them then to beleeve any Historians whatsoever, and this now will be manifested to us by these Arguments following, 1. Greater obligation. 2. Their sufferings. 3. Their Miracles. 4. Their predictions. First then, They were more power∣fully obliged to the delivery of the truth then others, not that others were not obliged likewise to deliver nothing but the truth: there is in the consci∣ence of every soul setled a principle dictating unto him, that he ought not not to recede from the truth in his rela∣tion; but yet this principle is, in the most of men, very much overclouded and overborn; as is manifest, not only by the fabulous relations of ancient Histories, even after the institution of the Olympiads; but by that inclinati∣on which we finde, almost in all men, to make their relations handsome; in or∣der wherunto even the gravest of them, Josephus, Livy, and the rest of those or∣ders of Historians, have often changed
the form of Circumstances, and varied from the truth, to make a coherence of things according to their fancy, such as might please their owne imaginati∣ons. The truth is, that which held in the Heathen, so far as they were held with∣in the boundaries of truth, it can be conceived to be no other then a certain magnanimity, and a morall generosity that was actuated and quickned in them by the conceit of a reputation, thereby gained amongst the people, of their own generation, their hopes of perpetuating their owne fame, toge∣ther with the acts which they record∣ed, and consecrating them to eterni∣ty and immortality; I do not say, that this was all the motive which they had, but that upon the consideration of them, in the whole complexion of their circumstances, I cannot finde out any more powerfull motive, nor any stron∣ger obligation. But, besides all that these men had to move them, the writers of the New Te∣stament had likewise other motives, as farre beyond these, as the heaven is be∣yond
the earth, either in dignity, or situation: A most severe injunction of their Master, such as they themselves have delivered, such as they could not, neither durst neglect: their writings abound in precepts of truth and of ve∣racity, and that prescribed under far other conditions, and setled upon a far surer foundation, upon the foundation of truth it self, the originall and the Ideall truth of the world; and pro∣pounded to them under far other pe∣nalties: they knew full well and taught to others, that of every idle word, which men shall speak, an account must be given at the day of judgement: how dreadfull an account then must they have expected, if they should have deli∣vered falshood in the place of truth, if they should have told a lye for God, or lyes of God, or delivered impostures in the name of God? nay verily, the necessity which lay upon them, compa∣red to others, doth as farre exceed it; as the fear of a little disreputation is ex∣ceeded by the horrour of eternall tor∣ments: and now their practise was al∣so answerable to their obligation, and
what they delivered, in their speeches and writings, was fully exampled in their lives. We have before intimated that whosoever will charge an authour with a lye, he must either detect the lewdnesse and corruption of their lives, or at least wise manifest what they might gain by their report; the former could never be by their sworn enemies detected, nay Julian the great Apostate could charge them with nothing but simplicity: now then, all the gain that can be, is reducible to the Avoidance of evill, and Obtaining of good. The Goods that are to be obtained are either of Body. Estate. Liberty. Reputation. First then, What outward evill did they thereby escape, that so they may be judged to have lyed out of fear? consider the state of the world at that time, and tell us, whether or no there was danger in speaking, and writing those things, or in the forbearance?
Did the Roman Emperours, or the Go∣vernours of Judea, or the Jews, or the Presidents of the adjacent Provinces, or the multitude threaten them to make them speak, or to be silent? Did they by that meanes put themselves into a condition of ease and pleasure, and soft luxury? Did they treasure up gold and silver, and raise themselves a fortune by it? Had they a greater freedome in∣ward or outward, did it let them into larger principles, or procure them a greater scope to gratifie their inordi∣nate desires? Was it the way to advance them to honour and reputation, either with the Governors, or with the people? nay, instead of bodily ease and plea∣sure it objected them to pains active, and passive, they were forced to undertake labours, and travels, and watchings, and the in∣conveniencies of great and painfull in∣dustry: they were daily opposed to hunger and thirst, and cold and naked∣nesse; nay, to torments and to death: instead of gaining an estate, they were enforced to forsake all that they had to
live an ambulatory kinde of life, with∣out any certain being, depending as it were on the Ravens, to provide them their meat from one day to another. Instead of that same freedome and li∣berty which men affect, they entred in∣to a straighter and more narrow way then the way of the world, they were forced to deny themselves, even such things as they knew were lawfull, and they were abridged even of the com∣mon enjoyments of mankinde, not suf∣fered to converse with freedom, or to breath with safety: they no sooner came to a city, but there they were per∣secuted and forced to fly unto another. That which Saint Paul spoke of himself as he was making his last voyage up to Jerusalem, might have been the com∣mon Motto of them all, Now I goe bound in the Spirit up to Jerusalem, not knowing what things shall befall me, only the holy Ghost that testifies in eve∣ry city that bonds and afflictions abide me there. As for the matter of honor and repu∣tation, that was all in the hands of their enemies, the Jews, and the Greeks:
they preached Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishnesse; and all the credit which they obtained at their hands was, to be accounted a company of silly men, con∣tentious for a thing of nothing, a que∣stion about names, about one Jesus which was dead, whom they affirmed to be alive: this was the opinion of the Gentiles; and by the Jews they were looked upon as revolters, and so not fit to live: as for this sect we know that it is every where spoken against; and they were hereby rendred the scorn and derision of the world, the off∣scouring of the people: what shall I more say? they were deprived of all the enjoyments of the world, and cast into all the miseries, or in the words of the Authour to the Hebrews, They wandred about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented; and all for the delivery of the things contained in those bookes: and if we will sadly consider it we can assigne no cause of this their choice, but the force of truth prevail∣ing on them, and the urging of their conscience, by the continuall instiga∣tion
of them by that spirit which act∣ed them, making their hearts hot, and kindling a fire within them, a fire in their bosome, which they could not suppresse. We cannot but speake the things which we have seen and heard: they suffered for their profession that, never men did; and so we have greater reason to beleeve them then any other men. And we have still greater arguments then these, because that God himselfe gave testimony to their words and wri∣tings; and that both in their own times, and the times which did succeed them: in their own times by miracles; in the succeeding generations by accomplish∣ing their predictions. The Apostles then, in confirmation of their doctrine, were endowed with a miraeulous power from on high, and manifested to all the world, that they had received in great abundance their portions of the spirit, from him that had the spirit not by measure: they preached, and as they preached, they confirmed their doctrine by mighty signs and wonders, and evident manife∣stations
of the holy Ghost; so evident, that when they had delivered the rela∣tion of them to a gain-saying, a croo∣ked and perverse generation, assigning the times and places, and other circum∣stances, their spightfull enemies could never detect them of the least impo∣sture; but were forced, though their teeth gnashed while they spake, to con∣fesse, that indeed great miracles were done by them; that this was evident and they were not able to deny it; nay, such was the evidence of the miracles performed by them, that some of them have been recorded in the annals of heathen Authours (Phlegon,) that they were appealed unto by the primitive Christians (in the times next succeed∣ing the Apostles) in all their Apolo∣gies for the Christian faith, in their A∣pologies made to the Heathen Empe∣rours, they are appealed unto as things commonly known by the world, yeeld∣ed without contradiction, which could not with any fore-head be denied; they were, I say, appealed unto, and that to the greatest enemies of the Christi∣ans, and that by way of challenge to
the triall, and that without any reply as to the falshood of them, and with∣out any recrimination; nay, which is yet much more, there were not only by these men themselves, but even at their sepulchres when they were dead, great miracles performed, for divers centuries of years, and that so certainly, that it was confessed by the sorest enemies of the Church, such I mean, as were of the School of Pythagoras, that by Magick Arts strove to out-doe the performances of Christ, particularly by that mad Dogge Porphyrius, and others. Unlesse then, men will deny God the honour due unto him, and make him by his presence, and testimony authorize im∣posture, there can be no scruple made of the truth of these mens writings, but they must be beleeved before the wri∣tings of any others in the world, un∣lesse they likewise could have done such acts as these have done, unlesse they could have cast out devils by their words, have given the holy Ghost by the imposition of their hands, unlesse they could have healed all manner of diseases, the blinde, the lame, the deaf,
the dumb, &c. by words, touch, shad∣dow; or could have spoke all sorts of Languages, or rather at one speaking could have brought to passe, that men of every language should perfectly have understood their speech, as if it had been their own: Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Meso∣potamia, and Judea, and Cappadocia, Pon∣tus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, Egipt, and the parts of Lybia, about Cyrene, strangers of Rome, Jews, and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, they all heard them speak in their own tongues. Nor did it please the Lord of the spi∣rits of all flesh, here to stint the dispen∣sations of his holy spirit to them, he gave them not only the power of mira∣cles, but the spirit of prophecy, he un∣folded to them the everlasting rolls, and admitted them into his decrees, and would not hide from them the things, which he meant to bring to passe, in the generations to come: he urged them by his holy Spirit, and they foretold the fates of the world, they foretold it, and God brought it to passe: I cannot stand to reckon up all their prophecies
which they delivered, and shortly after they were fulfilled, of the spreading of that leaven, of the growth of that grain of mustardseed, of the mighty and wonderfull propagation of the faith, and the perpetuall enduring of it, of the rejection of it by the Jews, and the receiving of it by the Gentiles, of the hatred of the Jews, and the tor∣ments which were to be undergone by the glorious Martyrs, of the destru∣ction of Ierusalem, and the calamities of that faithlesse Nation: all these make it evident that God was with them; that there is infinitely more reason to beleeve the writers of the New Testa∣ment then any other writers. That none can disbeleeve them, with∣out forfeiting his reason, by asserting that God would give testimony to im∣posture.
SECT. VI. That the Old Testament is the Word of God. A Proposall of three seve∣rall assertions, whereby it is concluded. HAving demonstrated that the Books of the New Testament are all of them to be received under the authority and credit of the word of God, that the dogmaticall parts are to be recei∣ved upon the credit of the Histories, and the Histories upon the common principles of reason, and consequent∣ly that no man professing to be guided by reason and judgement can refuse them. It remains, that we demonstrate the same of the Old Testament, and that we take off those colours, and answer those Sophisms, which by some
men are urged against the Scripture, and so conclude this argument. Before I proceed to the former of these, I must call to your remembrance that which, in the beginning, I did pre∣mise, that under the title of the Books of the Old Testament, I did compre∣hend those, and those only, which in the Church of England have been admitted, under the name of the Books of the Canonicall Scripture: and that I had no purpose at all to meddle with the controversies, which are betwixt us and the Romane Church, about the books which are Apocryphall: the reason, why the Church hath entertained them only, into the Canon, is, because they onely were of the Canon of the Jews beleef, before the coming of our Savi∣our, they only being written in the He∣brew tongue, and consigned by Esdras at the return of the Jews from the Ba∣bilonish captivity, as is generally belee∣ved amongst the Jewish Rabbines, whilest the Prophets Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy were yet alive. Now although the way to demon∣strate the truth of them, considering the
question apart, and by ic self, be the same with the way, whereby we did de∣monstrate the truth of the New Testa∣ment, by asserting the Authours of them to have been those men to whom they were evermore ascribed; and from the qualities of the things delivered (in matter of History) and the characters of those persons, who have delivered the severall parts of it, to demonstrate, that no reason can be imagined, why such men, as those are and must be sup∣posed to be, should deliver such impo∣stures as those must be, supposing them to be impostures; that no end or mo∣tive can be discovered, which they should propound to themselves for their reward, but on the contrary that many reasons are visible, why they should have held their peace, if they durst have concealed those things from the world; the reasons from safety, gain, glory, and the like, as might either jointly or se∣verally be demonstrated, of even all the books of the Law, and of the Prophets, which make up the greatest part (Mo∣ses together with the Law having deli∣vered likewise the shame of himself, and
Miriam, and Aaron. The Prophets ha∣ving been all or most of them hardly used: which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted?) Although, I say, this had been the naturall way to demonstrate the matter in question, ta∣ken singly and apart by it selfe; yet partly to avoid the similitude of mat∣ter, which renders unpleasant even the most profitable discourses, and partly to make a present dispatch of this Ar∣gument, I shall content my self to have put you thus in minde, that all those generall arguments, for the truth and credit of those writers, are common to these as well as to the others; and that there needs no variation of them, be∣ing to be applied to the question now in hand, any other then the interchan∣ging of their severall names, their per∣sonall relations, and qualities, and o∣ther accidents: In a word, that the kindes of the Arguments are the same, and the force of reason alike in both, allowing only the difference of gradual and individuall circumstances. This being premised, the summe of what I shall further say is briefly this,
That 1. In the time of our Saviour, and the Apostles, these Bookes were true. 2. That since that time they have not been changed. From which two Propositions it will follow, that still they are so; and conse∣quently that the Books of the Old Te∣stament, as well as of the New, are the Word of God. As touching these propositions, the truth of them will be inferred by this ratiocination. 1. The Books, which we now re∣ceive, are the same which the Jews do now receive. 2. The Books, which the Jews now receive, are the same which they did formerly receive, even up to the con∣signation of their Canon. 3. The Books, which then they did receive, were true.
SECT. VII. The first Assertion proved, That the Books of the Old Testament which we now receive are the same which the Jews doe now receive. THat those Canonicall Books which we receive are the self same with those which the Jews at the present do receive, is a case so plain, that it needs no manner of proof, but only this, that it is obvious to every man to compare our English or Latine Bibles with the Hebrew Bibles, which are used amongst the Jews at present, and daily put forth by the present Rabbines, residing in the severall parts and dominions of the world; upon such a comparison it
will be found, that we do own the self same Books which they do, without any difference in the number or inscri∣ptions, chapters, or verses of those Books: such as do doubt of this, they must take the pains to try, and to re∣solve themselves by their own experi∣ence, or else if they are not able, or not willing to take the pains to make themselves their own resolvers, they must of necessity beleeve the multitude of those, that have already tried it, and finding it to be generally granted, and allowed of all men, and all parties, however differing otherwise amongst themselves, they must upon that ac∣count, either beleeve the Proposition, or else devise some way how, and for what end it should be brought to passe, that the learned men of all Nations, and Re∣ligions, Jews, Christians, Papists, Pro∣testants, Turks, Pagans, &c. should a∣gree together to impose upon that part of people, that cannot or will not fit themselves, to resolve a question, so easie and of such concernment. Now, that all these sorts of men doe thus agree, must likewise be beleeved,
untill some one instance can be produ∣ced to the contrary: the truth is, the thing being a matter liable to the triall of common sence, and obvious to all the world, there is no more controver∣sie made of it, among the learned, then of a principle in Mathematicks. It is true indeed, that as concerning the interpretation of those books, there is, and almost, ever was a great deal of controversie amongst the learned, (but none as to the number and to the parts of those that are delivered amongst the Jews) and it is likewise true, that the beleif, of farre the greatest number of Christians, doth in its kinde depend up∣on the questionable fidelity of transla∣tors, and that fidelity of theirs, if it be to be tried, that must be done by means which are not exempt from question: all therefore which can be said in this matter is that unlesse we can attain to skill sufficient for our own satisfaction in this question, we take into thought the qualifications of Translators, in re∣spect of skill and of fidelity; and im∣partially that we consider all those ra∣tionall heads and grounds, whereon men
use to settle their belief, amongst which no greater evidence can be expected then there is in cases where all agree; and such is the main body of ours, and other translations likewise: this that I have spoken of translations is indeed a digression from the proposition I should demonstrate, seeing when we speak of the sacred authority of the holy Scri∣ptures we mean it not of translations, as they are such, but primarily of the ori∣ginals, and of translations, only so far as they are consonant to those origi∣nals. And thus much is indeed sufficient both for the assertion, and explication of that proposition, that the books which we receive, they are the same which the Jews receive.
SECT. VIII. That the Bookes, which the Iews do now receive, are the same which they have received ever since the Consignation of their Canon. BUt secondly, the Bookes which the Jews do now receive, they are the same which they did formerly receive, upwards to the time of our Saviour, and his Apostles; nay, beyond them to the very time of the consignation, or sealing up the Canon of their beleif, that is, their Bookes were never changed nor corrupted. It is not here my purpose to assert, that never any letter or word hath been changed, or formerly read otherwise
then now it is in the Jewish Bibles, (I am not so far unacquainted with their Keri and Chetib, or with the notes of the Massoreth) but that there hath not been made any variation so considera∣ble, as to shake the authority of the pre∣sent coppies. Of these various readings I hope to speak in the answering obje∣ctions. In the interim, I am to demon∣strate, that they have not received any considerable depravation. And now this being a negative Pro∣position, common reason doth present∣ly offer it to every ones judgement, that it cannot be positively proved, the very nature of such propositions, contradict∣ing that manner of proof: the argu∣ments then, which are producible, are some of them taken, from the causes why they could not (morally) be cor∣rupted; the other from signs that de fa∣cto they have not been so. The first argument then is taken from the multitude of copies, which it was impossible to combine together to cor∣rupt upon design, or that they should accidentally agree together in the same casuall corruptions.
It is certainly apparent out of the Histories of the Jews, that after their first and second captivities, they did store themselves with multitudes of co∣pies of the sacred books, and that both publikely and privately; that which, be∣fore they were dispersed, either was not so necessary to them, or else was not so apprehended by them: so long as the first Temple was yet unrazed, we reade but of very few (if any) Synagogues of the Jews in other Nations, out of the bounds and terrirores of Iudea: but af∣ter by their long and wofull captivity, when their confidence in the protection of their Law and their Temple had, by their sad experience and wofull suffer∣ing, worn it self out of their mindes, their Temple being utterly demolished, the best of them began to think that it was possible that even the Law might fail: (Habbakuk) and they now be∣thought themselves, of making use of the rationall means of the preservation of it; in the mindes of men, and seeing there could not be any readier way thought upon then the erecting of Sy∣nagogues, and writing many copies,
these were the courses which they took, (they had had experience of the incon∣venience of having one only copy, in the losse of that copy, which being found again by Hilkiah the Priest, made King Iosiah to rend his clothes, at the hearing of those things written in the Law) and accordingly we finde, before the coming of our Saviour, many Syna∣gogues erected in forrain places, and the books of the Law, and the Pro∣phets in every Synagogue, reade every Sabbath day; now every dispersion en∣creased the number of Synagogues and Books. And besides the first captivity of the Tribes carried into Media by the Assyrians, we shall finde them, even af∣ter they had licence from Cyrus to re∣turn, continuing still abroad, and up∣on many new occasions again disper∣sed: those that reade over sacred Histo∣ries and prophane, shall finde them seat∣ed in most of the Eastern Countries ad∣jacent Iudea, or not farre distant from thence: the Macedonians invited them to Alexandria, the cruelties of Antiochus, the civill warres of the Asmonaei, the armies of Pompey, and Lossius, drove ma∣ny
of them from their habitations: the cities of Cyrene, of Asia, Macedonia, and Lycaonia, the Islands of Cyprus and Crete, and divers others, even Rome it self, they were all of them furnished with Tem∣ples and Synagogues of the Jews: now so it is that the Books of all these did agree together amongst themselves, which they could not have done if any, and not all of them should have been corrupted; and that all of them should either casually or by design be corrupt∣ed (besides that no end can appear to encourage such a designe) the thing it self makes it impossible. Besides, had any such thing been, they must, to make a correspondence, have corrupted likewise the Septuagint tran∣slation, which for almost three hundred years before our Saviour was extant in Egipt; that I speak nothing of the Chal∣dee Paraphrase extant before the time of our blessed Saviour: so then, as far as the nature of a morall subject will ad∣mit, we have shewed, as from the cau∣ses, that the Scriptures of the Old Testa∣ment could not be corrupted. Now as from the signes we have like∣wise
powerfull arguments, that to our Saviours time, they were uncorrupted, because our Saviour never discovers any corruption of the Text, which certain∣ly he would not have spared, at such times as he taxes the Scribes and Phari∣sees of making the Law of God of none effect, by their traditions. Now, that the Hebrew Canon hath not been corrupted since our Saviours time, we have this sign likewise, that never any of the ancient Fathers have, in their greatest heat of zeal against the Jews accused them of such corruption, though Justin Martyr complain of wron∣ging the Septuagints Translation; and certainly if they should have corrupted them upon design, either before or since, it would have been in all those places which conclude against them, for Christ, (the true Messiah, that stumbling stone, upon which they stumbled and fell:) but those do remain unaltered. The truth is, to them were committed the Oracles of God, and they have, by the visible ordination of the providence of God, discovered so much care and diligence that way, as is not to be found
to have been bestowed upon any other writings under heaven: witnesse the Criticall notes of their Massoreth, which gives an account of the numbers of of letters in every Book almost, and almost, if not altogether, of every vari∣ous lection. I conclude then that they have never been corrupted.
SECT. IX. That in our Saviours time these bookes were true, and consequently were the Word of God. BUt we, in our Saviours time they were true, and the Word of God, as appears by our Saviours testimony, and the testimony of the Apostles, who still referre to them as being of divine inspiration, as being the truth and Word of God, their using the testimo∣ny, almost of every particular Book, as anthenticall, their disputations found∣ed upon their Authority. Particulars in this kinde are so many, and so plain, that without any more speaking I will conclude, that we are to receive the Old Testament upon the credit of the New; and the New Testament (as I have formerly demonstrated) upon
greater reason far then any other wri∣tings in the world; and consequently that we must receive the Books of the Old Testament upon the same Autho∣rity. We have already discovered some of those many reasons, whereupon we are to receive the Books of the Old Testa∣ment and the New, under the credit and authority of the Word of God. Besides those whereupon I have insisted there are many more; some of them taken from the quality of the writers, some from the manner of the writings, the former shewing that those men, from whom they proceeded, were not fit per∣sons to devise such things, they being ma∣ny if not most of them, simple and un∣learned men; the latter manifesting that such things are not, of their nature, ob∣vious to be devised, because they tran∣scend the wit and invention of man; the Majesty and simplicity of the stile, the concord and harmony, the end and scope, the power and efficacy, the an∣tiquity; besides the Testimony of the Spirit in the hearts of men. But the evidence of truth no way de∣pending
upon the multitude of argu∣ments or reasons, and all of these be∣ing insisted on in some or other of those Authours which are obvious, I shall at this time finish what remains, of that which at the first I propounded, which was to shew, That as there are many and important reasons, moving wise men to receive them, so there neither are nor can be any sufficient arguments on the contrary, to make men to refuse them.
SECT. X. That there is no reason to disbeleeve the Scri∣ptures. Objections brie∣fly proposed and answe∣red: first generall Ob∣jections against the whole. 'Tis true indeed, that many both of old and later times, have refused either all or severall parts of the holy Canon, and it is not to be hoped or expected, that they should ever be gene∣rally received by all the world: there must be heresies, and amongst the rest there alwaies have been, and sure there ever will be Antiscripturians: the grea∣test part of the world have ever lived according to sence and appetite; and
to prove that de facto it is denyed, is not to manifest that there is reason why it is so; yet seeing there are of those disputing and theoreticall hereticks, as well as practicall, to conceal or dissem∣ble the arguments, which are alleadged against the truth, it would be to be∣tray the cause that we have undertaken, and give occasion for some Jealousie, that their Objections are unanswe∣rable. To come then to an issue, some have rejected All, by reason of   Impossibi∣lities.       Repugnan∣ces.       Mutations.   Parts, ac∣cusing them as Sine no∣mine, Au∣tho∣ris.       Dubitati,       Ab intrinseco, matter Those who refuse the whole Scri∣ptures, they are some of them Atheists, others professe themselves Christians, and yet doe deny the authority of the written word, pretending to private and secret illuminations, as the last rule of their actions: the design of my dis∣course
being against the former, I shall only intimate the frenzy of the later. They pretend, that that, which we call the written word, is not the Word of God, because 1. The Word of God is God him∣selfe. 2. Christ is the Word of God. 3. The Letter kils. 4. The Word of God is spirit and life. These are the arguments which, by some Enthusiasts, are used against the written Letter. And for answer to them, we may only observe, how, by ar∣guing against the authority of the Scri∣ptures, these men do tacitely assert it; for taking their arguments out of it, and proceeding no further, either by reason or revelation, to the discovery of their antecedents, but barely resting in the recitall of those words which are there written, they do resolve all the power and force of their argument into the authority of those very writings which they would impugne, and conse∣quently they do at once deny and grant, the authority of the Scripture; which
is to deserue the Epithete, which is given them, of fanaticall Enthusiasts. That the Word of God is God him∣self (taking the Word of God for the immanent act of the diuine understand∣ing) is indeed a truth attainable by o∣ther principles, by those I mean from whence the absolute simplicity of the divine nature is attainable. But that Christ is the eternall word of the Fa∣ther, and that there is such a spirit and life, as the argument doth imply, and that there is a divine and mysticall mea∣ning of that letter of the word, they either owe their faith unto that word, or else they have not done very chari∣tably in concealing those waies where∣by they come to know it, and very im∣providently in giving occasion for us to beleeve, that their pretences of illumi∣nation are but pretences. Now for that other party, who doe reject the Scriptures (the whole bulk of them) their Arguments are these, I. Because they deliver things impos∣sible, and consequently incredible, and so they are not to be beleeved.
2. Because they deliver things repug∣nant, and contradictory to one ano∣ther. 3. Because the Books of the Old Te∣stament are doubtfull, by reason of the differences of the Text and Margent. And the Books of the New Testament are likewise uncertain, by reason of the various readings of severall copies. 1. Those things which the Atheisti∣call partie use to object, against the au∣thority of the Scripture as impossible and incredible, they are the miracles performed by Moses and the Prophets, by Christ and his Apostles, but if we shall attentively consider them, we shall finde, that they doe include in them no contradiction, nor any absolute impossi∣bility of the performance; the utmost that can be justly concluded from them, is, that they transcend the ordinary course of the dispensation of that pro∣vidence, which orders the world, and administers the laws of the government thereof. But, upon the hearing or read∣ing of extraordinary events, presently, (though they have been sufficiently at∣tested) to disbeleeve them, upon con∣ceit
of reason to the contrary, discovers palpably the want of the exercise of that reason, whereto they so much pre∣tend: for a man to deny, such matters of fact as he is not able to comprehend the reason of, must either suppose the party, to know the causes of all appea∣rances in nature, or conclude him guil∣ty of childish, and ridiculous increduli∣ty. We have before demonstrated the Omniscience, and the Omnipotence of the Divinity; and that being, as hath been actually proved, clearly and evi∣dently demonstrable, for the contem∣ptible wit, and reasoning of man to prescribe limits, and bounds to that power and knowledge, is no lesse, then to own the acknowledgement of a con∣tradiction, by professing that, to be li∣mited and finite, which the naturall principles of our understandings, will force us to acknowledge of necessity to be immense and infinite. It cannot be thought a thing impos∣sible, that God should either raise the dead, or command the Sunne to stand still in Gibea, by him that considers, what it is to be the originall of life, or
to have created the Universe with the word of his eternall power, the things which are impossible with men, they are possible with God: and consequently we having before concluded the vanity and madnesse of Atheism, shall need to say no more, to evince the frivolous weaknesse of this Argument, from the impossibilities. 2. As for those repugnances and con∣tradictions, which some men vainly please themselves, imagining they have found them in the Scripture, if they be well examined, they will be proved to be but so many instances of the weak∣nesse, or inadvertancy of the Objectors those which have been made against the Old Testament, have long agoe been found by Rabbi Moses ben Maimoni not to have taken in all those conditions, which have been by Philosophers disco∣vered to be required to make up a per∣fect contradiction, that is, that contra∣ry assertions be made of the same thing at the same time, according to the same part, or motion, or apprehension: and the same hath been lately performed by Manasseh ben Israel, in his conciliator for
the Old Testament. It hath likewise, for the New; been long since performed by many of the Fathers, and of late by diverse of all professions, Papists, Pro∣testants and their severall subdivisions. The matters of Doctrine are easily re∣conciled by distinguishing the notions of severall terms, so for example, as faith is said by Paul to justifie, and works by Jame., by distinguishing of Justificati∣on; and the matters of History are re∣conciled by attending to times, and pla∣ces, persons, and forms of speech. Thus are the differences cleared, which are a∣bout the Genealogies of our Saviour, delivered by Saint Matthew and Saint Luke. The truth is, there could never any considerable difference, either in matter of doctrine or history, be urged against the Scriptures; yet if some slight and inconsiderable circumstances should seem to us so to differ that we could not reconcile them, it ought ra∣ther to confirme our beleef, then any way to shake it; seeing it is the custome of those who designe to impose upon mens beleef, so to contrive all circum∣stances as they may be sure to have no difference discovered.
Such is, in truth, the agreement and harmony of all these authors, so distant in time, in place, in institution, as is not to be found in any other authours in the world, though of the same sect, either in Philosophy, Law, Physick, or any other faculty; nor yet in any one man with himself; as might be manifest∣ed, if either this time or place requi∣red it. And so instead of an objection to shake us, we have found an argument to confirm us. 3. The third Argument or objection against the whole Books of Scripture is taken from the Keri and Chetib of the Old Testament; and from the various readings of the New; from those they conclude them to be doubtfull, from these corrupted. Now the former of these is answered by the Jewish RR Isaac Jacob of old, E∣lias Levita of later times, who do deny the consequence of that Argument, and make it manifest that those were added for signification of some mystery, and not because the Text was doubtfull: and for proof of their assertion they prove, that the Books of Haggai, Zachary,
Malachy, Daniel and Ezra, had those mar∣ginall notes added to them by their au∣thours, who all were members of the Synagoga magna, and made the consigna∣tion of the Jewish Canon: these could not be doubtfull of the sense of their own writings; and consequently from those marginall notes, the doubtfulnesse of the Old Testament can no way just∣ly be concluded. As touching the various readings of some places of the New Testament, we cannot deny but that through the fail∣ings of some Scribes, there are found in the most ancient copies of those books some differences of letters, or some few syllables, or words; but this we deny, that those are sufficient, from whence to conclude the books not to be credi∣ted; for upon the same reason it will be concluded that no Book in the world is to be credited, unlesse they can be ma∣nifested to be exempted from the slips and failings of transcribers. Nay, the consideration of those various readings, are very strong arguments that the sub∣stance of the writings are incorrupted, and that they were never changed upon
design, seeing the differences that are do no way inferre any difference, either in the Doctrine or History of the Testa∣ment: it was of the favour and mercy of God to preserve to his Church those various readings, that by comparing them together, and likewise with the rest of the holy Scriptures, both the true sence and the true reading of them might at once be manifested.
SECT. XI. Objections against particu∣lar parts, briefly propo∣sed and answered. NOw Objections, against particular books of either Testament, will be found likewise inconsiderable: 'tis true that many of them have been either doubted of or rejected by some men, but those who have pertinaciously refu∣sed them, have done it rather out of the interest of their passions and cor∣rupt affections, then out of judgement. Briefly, Ecclestastes hath been rejected by some as Written by Solomon in his dotage, Placing felicity in sences. But the first of these can no way be pro∣ved; nay, the contrary appears by the whole tenour of it well considered; and the latter is evidently confuted by the conclusion, Fear Cod, &c. for God shall bring, &c.
The Canticles have been taken for a Love-song, compiled in a complement to Pharaohs daughter; but it had been but a slender complement to tell her, that her eyes were like fish-pools, and her nose like the tower of Lebanon that looketh toward Damascus. The Prophecy of Daniel hath been charged by Porphyrius, to have been a Hi∣story written after the things were done, written in the time of Antiochus, and imposed upon the world under the cre∣dit of the name of Daniel: but, beside the testimony of our Saviour, it appears out of History, that that Prophecy was shewed to Alexander the great, in his ad∣vance towards Jerusalem, 150. years be∣fore Antiochus. New Testament. Hebrews was rejected by the Latine; Church because the Authour was un∣known, and because of some passages especially seeming to favour the Nova∣tian herefie. I answer. 1. It is not the name of an authour which gives credit to his Writings, but that character of his person which is drawn from his abilities and integrity.
Now these were never doubted of in that Authour. 2. Those passages are very well to be understood otherwise, then in favour of the Novatians. 3. It was ever received in the Greek Church, and recited amongst the Cano∣nicall Books by the Councels of Nice, Laodicea, and Carthage. 4. If we are to beleeve, the Western Church had grounds to doubt of the credit of it, at such time as it did not admit it, we may as well beleeve, that that Church had reasons which satisfi∣ed them of the authority of it, at such time as they did receive it. The Epistles of Saint James, 2d of St Peter, the second and third of St John, Jude, Revelations, have all of them been doubted of, for some time; by some par∣ties whether or no they were indeed written by those authours, under whose names they are now received: but though they were some time doubted by some, they were alwaies received by o∣thers; and those Churches which did refuse them, so long as they were unsa∣tisfied, are to be supposed to have been
satisfied when they did receive them; and so we ought to give as great, if not grea∣ter cedit to them, then to such others as had not been questioned; inasmuch as that which hath been deliberated, and debated, and then decided, is to be cre∣dited, as well as that which silently hath passed on unquestioned. And now I have with brevity (as I suppose) congruous to such an Essay as I intended, made evident the last as∣sertion which I undertook, That to dis∣beleeve, either the whole body of Scri∣pture, or any part of it, there is no rea∣son; or not any sufficient reason.
