C659 99868814 121170
Honor rediviuus or An analysis of Hono and Armory by MATT: CARTER Esq London printed for Henry Herringman 1660 And Are to be Sould by Henry Herringman at the Ancker on the lowest side of the New-Exchange
ANDREW COLTEE DUCAREL L.L.D. Doctor's Commons.
A POSSE AD ESSE.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE. WILLIAML d. Marquesse AND Earl of HERTFORD, Baron SEYMOUR AND BEAUCHAMP. MY LORD. THat I have preferred so slender a Volume to Your Honorable Patronage, is no more than
the Subject of it (which is Ho∣nor) erects; as Your Lord∣ship is known of the first and greatest of those that chal∣lenge a concernment therein; yet not more eminent by that of Your blood, then of the inward Noblenesse of Your Vertues, whereof the World hath received un∣matchable testimonies. These reasons as they oblige me to this presentment; so I can∣not but hope will also plead pardon for the trouble it brings a long with it; and (that once obtained) I am
assured of the preservation of this imperfect Essay, under the powerfull Protection of your Lordships name: Of the infinite Honorers where∣of, none is more ambitious to be known such, than My LORD, Your Honours most humbly devoted Matt. Carter.
TO THE READER. READER, THe unhappy Causes of the present neglect of this most noble knowledge, are of so high nature, as will not endure to be na∣med: the ill consequents (in the im∣minent degenerateness of this Age) so manifest, that they need not. In this declining condition of Honour, nothing is more requisite then the means of its
preservation; amongst which this be∣ing one, and that not inconsiderable, gave me occasion of busying my self in this design. Such bookes as have beene already publisht, by persons eminent in this kinde, are of large bulke, and some of them too tedious to the most in∣genious Student. The more they comprehend, the less apt for memory: especially when enlarged with tedious impertinencies, and doubtlesse more difficult for the apprehension of eve∣ry Reader; to which, Method that is most discernable in brevity is the most excellent help. That which I have herein followed, is to treat first of the degrees of Honour, and then of Armory; and that although con∣cisely, yet I hope so clearly, and fully, that any person of ordinary
capacity may hereby be able to blazon a Coat of the greatest difficulty; the on∣ly care being in observing the termes given to things born, and the manner of posture, and position. Some errors have escaped both the Press, and theGraver, which the Reader may at his leisure rectifie by the Errata at the end; so let him peruse seriously, and censure mo∣destly; and then I shal wish him Fare∣well.
Of HONOR in Generall, and of its Particular Divisions. THe Heraulds of former a∣ges have, many of them, not onely divided the nobler sort of men into severall degrees, but di∣stinguished likewise the inferiour rank into four forms: But (as in some other things) in that also I shall forbear to fol∣low their method, as not altogether so perti∣nent to the intentions of this compilement. It is but an easie caution in me, when I know not how few I shall  by my best demerits, not to stumble into the hazard of disgusting many, by a rash enterprise in a weak endea∣vour; considering especially the present tem∣per of the world. The great and wise Disposer of all Entities hath contriv'd every thing into such a Method, as in every particle of the Creation is discover'd a most excellent harmony, in which that of the degrees and honorary distinctions is as admira∣ble as any; and this is the intended scope of this . Some he  created to honor, and some to dishonor;  a difference and
variety in all things, that by a rule of contraries they might the better display themselves. Some men he hath richly adorn'd with Excellency, and elevated them with the sublimary glories of Honor, Nobility, and Greatness; and others again (in the same light they shine) hath he obscured with contraries of Meanness, Ignobi∣lity, and Indigency. Of the latter I shall onely say, that for them to Spurn at the more hono∣rable, because themselves are debased to an in∣feriority, is to kick dirt in the face of that infi∣nitely just and wise God of our Creation. The first being the intended concernment, I for∣bear any farther discourse of the latter. Nobility (saith Sir John Fern) is thus defi∣ned, Fern. Glo. Gen. p. 4. Vir Nobilis idem est, quod notus ac per om∣nium or a vulgatus; A Gentleman or Nobleman is he which is known, and through the Heroical vertues of his life talked of in every man's mouth. In short, amongst all men it is defined, A certain eminence of some above the rest. This is by the same Author distinguished into three Species, Nobility supernaturall, No∣bility naturall, and Nobility civill or politicall. Supernaturall, as in the heavenly Hierarchies, or sacred Principalities: And that there are or∣ders Seg. Hon. mil. & civ. l. 4. c. 5. and degrees amongst them, we must be∣lieve, or renounce our Christianity; but I leave the further discovery thereof (as too sublime) to more mature and deliberate contemplations. The second is Nobilitas physica, or naturall Nobility; consisting in the great variety of na∣turall creatures, obvious to our human senses.
As for example, Among the Planets, the Sun is the most noble; among the Elements, Fire; among the Plants, the Cedar; among Flowers, the Rose; of Metalls, Gold; of Jems, the Dia∣mond; of Fish, the Dolphin; of Birds, the Eagle; of Beasts, the Lion; and amongst Men, the King. The last is Nobility civill or politicall, which onely relates to Mankind; and though some have distinguished the generality of a Com∣mon-wealth into two divisions onely, the No∣ble and Ignoble, the Gentry and Commonal∣ty; yet either part are again subdivided, accor∣ding to the policy of civill Government, as well as the providence of divine Ordination. When first this distinction came amongst us, is by some thought uncertain; but for my part, not. For doubtlesse it hath been continued from the first encrease of Mankind in the world; for if there were Kings and Governors, certainly other distinctions, (vertue being still admired, and honored, and some signall put Bartol. de Dig. l. 12. upon it); and, Dignitas & Nobilitas idem sunt, dignity or preferment to power is that which makes a man noble. And that there were Kings long before the Floud, as Mr. Selden (that excellent Master of Antiquity) is of opinion, is evident by those words he inserts, which signifie, that Adam, after the propagation of Mankind, was esteem∣ed Seld. . of Hon. c.  p. 4. nor onely the Father, but Governor, in a kind of Royall or Monarchicall power, during his life; and Seth his son succeeded him in the like.
The Jews called such as were in the state of Nobiles among them, Ben Ish, or Filii viri, or Drus. ob∣servat. lib. 3. cap. 19. the sons of great men; And the sons of men of common rank, they tearmed, Sons of men, by filiihominis. And the Scripture in many places distin∣guishes men thus, as in that of the Psalm: as Psal. 49. 2. well the sons of great men, as of men of com∣mon rank, both rich and poor together. And this distinction of men hath descended to us with so much severity, that our Saviour himself gave example in his Practise and Rule, in the charge he left us for it, in these words, Speak not evill of Dignities, and many other the like. And the Civill Law hath formerly been so se∣vere in the preserving this distinction, that Gentle or Noble were prohibited the marrying. Fern. l. gen. p. 9. with the Ungentle or Ignoble; as the Ignoble were debarred from any honour or dignity, to hinder the evill of introducing mongrell and mechanick dispositions in the Common-wealth, and consequently such impostumated humors as is commonly the Off-spring thereof, even among the greatest Nobility. The Law commanded, that in case a Guardian, being a Person of honor, having the tuition of a Child under age, and should marry him to the daughter of an ignoble person, it was an injury done to the whole Family, & a penalty should be inflicted upon the Guardian; the reason, for though the Husband cannot be ennobled by the Wife, yet the Issue of that Male is debased and a Mongrel; and primogenitus est totius geniturae
quasi splendor & gloria; and the glory of children are their parents. Pro. 17. 6. Civill Nobility is an excellency of dignity, and fame, placed in any Nation, People, or Blood, through the virtues there shewed forth, to the profit of that Common-wealth, as Sir John Fern defines it. Fern p. 13 This he divides into three so ts: of N tions, Cities, and Families. These last are by the Greeks termed , in Latin Nobiles, Ingenui, and Generosi, in Fern. Sel∣den p. 856 French Nobles, in the Empire , a∣mong the Spaniards Hiidalgo, and Gentilhome, or Gentilhombre; and in the old Saxon, Ardel. Aristotle maketh four kinds of civill Nobi∣lity, Aristot. l. 4. de pol. viz. Divitiarum, Generis, Virtutis, & Disciplinae. Cicero attributes the Crovvn of Generosity to the virtuous, and therefore is understood to al∣low of no other Nobility; and Diogenes was so Fern. p. 14 cynicall, as to term nobleness of blood a vail of lewdness, a cloak of sloth, and a vizard of cowardice: And what would he have said had he liv'd in our age? But to lay by these and many other divisions, the Philosophy of latter times have refined Ci∣vill Nobility into a triple division. The first by Blood, the second by Merit, the third by Blood and Merit; which last, without doubt, must receive the estimation of the most Segar. l 4. p. 226. honorable. See Sir Johu Fern and Mr. Segar in his Honor Military and Civill. And also by place in the Common-wealth. And Bartholus,
In the Court: his words are, Omnes  Bart. l. 1. cap. de dig. 12. Principi , & ideo Nobiles; cùm  & nobilitas idem sunt. Nobility of Blood, saith Sir John Fern, is a Nobility drawn from the first House, and conti∣nued through the virtues of those succeeding; which the Laws and Customs of Nations have permitted the progeny and kindred to chal∣lenge as their Inheritance, though for no excel∣lency in themselves that enjoy it. And this is the Nobility which Boetius takes notice of, Seg. p.  when he saith, Nobilitas est quaedam laus pro∣veniens de  parentum. Now as Nobility by Blood and Merit is justly esteemed the most honorable, so certainly this the least; the glory they shine in, being but the reflection of their Ancestors, and not their own proper rayes. Neither are dignities and discents of blood Ibid. enough to ennoble us, for whatsoever is not within us cannot justly be called ours, but ra∣ther the graces and goods of fortune. Genus & proavos, & quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix  nostra vaco. And certainly the Honor atchieved by an Ancestor, livs in his Family as his, and to the memory of his vertues, and example of theirs; which ought doubly to oblige them to care, first, in keeping that tenderly, which their An∣cestors purchased so difficulty; and to shew themselves the true heirs of such noble spirits, in their due imitations of those renowned vertues.
Therefore it is but vain for a man to boast, that he can derive the foundation of his honor from the renowned catalogue of worthy An∣cestors, and himself degenerate from their heroicall virtues; for at the best they blaze but another's honor, and their own shame; and may quickly be answered as Hermodius was by Iphierates, (who upbraided him with the stain of so base a parent) My House taketh beginning in me, but thine taketh end in thy Fern p. 1. self. And our Nation hath produced too many that deserve the saying of Lycurgus, whose Soldiers bragged much of the Nobility of Her∣cules being derived to them; he told them, Hercules's nobility would avail them nothing, except they did those things whereby Hercules became Noble. The second is, Nobleness of proper Virtue, Noble by Merit. atchieved by Merit; which is certainly to be esteemed above the other: for a Country's safety dependeth upon , counsell, and courage of the virtuous; when the  boastings of an authentick Stock, where vertues fail, do add nothing to the relief of a Com∣mon-wealth in time of need. The Romans attired their Knights with a Ring for faithfulness, a Buckle for stedfastness, and a Bracelet for industry, as signes of vertue; not of sloth, the appropriated priviledge of succeeding Nobility. And in all Nobility, Author &  à quo primum  in signia profecta sunt,
& homo novus fuit: The first atchiever in any stock whatever, was a new man ennobled for some demerit; Sir John Fern. And all men will judge him that was the originall of a fa∣mily more honorable, than him that succeeded him two or three descents, not adding to that honour by any merit of his own. Now these two qualities meeting in one man, is it that maketh the perfect Gentleman; and such a man ought to be preferred before all Nobility mixt, Sir J. Fern. others in the receiving of Dignity, Office, or Rule, in the Common-wealth. Wherefore by the Laws of Arms antiently, these seven circumstances were regarded in the chioce of a Captain or Leader; his Age, his Virtues, his Faith or Allegiance, his Know∣ledge in Martiall Discipline, his Authority, his good Fortune; and lastly, his Blood and Gentry. And antiently none were admitted into the Inns of Court, but who were Gentlemen of Blood, be their Merits what ever; as the Foun∣dations of some of  do yet shew. Therefore it is the best Patrimony a Father can leave his Son, to bequeathe him the glory of his merits, with the state of Gentility; And the best honor the Son can do to the deceased Parent, is, to continue his name in that estate which his Ancestors left him, and by imitating the virtues that obtained it, to preserve it without a stain. Which consideration hath been the occasion to stir up many generous spirits to a noble con∣tention, and commendable emulation, to ex∣alt
the worthiness of their Familie's fame. What those virtues are that must thus enno∣ble men, Sir John  hath taken too much care, I think, in demonstrating; for whose sake I shall take as little: First, he tells you of all the Cardinall virtues, and then what they are; which I am so confident as to believe, every man understands, that knows any thing: But I shall take up this conclusion, as that from them, as a true Fountain, these Rivers must flow; for there is such a connexion and chain of affinity in these virtues, that none may be severed from the rest, and that man may be truly said to be virtuous; though, Like as the body is conserved by the nourishment of the four Elements or Complexions, so that the extinguishment of any one of them is destruction to the body; yet the constitution of that body is generally tearmed from the predominancy of some one of them that is most erninent in him: So, the vertues of a man may be esteemed from the paticular discovery of someone more eminent. But if we will make any difference in the me∣rits of Atchievment, it may be best done in short, by taking notice onely of Prudence and Fortitude, from whence that generall opinion of the world, that Merit was onely by the Pike or Pen, is derived. And though it has ever been a dispute, to which of these the precedency should be al∣lowed; yet, I think, a little reason will decide it, For though there hath been so much of Honor allowed in all Ages to Prudence, yet we ever
found the first succession of Honor was from the atchievments of Fortitude, as in the ex∣ample of the Roman Statues; and at this day the publick example of the Shield, whereon all, both Civill and Military, do illustrate their atchievments, which should be enough to end that controversie; though some have been very violent in a dispute to prefer the Doctor to be before the Knight. To obtain estate of Gentility by learning, and discovering the secrets of Heaven, is very ho∣norable certainly; but to atchieve it by service in his Soveraign's Wars, the defence of the Church, King, and Country, is of all most ex∣cellent and worthy. In which case, War is per∣mitted by the Law of God, taught us by the Law of Nature, and commanded by the Laws of all Nations. Sir William Segar, when he speaketh of the Segar l. 4 c. 15. Nobility allowed to Prudence, disposeth it in the second Place: And Sir John Fern, spea∣king of learning, gives it the same; onely of all under that genus, when the degree of the Do∣ctor of Divinity differenceth; he saith, It excel∣leth all other degrees in Learning in four re∣spects; first, the excellency of the subject it treateth of; secondly, for the dignity of the matter, treating of things beyond reason of Philosophy, or the reach of Human Wisdom: thirdly, the excellency of the end whereunto it is ordained: lastly, the worthinesse of the Au∣thor's authority, receiving it not from mortall men, as all other Sciences, but from the Spirit of God.
Now a man may be ennobled by Leters Pa∣tent Seld. Tit. of Hon. c. 8 p. 853. p. 832. from his Prince, though he have not the Superior Titles added; as by the example of Jo. de King ston, who was by Patent from K. Ri∣chard the second receiv'd into the state of a Gentleman, as you may see at large in Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor. As also in another example of Hen. 6.  Rot. Vasco. 24 Hen. 6. M. 7. N. 3. by the word Nobilitamus, creates Bernard An∣geuin, a Burdelois, a Gentleman: and a latter of K. James to a Hollander. Which examples makes him divide Honor into Nativa and Dativa. There were Codicilli  in the Em∣pire, by which men were entitled to the Ho∣nors of Nobles. And there have been Edicts made in France Sel. p. 870. for the like ennobling of Centry, the form whereof Mr. Selden's Book sets forth at large. There is a whole Title, De honorariis con∣dicilliis C. Theod. l. 6. . 21. l. 1. in Theodosius his Code, and some Laws concerning them, as antient as Constantine. There is another kind of Nobility, and that Sir J.  is called Nobilitas adoptiva, a Gentility arising from adoption; when a Gentleman of Blood, and Coat-armour, for some speciall affection (though neither allyed to his Blood, or a Gen∣tleman otherways) adopteth a stranger to be his son, and constituteth him to succeed, as well in his Estate of Gentry, as to his Name and Possessions. An example of the like, also of great Anti∣quity, Form. l. 3. p. 382. Edit. Rom. 1621. in Salustius Tiberius, à  his for∣mulari,
where the greatest part of a Gentle Family assembling, do by consent adopt a stranger that hath well deserved of them to be of their Family, as if he were descended of a Male from among them, creating him a Gen∣tleman, to be reputed De domo & agnatione ipsorum; and granted him also their Arms, and limited the whole honour to him, and the Heirs of his body. But this creation cannot make him a Gentle∣man by birth, as it is in Spain a proverb, The King cannot make an Hidal go: he may be No∣bilis, but not Generosus; which Mr. Selden de∣fines to be qui, bono genere ortus, non degene∣rat, which the Dutch have the word  for, which is well-born in English. But this word Generosus hath been in use a∣mongst Seld. Tit. of Hon. c.  f. 858. us but since the time of Hen. 8. since when it hath bin constantly used for a Gentle∣man of what sort soever, if he had no title a∣bove it: the word Gentleman being before ge∣nerally used in the like nature in Writs, Plead∣ings, and the like, though they were Latine. This word Gentleman, did first rise from the word Gens or Gentes, which the Christians in the Primitive times used for all such as were neither Jews nor Christians; which our English Translators turn Gentiles; as the French, Payens for Pagans; the Dutch, Heyden, or Heydenen, for Heathen. So afterward, the same word and Gentiles was used in the Empire, for all such as were not Cives Romani, or Provincials.
But it is more reasonably resolved, that the word Gentleman is derived from this origina∣tion. That the Northern Nations, framing their words out of Latin to make up their Provin∣cial or Roman Tongues, so esteemed the word Gentilis, by which they found themselves styled Seld. Tit. of Hon. pag. 862. pag. 864. in the Latine, that they now made it in those Tongues a distinction or note of Honor, for such of them as were of more eminent quality; ambitious, it seems, to be honored with that very name, with which the Romans had before in scorn expressed them. By which means Gentil-hommes became generally a word a∣mongst the Provincialls for Nobiles. So that from the word Gentil homme,  Ibid. p. 865. Gentilhombre, (which we received from the French, for till the Normans we had it not) we made out this word Gentleman, which was be∣fore called AEdel. This Nobilis or Gentleman (as before we find) is a generall denomination for all that come under the notions of Honor, (for indeed it is our vulgar genus, for those also that are di∣stinguished by higher Titles) but to those that are not more properly, the Species whereof I shall a little further look into. Of the Doctor of Divinity, I spake before; the next is the Doctor of Law, which hath also held a dispute of precedency with the Knight, but to lesse purpose than the other; the same reason that held in the major, must of necessity in the minor. Besides, admit the great benefit
and necessity of Laws in a Common-weal for the preserving of peace; yet we must acknow∣ledge, that the peace which produced those Laws was the effect of the Sword; and neither is Peace able to protect those Daws, nor those Laws Peace, without the assistance of Military Authority. And so necessary is the profession of Arms, Sir John , p. 37 that no Common-wealth, no City, no publick Society, can subsist without it. Aristotle, when he speaketh of the constitu∣tion of a well-govern'd City, in the first place calleth Soldiers the true Citizens; And at the same time faith, Ea Respublica tyrannidem , quae fortes & saptentes minimè honorat. Plato, in the institution of his Common∣wealth, appoints one sort of men (far more ex∣cellent then the rest) whose office should be the taking up of Arms for the defence of the other Citizens, to which he allowed many pri∣vileges; and that they should be more hono∣rable than any other state of people. Sir John Fern determines thus, In artibus militaribus, vel in actu indiffer enti, data paritate Militum Ibid. p. 36. & Doctorum, &c. semper praefertur  Miles Doctori, & sic de singulis, de gradu in gradum. And the same Author understands this rule to extend also to the Serjeant at Law, as to the Doctor at Law. Neither can I any way derogate in other re∣spects from the honor due to a Doctor at Law; for they are to be preferred in the second place
below a Knight, that is, next the Doctor of Di∣vinity, out of the respect due to the Law it self; And what respect hath always bin given to it, you may see by these of the Fathers, Quid enim Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 4 sunt regna, nisi latrocinia, remotâ  quae est legum effectus? And again, Justitia regentis est utilior,  Cypr. lib. de 12. Abu∣sionibus. fertilitas , solatium pauperum, haeredi∣tas filiorum, & sibimetipsi spes futurae beati∣tudinis. This Doctor, as well as the Doctor of Divinity, hath for his honor many Ceremonies and Tokens of Honor appropriated to his Creation or Commencement. As first, a Book, in token of his Learning. Sir John Fern. Secondly, a Habit, which is called Biretrum,  bis rectum. Thirdly, a Ring, to shew how he is espoused to Philosophy and Science. Fourthly, in token he is a Doctor he must sit in a Chair, which hath been thus described: It ought to be four-square; in the forepart should be painted a Young-man of great strength, noting labor and love, to work and to finish; on the hinder part two Virgins, called Care and Vigilancy; on the right side a Young-man well girded, car∣rying in his arms things of small value, to sig∣nifie the mean estate of wealth; and on the left, a man running away, to shew that the study of Science requires a volunary exile from all rela∣tions. The fifth Ensigne is a Girdle about his loyns, with these words, Take this Girdle, and gird thy loyns with a bond of Faith, so that thy body may be adorned with all vertues, that thou mayst seem before God and man perfect in thy degree.
Lastly, a Kiss, with these words, Take the Ibid. Kiss of Peace, in token thou shalt ever seek to preserve the bonds of Concord in thy Faculty. The next place amongst these honors is due to the Doctor of Physick, which being the very perfection of naturall Philosophy; and from the necessity of it in a Common-wealth, is al∣lowed the name of Liberall, and not Mecha∣nicall Science. To this Profession also is admitted the bear∣ing of Arms; but in that case the Herauld ought always to be carefull, to have regard in the designment to the . Which bearing of Arms is the  badge of all Honor, as in its due place shall be set forth. Neither are the rest of the Liberall Sciences debarred from the like priviledges, according to the excellency of the Professors. To which is adjoyned Poetry, which among Antients Poetrie. hath been honored with the style of Sacred; and Poets called Prophets by the title of Vates. St. Austine give them this character, Poetae Ibid. Theologi dicti fuerunt, cùm de diis immortali∣bus multa scriberent, quales Orpheus, Musae∣us, & Linus. How they have been honoured of Princes is evident in every Chronologie; amongst which, that of Alexander is most : With Homer will I sleep, with Honor will I wake; Homer is a fit companion for Alexander. The Ensigne usually given to a Poet Laureat is the Swan, signifying pureness of style, the Bird of
Venus, and consecrated to the Muses; and some∣times a Pegasus, as to Michael Drayton: See his tombe in Westminster. To this I must joyn, and indeed should give the precedency to that sister-Art of Painting, than Painting. which none hath received more honour in the World, though too Mechanically slighted a∣mongst us; which hath been the reason we have not arrived to that excellency that some other Kingdoms have done in it: For,  is the true spurre to perfection. This hath been for its sublimity reckoned with much honour among the liberall Sciences, by many Princes; nay, Pliny calls it plainly, a liberall art, whose reasons not his own onely, Vid. Paul Lomazzo p. 14. but modern times have approved: & much rea∣son there is to give it that honour, since its per∣formance is by the exact engagement of Geo∣metry, Arithmetick, Perspective, and indeed all points and species of natural Philosophy; besides the remembrance of the great estimation it was in amongst the Grecians, whose Kings (many of them) were proud in professing the Art. And then the law amongst the Romans, that no man should undertake it but such as were Gentlemen; because the brain of a clown must be too durty, and muddy to arrive at excellen∣cy in it. They were also to be of estate; that the labouring for a lively-hood, might not take them off from industrious study for perfection. Other examples, that Princes have given of their delight in it, is declared in the Ingenuity of Francis and Emanuel, Kings of France; and
many Germane Princes since. Under which genus I wish the Ingenuity of our Nations, like as others, would also comprize that species of Graving, an art too noble to be so much slighted as it is amongst ingenuous men. History also be∣ing History. esteemed a witnesse of time, a light of truth, a mistris of life, and a messenger of antiquity, deserves from its Country the gratefull return and reward of its merits. In generall; if any person be advanced by Sir John  Ferne. lawfull commission of his Prince to any office, dignity, or publique administration, be it either ecclesiasticall, military, or civill; so that the said Office comprehends in it, dignitatem, vel dignitatis titulum, he ought to be matriculated into the rank of Gentility. In the State Ecclesiasticall are, Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, and Bishops; all which by custom of the Realme, and Royall grants of  Princes, are invested Barons, and ad∣mitted to the high Court of Parliament: But more of that in its due place. Also are admitted to the state of Gentility, Vicars Generals, Guardians of Spiritualties; Deans of Cathedralls, Arch-Deacons (called  Episcopi,) Chancellours, Treasurers, and Chauntors in every Episcopall Sea, so Sir John Ferne; as also Doctors, Provosts, Deans, and Governours of all Collegiate Assemblies. In the Military or Marshall Government, the high Constable, Lievtenant-General, Marshall, Admiral, Major General, Quartermaster-Gene∣ral, Treasurer of the Army, Guardians of Fron∣tiers, Ibid.
the Master of the Horsemen, or grand Es∣squire, the Master of Artillery, the Colonel, Ser∣jeant-Major, Captain and Provost; and indeed all that receive Commission from their Prince. In the Civill or Politicall estate; the Chan∣cellour, President, Treasurer, Judges, Justices, Chief-officers of the Pallace-Royall, Secreta∣ries of State, Mayors, Provosts, and Baylifs of Incorporate Cities and Towns. And since from the seat of Royalty and Ma∣jesty, all honours do flow, it is no reason this Fountain should by any restriction be limited, neither is it; for as before in the discourse of Gentility, by Patent it is signified, so there is another sort of Gentility, made by the Prince, which as it is by Patent, ought to have taken place there; but being by purchase only, and not of merit, is esteemed of all the most inferior, and therefore to be set in the lowest degree. The King, saith Sir John Ferne, may also create a Gentleman, and give him Coat-Armour to Sir John Ferne. p. 61. bear, although he be unworthy of the same, but, saith he again, est haec quaedam fucata Nobilitas & non ver a nec essentialis, it is but a counterfeit Nobility, so that this Gentility brings the pur∣chaser little more then the shadow of Honour, to shroud him from the name of Plebeian, and these Gentlemen by the strictnesse of the Laws of Honour, are excluded from the priviledges Ibid. of Gentility. Then, saith Sir Wil. Segar, a simple subject be∣ing  a Gentleman, by the Prince's grant, and does not exercise the qualities beseeming
that dignity, ought to be deprived of his Title. This consideration made Sigismond the Em∣perour, answer one soliciting for such honour; I can, said he, make thee rich, or exempted with priviledges; But, without virtue or noble de∣sert, it lieth not in Caesar's power to make a Gentleman. And the retort of a Gentleman to a Knight, (which my self knew) was not amisse, being to the same purpose, who said, It was more honour to be a Gentleman and no Knight, then to be a Knight and no Centleman, the Knight being then a Knight meerly by purchase, without any desert at all in him: too many whereof are  in our Nation. Privileges due to Gentility. NOw since others, as Sir Jo. Fern, and Sir Wil. Segar, have been so punctuall in dis∣coursing the priviledges due to Gentility, I can∣not but touch upon it a little, before I passe to the next degree of Noblenesse, which is the Esquire. The priviledges, as they have laid them down, are these. 1. Pro honore sustinendo, if a Churl, alias Pe∣sant do detract from the Honour of a Gentle∣man, he hath a remedy in law, actione injuri∣arum; but if by one Gentleman to another, anciently, combate was allowed. 2. In crimes of equall constitution, a
shall be punished with more favour then a common person; provided the  be not Heresie, Treason, or excessive Contumacy. 3. The many observances and ceremonious respects, that a Gentleman is, and ought to be Honoured with by the ungentle. 4. In giving evidence, a Gentlemans atteste∣station Bart. in l. . is to precede a Clown's. 5. In election of Magistrates, and Officers by vote; the suffrage of a Gentleman shall take place of an ignoble person. 6. A Gentleman ought to be excused from base services, impositions, and duties, both reall and personall. 7. A Gentleman condemned to death, ought Ibid. li. de capitu. not to be hanged but beheaded, and his exami∣nation taken without torture. 8. To take down the Coat-Armor of any Gentleman, deface his monument, or offer vio∣lence to  Ensigne of the deceased Noble, is as to lay buffits on the face of him alive; and punishment is due accordingly. 9. The Clown may not challenge a Gentle∣man to Combat, quia conditione impares. Many others there are, but it would be too Ferne p. 86. . of  tedious to insert them, I referr the Reader to Sir John Ferne, his Glory of Generosity. For the protection and defence also of this civill dignity, they have discover'd three Lawes provided: the first, Jus Agnitionis, the right, or Lawes of Discent for the kindred of the Father's side: the second, Jus Stirpis; for the whole Family: the third, Jus Gentilitatis, a
Law for the descents in Noble Families. Which Tully esteemed the most excllent, of which Law a Gentleman of blood and Coat-Armor per∣fect possessing virtue was only priviledged. To the making of which Gentleman per∣fect, in his blood, was required, a lineall descent on the part of his Fathers side, from Atavus, Abavus, Proavus, Avus, and Pater; and as much on his Mothers line: then is he not only a Gentleman of blood perfect, but of ancestors too. The obscurity and neglect of which Laws hath introduced other sorts of Gentlemen a∣mongst us, which are men taking the style of Gentleman being neither of blood nor Coat-Armor; which style only serves to hurry them to an unruly pride, when indeed it is but rude and false Honour, and is by Sir John Ferne termed apocryphate, and debarred of all priviledges of Gentility. These Gentlemen, nomine, non re, he calls such of the Students of the Law, Grooms of the Soveraign Palace, sons of Churls made Priests or Cannons, &c. and such as have recei∣ved degrees in the Schools, or born office in the City; so that by that they are styled by the title of Master, yet have no right to Coat-Armor. As to the Student of the Law, Sir John Fern allowes him the best assurance of his Title of Gentleman, of all these irregular and untriall Gentlemen, (as he terms them;) for so much as in some Acts of Parliament he is named with the Title of Gentleman, yet he saith, that he is also debarred from all honor and privi∣ledge of the Law of Armes.
But those Students were antiently by cu∣stoms of the Inns of Court, (as I shewed be∣fore) to be weeded out of the Societies, if by chance any were crept in; and none to be admitted but Gentlemen of Coat-Armour; Vid. For∣tescue de laud. Ang. cap. 49. by which excellent Rule the younger sonns of Gentlemen would have the priviledges and be∣nefit of that study, to maintain and support them, as it is in the Empire of Russia, and ma∣ny other Nations; when as now every Clown, that can but pick up so much money at the plough tayle, as shall fit his son up for that stu∣dy, receives the benefit, and the Gentry of the Nation frustrated of that support; which cau∣ses so much decay amongst them, that younger sons of Gentlemen, (being thus destitute of imployment) are commonly the objects of much pity, either for the suffering, or doing much evill; and the Common-wealth in ge∣nerall, much prejudiced by the insultan∣cy of such mungrell spirits, in eminent prefer∣ments; which they too often come to, more by insinuated favour, than reall desert: And in∣deed not in that case only, but in Church pre∣ferments also; and by this means is it, that so much corruption and abuse is the daily leprosie both of the Civill and Ecclesiasticall State. The Romans were so carefull of the preser∣vation Sir John Feine, p. 95. of Honor, that they had a custom by which the children of noble Persons unprovi∣ded for should be maintained out of the com∣mon treasury: which custom, though all ages have most infinitely applauded, our Nation
hath so absolutely exploded, that the Gentry are in all cases hindred as much as may be of all preferments that should give it them, without burthen to the Common-wealth: But it is to be hoped, succeeding times will produce better manners. Of the Esquire. THe division of these Dignities of Honour, was antiently but into twelve parts; but the addition of Knight Baronet hath made them thirteen: The six first only Noble, as, the Gentleman, Esquire, Knight Bacheler, Knight Banneret, Knight Baronet, and Baron: The o∣ther seven Princely, and are allowed Crowns and Coronets; as the Viscount, Earl, Mar∣quesse, Duke, Prince, King, and Emperour. Sir John Ferne placeth the Viscount in the first di∣vision, but I think improperly, in regard of his Coronet. Of the lowest of these enough is said, the next is the Esquire, according to my intended method. The Esquire, or Escuyer, is called in Latine Armiger, but more antiently Scutiger, from the office of bearing a Shield as an attendant upon a Knight, and were (militaris ordinis) can∣didati in the field, because they served not as Knights Bachelers, nor Bachelers, which was M. Seld. Tit. of Ho. p. 555. then a distinction. The etymology of the word will something signifie as much, being from Scu∣tum
in Latin, and  in the Greek, which is a Shield, from the antient way of making it in leather. Armiger nuncupatus est qui Domini sui  bajulat, ipsisque  cingit, saith Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossarium, p. 50. Neither came this title in Cam. fol. 176. honorary amongst us till the reign of Richard the second: though the Title as to office was much antienter amongst us, yet the antientest mention of it is in lib. 4. p. 507. Order Vitalis, speaking of William Fitz-Osberne Earl of He∣reford, and Odo Earl of Kent in the time of the Conqueror. Nam Armigeros suos immodicas praedas, &c. facientes. Dr. Argentre, President of the Parliament of Ad . Brit. Art. 88. Rhemes, speaks thus of them: Esquires are, Qui scutums Ducibus aut Patronis praeferebant, po∣steriùs et Strateres, qui Dominos in equos tolleren, & equos regerent. Is qui primus inter coeteros gradus Nobilitatis. And Verstegen tells us, the Teutonick word was Scyld-knapae, which is a Verst. p. 322. Sir Tho. Smith de Rep. Aug. Shield-serviture; but some have since gotten another distinction for the title, which is, that they are Gentlemen, bearing Arms and Armo∣ries, in testimony of Nobility, or race from whence they are come. Sir Edward Cook p. 667.  in his Exposition upon the Statute of 1 Hen. 3. chap. 5. (of Additions) saith, that the word Esquire, Armiger, or Scu∣tiger, in legal understanding is derived ab armis quae clypeis gentilitiis honoris insignia gestant. In which sense, as a name of estate and degree it was used in divers Acts of Parliament before the making of that Statute, and after also.
But by this the Honour of the title is lost, and every Gentleman of Coat-Armor shall have as great a share in it as themselves; which in truth hath not been since the dividing the Gentility into these two divisions; when this title of Es∣quire was made a legall and appropriated ad∣dition. Of these, there are four sorts: By Creation, Sir John Ferne. p. 100. by Birth, by Dignity, and by Office. Esquires by Creation are sometimes made by Patent, as one Jo. de Kingston was by King Rich∣ard, as I mentioned before, being received into the state of a Gentleman, and made an Esquire, Camb. de Ordin. p. 117. & de reliquiis p. 23. Spel. Glos. p. 51. and sometimes by the giving of a collar of SS. by the King, as an ensigne of the title. Eúmve (saith Sir Henry Spelman) argentatis calcaribus donaverit. Which silver Spurs were given by the King, as the Gold was to the Knight, to dif∣ference the Honor; from whence they are cal∣led White-spurs. There is commonly given to him also an ad∣dition to his paternall Coat, or a new Coat, if he owned none before, which is due to the descen∣dents onely of his body, not related to any of his line besides; and the eldest son of that Segar p. 224. ibid. Coat-Armor is ever an Esquire. Esquires by birth, are the eldest sons of Knights, and their eldest sons successively. Sir John Ferne, and Sir Henry Spelman call all Esquires, that being the sons of Lords, are not allowed the title of Lords: but Sir Henry Spel∣man Spelm. p. 10. c. 2. ibid. again, Propriè natalitio jure Armigeri di∣cuntur, Equitum auratorum filii primogeniti; &
ex ipsis haeredes inperpetuum masculi. Those by Office, are such as bearing high Offices in the Commonwealth or Kings Palace, have not the augmentation of Knighthood or Lordship. Such are the Sergeants at Law, Segar. Ferne. Sheriffs, Escheators, the Sergeant of every Office in the Court. But these are only the pos∣sessors of that dignity; it dying with them: And not only so, but if he lose his Office, that is a Gentleman by Office; he lo seth his Genti∣lity also. And this ennobling by Office was also a∣mong the Saxons, and hath so continued among them, saith Mr. Lambert, If a Churle so thrived, that he had fully five Hides of Land of his own, a Church, and a Kitchen, a Bell-house, and a Gate, a Seat, a severall Office in the Kings Hall, then was he the Theynes right worthy. A∣mongst which sort of Esq those four of the Kings body are the principall, which (he saith) are to be esteemed above the elder sons of Knights. And indeed in all processions of State, Spel. p. 51. Segar. l. 4. p. 246. they go before the Master of the Jewell-house, all Judges or Sergeants at the Law.
Of Knighthood in generall, and of the Knight Bacheler. OF the distinctions by Knighthood there are many in other parts of the World; but in England only these, Knights Batchelers, Knights of the Bath, Knights Bannerets, and Knights Baronets, and Knights of the Garter. The word Knight, as Mr. Selden saith, com∣ing from the Saxon , which signified puer, or servus, as Dienaknecht is yet among the Dutch, for a man-servant. So Tenants by Knights service were called Milites, or Chiva∣lers, Seld. Tit. Ho. p. 769. Camb. Brit. p. 170. because their service was military. Knights (saith Mr. Cambden) who of our English Law∣yers are termed also in Latin Milites, and in all Nations almost besides, took their name of Horses. The Italians call them Cavalari, the French Chevaliers, the Germans Kutters, and our Britans in Wales, Margagh, all of Riding. Englishmen only term them Knights, by a word, that in old English-language, as also of the German, signifieth indifferently a Servitour, or Minister, and a lusty young man. Hereupon it cometh, that in the old written Gospels tran∣slated into the Saxon, we read, for Christs disci∣ples, Christs leorning knights. And elsewhere for Client or Vassal . And Bracton (our ancient civill Lawyer) maketh mention of Rad Cnyhts, that is Serving-men, who had their
Lands with this condition, that they should serve their Lords on Horseback, and so by cut∣ing off a piece of the name, (as our delight is to speak short) this name of Knight remained with us. But whence it came that our Country∣men should, in penning the Laws, and all Wri∣tings since the Norman Conquest's time, term those Knights in Latin Milites, that is, Soul∣diers, was transferred unto those that conver∣sing near about the Princes person bare any of the great Offices in the Prince's Court or Train. But with us, I conceive, those were first so called, who held any Lands or Inheritances in Fee, by this Tenure, To serve in the War, for those Lands were tearmed Knights Fees: and those that elsewhere they named Feuditary, that is, Tenants in Fee, were hete called Milites, that is, Knights; as for example, Milites Regis; Milites Archiepiscopi Cantuar. Milites Comi∣tis Rogerii; Comitis Hugonis, &c. for that they received those Lands or Mannors of them, with this condition, to serve them in the Wars, and to yield them fealty and homage; whereas others, who served for pay, were simply called Solidarii (from whence the word Soldier) and Servientes. This Title comming to be a reward or degree Segar. ch. 1 p. 51. of Honor, is thought to be in imitation of the Equestris Order in Rome, to which men were onely advanced for extraordinary virtue, and notable merit: who onely were admitted to beautifie the Caparizons of their Horses & their
Armor with Gold, from whence they were cal∣led Equites aurati. In which time, all sorts of men were distin∣guished in their degrees by some garb or habit; as some by their clothes, some by cutting their hair, &c. The Roman Knights also were allowed to wear a Chain of Gold, and therefore called Torquati, from Manlius Torquatus, who wore the first, obtained by him in a victory in France, which is by us yet imitated in the collar of S S. by which it is easily collected, that the true institution of it was a reward of Honor and Valour, not Sloath and Riches. And therefore all men thus ennobled, ought either to be deserving by action before, or by endea∣vour and good service after; and to be else esteemed unlawfull possessors of that Honor, at what rate soever purchased. The first account of Ceremonies (that we Will. of Malmsb. de gest. Reg. l. . c. 6. Seld. . of Hon. p. 773. p. 778; have) at the creating a Knight, is in the exam∣ple of King Alfred, Knighting his grandson Athelstan; and after the continuance of them (it seems) grew more precise and customary, by Feasts, giving of Robes, Arms, Spurs, and sometimes Horse and Arms; untill our later times produced the new, yet usuall Ceremony, of a stroak over the shoulder with a Sword, with these words, Sois Chivaler au nom de Dieu, by the King, or some by his Commission, though the Spur hath lately been observed also. Another manner of Creation there hath been also among the Saxons before the Conquest,
which was by sacred Ceremonies, shew'd by one Ibid. p. 779 Ingulphus, that lived in the time of the Con∣quest, by a solemn Confession, a Vigil in the Church, receiving of the Sacrament after an offering of the Sword on the Altar, and re∣demption of it; then the Bishop, Abbot, or Priest putting it on him, made him a Knight, with many prayers, called Benedictiones Ensis. To this Order or degree of Honor, an Infant may be admitted, though he be a Ward, and Bract.  36. Cook 5. Jacobi part. 6. then (till a late Act of Parliament ordained o∣therwise) his Wardship was free, both of per∣son and estate; but now their lands are not. And there were feudall Laws for, and at, the making the eldest son of a Lord a Knight, as there was also for the marrying of the eldest daughter, as in the Charter of King John, which was mony raised on the Tenant. But any man in the order of Priesthood is debarred the Honor of Knighthood of the Sword, Cùm eorum militia sit  mundum, carnem, & diabolum. So Sir John Fern. Though I find, that antiently they have been allowed it, but not without first laying aside their Spirituall Cures, and applying themselves to a Secular life. So Matthew Paris, Dei natalis Johannem de Gatesden Clericum, & multis dita∣tum , (sed omnibus ante expectatum resignatis, quia sic oportuit) Baltheo cinxit mili∣tari. And then the persons that gave this Honor were sometimes subjects (without any superior authority granted to them) as well as Sove∣raignes, though long since it hath been an ap∣propriated
priviledge of the Crown. Land∣frank Selden. p. 772. Archbishop of Canterbury made William the second a Knight in his Fathers life-time. But the name of Bacheler added to it seems not to Mat. Patis have been till the 33 of  the third. Sir John Fern also tells of Ensignes that an∣ciently were marks of Knighthood, as a Ring on the thumb, a Chain of Gold, and gilt Spurrs. All which tokens of his Honor he was as care∣fully to preserve, as a Captain his Banner, which (according to the rules of Arms then) if he once lost basely in the field, he was  of flying any more again, till he had regained the same or another from the Enemy. To which end it was carefully to be provided, Sir 10. Fern Glo. of Genere. that such men as were endowed with this Honor, should have these Accomplishments, He ought to be faithfull and religious, just in his engagements, valiant in his enterprises, obe∣dient to his Superiors, expert in Military affairs, watchfull and temperate, charitable to the poor, free from debauchery, not a boaster with his tongue, ready to help and defend La∣dies, especially Widows and Orphans: and he ought to be ever in a readinesse, with Horse and Arms, and to attend the command of his Soveraign in all Wars, both Civill and Forrain; the neglect where of is a crime as great, as to fight against him, and merits at the least a shamefull degrading And formerly when the King hath been to make a Knight, he sate glo∣riously in his State, arrayed in cloth of Gold of Cam. Brit. p. 74. the most precious and costly bodkin-work, and
crowned with his Crown of Gold: and to eve∣ry Knight he allowed or gave a hundred shil∣lings for his Harnessements, &c. And Knights in this manner dubbed made pag. 175. this esteem thereof, that in it consisted the guerdon of their Virtue and Valour, the praise of their House and Family, the memoriall of their Stock and Linage; and lastly, the glory of their Name. There are many priviledges belonging to that Dignity; and Mr. Selden speaks of a Law, that a man was to be punished with the losse of a hand, that should strike a Knight; yet he sayes, he remembers no example of the practise of it, which I think is the greater honor to the Dignity, as being a shame, that any such Law should be the guard of a man so honored with Arms, and appropriated to the Sword. Against a Knight in the War, runneth no pre∣scription. The Office of a Coroner in former times being honorable, none were capable of it but a Knight. By antient Custom, none were admitted to Vid. Stat. de An. 23. H. 6. c. 15. the House of Parliament, but who were Mili∣tes gladiis accincti. Many other priviledges there were appro∣priated to them, according to the rules of Ho∣nor, and custom of the Nation, as well as re∣quisites in them; which more at large may be understood in Sir Will. Segar's Honor Milita∣ry Seg. lib. 2. lin. 2. and Civill.
Where is to be found the severity in degra∣ding them. When if any Knight at any time had been corrupted with mony by his Prince's Enemy; or committed any other notable fact against Loyalty and Honor; he was apprehend∣ed, and caused to be armed from head to foot, and on a high Scaffold in the Church he was Vid. Mills fol. S . 4 Ed 4. 20 placed; and after the Priests had sung some fu∣nerall Psalm, as though he had been dead; first, they took off his Helmet, to shew his face, and so by degrees his whole Armor: and then the Heralds crying out, This is a disloyall Miscre∣ant; with many other ignoble Ceremonies, he was thrown down the Stage with a rope. This he mentions to have been about the time of King Arthur. We have many examples of lat∣ter times also of degrading Knights, for disho∣norably absenting from the service of the King, and other treasons; with which seising on all that he had (except one Horse; ne, qui digni∣tate factus est Eques, cogatur pedes incedere: for in all Countries, the Title is related to a Horse, from serving on Horseback;) and also by See Stow in Anal. p. 693. & 694. edit. vet. in 4. the cutting off their Spurrs from their heels, ta∣king away his Sword, reversing his Coat-Arms, and the like; as in the degrading of Sir Ralph Gray. See more at large Sir William Se∣gar, Mr. Selden, and Sir John Fern.
The Creation Robe of a Knight of ye Garter
IT is ever to be observed, that when the word Knight is found without any addition of distinction, it is meant by the Knight Bat∣cheler. Of the Order of the Bath, the first that are taken notice of is in , who gives an account of 46 made by Henry the Fourth: But Mr. Selden is of an opinion, they were long before. Mr. Upton (in a Manuscript which Mr. Bish (a Gentleman much deserving of Honor from our English Gentry) hath since very  il∣lustrated and published) takes notice of this Order in these words, Creantur  modis, &c. Creantur in alio modo Milites per Balneum, qui modus multùm observatur in Anglia, & in  Regnis. He lived in the time of Henry the sixth. The Honor is invested with a great deal of noble Ceremony, as is seen by the example of Henry the seventh, when he sent Writs to di∣vers Lords and Gentlemen, to come up to the making Henry his second son Knight of the Bath, Ad ordinem Militia  suscipi∣endum, Dor. Cl.  20 Hen 7. 20 Sep. juxta antiquam consuetudinem in cre∣atione usitatam. When one is to be made a Knight of the Bath, he comming up to the Court, is very
nobly received by the Officers and Nobles of the Court; where he hath two Esquires ap∣pointed to wait on him, who convey him to a Chamber, where is to be Musick before he commeth to the Tubbs; then they uncloath him, and put him naked into the Bath, where, if For K. of the Bath, see Far. f. 65. 5 Book. there be any other Knights of the Order in the Court, they come in their Order and sa∣lute him, and after discourse concerning the Order, they sprinkle some of the water on his shoulder, and so depart. Then the Esquires convey him to a bed, where he is dry∣ed, and then he putting on his clothes, they put over them a long gray coat like a Hermit's weed, with long sleeves, and a hood; then the Knights return to him again, and lead him to the Chappel, where he receives a cup of spiced Wine, and with that salutes the Knights, who after leave him there, onely with his Esquires and Priest, where he performs a Vigill till almost day, with Prayers and Offer∣ings. After this, and some repose in his Cham∣ber, the next morning, where are Robes pro∣vided for him; the Knights wait on him a∣gain, and do service to him in his making ready; one giving him his doublet, another his breeches, another combes his head, &c. Then with Musick he is brought to the Hall in the Court on Horsback, accompanied with those Knights and Esquires, where the Marshall meets him. Then the King comming to the Hall, commands a Lord to put on his right
Spur, and making a crosse upon his knee, rises up and kisses him, and so another the left. Then the King puts the Sword about him him∣self, and smiting him on the shoulder, says, Be a good Knight, and kisses him. Then with the Musick he is conducted again to the Chap∣pel, where he goes to the Altar, and performs some Ceremonies, maketh protestation for the performance of the Orders of Knighthood. Then the King's Cook comes to him with a knife in his hand, to demand his fee; and tells him, That if he do any thing against the Or∣ders of Chivalry, he will cut his  off from his heels. Then he is habited in a blew Gown with Maunches open, like a Priest, and so led again to the Hall. The particular manner is more at large set down by Sir William Segar, in his Honor Mi∣litary and Civill, and Cambden's Britannia. They are distinguished ordinarily by the wear∣ing of a red Ribbon cross the left shoulder, as Knights of the Garter by the blew. And have this priviledge above all Knights, their sons are free from Wardship: as in the example of the Heir of Sir Thomas Wise of Essex, which was a Cause in Chancery, and the Heir Victor.
Of Bannerets. THis was antiently an Order in France, and (excert that in England they are not cre∣ated by Parent, not the Title Hereditary,) the same: The creation is almost the same with theirs, by the solemn delivery of a Banner, Mr. Seld. fol. 790. charged with the Arms of him that is to be created, and cutting or tearing off the end of Camd. Brit. p. 171 a Pennon or Streamers, to make it square into the shape of a Banner, are called by some Equites vexillarii. Sir William Segar relates the Ceremony thus; He is led between two other Knights into the presence of the King or Generall, with his Pen∣non of Arms in his hand, and there the He∣ralds Seg. f. 69. declare his merit, for which he deserves to be made a Knight Banneret, and thenceforth to display a Banner in the field. Then the King, or Generall, causes the point of his Pen∣non to be rent off; and the new made Knight returns to his Tent, the Trumpets sounding be∣fore him. A Banneret thus made may bear his Banner display'd, if he be a Captain, and set his Arms thereon, as other Degrees above him. And although the Knight Baronet be an honor given by Patent, and made hereditary;
yet, by Decree of King fames it is established, Rot. pat. 10. Jacob par. 10. mem∣br. 8. that all such Bannerets, as shall be made by the Kings Majesty, his heirs and successors, un∣der their Standard, display'd in an Army Roy∣all in open War, the King personally pre∣sent; for the tearm of the lives of such Banne∣rets, shall for ever take place and precedency as well before all other Bannerets, as the younger sons of Viscounts, and Barons, as also before all Baronets; but not other∣wise. And this Order was of so great estimation, Seld. p.  that divers Knights Bachelers and Esquires served under them; which Title, it seems, in many antient Writs, hath been mis-writ Bar∣ronets, as in a Patent to Sir Ralph Fane, a Knight Banneret under Edward the sixt, he is called Barronettus for Bannerettus; which Title of Baronet was not amongst us till King James. Of Baronet. THe Title of Baronet was erected by King James, in the ninth year of his Reign: He made diverse on the 22 day of May, whose Patents were all of one form, without any difference at all; the  or Argument be∣ing for the propagating a Plantation in Ulster Pat. 9. Jac. part 48. in Ireland, to which the aid of these Knights
was ordained; the words run thus, , ex certa scientia & mero  nostris, Ordina∣vimus, ereximus, constituimus & creavimus quendam statum, gradum, dignitatem, nomen & titulum Baronetti (Anglice of a Baronet) in∣fra hoc Regnum nostrum Angliae perpetuis temporibus duraturum. Their aid was the main∣tenance of thirty Soldiers in that Province for three years. Their Titles were to descend to the heirs male of their body, and to take place before all Knights Bachelers, Knights of the Bath, and Knights Bannerets, (the other De∣gree before specified, being afterward made) and that the name of Baronet in all Writs, Commissions, and Style, should be added to his Surname; and that the addition of Sir should precede in all mentionings of his name (as the Title of Lady and Madam to the Wives of them) and their Successors; and that they should take place according to the priority of the date of their Patents inter se, and so to their suc∣cessors. In which Patents also, the King did engage for himself and successors, that there should be but two hundred of them made; and that there should be never any degree of Ho∣nor established, that should take place between the Baronet and Baron; and if for want of heirs male, the Title in any should fall, there should never be any created in their room, but that the Title should diminish, to the honour of them remaining, and be by that means reduced to a  number.
And afterward a Commission was ordained Sel. f. 827. under the great Seal, for filling up the num∣ber, who had instructions also enacted; a∣mong which, they that desired to be admitted into the dignity of Baronets, must maintain the number of thirty Foot-Soldiers in Ireland for three years, after the rate of eight-pence sterling a day; and a years pay to be paid in (at the passing of the Patent) to the Exche∣quer. And again, That they must be of good repu∣tation, and descended of a Grand-father, at least, by the father's side, that bare Arms; and have also a certain yearly revenue of one thou∣sand pounds de claro. They were to take bond also for the true payment of that maintenance, and to appoint one particular Treasurer for it, that it might not come into the King's Exchequer. After this, many being made, it was also or∣dained Pat. 10. Ja. par. 10. n. 18. by the King, That they and their de∣scendents, being of full age, should be Knight∣ed; and that they should in a Canton or In∣escutcheon, as they pleased, bear the Arms of Ulster, which is Argent, a sinister hand, and Gules. There are many other Orders of Knight∣hood, almost in every Nation; some appro∣priated to the Country, and some of more excellency, as is that of the Garter, where∣of in another place I shall speak with the rest; but these Titles have an estimated ho∣nor
due to them, greater or lesse, according to Segar. l. 2. c. 3. p. 53. the quality of the creator: for the Knight made by the King, shall be preferred before a Knight made by a Prince of meaner title. So all Emperors, Kings, and Princes, acknow∣ledging no lawfull Superior, may make Knights; as also some Common-wealths, as the State of Venice and Genoa: The Popes also sometimes do make Knights, calling them af∣ter their own names, as, Chevaleri de San Pe∣dro, San Paulo, , &c. And so much for Knights may serve in this place. Of Barons. THis word Baron is very variously inter∣preted, Albert. Ro∣su dicti. as first, that it comes from the word Baria in Greek, which signifies Autho∣ritas gravis. Bracton interprets it, Robur belli. Again, saith Sir Henry Spelman, the word Baro is the same in Latine with Vir, whose derivation is from Vi, Force; and from thence, Sunt & alii potentes sub rege qui dicuntur Barones, id Gloss. p. 79. Bract. lib. 1 cap. 8. est, robur belli. And taking of it in that sense we now un∣derstand it, Sir Henry Spelman calls him, Cli∣ens Gloss. p. 79. feodalis; and Vassallus capitalis. Hujusmodi sunt (saith he) qui Pagos, Urbes, Castra, vel ex∣imiam ruris portionem, cum jurisdictione acce∣perunt à Rege.
The Creation Robe of a Baron
This word is a generall notion in England to all Lords of the Great Council of Parlia∣ment, as it is in Naples and Lumbardy, where all those Lords that are called Titulati, are in generall styled Barons; thus dignitas Baronalis stat ut genus. This word was used by the Lamb. fol. 336. Danes in the stead of Thane, which was among the Saxons a Title of Honor, and being next the King, he was called the King's Thane. And in the Laws of William the first, in∣stead Seld. f. 87. of the Earl, King's Thane, and middle Thane, of the Saxons times; the title of Count or Earl, of Baron, and of Valvasor are used. By which we understand it to have been, though not in the same name, yet notion, a Feodall honor of great antiquity; Sir Henry Spelman says, they were such as had not onely Castles, Towns, or great parts of Countries in their jurisdiction, but they had their Valva∣sores, (Minores, I conceive; for there were then Valvasores, Majores, & Minores; Milites, & libere tenentes.) Which should signifie an honor of command in the Common-wealth. In France, Germany, and Italy, Baronem Spel. Gloss. fol. 79. vocant, qui merum mistumque Imperium ha∣bet in aliquo Castro, ex concessione . And it hath been a common opinion, that every Earldom in times past had under it ten Barons, and every Barony ten Knights Fees holden of him: But those Knights Fees, say other Authors, were uncertain for number. However, we find many Barons created in
the times after the comming in of the Normans that held both of Knights service, and of the Crown in chief; which were either Spiritual or Temporall; and it is certain, that all honorary Barons from the Conquest, till the latter time of King John, were onely Barons by tenure. These Spirituall Barons were distinguished from the Temporall Thane, in the time of the Saxons, by holding their lands free from all se∣cular service; excepting trinoda necessitas, (as it was called) which was, assistance in War, in building of Bridges, and Castles. Which con∣tinued till the fourth year of William the first, who then made the Bishopricks and Abbies, Mr. Seld. Title of Hon. ch. 5. f. 699, 704 subject to Knights service in chief, by crea∣tion of new tenures; and so first turned their possessions into Baronies, and thereby made them Barons of the Kingdom by tenure. That all Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and the like, that held in chief of the King, had their posses∣sions as Baronies, and were accordingly to do services, and to sit in judgment with the rest of the Barons in all cases, but cases of Blood, from which they are prohibited by the Canon-Law. This Honor of Baronady is of three kinds; Seg. lib. 4. fol. 223. by Tenure, by Creation, and by Writ. Barons by Tenure are the Barons Spirituall, as I said before, which are reputed Peers of the Realm, and were ever first in nomination, and take place on the Prince's right hand in Parlia∣ment, and have been capable of temporall
, and some of them are accounted Count Palatines in their Jurisdictions. And by tenure Temporall, which are such as hold their Honor, Castle, or Mannor, as the head of their Barony, per Baroniam, which is Grand Serjanty. By which tenure, they ought Coke par. 2. pag. 5. to be summoned to Parliament. See Bracton, lib. 5. fol. 351. & 357. But he is no Lord of the Parliament, untill he be called by Writ to the Parliament. These Barons by renure in the time of the Conqueror, and after, were very numerous; and  his time, as I conceive, distinguished into Majores & Minores, and summoned accor∣dingly to Parliament: the Majores by imme∣diate Writ from the King, the others by ge∣nerall Writ from the high Sheriff at the King's command. But these had also another distinction, which was; the first, were called onely Barons by te∣nure then, and the last Tenants in chief, which were after quite excluded the Parliament, as Mr. Cambden says, in the reign of Henry Camden. fol. 122. the third, by a Law made, that none of the Ba∣rons should assemble in Parliament, but such as were summoned by speciall Writ from the Sel. f. 712. King. And that King Edward the first summoned always those of antient Families, that were most wise; but omitted their sons after their death, if they were not answerable to their pa∣rents in understanding.
But Mr.  opinion is, that not long after the Grand Charter of King John, the Law for excluding all Tenants in chief was made. From whence came that other dignity of Ba∣rons by Writ, the King summoning whom he pleased, though he were but a private Gentle∣man or Knight, as many Seculars, Priors, Ab∣bots, and Deacons also; all which have been fince omitted, that held nothing of the King in chief, or Grand Tenure. This title of Baron by Writ is by some esteemed onely temporary, pro termino Parlia∣menti; but that cannot be, for the ceremony of his admittance signifies more than a titular or temporary Honor, which is this; He is first brought by the Garter-King at Arms in his Soveraign Coat, to the Lord Chancellor, be∣tween two of the youngest Barons, who bear the Robe of a Baron; there he shews his Pre∣script, which the Chancellor reads, then con∣gratulates him as a Baron, and invests him with those Robes, and sends him to take his place. Then the Writ is delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament, and he by the Garter shewed to the Barons, and placed in the House; and from thence is this title allowed him as here∣ditary. Since these two sorts of Barons in the time of Richard the second, hath another been esta∣blished, which is Barons by Patent, and indeed more usuall in our latter times than those by
Writ. He first created John de Beauchamp Steward of the houshold, Baron of Kidermin∣ster to him and his heirs males of his body. And this comming afterwards to be the onely See Mr. Sol. f. 748. way of creation, they had commonly creation∣mony granted them, as Sir Ralph Botiller, who had one hundred marks granted him annuity out of the County of Lincoln. Some of those Minores have yet remained to our memories, as the Barons of the Cinque Ports, Barons of the Exchequer, &c. and some others, which are called Barons, yet have not the honor; such are those that were created by Count Palatines, as the Baron of Kinderton, and some few others. As concerning the descent of this Honor, and the extension of it, it many times descends to heirs female, as when there is no speciall entail on the heirs male; yet then no husband of that heir female shall enjoy the style and honor in right of his wife, unlesse he have issue by her, as it was decreed by Henry the eighth, in the case of Mr. Wimbry, for the style of the Lord Talboyes. Neither shall any honor of Barony by Te∣nure be conveyed with the  of any place from whence the title is derived, without licence immediate from the King; but all such as shall without, is absolutely forfeited and stopt, and returns again into that great Fount ain Cook 2. part. 80. b. of Honor the Crown. Now though this dignity be not allowed
the Princely distinction of a Coronet, yet is he as a Lord of the Parliament reckoned among the Peers of the Realm, and priviledged a∣mongst them in all these things, as first, in all  pleas. del. Coron. lib. 3. ch. 1. trialls of criminall causes, he is not tried by a Jury, but a Bench of Peers. If for Treason he be indicted, and shall stand mute, he shall be convicted, but not prest; but if it be for Felony, his standing silent shall not  Dir 205. & 300 convict him. Upon any tryall of Peers, the Lords that are to give Verdict, are not, like a Jury, put upon their Oaths, but upon their Honor. A Peer of the Realm is not to be Empan∣nelled Fitz. nat. br. 165. in any Jury, but what concerns the King's Enquiry. Neither are they to be arrested by any War∣rant Lamb. Just. l. 2. c. 1. fol. 17 of Justice of Peace, either for the peace or good behaviour. Neither is he to be put upon his Oath, upon any appearance he shall make in Court; but his Honor to be esteemed as binding. And whereas all Burgesses of the Commons Dier. 315. House are sworn to Supremacy, the Barons of the Upper-House of Parliament are not; with 5 Eliz. c. 1 many other priviledges. But it is to be noted, that by these are onely meant, to Lords of the Parliament, not to the sons of Dukes, Marquesses, or Earls, during the life of their fathers. Nor to any Baron of another Kingdom in this, though under
the same allegiance, who are not triable out of their own Kingdome, unlesse they enjoy some honor in this. The form of creating a Baron is in this man∣ner. The King sitting in state in the Presence-Chamber; First, the Hetalds by two and two, and their Garter Principall King alone pro∣ceed, bearing in his hand the Patent of crea∣tion; next to him a Baron bearing the Robes; and then the Person to be created followeth betwixt two other Barons. Being entred the Chamber of Presence, they make their obey∣sance to the King three times. Garter then delivereth the Patent to the Lord Chamberlain of the houshold, and he to the King, and the King to one of his Principall Secretaries of State, who readeth it, and at the word Investi∣mus, the King putteth on him the Baron's robe; so soon as the Patent is read, it is to be delivered to the King, who gives it him that is created. Then he returning thanks for his great honor, withdraws in the same manner he came in, the Trumpers sounding, and so he goes to dinner. Where, after the second service is gone up, the Garter with the rest of the He∣ralds cometh neer the Table, where first pro∣nouncing Largesse, with a loud voyce he de∣clareth the King's style in Latin, French, and English; and then standing somewhat further off, pronounceth Largesse again, with the style of him that is newly created.
In which form was William Cecill created Mills de Nob. pol. vel liv p. 58. Lord Burghley, 15. of Febr. 13. Elizab. Of the Viscount. THis word in Latin is Vice-comes, which is interpreted from the office of the person who was one, cui Dominus (hoc est, Comes) com∣mittit vices suas, sive gubernationem castri, saith Sir John Ferne. The Title is derived from the same Order in France: which there were only first substitutes to Earls, till, getting themselves first in power, got also to have the title honorary and here∣ditary, between the Earl and Baron, it being the same word which signifieth our Sheriffe, and began not with us, till about the 18. year Pat. 18. H. 6. par. 2. m. 21. of Henry the sixth, who then created John Lord Beaumont Viscount Beaumont, by Letters pa∣tent. Though Sir John Fern tells us of it in the time of Henry the first, and King Stephen; and though the Elder sons of Dukes are styled Earls during their fathers life time, (so the Eldest sons of Marquesses are styled by their Fathers Vicounties and Baronies, and called Lords, and the younger sons saluted with Lord) yet it is by  only. To this degree, is allowed a Surcoat, Man∣tle, Rat. pet. 4.  par. 1. Hood, and a Circulet, without either flowers,
or points, as in the discourse of Armory shall Sir Wil. Se∣gar. f. 821. be seen, and is created with the same ceremo∣ny, those above him are. Of the Count or Earl. THe next precedency is an Earl, called in Latin, Comes: and thence is an English word Count, which word Comes we have from the example of the Romans; amongst whom Segar. fol. 220. they used it for the title of sundry offices. Coke defines them thus, Dicuntur Comites, Instit. par. 2. fol. 5. quia à Comitatu, five à societate nomen sumpse∣runt; qui etiam dici possunt Consules a Consu∣lendo, &c. But John of Salisbury, who writ in the time of Henry the second, says thus, Comites dici à  participatione. And the word Earl we had from the Saxons, from whence, till we borrowed the word Ho∣nor, we used the word Earl for gentle or noble, and Ethel, which was sometimes abridged to el, so that of Ear-ethel, it was Ear-el, and by abbre∣viation Earl, which the Dutch called Eorle.  fol. 315. Amongst the Germans, they have the word Grave for it, as Palsgrave, Landgrave, Rein∣grave, &c. from the word Gerefa, by abbre∣viation Gereve, and Grave, as also Reve, from whence our Shierreve, or Shirriffe, as some do Ib. f 325. abbreviate it. Which word in the Teutonick, signifies a Disposer or Director. Others have, That the word with the Sax∣ons, was Erlig, and Ethling, and used for the
same office of Ealderman was before; and the Cam. rem. 6. 15. word Ealderman, which now is writ Alder∣man, was transferred to a lower degree; who used the word also Thegon or Thaine for Baron, as I said before. But the word Ealderman, and Ethling, it seems, did only signifie them ac∣cording to Civill power, and the word Here∣toga, from whence Hertshog, for their Military power; the former word being no more then Seld. fol. 605. Senior, or Senator. This title of Ealdermen continued, for Duces, Principes, & Comites, untill Canutus reign, when Ibid fol. 609. the word Earl was brought in, and the other lost, as to that Honor. What the Jurisdiction of the Ealderman in those times was, and how absolute, or large, is to me yet uncertain: though large it was, doubtlesse, because of the severall Offices that were under them; but as it hath remained since the Conquest, we find more reasonable satisfa∣ction. Their possessions were sometimes the whole Territories they derived their Title from, and sometimes not; but some particu∣lar , or place in it. We find also, that both it, and Thane were honorary, and feudall Titles. Upon the coming in of the Normans, this word was turned into Comes, or Count, since when it hath remained. And this word in the Empire, was given to Quotquot è Comitatu Prin∣cipis Spelman,  fol. . erant, to all that were admitted to society of the Prince. So the  styled them
in Warre, Commilitones, in the Court Comites. The dignity is of divers kinds, for an Earl Ib. f. 109. acknowledging no Superior, is equall to a Prince. This Title, as it continues since the Conquest, is either locall, or personall. Locall, as from the denomination of some County, or other Territory; and Personall, that hath its being in some great Office, as Earl-Marshal, and the like. Those locall are also simplices, and Palatine: Selden. fol. 639. which last retain the same constitution, the Saxons time allowed them; which is Juraere∣galia, or merum, & mixtum Imperium, and could make Barons under them, as those of Chester, Lancaster, the Bishopricks of Durham and Ely. Hugh Lupus, had the County Palatine of See Sir Jo. . Chester, given him by the Conquerour, Ita libe∣rè ad Gladium,  ipse Rex tenebat Angliam ad Coronam. Who governed the County forty years, he created eight Barons, and built the Abbey of Chester. Lancaster was made a Palatinate, by Edward the third, as says Sir William Segar, and had Hon. Mil. & liv. fol. 641. Barons, Chancery, and Seal; and so had the Bishopricks of Durham and Ely. The office of those Barons, being to sit in Councell, and Judgment, with the Earl. To the County Palatine of Chester,  been Chamberlains, who supplied the place of Chancellor, Justices, before whom the
causes that should else belong to the King's Bench, and Common Pleas, are triable; a Baron Seld. title of Honor, ch. 5. f. 641. of the Exchequer, a Sheriffe, and other offices proportionably to those of the Crown at Westminster, which being since reserved in the Crown, is given to the Prince of Wales, when he is created. This County had this honor, I conceive, out of regard to the great trust, was reposed in the first Earl, which was to sub∣due, and keep in order the British, or Welch af∣ter the Conquest. Of those that are not Palatine, we find their Creation also as ancient as the Conquest, Willi∣am theConqueror, made Alan Fergent thenDuke Ib. fol. 646 & Camd. Brit f. 591. of Brittaign, Earl of Richmond, by a Patent. Queen Maud, created Geoffry of Mandevile, Earl of Essex; Aubrey de Vere (Earl of Oxford) she made Earl of Cambridge, on condition, that if he could not enjoy it, to chuse Oxford, Bark∣shire, Wiltshire, or Dorsetshire; and others of King Stephen, who is said to have wasted the Crown, by the many of them that he created. The manner of their ancient Patents, may be seen in Mr. Selden at large in his Titles of ho∣nor: the Modern Patents may be also seen there, and in Sir William Segar's Honors Mili∣tary and Civill. Where we find, that many times in their Patents, they had Rents annuall granted them, and sometimes lands for the supportation of the Title. To this Degree, be∣longeth a Surcoat, Mantle, Hood, and Coro∣net of gold with points, not flowers, (called
The Creation Robe of a Marquesse
circulus aureus) a Sword and Cap of Honor. Which hath continued ever since Edward the sixt, being only before but per cincturam gladii. Which law was first also used by King John, to William de Ferrers Earl of Derby. That per∣sonall, in England, is only Earl-Marshall of England. The first of these, that we find is Thomas of Mowbray, Earl of Notingham, made Earl Marshall, or Marescallus Angliae for life, and after to him and his Heirs Males of his body, by Richard the second. But since the 14. of Q. Elizabeth, the office hath been only for life again, to whom belongs as an Ensign of his authority, a Rod, or Staffe of Gold, ena∣melled at each end with black. Of the Marquesse. THis word Marquesse at the first was used to all Earls and Barons, that were Lords Marchers, or Lords of Frontires; and came afterward into a Title of speciall dignity, be∣tween that of Duke and Earl: beginning in the time of Richard the second, who created Robert de Vere (Earl of Oxford) Marquesse of Dublin, Per gladii cincturam, & circuli aurei suo capiti positionem; The form of the Patent was then, and many ages since very various, but it is now regulated to one method; which is the same in a manner with that of Earl,
only the word Marchio is put in the place of Comes: the ceremony of Creation much at one, and the title hereditary; the annuity Seldens ti∣tle of Ho∣nor, pag. 761. money in their Patent is forty marks. And here, by the way, I cannot but observe one note of Mr. Seldens; that John Beaufort Earl of Somerset, modestly refused to be made Marquesse of Dorset, by Henry the fourth, be∣cause the title was then so strange, and new in the Kingdome. The Marquesse is honored with a Coronet of gold flurred, the points and flowers of e∣quall height; whereas of the Earls, the pearled points are much longer then the flowers. His Mantle also doubled Ermine, as is the Earls also; but the Earls is but of four, and the Mar∣quesses is of five: the doubling of the Vis∣count, is to be understood, to be but of Mini∣ver, or plain white Fur, so is the Barons; the Barons of two, the Vice-counts of three doub∣lings. Segar. fol. title of Honor, pars Lati∣na. Of the Duke. THis word, says Sir Henry Spelman, was no∣men officiale, a title of office, afterwards Honorary, and since feudall and Hereditary. He is said to be called Duke, à ducendo, from Segar. fol. 218. his leading an Army Imperiall; whom the Saxons called Hertshog; but they are since on∣ly Dignities, given by Kings and Princes to
The Creation Robe of a Duke
men of great blood, or excellent merit: This title hath been of ancienter standing in the Em∣pire, and other Countries: but the first, that we find in England, is of the black Prince, created Duke of Cornwal, by Edward the third, Sir Henry Spel. . . 237. his father. By which creation, according to the Tenure of his Patent, the first-born sons of the Kings of England, are Dukes of Cornwall; neither is there any creation required for this honor, though there is for Prince of . Where, by the way, one note is proper to be understood, that as he was here created with∣out any Ceremony, except the girding with a Sword, so in all other degrees of honor, where a lesser degree is conferred on a person of a greater, there needs nothing but meer Patent, without any ceremony of creation. But John, son to Edward the third, being created Duke of Lancaster, had a Cap of furre added to the ceremony, and succeeding times have had the Sword, Crownet, and Verge of Gold, a Surcoat, Mantle and Hood, and a Ducal cap doubled Ermin, but not indented, and is honored with the style of, Gratious and Excellent. These if they be of Royall line, are reputed . fol. 219. as Arch-dukes. It is also allowed, that a Duke tantum, shall take place before any Lord, that is both Marquesse and Earl; but a Duke, that is Marquesse, or Earl besides, shall precede him. The Duke, Marquesse, and Earl at their
creation have a sword put over their shoulders, which the Vice-count and Baron have not. Of the Arch-Duke. THis title is of neer relation to the other, Segar. fol. 214. but not found in any place, save in the house of Austria, the addition of which word Arch, is from the Greek word Archos, which is as much as Princeps in Latin. So he taketh place of all other Dukes; and he is allowed a Surcoat, a Mantle, and a Hood of Crimson Velvet, at his Creation: He hath also a Cha∣peau, or Ducal Cap doubled Ermin indented; with a Coronet about the same, and an arch of Gold, with an Orbe, and Verge of Gold. Of these titles, the Duke, Marquesse, and Sir John Fern. fol. 138. Earl are esteemed Princely; especially the two last: These also are allowed to bear their Crests with Helmets, the Beaver directly forward, whereas a Gentleman, Knight, and Baron, bare them with half the Beaver seen.
The Creation Robe of the Prince of Wales
The Prince. THe next, and first, immediately subordi∣nate to the Crown, amongst these radi∣ant Stars is, The Prince, who in England one∣ly is the Prince of Wales, the first-born of the King. These in the Saxons time were called Cli∣tons, and clitunculi, from , that is, Illu∣strious. But, since it hath been a title of creation for honor to the rising sun, there were none crea∣ted in the Nation, but the King's eldest son; who are in all Nations honored above all other subjects, and amongst some, as in Spain, have been called King's during the life of their Fa∣thers, Ludovic. de Molina de Hisp. pri∣mogen. lib. 3. c. 6. because of his so neer a relation to the Crown, that if the Father dye, he is ipso  Rex, there being no interregnum, though he be not crowned. In a Statute of the second, of Henry the fourth, it is provided, that the Prince may give his honorable Liveries of signes, to the Lords, or to his meniall Gentry; and that the said Lords, may wear the same, as they wear the Kings Livery; and that the Menials of the Prince, may wear the same as the King's meni∣als; but this hath been since abridged. So likewise by a Statute of the 25. of Ed∣ward
the third, chap. 2. it is declared, that to compasse, or imagine the death of the Kings eldest son, and heir, is, Crimen laesae Majestatis, high Treason, as also to violate the wife of the King's eldest son. And again, see Coke, 8. part. 28. The Prince shineth with the beams of his Father, and is holden to be one person with him. Yet doth he acknowledge a reverence, not only as to a Father, but Soveraign, and to that Lamb. per. Kent, fol. 364. purpose continues that Motto, which the Black Prince took up, (Ick dien) I serve. He is called Princeps, quia principalis in stre∣nuitate post regem, saith Sir William Segar. The first, that we read of in England, was Edward, eldest son of Henry the third, and af∣ter him, the eldest son of the King hath been ever by Patent, and Ceremonies of Instalment, created Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester, and Flint, being born Duke of Cornwall. The Prince, or first born of the King in France, is called the Dauphin; in Spain, l' In∣fanta. There are, in other Countries, Princes by Creation, as the Prince of Piemont, the Prince of Orange, and many others, but these are also now become hereditary, and in some Countries, all the Royall line are styled Princes. When he is created, he is presented before the King in Princely Robes, who putteth a∣bout his neck a Sword bend-wise, a Cap and Coronet over his head, a Ring on his
middle finger, a Verge of gold in his hand, and his Letters Patents after they are read. His Mantle is once more doubled then the Dukes, and his Coronet of Crosses, and Flow∣ers de Luce, and his Cap of State doubled in∣dented. The King. THe King is the next, and in our Nati∣ons the highest, being subordinate to no sublunary power, as those of Spain, Portugall,  . 97. and other Kingdoms of Europe, and other parts of the world, are. He is the true Fountain from whence all these Rivulets and swelling Streams of Honor spring. He is called Rex, (from whence the word Rego came) and King amongst us, from the Saxon word Koning, and Kuning. To say any thing of the Originall of the Government here, were in vain, for it is unknown; onely I may say, that none can produce any thing to assure any Government before it; and what I spake in the beginning concerning the first Fetn Glo∣ry of Ge∣nerosity. institution of it universally, is sufficient: Besides, these times have said enough to that purpose. He hath ever bin of great reverence amongst Segar. . Mil. & Civil. these Kingdoms of Europe, the very Title car∣rying Divinity in it, being of Heavenly in∣stitution,
ordained by God himself; the Bond of Peace, and the Sword of Justice. He is God's Vicegerent, and to be obeyed accordingly, both in Church and State: If good, he is a blessing; if bad, a judgment. He is styled Pater Patriae, & Caput Reipub: and for that the protection of his Subjects lies in his breast, the Militia is annexed to his Crown, and the Sword as well as Scepter put into his hand. He hath power of pardoning where the Law Coke 3. fol. 238. condemns, even Parliament-Attainder. The things that belongs to Justice and Peace are annexed to the Crown, nor can they be se∣parated. The Parliament, in the behalf of Henry the Bracton: de acqui. rerum. Dom. l. 24. in 1. 7. 11. eighth, writ thus to the Pope: His Royall Ma∣jesty is the Head, and the very Soul of us all; his Royall Majestie's cause is the cause of us all, derived from the Head upon the Members; his griefs and injuries are ours, we all suffer equally with him. Mr. Camden speaks thus of him, The King Camd. Brit f. 105 is the most excellent part of the Common∣wealth; next unto God, he is under no vassal∣lage; See Bract. also, lib. 1. chap. 8. he takes his investiture from no man, he acknowledges no Superior but God. In England, France, Spain, Denmark, and Seld fol. 123. other Kingdoms, they are styled Kings, Dei gratia, by the grace of God. Which hath been an antient custom in these Nations, in the same or the like words, as in
the style of King Ethelbald: Ethelbaldus divi∣na Ingul. hist fol. 484. ib. dispensatione Rex Merciorum (An. 716.) Kenulphus, Dei misericordia, Rex Mercio∣rum. Beoredus, largiente Dei gratia, Rex Mercio∣rum. Ego Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum. Ib. f. 510. Ego Wilielmus Dei beneficio Rex Anglorum. And the Kings of England since, by a Bull 26 Hen.  chap. 1. from Rome, in the time of our obedience to the Pope, have been styled, Defenders of the Faith; and by Act of Parliament, of Henry the eighth, (to whom that Bull was sent) had the title of Supream Head of the Church of England annexed. As the King of France is styled, Rex Fran∣corum Christianissimus; the King of Spain, Rex Catholicus, or Catholica Majestad, Catholick Majesty; and the Emperor, Defender of the Church. It is the manner of Kings also to write in Sold. Title of Honor. chap. 7. the plurall number, which is God's own style, as Mandamus, Volumus, Facimus, &c. And in∣deed, in the Scripture we often find them called gods, and in that sense may be styled Divi, or Dii, quia Dei vicarii, & Dei voce judicant. Ibid. f. 44. Mr. Selden speaks thus upon this subject: Man, as a civill creature, was directed to this form of subjection; As if the sole observation of Ibid. fol. 4. Nature had necessarily led the affections of men to this kinde of state. Whence it is al∣so, that while others of the most curious
in Philosophy tells us of Angells, and the Su∣pream Her. Tris∣megist. Heavens being immediately Governed by the Maker of all things; of the Planets and other Stars being ruled by the Sun; and the separated Souls, and the Aire, being sub∣ject to the Moon; they add together, that upon Earth, Kings are in like sort of Govern∣ment; as if naturall reason had first ordained them on earth, by an unavoidable imitation of the Creator's providence, used in that in∣stitution of Government in the Ayr, Starrs, and Heaven. Neither do the antientest Gen∣tiles speak of those elder times, than with clear supposition of Monarchy, even in the Infancy of the world. And though divers of the chiefest States of the old Grecians were in their most flourishing times Democracies, or Opti∣macies; yet the more antient States there, were in every place Monarchies, as is expresly no∣ted Paus. in Boeoticis. Seld. f. 11. by Pausanias. They are honored in all salu∣tations, not onely with kissing the hand, but bowing the knee also, in acknowledgment of their superiority to all. Some are of opinion, that this kind of Salu∣tation came first to Rome, from the old cu∣stomes of the Asiatick Kingdoms. For when the Persians meet, you may know whether they be equall or not, for in salutation they kisse each other; but if one be somewhat inferior, they kisse onely the cheek; but if one be more ignoble, he falls down adoring the other, and passing by one another he turns his back, as
unworthy to look him in the face, that is so much above him in honor. The Ceremonies at his Coronation are ma∣ny, and in England more than any other Countries, As the annoynting with Oyl, the sacred Consecration (which is to no other Kings but France, Sicily, and Jerusalem); and his Crown fell on his head with many Religi∣ous Ceremonies, which Spain, Portugall, Ara∣gon, and Navar, &c. have not; besides the En∣signes of Regality, which are, a Ring to sig∣nifie his faithfulnesse, a Bracelet for good works, a Scepter for Justice, a Sword for ven∣geance, Purple  to attract reverence, and a Diadem triumphant to blazon his glory. The Ceremony of Anointing, every one al∣most understands to have been an. Institution as old as the Law of God almost; for though we find no speciall command in the Law de∣livered for it, yet we find examples of it in a continued succession from God's own people, and that with the holy Oyl, with which none, by the command in the Law, were to be a∣noynted, but the Priest; which Oyl never wa∣sted. And that this hath been no Innovation Seld. c. 8. fol. 149. among us, is proved by Mr. Selden, who makes it appear to be of above a thousand years stand∣ing, before it was either in the Empire or France. Though they have had it in France a long
time, and they say by divine Institution.  upon us for their authority, the Mi∣racle of a Dove, that brought a Vial of holy Oyl from Heaven, to anoynt King Clovis the Chopni de Dominio. lib 3. tit. 8. first, about five hundred years since Christ; which Oyle, they say, hath never wasted. It was the saying of Thomas Becket, Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, Inunguntur Reges in Ca∣pite, etiam Pectore, & Brachiis; quod  ficat gloriam, sanctitatem, & fortitudinem. Kings are annointed on the Head, to signifie their glory; on the Breast, to  their sanctity; on their Arms, to  their power. He is Crowned with an Imperiall Crown, the Crown set on his head by the Archbishop of Canterbury, a Prerogative to that See, as it is in Spain to Toledo, in France to Rheims, and in Swethen to Upsalia. But this Imperiall Crown hath not been long in use among us, though our Kings have have had Imperiall Commands, as over Scot∣land, Ireland, Man, and other : yet of Ireland they were but Lords, untill the 33 year of Henry the eighth, he being notwithstanding as absolute a Monarch over it when he was but Coke 7. par. Seld. fol. par. 1. c. 8. Lord of Ireland, as when he was styled King. The Crowns formerly were but the same in a manner with that of an Earl now. Neither is it to be found, that any such thing as a Diadem was in use at all, till the time of Constantine  Great, the distinction before being some kind of Chaplet, or, which
is most certain, a white silk Fillet about the brows, which was an ordinary way to distin∣guish them, as I have my self seen Statues of the Emperor, with such a kind of Fillet about the head. From whence is that which we read, that Alexander the Great took off his white Dia∣dem, to cure the madness of Seleucus. The first that was Crowned with this kind of Imperiall Crown, floryed and arched, was Henry the third, say some; but others, Henry the first: and indeed it is left disputable to me, so by me to others. However, it is very probable and plain, that the antientest Ensign of Regall Authority was the Scepter; which is every where spoken of, both in the Scriptures and profane Sto∣ries. There is another Ensign of their Authority, which is a Globe with a Cross, in use amongst us ever since Edward the Confessor, which is placed in the left hand, as is seen in most of their Coyns; the Cross denoting his Faith, and the Globe his Empire both by Sea and Ibid. cap 8. Land, as it is said of Justinian, who was the first Emperor that ever had it. At the Coronation of the Emperor, it is car∣ried by the Count Palatine of the Rhine, where they call it Pomum Imperiale. This power, dignity, and state, hath been enjoyed by the Female sex, as heirs descending by the common right of Inheritance, and not
onely in our parts, but many others, as at this day in Swethen, when there is not the least punctilio of a diminution in respect of the Sex. Besides, for an addition to the honor of a King, there is the same state allowed to a Queen, during the life of her husband, as to a Queen absolute almost, and is allowed a Crown. She is called Queen from the Saxon word Cuningine, as King from Cuning, onely by variation of the gender, as it was their man∣ner in such cases. She is permitted to sit in State at the King's Seg. Hon. Mil. & Civ. lib. 4. cap. 6. right hand, and to keep a Court distinct from the King, although she be but the daughter of an Earl. But this was in the time of King Edgbert prohibited, and so for a long time continued, by reason of Eadburgh, who poy∣soned her husband King Brithick of the West-Saxons. And if she be the daughter of a King Superior to her husband, she may retain the Jac. Rebust. de dig. lib. 12. dignity of her father's daughter, and in this case the daughter hath preceded the mo∣ther. And although in these latter times, our Mo∣narchy hath been reduced under the circumfe∣rence of one Crown Imperiall, no others ha∣ving any other substitute Governors crowned: Yet formerly, both Scotland and Ireland had King's distinct, whilst they acknowledged ho∣mage to the Crown of England; as also the isles of Man and Wight. The Kings of Man were first subject to the
Kings of Norway, then to the Crown of Eng∣land, and after to the Kings of Scotland, and since again to the Kings of England. Dominus Th. Wal∣singham 17 Rich. 2 hujus Insulae Rex vocatur, cui fas est Corona aurea coronari. The Lord of the Isle is called King, and it is lawfull for him to be crowned with a Crown of gold. Henry the second allowed with the same ho∣nor Seld. c. 3. par. 1. Roderig of Conaght to be King, paying a homagery Tribute. The Lord Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, un∣der Henry the sixth, was in the like manner crowned King of the Isle of Wight. Which is enough in this place as to the Dig∣nity of a King. Of the Emperor. THe originall of this Title, as it was long amongst the Romans, denoted onely a Ge∣nerall of an Army; and not till the time of Julius Caesar translated to an honorary Title, who being made perpetuall Dictator, took also that of Imperator into his Title; which hath continued in his Successors untill this day, and became Superior to the Title of King, that before was but substitute under it; (be∣ing Seg. fol. 214. yearly created in January, and ended in September.) Which great change hapned upon the Victory of Caesar against Pompey, at the Battle of Pharsalia.
This Title was onely taken up to supply that of King, which had not long before been See . de divin. lib. 2. thrown out by Brutus, and was supposed by the Usurper to be yet fresh in their memories, and odious amongst them; and it was long after, before they used the Title of King, though their power were as much, and the Ceremonies and Ensignes of Regality the same; and the Emperor's Throne at Rome was . ad Spartian. called Sedile regni. But at last it grew to be as one, and then the Emperor of Rome ha∣ving subjected under his Jurisdiction many Kingdoms, thought it however a title of more eminence, and so retained it. And though the title has not been so generally appropri∣ated Stat. Hyb. 24 H. 8. cap. 12. & 25. to our Crown, yet our Kings have been styled Emperors, and this Realm of England called an Empire. So have the Kings of Spain and France. But it is more peculiarly allowed or assumed by the Emperors of Germany, who suppose, that they have a right to the government of the whole world. This Empire, after it was divided to Constan∣tinople and Rome; and then again, that Constan∣tinople had lost it to the Turks; it was removed to Germany, and in the reign of Otho the third, the Election granted to seven Princes of Germa∣ny, the Archbishops of Mentz, Trevers, & Cul∣len; the Count Palatine of Rhine, the Duke of Segar l. 4. cap. 4. Saxony, the Marquesse Brandenburgh, and the King of Bohemia, then called Duke of Bohemia.
He hath had also the Superiority allowed him by all Secular Princes; and whereas other Princes of Regall Authority are crowned with but one Crown, he is with three; the first of Iron, which he receives of the Bishop of Cullen at Aquisgrane; the second of Silver, which he receives at Modena from the Bishop of Mil∣lan; the third is of Gold, wherewith he is crowned at Rome by the Pope. And in latter Ages, the title of King of the Romans is given to the Heir, or him that is made, or chosen Heir of the Empire; and he is crowned, and Jura Regalia given him, though not so absolute, as not to have a depen∣dence on the Empire. See Mr. Selden, part 2. chap, 1. The Ensignes of his Imperiall Dignity are a Crosse, a Launce, and a Sword; a Scepter, a Mond, and a Crown; and he is styled . The Emperor of Russia is not Crowned, but is adorned with a rich Cap of Purple; nei∣ther is the Greek Sultan, but vested with a mighty rich Tulipant. But there, though Leuncla∣vius sup∣plement, annal. Turc. Ann. Chr. 1566. the Emperor have no Diadem, yet the Sul∣tanesse is adorned with a Rich Crown or Diadem. Thus have I run through all the degrees of Honor, and with as much brevity as so copious a Theam would allow of; and for matter of precedency, I think the method I have taken will save me the labour, and I am
unwilling to trouble the brains of the Ingenu∣ous Reader with an unnecessary prolixity; one∣ly as to Offices of State, because I have omit∣ted them altogether, I shall set down their places as in Princely Solemnities they are to be disposed. In which, those of the Crown are to precede all other of the Nobility that are not, except the Blood Royall. As the Lord Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Lord President of the Privy Councel. Lord Privy Seal. These six also are placed next the Lord Pri∣vy Seal thus, according to their state of dignity; that is, If he be a Baron, to sit above all Ba∣rons; if an Earl, above all Earls. Lord Great Chamberlain of England. Lord High Constable of Eng∣land. Lord Marshall of England. Lord Admirall of England. Lord Great Master, or Steward of the King's House. Lord Chamberlain of the King's House. So the King's principall Secretary being a
Baron of the Parliament, hath place above all Barons; and if he be of a higher degree, accor∣ding to the former rule. The Spirituall Nobility are thus placed. The Archbishop of Canterbury. The Archbishop of York. Bishop of London. Bishop of Durham. Bishop of Winchester. The two first are placed according to anci∣ent dignity, and the three last by act of Par∣liament, and the rest of the Bishops to take their places according to the seniority of Con∣secration. Segar. lib. 4. cap. 24. By an Act of Parliament, An. 31. Hen. 8. See the Act in Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor. So all men serving near unto the Prince's Person, either Civil or Military, are allowed a precedency in pari dignitate, and themselves according to his seniority of place. As to their precedency otherwise, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, are to take their places according to the antiquity of their Title, and their Ancestor's creation; and their Wives accordingly. A Duke's eldest son takes place as a Mar∣quesle, but beneath him; and his Wife be∣neath a Marchionesse: and if she be the daugh∣ter and heir of a Duke, she shall go before all
Duke's eldest sons wives; and however are equall to a Marchionesse, but to go beneath them; and the younger sons of Dukes are in equall degree with an Earl, but to go beneath him; and Marquesles eldest sons, and their La∣dies, to take place accordingly. So the eldest son of a Marquesse as an Earl, and the younger as Viscounts; and their La∣dies and sisters to take place accordingly, as before. An Earl's eldest son takes place as a young∣est Viscount, and the younger as Barons, their wives and sisters accordingly: Viscounts eldest sons as Barons, and their youngest sons to take place with Barons eldest sons, above Seld. fol. 906. Knights Baronets, (by an Act of King James) and above all Bannerets, but those made by the King himself under the Stander; and all Knights Batchelers. Of Women. NOw lest I should be thought malitious to a Sex I owe much honor to, before I conclude, I shall take some short observations more then already I have. And first, that al∣though they are not allowed to sit in Parlia∣ment, yet do they enjoy almost all priviledges Coke 8. part. 53. due to the other Sex. The honorable Feminine Dignities are,
Princesse, Dutchesse, Marchionesse, Countesse, Vicountesse, and Baronesse. Which are either by Creation, by Descent, or by Marriage. This honor by Creation, as it is rare amongst us, so it is more rarely taken notice of, though Cart. 21. Rich. 2. mem. 12. num. 18. many examples have been; as Richard the se∣cond created Margaret Countesse of Norfolk, into the title of Dutchess of Norfolk, See the Charter in Mr. Selden. Anne Bullen was created Marchionesse of Pembrook by Hen. 8. limited to her, and the heirs males of her body to be Pat. 24. Hen. 8. par. 1. begotten, with creation-mony of twenty five pounds per annum, and the ceremony of Man∣tle and Coronet. The Lady Finch was by King James created Vicountesse of Maidston, to her and her heirs of her body; with speciall clause, that her heirs male should have a voice in Parliament; and afterward she was likewise made Countesse of Winchester, &c. Of these Titles thus conferred, Sir John Pat. 21. Jac. part. 8 num. 4. Fern takes no notice, though else he discourses largely enough. By Descent, we have continuall examples: When any daughter of an Earl or Vicount shall continue a Virgin, or marry an Esquire, she shall retain that honor that springs from her father's blood, take place according; and be sa∣luted by the Title of Lady. Which word Lady came from Hleaf∣dian, or Leafdian, by contraction in the Teuto∣nick, and so Lafdy, and thence Lady, as from
Laford, Lord. The word Laf signifying bread, Versteg. fol. 413. and Dian serve. It seems, from that they cal∣led those persons, that for their quality could entertain others, and distribute corn and bread to their neighbours, by that Title. And of old, though in the Empire, and here, the word Dominus was used in generall for salutation amongst men of all sorts, yet Domina onely to persons of honor amongst Bract. l. 3. de Coron. 116. women; as the widows of all Tenants in chief, and daughters and heirs of all Knights, &c. The heirs females of any Count or Baron, Ib. de acq. rer. Dom. lib. 2. c. 34. shall enjoy both the Estate divided, and Titles too, if they be to be divided; and they shall be enjoyed by their husbands, if they marry, in the right of their wives. So that if there be two, or three, or more si∣sters, to share the estate, and the honors and dignities inherent be enough, they shall enjoy every one, one; as in the case of the Earldom of Pembrooke in the time of Edward the third, and now the Lord Darcy of the North, by the same right enjoys the title of the Lord Conyers. But this holds not; when the title is held by Jus gladii, or Knight's service; or if the Ho∣nor be in any Castle or place onely, it cannot be divided, but falls and dissolves in the Crown, or left to the disposing of the King. And again, if the estate of honor and dignity be not descending to the heirs generall, but en∣tail'd to the heirs male, it cannot be the inheri∣tance of a daughter, as many times it is.
But we may understand this the better by that more eminent demonstration of high Of∣fices of the Kingdom, which descending by inheritance on the heirs generall, have been challenged by the husbands of heirs female, in right of their wives, the Descent-male failing; as in the case of the Duke of Buckingham, in the time of Henry the eighth, challenging the Dier's Re∣ports. 283. b. Office of High-Constableship of England. The Office of Lord Steward descended to Blaunch, daughter of Hen. Earl of Lancaster, in whose right Joh. of Gaunt her husband enjoy'd it. So the Office of Earl Marshall descended to the house of Norfolk, by an heir female; after∣ward being forfeited by treason, was conferred to the Lords Howards of Arundell. And in this and all such Descents, where there are not dignities enough to allow a par∣tition to all the Sisters, but the Honor shall be undividable; it shall descend to the eldest, or be disposed by the King to which he please. And for ennobling by birth, these rules are observed: That if a Gentleman, Knight, or Baron, do marry a wife of ignoble parents, she shall enjoy the title, name, and dignity of her husband: For, saith Sir John Fern, let the wife Glory of Generosi∣ty. fol. 62. be shining and glorious with the dignities of her husband: Whereas, on the contrary, if a Gentlewoman of blood and Coat-Armor shall marry a Francklin, Yeoman, or the like, that Ibid. is ignoble, having no Coat-Armor, his condi∣tion is no whit advanced by marriage in point
of honor; Although let him be inferior to her Coke 4. part. 118. b. 6. part. 53. b. ibid. whom she shall marry, yet she shall retain the ho∣nor, state, and dignity she was born to. But there is this Law for them to walk by too, that is, Si mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili, desinit esse nobilis; that is, If a Noble-woman marry with an ignoble, her nobility is extingui∣shed; for she is under the power of her husband, and ought not to be in a condition above him: For example whereof, a case is cited of one Ralph Hayward Esquire, and the Lady Anne Dyer. 79. Powes, widow of the Lord Powes. But I am of opinion, that (being onely an acception in Court by the Adversary of the Party) this is not to be understood, but in case the person such a Noble:woman shall marry, be no Gentleman, and that she hath received the Honor she enjoyed before, from the right of a former husband, and not by descent of Ancestors; for the words of Judge Coke par. 1. fol. 16. Coke run thus: Si mulier nobilis nupserit igno∣bili, desinit esse nobilis; & eodem modo, quo quidem constituitur, dissolvitur: That is, If a Noble-woman shall marry an ignoble husband, she ceases to be Noble, and in the same man∣ner her honor was constituted it is dissolved. So as by the Laws of the Nation, an Adulte∣resse forfeiteth her Dower, so also her honor of Nobility, if she commit adultery, either as a wife or widow; or else having received honor from her deceased husband, and shall so put him out of her mind, as to subject her self to
another, by which act she wipeth both the name and memory of the former from her, she hath the sentence of forfeiture against her. So Sir John Fern, in his Glory of Generosity, fol. 62. Yet the Law is thus curious in preserving the memory of Vertue in the honor of its reward, that if a woman of noble blood do marry a Churl or Clown, and have issue by him, she being an heir, that issue shall have liberty of bearing her Coat-Armor. But Sir John Fern says, onely for life, and that on a Lozenge Shield, (which is the feminine bearing) with the difference of a Cinque-foile. One note more I think proper in this place, which is, If a French, Spanish, or German wo∣man be married to any Peer of this Realm, or other Gentleman, and be not denizoned; by 32 of Ed. 3. 35. in the case of Gilb. Humfrevill the Laws of the Nation, she cannot claim the priviledges or titles of her husband, nor have Dower or Joynter from him. And thus much I think sufficient in this place as to the honor of Women; and if I have said too little, I wish I could have said more; if too much, I beg their pardons, but refer my self to the Law. In the next place, I should proceed to the display of Armory, by which the infinite number of persons are distinguisht, by an in∣numerable variety of different Ensignes, that do illustrate and appropriate their dignity and honor: But, by the way, I have stumbled on another Theam, which though it be not
so much concerned in honor, yet the Kingdom is much concerned in it, as a Power; and though I need not say much, yet I cannot passe by it and say nothing. Of a Parliament. SOme not altogether knowing of that true constitution of a Parliament, may be apt to think, that its Authority is onely Supream in this Nation. But let such understand, that from this Argument, if there were none other, it is disproved; That nothing can be made greater or more excellent than the thing that makes it, Propter quod unumquodque tale est, illud majus tale. And such creatures as shall aim at a Superiority to their Creator, are to be esteemed like those Angels, that (by the same spirit) attempting the same pride, preci∣pitated themselves from everlasting liberty to eternall chains. This great Council did arise from the an∣tient custom of, not onely the Saxons, but all Nations in the world almost, who have had examples of their King's summoning the chief Peers and Nobles to consult in weighty af∣fairs. Which Councel among the Saxons was called , which was a Seld. Tit. of Honor, fol. 632. meeting of the chief Prelates and Peers, to deliberate about, and to consent to, what
laws the King should enact: and advising in matters of State, giving Judgement upon suits or Complaints in the same Court, as is under∣stood of the time of King Ine, (of West sexe) about 711. years after Christ. And again, of King Ethelbert, his ordaining, Bed. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 5. Decreta Judiciorum juxta exempla Romano∣rum cum consilio sapientum. And when Edwin King of Northumberland, was perswaded to be a Christian, he consulted, cum Principibus & Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 15. Consulariis suis. He called to Councell his Princes, or Ealdermen, and Counsellors. And again, King Eldred, An. 948. In festo Nativitatis Beatae Mariae, all the Nobility of the Kingdome, were summoned by an Edict from the King, as well Arch-bishops, Bishops, and Abbots, as all of the rest of the Lords and Chief Counsellors, Thanes and Ealdormen, to come to London, to a , or great Councel, to consult about affairs of the whole Kingdome: As Ingulphus his words are. And again, in the time of Edward the Con∣fessor, . p. 77. the Parliament sate at London, Rex & omnes  Magnates; In which Parliament, the King attaches Earl Godwin, for that he had kil'd his Brother Alfred, and upon his pleading, and submission, the King refers him to the Judgement of the Court: who a long while debating it, to no purpose: at last, Leofri∣cus Consul Cestriae, probus homo quoad Deum, & Seculum, (saith the Author) spake thus; Earl Godwin, is a gallant Person, and a man next
the King, of the best birth in the Land; and it cannot be denied, but by his Counsell or De∣sign, Alfred was slain; therefore my opinion is, that he with his son, and all we twelve Earls, that are his friends and kindred, do present our selves humbly before the King, loaden with as much Gold and Silver, as every man can carry betwixt his arms, to offer it up with supplication, for an expiation of the crime. Which being consented unto, and done; the King considering the reference he had made to the Court, ratified their act, and his pardon. By which, we see their meetings was at the Kings summons; their power only deliberative in giving legall force, by consenting to what he should think fit to make a Law; and to advise de arduis Reipub: not that this force given by them, is to be understood otherwise, than that, because, it was enacted by their consent, it was the more binding over them: their consent otherwise, being no whit binding over the Soveraign's will, in the enaction; for it was his Volumus that made it; and let their Consultations rise to never so powerfull votes, and results; be the thing what it would, his Nolumus buried it in oblivion, which custom  ever continued, as a true Prerogative of the Crown. Nay, avisera le Roy, which is but, The King will consider of it, was enough to throw a Bill out of the House. Nothing en∣acted by them, though by a generall consent
of both Houses of Lords & Commons, being of any force, and that not only before, but after the Commons were brought in; which I find to be about the time of Edw. 1. his third year of In∣auguration, See the Statute of the year, 1273. Seld. p. 117 an. Dom. 1273. Who in the 23. year of his reign, confirmed the Magna Charta, made by Henry the third, though Mr. Selden is of opi∣nion, The first summoning of the Commons, was in the 49. year of Henry the third. The style of the Statutes, running after this manner, The King hath Ordained and Esta∣blished these Acts underwritten, &c. First, The King willeth, and commandeth that, &c. Sig∣nifying, the power of enacting to force, and penalty, was derived from the Volumus of the King, not the Vote of the Lords and Com∣mons; their consent only making it of more vigour against themselves. If it were an Act of Indulgence, or relief to Anno 18. 1. Edw. 1290. the Common-wealth, it run thus; Our Lord the King, of his speciall Grace, and for the af∣fection that he bears unto his Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and others of his Realm, hath gran∣ted that, &c. And sometimes, Our Soveraign Stat. de : An. Reg. Ed. 20. Lord the King hath granted, and commanded at the Instance of the Nobles of this Realm, &c. No mention at all, being made of the consent of the Lords and Commons. Then afterwards, thus they run, Our Lord the King, by the Counsel of his Prelats, Earls, & Ba∣rons, & other great men & Nobles of his King∣dom, in his Parliament hath Ordained & ,
&c. An. 33. Edward the first, 1307. and so along in other Statutes, the Commons not at all mentioned in the enacting any Statute; but as thus, in the beginning of Edward the third, At the request of the Commons of this Realm by their Petition made before him, and his Councel in the Parliament, by the assent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, &c. Untill the 23. of this Kings reign, in a Statute of Labourers, I find the Com∣mons not mentioned, and then the power of Or∣dination given to the Statute, still by the King, as thus, It is ordered by our Lord the King, by the assent of the Prelates, Farls, Barons, and o∣ther great men, and all the Commons of the Realm, summoned to this Parliament, &c. And in one Act of the same King, the style runs thus, The King of his own will, without mo∣tion of the Great men or Commons, hath granted and Ordained in ease of his people, &c. And then to signifie the Constitution of the An. 36. Ed. 1. Commons in Parliament, See the 37. of Ed∣ward the third, where the Statute runs thus; The King at his Parliament, &c. at the request of An. 37 Ed. 1. & an 7. Rich. 2. Hen. 3. Ed. 4. Rich. 3. the Commons, and by the assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, and other Great men there assembled, hath Ordained, &c. and at the prayer of the Commons, &c. In which style, most of the Statutes run untill Henry the eight. And for provision of the choyce of the Com∣mons, in a Statute of the 23. of Hen. 6. is set down the form of Writ, by which they are summoned, where it is also enacted, That the
Knights of the Shires for Parliament, hereafter to be chosen, shall be naturall Knights, or other∣wise Vide Plow. den f. 121. such naturall Esquires, or Gentlemen of the same County, as shall be  to be Knights. And every Knight that is elected, ought to be a resident of the place, for which he is ele∣cted: and every man that is an Elector, ought to have forty shillings of free-hold, within the said County; and for the security of it, the Sheriffe hath power to put them to an Oath, Statute 8. of Hen. 6. cap. 15. upon the Evangelist, and the Election ought to be betwixt the hours of eight and nine in the Forenoon, and so of Burgesses. The form of the Writ, is this; Rex Vic' &c. Salutem, Quia nostri  pro qui∣busdam arduis & ur gentibus negotiis nos statum & defensionem regni nostri Angliae & Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernent' quoddam Parliamentum nostrum Westm. 12. die Novemb. proxim' futur' teneri Ordinavimus, & ibidem  Magna∣tibus Proceribus domus regni nostri colloquium habere & tractare, Tibi praecipimus firmiter in∣jungentes, quod, facta Proclamatione in prox∣imo tuo post receptionem hujus literis nostris tenend' die & loco predicto duos milites gladiis cinctis magis idoneos, & discret' Com' praedict' &c. & electionem illam in distincte Crompt. Courts 16. vid Sta. de An  H. 6. cap . & apertè sigillo tuo, & sub sigillis eorum qui electioni illi ,  bis in Cancellaria no∣stra & locum certisices . And still, before they came up to the House,
they signed Indentures to be true and faithfull to their King and Country, and the service thereof, upon a penalty, even to the last long Parliament of eternall infamy. And in the third, of Queen Elizabeth, it was enacted in full Parliament, for the safety of the Queen's Majesty, her Heirs, and Successors, and the dignity of the Imperiall Crown of England, for the avoiding both of such hurts, perills, dishonor, and inconveniencies, as have before time befallen; that not only all persons should take the Oath of Supremacy, upon di∣vers penalties in that Act specified; But also every Knight, Citizen, and Burgesse of the Parliament, should take the said Oath before he entred into the said House, or had any voyce there; else he should be deemed no Knight, Citizen, or Burgesse for that Parliament, nor have any voyce; but shall be to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as if he had never been Returned, nor Elected for that Parliament, and shall suffer all pains, and penalties, as if he had presumed to sit in the same without Electi∣on, Return, or Authority. And by King James, the Oath of Allegiance was added. Yet, not∣withstanding all this limitation upon the Com∣monalty, Parliaments in England were ever esteemed, since Magna Charta, the greatest liberty of the Subject, none else indeed being dreamt of. And as it is as great a flower of the Crown to summon Parliaments, as foedera, & bellum
indicere, to make War and Leagues; which is so absolute, that it is resolved by all the Judges of 21 of Ric. 2. cap. 12. the Land, that the King may, before he is Crowned, (if by descent the Crown be his right) summon a Parliament, or within age; as was seen in King Henry the sixth, who sum∣moned divers Parliaments in his 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. years of his reign, yet was not Crowned till the eighth. He being then essentially King, Plowd. 221. 6. without any Ceremony or Act, ex post facto; and Coronation, but a Royall Ornament. So the priviledges of Parliament, and of the Common-wealth by Parliament, are as great: for though we thus see the great Prerogative of a King, yet many things there are, which a King in his own Kingdome cannot do without a Parliament by the Laws, by which he hath Bract. ini∣tio libri. bound himself; as the making any man heredi∣table, or the altering the Common Law, or Customs of the Realm, though by his absolute Brookes prerog. 13. c. 73. & Stamff 72. authority, he may commit any man to Prison, during his pleasure. Therefore, every Parliament-man, during the time of the Parliament, is priviledged from Dyer 60. Cromptons Courts. fol. 11. all disturbance of arrest for debt, or the like, and the servants of any Parliament man, as much as the Kings are. And to this Parliament, for the further se∣curity of the good of the Common-wealth, were ever admitted certain Judges of the Land, (though they had no Vote, which sate on Woolsacks) that as the Clergy in Spiritual∣ties,
so the Judges of the Law, in things of the Law, were to advise and determine, when any difficulty did arise. That what Laws should be Enacted, might be answerable to the Will of God, and not repugnable to the Customs of the Land. And in our latter times, all Acts of Parlia∣ment, though made by the King, have this style; By the consent of Lords and Commons; not∣withstanding the Civill Law, saith, Quod Prin∣cipi placuit, Legis habet vigorem, The will of the King, is the power of the Law. The End of Honor.
The Analysis of Armory. I Have, with as much brevity, as so copious a Theam would admit, run through all the distinctions of Honor. In the next place, I shall with as great a contracti∣on, lay down the emblems of those distinctions, and atchievements due to No∣bility, and the reward of virtue, in the metho∣dicall rules of Armory. Bearing of Arms at this time, being the only externall distinction of de∣grees and qualities, amongst all civill Societies and Common-wealths. From whence we received this custom, is uncertain, if especially, we look to the produ∣cing of it into rule and form: As it is from imitation, Sir John Fern is of opinion, that we did borrow it from the Egyptians; meaning from their Hieroglyphicks. Others will have, that the first institution of these honorable differences, was amongst the Israelites; but however, it is not much material to this discourse, to be too inquisitive of the
originall in that kind, since succession of time hath converted it into another custom; which may be, for ought I know, in imitation of the Romans: who were accustomed upon triumphs or festivalls, to produce the Statues of their Ancestors, as the pedigree of their Generous race. Which Statues were not, (as some may ima∣gine) erected from the voluntary phansie of the parties represented, as is the leaving our Pictures behind us when we dye, to our pro∣geny; (so might every phlegmatick, me∣chanick do:) but they were such, as were, for some Heroick act, allowed as a publick reward of virtue, which was customary amongst them. And truly, although every good Subject ought to be alwayes prepared alike, to offer his body and mind unto the service of the Common-wealth, without hope or expectation of mercenary reward, honor, or glory; yet is honor a necessary perquisite to a Crown and Common-wealth, being in it self a true spur to generosity. Out of which respect, the Romans joyned the two Temples of Honor, and Virtue, in such a manner, that no man could enter into that of Honor, without, first passing through the other of Virtue. Sir John Ferns opinion is, that the first that imployed these Ensignes in this nature, was Alexander the Great; so to distinguish those
that had done any memorable Acts, that they might urge an emulation in their fellow Soul∣diers. It is said of Epaminondas, and Othraydes, that being ready to dye, they wrote their glorious exployts upon their shields themselves; to give  to others, to follow their  when they were dead. believes, that Charls the Great was the first that put them into this methodicall order; which doubtlesse, could not be, if, as Sir John Fern saith also, that Julius Caesar con∣stituted an office of Feciales. But I find it in another Author, to be insti∣tuted by Numa, when he made warre upon the Fidenates, a people of Latium. However, it is a generall opinion amongst our most judicious Heralds, that the bearing of Arms, as a badge of honor amongst us, was not till about the time of Henry the third, although many coats have been  in some Wri∣ters, of much longer standing; as that of Hugh Lupus, Earl of Chester, in the time of the Conqueror, a Woolfs head errased: of Gilbert de Gaunt, Earl of Kime, long before, Barry of 6. Or & Az. over all a bend Gule. Which are  of by Sir John Fern: But how authentick his Authority might have been to him, to cause his insertion; or his to others, I know, not; but I shall be bold to insert one, which may chance carry some weight with it, which I shall raise from a Noble Family in the
North; the family of the Hiltons, (whose an∣tiquity, (not only by an ancient pedegree, which I have seen taken out of the Office; but by the Records of the Tower) doth pro∣duce the noblest descent that I know any Fa∣mily in England;) the pedegree is too large, to be inserted in this place, else I would do it; however shall extract some notes from it, that may signifie as much. The first, that I find recorded of the Fa∣mily, was Sir William Hilton, Knight, who marrying the daughter of Sir John Grisly, Knight, (a Family long since I think extinct) had is∣sue Adam Hilton: Which Adam living in the time of King Athelstan, gave to the Mona∣stery of Hartlepool, a Pix or Crucifix, which was in weight twenty five ounces of Silver, and caused his Armes to be engraven on it; Arg. two barres Azure, which are yet seen upon the Gate of Hilton Castle, in the Bishopr. of Dur. where they lived, with a Moses head for Creast; the Gate and the Chappel, (which is very stately for its structure and bignesse) are the only parts remaining of the ancient building. He gave unto the same Monastery, a Cope & Vest∣ment with the Stole; and the like gift unto the two Monasteries, of Whitby and Gisbrough, with fifty seven ounces of silver to make Cen∣sors. They were five descents before the Con∣quest; and hath now the nine and twentieth descent surviving. In which line were twenty four Knights, eighteen whereof were in a con∣tinued succession.
But I leave this nicety to more criticall judgments to determine the thing, having for authority custom sufficient to make it a law within it self, without the derivation of any originall institution. Former ages ha∣ving esteemed the Laws of Heraldry with as great a veneration as any in the Nation; as indeed it ought still to be, and more especi∣ally in these, and all such times as ours, the Court of Heraldry being not onely the Law-gi∣ver to Honor, but the best record of Families and Inheritances, (though the Gentry of this Land are too dull to know it) since Coat-Ar∣mor hath been hereditary, as it hath ever since the time of Lewis Le-grosse (according to the account of Sir John Fern and Guillim:) As by one instance I shall declare; If a man being an Orphan, and, by such times as ours have been, the Records of what Estate did rightly belong to him, and from his Ancestors, may be burnt, plundered, or otherwise embeselled, and by such spirits, as such times do plentifully af∣ford, have been obtruded from his right, and hath nothing to plead for it, this Office being the just Record of his Pedigree, would pro∣duce an Evidence sufficient, though from many generations his misfortunes have descended: More particularly of the Office in another place. As for the progresse of Armory, I have pitcht upon the most methodicall course I could, disposing it into severall divisions
and to every division adding its varieties, as in the succeeding Scutcheons will appear; that I have crowded many severals into one Scut∣cheon, is to contract the generall into lesser bulk. The form of placing the devices of Arms on Escutcheons, is from the antient Shields; and therefore called an Escutcheon from the word Scutum. They are also called Coats of Arms from the custome of the Antients, embroidering their Devises on the Coats they wore over their Arms. For the form, or rules, for the shape of Shields, there can be none; for, any form that a Shield may be devised into, may be taken for the shape of an Escutcheon. And next, for the rules of Blazoning, there are not many, but every thing to be called ac∣cording to their denomination; excepting such as by antiquity have continued other names then our vulgar Language doth now give. And again, observing a method from their severall po∣stures and positions in the Shield, which gives a severall tearm, and must be very carefully re∣garded; for the adding or diminishing the least punctilio, makes the Coat so much ano∣ther thing, that should another man own it, he could not be question'd for it. And although Sir John Fern gives this defini∣tion of it: Blazonia est recitatio, vel commemora∣tio alicujus virtutis; & quempiam, sub quibus∣dam
abunde, & vere laudare, aut deco∣rum dicere: Yet our latter times have prescri∣bed a rule of avoiding, in any case of Blazoning, as much as may be, multiplicity of words, especially such as are impertinent: This is also Rules in Blazon. called Martialling a Coat, though that is a word by some esteemed onely to be used when many Coats are disposed or quartered in one Shield. Iterations of words are also to be avoided; and in Blazoning a Coat, the Field must ever be first exprest, and then the Charge; and in that what possesseth the greatest part, or nearest the center of the Shield, first. As for the diversity of kinds of Blazon, though by no greater authority than custom of some men, there is three made, By Colours Sir John Fern makes . and Metals, pretious Stones, and Planets; the manner of blazoning thereby, making a distin∣ction betwixt private Gentlemen, Persons en∣nobled with dignity, and Royall Families. Or Topaz Sol Arg. Pearl Luna Sab. Diamond Saturn Gul Rubie Mars Azure Saphir Jupiter Ver Emrald Venus Purpur Mercury Fenne Jacynth Dragon's head Sanguin Sardonix Dragon's tail
But this is onely a fantastick humor of our Nation, and for my part I shall avoid it as ri∣diculous, being no where in the world used but here; and not here by any judicious He∣rald. That I insert it, it is to leave it to those humors that will make use of it. For the order, according to the antient rule I have first begun with Metalls, and Colours, to which I have adjoyned the  the parts of the Escutcheon; distinction of Families, Bor∣dures, and crooked Lines; because from them the honorable Ordinaries receive a various form and nomination. Then I have set down in one Escutcheon all the Ordinaries, which are afterward in an order, (beginning with one particular) fol∣lowed in their varieties. Then all dead things in their order, living and verdent, according to their position and posture; also those that are composed of some kind of Celestiall things, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars; all kind of Martiall things, or Me∣chanick; or the most part of what is usually born in our English Armory. In the  of Arms, there is by all ob∣served a different value; as first, that the Me∣talls are allowed a precedency to Colours; so also is there by some understood to be more of worth in one Colour then another: Yet, for Colours. my part, I am of opinion, that it is so little, as not  the taking notice of; onely for other mens opinions sake, I will touch at it.
First, of the Metals; Every judgment will be ready without any argument to give Gold the preheminence. As for the colours; I think they are thus to be esteemed in point of priority, Sables, Gules, Azure, Verd, Purpure; and some do in∣troduce Tenne, but it being a bastard colour, is exempted, especially amongst English Ar∣mory, onely reserved for abatement of honor, except in one or two examples of things. Thus I have placed the colours, though con∣trary to the rules of some, as Guillim placeth yellow in the third place, & green in the fourth.
Sir John Fern allows Gules the third ho∣nor, and placeth Sable in the fifth. Mr. Guillim bringeth in also another colour, called Murrey or Sanguin, but I never saw it used in an English Coat; onely this and Tenne are appropriated to the abatements of honor, therefore to be set apart from the rest, I think, properly. The next in order is Furrs, which may be of one colour alone, or more than one, which Furrs are supposed to have been the doublings of Mantles. The first of these may seem to go all under
the name of Ermins, but they are distinguish∣ed by various names, according to their co∣lours; as if as the first it be white powdred with black, it is Ermin; if black with white Ermines; if yellow with black as the Erminoys: if as the fourth black with yellow Pean: if white with black, and one red hair, Erminites. By which it is understood, how precise a man ought to be in the Blazon, or tricking a Coat, when so small a difference, as the colour of one hair, shall make a Coat another thing. The next is called Vayre or Verry, this be∣ing of Argent and Azure, is termed Vaire onely; but if any other colours, then must it be blazoned Verry of such colours; as for exam∣ple, Ermin and Gules by the name of Gres∣sey of Darbyshire. The next is Potent Counter-potent, by some Varry-Copy. The colours whereof must be Blazoned. The last is but of two Counters, if called Countercomponed; but if more, then checky. If any of which be in a Bordure, you must say, A Border purflew of such a furre; blazon∣ing the furre and the colours. Now by the way, Mr. Guillim doth hint one rule in Blazon concerning the Field (which is the surface of the Shield) which ought to be well observed for propriety of speaking; which is not to say, He beareth a field Or, or Arg. &c. but the field is Or, or Arg. &c.  else he beareth Or, or Arg. Gules, or the like, &c.
These Furres are often born in Bordures also, which are in the next place to be treated of. And here in one Escutcheon have I placed the Bordures; and in the severall quarters the differences of brethren. Of Bordures, if it be plain, you must say, A Bordure Gules, or the like. If it be charged with Beasts, then it is bla∣zoned, A Bordure Enurney of such Beasts; if of Birds, Enaluran of such Birds; if of Flowers, Verdoy; if of dead things, Entoyre, as of Be∣zanti, Mullets, or the like.
The plain or simple Bordures have also their varieties, according to all their crooked lines. Which I shall shew shortly after. For the charged Bordures, here is exempli∣fied nine distinct. In the first is a Bordure counter-compound∣ed Or and Gules; the second, a Bordure Pur∣flew of Vayre, the third, quarterly composed of Ermin and Checky, Or, and Azure; the fourth, Gobbonated, Or, and Sables; the fifth, Sables Entoyre of eight Bezants; the sixth, Or, a Bordure Gules, charged with three Bendlets Sables; the seventh, Azure, Enaleuron of eight Martlets Or; the eighth, quarterly, the first Gules Enurney of three Lyoncels passant guardant, Or, the second Azure Verdoy of as many Flowerdelis: the third as the second, the fourth as the first: which, with a Field Argent, was the Coat-Armor of Henry Courtney Earl of Devonshire, Marquesse of Exon. This may be blazoned short, by England and France. The ninth is a Bordure Gules, Diapred, En∣toyre, Enurney, Enaleuron, and Verdoy. This kind of Bordure may be of any two or other set number of these also. Now to the intent that Coat-Armor might descend to the Posterity with safety, and free from dissention of strife, Distinctions were invented, which I have here set down, to the number Nine. By which differences the Bearer is under∣stood of what degree or line of Consanguinity
he is; if he be of the second, third, or fourth House, and what brother of that House, by charging his Coat with the difference apper∣taining; and if a younger brother of a younger House, then by charging the difference of the House with difference of Line, of Fraternity: There being so much care taken for the pre∣serving the honor of the entire Coats, that the eldest son of the first House during the life of his father (so of the rest) cannot bear it with∣out his distinction, and, for this reason, hath Segar, Fern, Guillim. the Nephew of the first (the father being dead) been always preferred before the Uncle of the second, &c. and taketh place before him. By the way also, we are to take notice, that if all the brethren die without issue, and leave sisters behind, as they are co-inheritors of the Lands and Estare, so shall they be of the Coat-Armor also, without any distinction at all, to either of them; because by them the name of the House cannot be preserved, they being all reckoned but as one Heir. Again, if they be not heirs, they are not ad∣mitted to the bearing of the Coat-Armor; for, saith Sir John Fern, Arma non transeunt ad agnatos & affines. Yet their husbands are ad∣mitted to adjoyn the Arms of their wives fa∣milies in the sinister side of their Escutcheons, with their own; but if they have none of their own, then not at all. Now there is none of those signs, but are
sometimes born in Arms, as Charges of the Coat; but when they are distinctions, it is ea∣sily known by their singularity, either of place, position, or diminutive proportion. There is a care to be observed concerning the parts of the Escutcheon, as to the prehemi∣nence of location for all charges, which are here marked thus, A, The Dexter chief. B, The precise mid∣dle chief. C, The Sinister chief. D, The Honor point. E, The Fesse point. F, TheNombril point. G, The Dexter Base. H, The precise mid∣dle Base. I, The Sinister Base. There are severall crooked lines to be ob∣served also, wherewith all the Ordinaries are many times made different and various, which are these:
1, Invecked. 2, Ingrayled. 3, Wavy. 4, Nebule. 5, Embat∣taild or Crenelle 6, Indented 7, Dancette Of these lines, the two first differ onely in this, that the points of the ingrailed line are turned into the field, and the other contrary into the ordinary, that those lines do make. The two last are both one secundùm quale, onely differing secundùm quantum; the one being onely wider and deeper then the other. And when any of these Ordinaries are drawn withthese lines, the Blazoner is to say, A Bend, Chief, Pale, or what it is; Invecked, Ingrayled, Wavy, or the like: But if plain, then onely to name the Ordinary with its colours, according to the following examples.
1, A Crosse. 2, A Chief, 3, A Pale. 4, A Bend. 5, a Fesse. 6, An Inescutcheon. 7, A Cheveron. 8, A Saltyr. 9, A Barre. The last of which Ordinaries may easily be mistaken for the same, or at least a diminutive of the fifth; but it is not: and they are distin∣guished by the space they possesse in the field, and also by this difference, the Barre hath li∣berty all over the field with its diminutions; the Fesse onely one proper place. These Ordinaries according to Leigh do possesse these proportions of the field.
Crosse, containeth uncharged the fifth part, but charged the third; the Chief, the third part, the Pale, the third part, the Bend, the fifth uncharged, but charged the third; the Fesse, the third part, the Innescut. the fifth part, the Chever, the fifth part, the Saltyr, the fifth uncharged, but charged the third; the Barre, the fifth part. Of these Ordinaries, some have their dimi∣nutives, as the Barre a Closset, a Barralet; the Bend both Dexter and Sinister, the Dexter hath a Bendlet, Garter, single and double Cottises, and a Ribbon; the Sinister Bend, a Scarp, and a ; a Cheveron hath its Chevero∣nels. And here now I shall desire to be excused for digressing from the method of other men, especially Mr. Guillim; and first to take no∣tice of some other forms near relating to the Ordinaries for their shape and proportion, on which are oftentimes rewards and addi∣tions of Honor placed in Coats; as also the abatements of Honor for misdemeanor, and dishonorable actions, that afterwards I may not have any thing to interrupt a
methodicall proceeding in the rest. The first of which are those, on which most commonly additions are given, which are these. The first is a Bordure, spoken of before. The second, a Quarter. The third, a Canton. The fourth, a Gyron. The fifth, a Pile. The sixth, two Flasques. The seventh, two Flanches. The eighth, two Voyders; which, saith Leigh, is the way of bearing a reward given to a Woman.
The ninth is Ernoin, an Inescutcheon Gules, named also a Scutcheon of Pretence. On any of these may an addition of Ho∣nor be placed, according to the pleasure of the Prince, or the fancy of the Herald, that is left to the designing. Which reward remains to the posterity of the Atchiever, and none of the descendants of his family, but his own line may bear it. In which manner I have seen the Arms of a Kingdom given to a pri∣vate Subject, nay, and sometimes to a Stranger, as in the example of Sir Henry St. George Nor∣roy King of Arms, who upon an Embassie into Sweden, was honored by the King of the Swethes with the addition of the Arms of Swethen in a Canton. The Marquesse of Exeter gave the Arms of England in a Bordure, as in the Escutcheon of Bordures is seen in the eighth quarter, being gi∣ven him by Henry the eighth. Now the Laws of honor having by a con∣tinued succession of time maintained and re∣fined these rules of Nobility, for the encou∣ragement of brave and generous spirits: So, foreseeing the pronenesse of all men, being ap∣ter to fall and decline from the vertues and bravenesse of their Ancestors, and to bury the honor of the deceased Purchasers in the dust, than to improve the Talent of Renown Time hath entrusted them with; as a correction to such dunghill-spirits, there is provided a me∣thod of degrading them from, or giving di∣minutions
of disgrace to the Arms of such: As the example of the succeeding Escutcheon de∣monstrates. The first, according to Mr. Guillim's rules, is a Delph Tenne, due to him that revoketh a Challenge. The second is an Inescutcheon reversed San∣guin, for deflowring a Maid or Widow. The third is a point Dexter, for too much boasting his Martiall acts. The fourth, a point in point, Sanguin, due to a Coward. The fifth, a point Champion Tenne, to him that killeth his prisoner.
The sixth, two Gussets Sanguine for Adul∣tery. The seventh, a gore sinister Tenne, for him that flies from his Colours. The eighth, a point plain Sanguine, for tel∣ling lies to a Soveraign or Generall. The ninth, the whole Coat of Arms rever∣sed, and proper onely to a Traitor. But there is another stricter punishment also for Treason, as Sir John Fern, Sir William Se∣gar, and the Civil Laws relate, which is, that though he have many sons then living, his Arms are for ever taken away, unlesse by some extraordinary service his successors do regain the honour of them, and wipe away the stain; for, Eorum memoria destrui debet, says the Law. And in the same manner are those other stains of abatement so rivetted to their Shield; when once by the Soveraign authority placed there, that neither the immediate possessors, nor succeeding owners, with their greatest force, or the all-corroding teeth of time are able to tear it away; but by vertuous demea∣nor to ingratiate the same hand, that put it on, to wipe it off. Pitty it is those Rules have not been exact∣ly observed in our latter Ages; such a severity would doubtlesse be a means to affrighten ma∣ny, that are enclined to these abominable enor∣mities, to apply themselves ingenuously to a gentle obedience, and plausible demeanor:
For, if not for Loyalty, Honor, or the Punish∣ment of other Laws; yet, rather then leave so great a proclamation of their , to be both a plague upon their fames, and a lepro∣sie on their posterity, they would cautiously flye from such senslesse carelessenesse. Now having thus laid down the  as well as the additions of Honor, I am brought by my Method to the main body of this gene∣rall work of Armory, which is the variety of bearing the Ordinaries, and after the accidents more common; as of Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Plants, Mechanicall things, &c. And for the first (as in my estimation very reasonably) the most honorable, I begin with the Crosse, and its various kinds of bearings, being more numerous by much than any of the other Ordinaries. This hath its position in the greatest and most eminent parts of the Shield; and therefore it is much to me, that Mr Guil∣lim, and others, should place it last of all the Ordinaries. The Crosse, if uncharged, possesseth the fifth part of the Field; but, if charged, the third. The varieties I have placed in two Shields, as first in this.
In the first quarter is Azure, a plain Crosse Or, the Coat of the Sheltons of Norfolk. The second is Gules, a Crosse crossed upon three Grees Or, by the name of Jones in Den∣byshire. The third, Or, a  pattec Sables, fimbri∣ated Gules. The fourth Arg. a Crosse Wavy voided Sa∣ble, by the name of Duckenfield in Devon∣shire. The fifth, , a Crosse Moline pierced Lozenge, Or, which was the Coat-Armour of Molaneux of .
This piercing a Crosse, is alwayes known from a charge on it, by the colour of it; for if it be the same with the Field, then it is supposed the appearance of the field through it; and is sometimes square, sometimes round, and sometimes Lozenge-ways; but if it be not the colour of the Field, then it is a Charge, and receives another Blazon, as hereafter will ap∣pear. The sixth example is Azure, a Crosse pa∣tonce Or, which Leigh saith, was the Arms of King Edgbert: this differeth but little from the Crosse Flory, Flurry, or Fleury; as by the next you see. The seventh is Arg. a Crosse Flurry Gules. The eighth Gules, a Crosse Avelane Or. The ninth Azure, a Crosse potten fitched Or, the Coat Armour of Ethelbert, King of the West-Saxons, as saith Guillim. The second Escut cheon represents, as ma∣ny as I have exprest in the first, and those as strange.
The first is a Crosse formy flory. The second is a Crosse bottony. The third a Crosse couped Or, charged with a pellet in the fesse point or center. And by these next examples is seen, that the Crosse is many times divided into more then two parts, and sometimes all over the Field, as in this fourth, which is Or, a Crosse triparted flurry Gules. The fifth Azure, a Crosse double-parted Arg. The sixth is quarterly, Gules and Vert, four Pheons Arg. in Crosse, their points meeting in
fesse. By which example may be seen, that ma∣ny times, severall things are born formed into this, or any other Ordinary. The seventh is Azure, a Crosse resarcelled Or. Which, saith Sir John Fern, is as it were sewed together again, after a voiding. The eighth is Gules, a Crosse crossed Or: pierced all over the Field, which is the Arms of the Earl of Tholouz. The last is Argent, a Crosse voided Couped Sables, by the name of Woodnoth. Sometimes one Crosse is charged with ano∣ther, which differeth from a Crosse Fimbriated, thus: The sise of the Frimbria, is much narrower then that appearance of the Crosse, that is surmounted of another, (as Mr. Guillim saith;) but Sir John Fern saith, it is not a Crosse fimbriated,  when the uppermost is also charged. The next of these Ordinaries to be exem∣plified, is the Chief, which is variously born  thus.
The first Gule, a chief Argent by the name of Worksley. The second Tenne, a chief Shapernette Ermine. The third Vert, a chief crenelle Argent, char∣ged with a file Azure. The fourth Gules, a chief Argent, surmoun∣ted of another, Or: which, saith Sir John Fern, is a double addition of Honor. The fifth Gules, or a chief Azure, filleted in the nether part Argent: Now, sometimes this Ordinary is Honoured with an augmentation,
which, very rarely, are any of the rest; as in the next example. The sixth is Or, two barres Azure, a chief quarterly Azure and Gules, on the first two Flowerdelys Or, on the second, one Lyon Passant guardant of the last; the third as the second, the fourth as the first, which is the Coat Armour of the Earls of Rutland. And this is also sometimes charged with other Ordinaries, as in this seventh example, which is Barry of six per pale; in a chief paly of six per fesse, all counter-changed, Or & Azure, between two Cantons gyronny of the first and second; an Inescutcheon Argent joyning to the chief. The eighth is Sables, a bend, and chief Or. The last is Gules, two barres and a chief in∣dented Or; by which is seen that this Ordi∣nary is sometimes also formed of the crooked lines; as all the rest are. The pale doth not only vary its form, as the rest with crooked lines, but hath its diminutives too; as in this example.
The first is Gules a pale Or; the Coat Ar∣mour of the Lord Hinkley. The second Azure a pallet Argent, which possesseth the half part of a pale. The third is Or, an endorse Gules, which is the fourth part of a pale. The fourth is Argent, three pallets Wavy . The fifth Azure a pale radiant rayone Or. The sixth Argent, three pallet Gules, in a chief Azure, a barrulet dancettee Or. The seventh is Argent, on a pale Sable, three crosse pattees Or, within a bordure engrayled
of the second, by the name of Crowch. The eighth paly of six Argent & Azure, fret∣ted with a barrulet in fesse Gules a chief and base of the same. The ninth Argent on a pallet Sable a fesse Gules, and two barrulets of the second, quar∣terly pierced of the first. The bend is an Ordinary drawn of two lines from the dexter to the sinister base; and some∣times from the sinister chief to the dexter base; and have both their diminutions, and are varied as the rest, as oft as the variety of crooked lines can do it. The first is Argent, a bend engrayled Sables,
by the Lord Fitzwater, Earl of Sussex. The second is Argent, a bendlet Gules, which possesseth half the bend, and according to the rule of some, should begin its upper line in the precise corner of the dexter chief, whereas the bend begins above it, as much as below it. The third is Or, a garter Gules, which ought to contain but the third part of the bend, and derive its lines as the bend doth. The fourth is Gules, a Cost, or cottis Or; which containeth the fourth part of a bend. The fifth is Or, a ribbon Gules; this contain∣eth but the eighth part of a bend, and is couped at the ends. The sixth is Argent, a bend sinister Vert, this bend meeting in the same field with the dex∣ter bend, seems to make a Saltyre; but they do not: and care must be taken in the blazon of it, to begin first with that which lies next the , and then to say, The one surmounted of  other. The divisions of this, are first a Scrape, as in the seventh, which is Argent a Scarpe Azure. The eighth is Or, a battune Gules, which is most commonly couped at each end as the Rib∣bon is, which is commonly the stain of a , when he is admitted the bearing the  Armour of his Father's line: but it is not to  then in mettle, but by Bastards of . last, (which for its variety, I have in∣serted as rare) is Azure a bend double dan∣cette
Argent, by the name of Lorks. If there be more then one of these Ordina∣ries in a Coat, they are to be blazoned thus; if two bendlets, if more, bendy of so many as it is; and sometimes  a bend with its dimi∣nutives meet in one field, as in this of Sir Ed∣mund Boyers of Camberwel in Surrey, which is Or, a bend vayre between two Cottizes Gules. And sometimes these Cottizes are born without any bend between them, as in the ex∣ample empald of John Marsham of Hornsplace in the County of Kent Esquire, which is Or,
a Lyon passant in bend Gules betwixt two bendlets Azure. And this manner of empaling, is a way that a man joyns his Wife's coat with his; and I wish these Coats might so come together. Now I proceed to the Fesse, according to my promised method. And first in its place and genuine nature, as in the first quarter here, which is Verry of Or, and Vert, a fesse Gules by the name of Duffield. The fecond is Or, a fesse dancette Sables, the proper Coat of Sir Thomas Vavasor.
The third Argent, a Fesse and Canton Gules, by the name of Woodvile. The fourth Or, a fesse between two Cheve∣rons Sables, by the name of Lisle. The fifth, by the name of Blyton, is Gules, a fesse Sable & Argent indented, par fesse point in point, between three Owls head errased of the third. The sixth is Vert, on a fesse Argent, a barre Sable charged with four Cheverons between three Spades of the second. The seventh Sable a fesse Wavy Argent, be∣tween two Stars of the second, given to that honorable Person Sir Francis Duke, by Queen Elizabeth, for his service at Sea. The eighth is Sables, a fesse  at each end Or, which  I have very rarely seen. The ninth Or, a fesse Nebule betwixt three trefoyls slipt Gules. Thus you see a variety of bearing this Ordi∣nary: yet it shews not any diminutives,  changeth its place in the field; which two on∣ly properties belong to the barre, and it only so differs from this in specie. As for the Escutcheon born as an Ordinary, I find very little variety, only sometimes it is called an Inescutcheon, which is when thus born, which is Ermin an Inescutcheon Gules, by the name of Hulgrave.
And sometimes an Escutcheon, as when more then one is in the field, as thus in the se∣cond which is Argent, three Escutcheons Sable, by Sir John Loudham of Suffolk. Sometimes these are charged only with augmentations of honor, and sometimes the field is charged with other Ordinaries promi∣scuously with these as in the third, which is Or, a barruler between two barres gemels, Gules, three Escutcheons vayre, by the name of Gamolle. And sometimes these Escutcheons are char∣ged
also as in the last, which is Or, three Escut∣cheons barry of six vayre and Gules. The Cheveron containeth the fifth part of the field, and is not so confined to one place, but may be born in another, and also more then one in a field, but if above two, they are called Cheveronels: Guillim. The first example is , a Cheveron Gules, belonging to the Lord's Staffords. The second is Or, a Cheveron in chief Azure. There are divers other accidents, incident
to this Ordinary, as transposition, coupings, voidings, and reversing, besides it hath its di∣minutives, for example, the third is Ermin, a Cheveron cooped Sable, by the name of Jones. The fourth is Azure, a Cheveron engrayled, voided Or, by the name of Dudley. The fifth Argent, a Cheveronel Vert: of which there can be but three in a field. The sixth is Vert, a couple close Argent, which containeth the fourth part of a Cheve∣ron, and is not born but by payres, except a Cheveron be between. The seventh is Sables, a Cheveron Rompe Or, betwixt three Mullets by the name of Sault. The eighth is Azure, three Cheveronels bra∣sed in the base of the Escutcheon, and a chief Or, by the name of Fitz-hugh. The ninth is Gules, three Cheveronels re∣versed Or. The Saltyre, is an Ordinary formed of a fourfold line, two from the dexter chief, ex∣tending towards the sinister base, and two towards the dexter base from the sinister chief, meeting in fesse by couples in acute angles; in the nature of that which we usually call, a Saint Andrews Crosse.
The first is Argent, a Saltyre Gules, by the ancient and Noble Family of the Gerrards of Lancashire. The second is Azure, a Saltyre quarterly quarter'd Or, & Argent, the Arms of the Epis∣copall Sea of Bath and Wells. The third is Gules, a Saltyre Or, surmounted of another Vert, by the name of Andrews. The fourth is Sables, a Saltyre Argent, in the fesse point an Inescutcheon Or, char∣ged with a Crosse Gules; and this, though we should allow colour upon colour, and metall upon metall, to be false Herauldry, yet is good:
the last being the charge of a distinct Scutcheon, it being of pretence, and of another family. The last of these Ordinaries is the Barre, which though it is allowed the Honor of a par∣ticular Ordinary, yet in my opinion, is but a diminutive of the Fesse, however differs only in this, that it hath the liberty of the field, and taketh place any where which the Fesse cannot: this also hath its diminutives, being subdivided into a closette and barrulet. First of the barre, as in the first quarter of this Scutcheon, Azure three barres Wavy  by the name of .
The second Argent, three Barres and a Can∣ton Gules, by the name of Fuller. The third Gules, two Barres and a Chief in∣dented, O, by the name of Hare. The fourth is Or, a closset Sanguine; this is the one  of the barre. The fifth is Sables, a Barrulet Argent; this containeth the one fourth part of the Barre. The sixth beareth Gules on a Cheveron Arg. three Barres gemmels Sables; these are called Gemmells when they are placed in couples at a near distance, and more than two in the field in even number. The seventh is Ermin, three Barres couped Gules, charged with six Escollups shells, or three in the first, two in the second, and one in the last; by the name of Sabridge Court. The eighth is barry of ten Or, and Azure in a Canton Gules, a Chaplet Argent, by the name of Holms of . The ninth is Barry of six on a Chief, between two  party per bend, dexter and sini∣ster two pallets, Or and Azure, over all an In∣escutcheon Arg. which was the  of Mortimer Earl of March. Thus have I run through all the Ordinaries, with their varieties of Barring in their due or∣der, according to their usuall terms of proper Blazonry. In the next I shall shew some other forms of Charges, framed of such like lines in the Escut∣cheons; and then proceed to shew  all the partings & counterchanges.
First then, as in this shield there is Or, an Orle Azure, by the name of Bartram Lord of Bothall. The second is Or, an Orle of three pieces . The third Argent, an Orle engrayled on the inner side Gules. The fourth is Or, a double Tressure Flory, . The fifth is Sables a Fret Or: by the Lord Mautravers, now quartered by the Earl of Arundel. The sixth Vert,  Or, this with the
distinction of a second Brother in a third House, is the Coat-Armor of Sir George Whitmore, late Lord Mayor of London. In the three last are a , a Lozenge, and a Mascle. The Pile is an honorable bearing, though not to be reckoned among the Ordinaries, as some would have it: this hath divers ways of bearing, and is free to any place of the field; but its property is to issue from the middle chief, and extend with an acute angle almost to the middle base, and then is termed plainly a Pile: but if otherwise, you are to distinguish, as this  quarterings will demonstrate.
The first, Argent, a pile Gules; this belonged to Sir John Candoys in the time of Edward the third. The second is Or, three piles meeting near in the base of the Escutcheon Azure, by Sir George Brian. The third is Argent, three piles, one issuing out of the chief between two other transposed Sables, by the name of Huls. The fourth is Argent, a triple pile flory on the tops, issuing out of the sinister base in bend, Sables, by the name of Wroton. The fifth is Argent, a pile in bend, issuing out of the dexter chief in pale Sables, Cottised engrayled Argent. And here in the same Scutcheon, for their nearnesse of form, have I inserted the Gyron with its varieties. As in the sixth Gules, a Gyron issuing out of the dexter point Or. The seventh is Argent; two Gyrons Gules. These do always meet in  with their points; and therefore  is needlesse to name the place, onely naming their number and colour. The eighth is Gyrony of eight pieces, Or, and Azure, a Canton Ermin by the name of Octon. The last is Gyrony of twelve Argent and Sables, and so are they always to be blazoned, Gyrony of so many, if they be more then two. These, I must confesse, should properly
have been placed among the counter-changes. But my digression is excusable, since it is so near concerned, as the single Gyron belong∣ing properly to that place; and then that the counter-changes are so near in a concor∣dancy, as the next discourse must bring them in; which is, to describe the partitions and counter-changes, according to the disposition of every Ordinary; and first of the partitions, as in the first next example. The first in this example is party per Crosse, Arg. and Gules, by Sir Henry Cock of Hertford∣shire;
and here is to be noted, that though the mettle be more honorable, yet if the colour possesse the dexter part, or chiefest part of the Field, that is first to be named. And, by the way, I must here observe, that some will have this to be blazoned quarterly; but certainly improperly, unlesse the quarters were charged; for why should this Ordinary above all the rest be denyed the priviledge of partition, which all have, but the chief, that in its propriety is formed but of one line? The second quarter bears party per pale, a bend counter-changed Argent and Gules, by Sir Geofry Chaucer. The third party per bend, Or, and Vert, by the name of Hawly. The fourth party per Cheveron, Sables, and Argent, by the name of Aston. The fifth party per Fesse, Or, and Azure. The sixth party per Pile, in point Or, and Sables. Now the difference betwixt this and the Pile alone, is, that the lines meet at the ve∣ry base of the Escutcheon, and others short; and sometimes this is changed by a Reverse, as in the next example, which is The seventh party per pile reversed, Or, Gules, and Sables, which is very rare for the distinction of the field into three colours, as the last is also. The eighth is party per Saltyre Ermine and Gules. The ninth is party per pale and base, Gules, Argent, and Sable.
The counter-changes are thus, first, party per pale Or, and Gules, three roundalls counter∣changed. The second is party per Cheveron unde, three Panthers bends erased, counter-changed Sab. and Or; by the name of Smith of Norfolk. The third is pally of six, a bend-pally, as many all counter-changed, Argent and Gules; which is a quartering of that honorable Gentle∣man the Lord Strafford. The fourth is barry of six party per pale in∣dented, Argent and Gules counter-changed.
The fifth is barry pily of eight pieces Gules, and Or, by the name of Holland. The sixth is paly-bendy, Or and Sables. The seventh is paly of six Argent, and Gules on a chief as the field as many crescents all counter-changed. The eighth is barry of six, Argent and Sa∣bles, indented one in the other. The ninth is barry bendy, Arg. and Sables. Thus I have run through all the bearings of the Ordinaries, both plain, and in their va∣riety, together with the partitions and coun∣ter-changes; I shall now as concisely lay down all the Ordinary bearings, as well of Natural and Celestial things, as all Sublunaries of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Vegetables, and Artifici∣als, in the best method I can, according to the Blazon of Leigh, , Guillim, and others, the best I could consult in this study. Of Celestialls. As for Celestialls, I shall skip over some of them, as Angells, Cherubims, and the like, because they are obvious enough to every man's judgment, when ever they are met with; as some of these examples are also.
The first of these quarterings shews the ex∣ample of Gules an Increscent Or, by the name of Descus. The second Azure, the Sun in its full glory, by the name of St. Cleere. The third is Azure the Moon decrescent proper, where the difference from the first is, from the contrary position of them, which is the same in the Firmament: And by this rule, any man at the first sight may know in what state the Moon is, though he never saw an Al∣manack.
The fourth is Azure, a Moon in her com∣plement proper. The fifth Or, the Sun eclipsed Sables. The sixth is Argent, the Moon in her Eclipse Sables. The seventh Azure, a Ray of the Sun is∣suing out of the dexter corner of the Escut∣cheon bend-wayes proper; by the name of Aldham. The eighth is Gules a chief Argent, at the lower part thereof, the Rayes of the Sun is∣suing out of a Clowd proper; by the name of Lesone of Northamptonshire. The ninth is Azure a Comet Or, streaming proper. And unto these I have added one more Es∣cutcheon of the like bearings, because of the rareness of them.
The first is Azure, Jupiters Thunderbolt in Pale Or, enflamed at both ends proper, shaf∣ted Saltyre-wayes, and winged Fesse-wayes, Argent. The second Argent, a Rain-bowe proper, is∣suing out of two peteet clowds in fesse Azure. The third Gules a chief Argent, over all an Escarbuncle of eight staves-pommette and Flo∣rette Or; which, saith Guillim, was the Coat-Armor of the Earls of Anjou, of whom was Geoffry Plantagenet. The fourth is Or, six fire-brands, enflamed proper.
The fifth Sables, a bend Or between six Fountains proper, by the Lord Sturton. The sixth Argent, a Cheveron Sables, be∣tween three flames of fire proper. The seventh is Sables, a Star of eight points Or, between two Flanches Ermin, and a Can∣ton of Ulster; by Sir John Hubbart of Nor∣folk. The eighth party per bend Crenelle, pointed the one in the other Argent & Azure, four Crescents, by couples enterlaced, counter∣changed. The ninth Ermin on a chief Sab. three Cre∣scents, arg. Of Beasts. NExt of Beafts, as, in my opinion, the most proper to order, as the more noble crea∣tures; though, I confesse, it is contrary to Mr. Guillims Method. And of those, in the first place Lions, as the principall of them; which are diversly born, and from their severall po∣stures receive a severall character of blazoning, which is cautiously to be observed, as well as in other things; and it is not difficult for any indifferent genius, without much dis∣course; which would but make up a tedious
prolixity to little or no purpose; when Ver∣bum sapienti sat est, is a Proverb in every man's mouth. The first example is of Azure, a Lion Ram∣pant, Argent, being the Coat-Armor of Roger de Montealto, who was a Benefactor to West∣minster-Abbey. The second is Or, a Lion Sayliant Gules. The third is Gules a Lion passant Guardant Or, which being the Coat-Armor of the Dukes of Aquitane, was joyned with the Coat of the Kings of England, by the  of Henry the
second, being before two Lions, the posture and colours one; then indeed called Leopards, as they are most properly so called, (where they are not of Royall bearing) if they be more then one in a field, and Guardant, as  would have it: This same single Lion passant guardant, onely the colours contrary, as Or, a Lion passant guardant, Gules, says the Welch petegree, was the Coat-Armor of Rode∣rick the great Prince of Wales, in the year 843. By which account, Coat-Armor hath gained a great Antiquity. The fourth example is of Lions passant, and not guardant, which is Gules, two barres Er∣min in chief, a Lion passant party per pal Or, & Argent, by the name of Hill of Norfolk. The fifth is Gules, a Lion Seiant Argent. The sixth is Or, a Lion Couchant. Gul. The seventh is Azure, a Lion Dormant, Or. The eighth is Or, a Lion Rampant regarding Coward, Sables. The last is Gules, a tri-corporated Lion issu∣ing out of three corners of the field, and meet∣ing under one head in fesse Or; which was the Coat-Armor of Edward Crouchback Earl of Lancaster. Lions are sometimes with the tail elevated over the head, sometimes with the tail forked, and sometimes you shall meet with Demy-Lions, which is half Lions passant and Rampant, and sometimes heads, erased or couped; but if Cabossed, then they are ever  Leopards heads, as in these examples.
The first Azure on a chief Or, a Demy-Lion Rampant issuant out Gules, languid and armed of the first, by the name of Markham. The second is Azure, three Demy-Lions pas∣sant guardant, Or, languid, and armed Gules, by the name of Hammon of Acris in Kent. Now the French are so severe, that they will not allow the tearms of Lion to any, either Whole or Demy, that are guardant; but, I think, without reason. The third is Or, out of the midst of a Fesse, Sable, a Demy-Lion Rampant Nais∣sant
Gules languid and armed, Azure. Where it is proper to take notice, that if it be armed or languid by any other colour than the body, unlesse Gules, it is a blemish to it; but Gules, signifying blood, addes to it. So it is an abatement if it be without tongue, teeth, or claws. The fourth is Verry, Argent & Azure, on a pale Gules, three Leopards heads Or, by the name of Ockould. The fifth is Azure, three Leopards heads cooped Or. This Coat is in the Walk under Lincolns Inne Chappel, and I think is very rare. The sixth is Azure a Cheveron, betwixt three Lions he ids erased Ermin, crowned Or; the Coat-Armor of  worthy Benefactor of Pauls, Sir Paul Pindar. The seventh is Sables, three Lions tails era∣sed Argent, by the name of Cork. The eighth is Gules, a Cheveron betwixt three Lions paws erected and erased within a bordure Argent, in a chief of the second, an Eagle displayed Sables, by the name of Brown. The ninth is Sables, two Lions paws, one issuing out of the Dexter, the other out of the Sinister point of the Escutcheon in Cheveron, Arg. armed Gules, by the name of Frampton. There is one rule more that hath been by some, both antient and modern Heralds, ob∣served, concerning the blazoning of Lions; which is, That if above one Lion be in a field,
they must be termed Lyoncels, that is, young-Lyons; because the spirit of a Lyon is full of Majesty, and admits no co-partnership in one Territory. But they make two exceptions to this generall rule, that is, When any Ordinary parts them; and, When it is the Coat of a Mo∣narch; to which last I must concede, from his argument which is propter Regiae Maejestatis dignitatem. But for the former, it cannot al∣wayes hold according to their own argument, without an absurd contradiction. As for ex∣ample; Mr. Guillim blazons a Coat thus, A fesse Wavy betwixt three Lyons passant, where∣of three is but one barred from the other. But I must be forc't to beg pardon, and to accuse him again, and by it lay down one exception more; in the Coat of Wickombe he blazons thus, Two Lyoncels rampant com∣bant. When as in ordinary reason, accord∣ing to his own argument too, being in a fight∣ing posture, they deserve the name of Lyons. As I should be bold to blazon my own Coat, being the same, only the colours contrarily disposed, as Azure, two Lyons Combatant Or, languid and armed Gules. I confesse, where I find them indorsed, as in that which he believes to have been the Arms of Achilles at the siege of Troy, I think it much reason to blazon them Lyon∣cels. For other examples of beasts, I shall only adde one more, which is,
First Argent,  a Mount proper a Stagge lodged Gules, by the name of Hart-hill. The second Arg. a Stagge tripping armed and unguled Or, by the name of Holms. The third is Vert a Stagge stripping proper Or, by the name of Gilsland. The fourth is Argent, an Unicorn seiant Sab. armed and unguled Or, by the name of Har∣ling. The fifth Azure, a Stagge at gaze Gules. The sixth is Vert, a fesse between three Bucks, in full course Or, by the name of Ro∣bertson.
The seventh is Argent a Lyons head erased Gules, by the name of Gowis: this is the most honorable bearing of the heads or limbs, be∣cause it is said to be torn off from the body. The eight is Gules, three Unicorns heads couped, Argent. The last is Gules, a Cheveron betwixt three Bulls heads Cabossed Argent, armed Or; by the name of Baynham. Of Birds. THe second sort of the most Noble sensi∣tives are Foules of the Ayr: all which I shall comprise in a very short example. On∣ly, by the way, this note is to be observed; that as I have disposed them all into an order; so are they in degrees of excellency in Armory. And again when any quick things are born, it is most commendable when born in the most generous and noble action, or the most proper to its nature.
Of these the first is Sables a Swan with her wings expansed Arg. membred Or, within a bordure engrayled of the same, by the name of Moore. The second is Ermin an Eagle displayed, Gules, armed Or. The third is Sables, a Goshawke, Arg. perch∣ing upon a stock fixed in the base point of the shield, of the second, armed Jessed, and belled Or. The fourth is Gules, a Pelican in her nest with wings displayed feeding her young Or, vul∣ned
proper, by the name of Carn of Wenny in Glamor ganshlre. The fifth is arg. three Peacoks in their pride proper, by the name of Pawne. The sixth is arg. a Heron volant in fesse, azure, membred, Or, between three Escoliops shels, Sables. The seventh is Gules, three Cocks argent, Armed, Crested, and Jellopped Or. This was the Coat Armor of that reverend Dr. Cocks, Bishop of Ely, in Queen Maries, and Queen Elizabeths times. The eighth is Gules, two wings inverted and conjoyned Or. The last is Or, on a bend Sables, three Estridge feathers, passing through as many escrowls of the first. Many other Birds, as well as Beasts, are used in the infinite variety of Coat Armour, but by the observance of these examples they will be all understood. Of Fishes. MR. Leigh observes this general rule in blazoning of Fishes, That all Fishes that are born feeding should be  in blazon Vorant, or devouring: because they swallow without chewing; and that what they devour should be named,
These are, as Beasts, born in divers postures; as Nayant, which is swimming upright, em∣bowed, extended, endorsed, trianguled, and fretted, &c. As in this following demonstra∣tion. The first is Argent three Eeles Nayant in pale Sables, by the name of Ellis. The second is Sables, three Salmons hauri∣ant Argent, by the name of Salmon. The third is Azure, a Dolphin Nayant, em∣bowed, Argent, by the name of Fitz-James. The fourth Argent, two Barbels Hauriant,
respecting each other by the name of . The fifth Gules, two Pikes hauria ntendor∣sed, Or. The sixth three Trouts fretted in triangle Arg. by the name of Troutback. The seventh is Arg. two Lobsters clawes in Saltyre, the dexter surmounted of the sinister Gules, by the name Tregarthick. The eighth is Arg. a Cheveron engrayled, , betwixt thre Crevices, Gules. The ninth is Sables, a fesse engrayled betwixt three Welkes, Or, by the name of shelly. Thus are all manner of Shell-fishes as well as others. And some times, Reptibles, and Insects, all manner of Flyes and Grashoppers; But their blazon is obvious enough to every mans judgement, that can distinguish one from another when he sees them, therefore it would be but an unnecessary intrusion in this place. Vegetables. I Shall not need here, I hope, to run over all parts of Philosophy, and Diviniry, and to tell what Trees are, and their Natures; For as they are not discourses pertinent to this place; so Mr Guillim, as well as my self might have  every ingenious man as know∣ing as himself in it; or at least : And
to none other do I submit my endeavours. I shall only trouble the Reader with their various bearing, in the examples of some few, which will direct to all others, And herein the first is Argent, on a mount in base a Pine-tree fructed proper, by the name of Pine. The second is Gules, the trunck of a tree in pale eradicated and cooped, Sprouting out two branches Arg. by the name of Stockden of Lei∣cestershire. The third is Arg. three sterved branches slip∣ped Sables, by the name of Black-stock.
The fourth is Arg. a Cheveron Gules, be∣tween three garbs of the second, by the Lord Sheffield Earle of Mougrave. The fifth is Sables, three Lillies slipped Arg. the Coat-Armor of Winchester Colledge. The sixt is Arg. a Cheveron Sables, between three Columbines proper; by the name of Hall of Coventry. The seventh is Arg. a fesse Nebule between three trefoyls slipt Gules, by the name of Thorpe of Glocestershire. The eight Arg.  Holly leaves pendant proper, by the name of Inwine. The ninth, a fesse Arg. three Apples trans∣posed in base Or, by the name of Harwine of Devon. Of Monsters: ANd here before I proceed to dead and artificial things, I think it proper to take observation of some Monsters in nature, which are often born in Arms.
And the first of these is Arg. a Griffen ram∣pant with wings displayed Sables, by the name of Morgan. The second is Arg. a Wiverne, his wings displayed, and tayl nowed Gules, by the name of Drake. The third is Sables, a Cockatrice displayed Arg. membred and Jolloped Gules, by the name of Buggine. The fourth is Arg. a Rearmouse displayed Sables, by the name of Backster. The fifth is Arg. on a bend Gules, three mens
heads horned Or, by the name of Wittall, or Witwell in Yorkeshire. The sixth is Azure, a Harpy displayed, cri∣ned, crowned and armed, Or. The seventh is Arg. a Mermayd Gules, cri∣ned Or, holding a Mirror in the right hand, and in the cleft a Comb, by the name of Ellis. The eight is Gules, a bend engrayled Arg. between three Leopards heads Jessant Flower∣de-luce, of the second, by the name of Dennys. The ninth is Gules, three Leopards heads vorant, as many Flower-de-luce Or, which, saith Guillim, belongs to the See of Hereford. Of the parts of Mans Body. THere are sometimes whole figures of mans body, born in Coat Armor, as for ex∣ample, the arms of Sevil in Spain, which is Or, a King enthronized on his Seat Royal Azure, Crowned and Sceptred, and invested of the first the doublings of his Robe Ermine. The Arms proper to the Episcopal See of Salisbury, is Az. the Virgin Mary with her Son in her right arm, and a Scepter in her left hand, all Or. But the like of these are very seldom seen, only the leggs, armes, hands, and other de∣sected members are often met with, as in
these following examples I have demonstra∣ted. The first is Gules a Saracen's head erased Arg. environed about the Temples with a wreath of the second and Sables, by Mergith of Wales. The second is Arg. a Fesse Gules, betwixt three Hearts vulned, distilling drops of blood, on the sinister side proper. The third is Gules, a Heart betwixt two wings displayed Or. The fourth is Gules, three dexter arms con∣joyned at the shoulders and flexed in triangle,
Or, with the fist clinched Arg. by the name of Tremain of Devonshire. The fifth Arg. a mans leg erased at the thigh, Sables, by the name of Prime. The sixth is barry of six, Or & Sab. over all a pale Gules, charged with a Womans Dug, distilling drops of milk proper, by the name of Dodge. The seventh is Arg. a Cheveron Sab. between three Blackmores heads couped at the shoul∣ders proper, by the name of Ives. The eighth is Arg. a Cheveron Gules, betwixt three Periwigs Sab. The ninth is Barry nebule of six pieces, Az. & Arg. as one chief of the second, three eyes, Gul. by Delahay. If those drops are charged distinctly in any field, as sometimes they are, and sometimes the field all over, you are to blazon them dif∣ferently according to the colour, as, if San∣guine, then Gutte de Sang. which is, drops of blood. If Arg. then Gutte de l' aue, drops of water. Or, Gutte de Or, drops of Gold. Az. Gutte de Lermes, drops of Tears. Guillim. Vert, Gutte de Vert, drops of Oyl-Olive.
Of Artificiall things. HAving thus cursorily run through these examples, yet I hope sufficiently enough, for the satisfaction of an Ingenuous Reader; I now come to the artificiall varieties, of bearing in Coat-Armour. Which since they are as numerous almost as the conceits of inge∣nuity: I must be excused from inserting the in∣finite examples of them, yet I shall propose some, and let the eye of the observing Student make up the defects of the rest, as it may well do.
The first is Arg. a Cheveron Gules, betwixt three Ducall Caps, Azure doubled indented Ermin. The second is Arg. a Mantle of estate, Gules, and doubled Ermin, ouched or garnished with strings tassals of the same. The third, the Arms of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which is Azure, a staffe in pale Sol, and thereupon a crosse Patree Arg. surmounted of a Pall of the last, charged with four other crosse pattees fetched Sables, edged and fringed as the second. The fourth is Arg. on a bend Vert, betwixt six crosse crosselets fitched Gules, three Crosier staffs, by the name of Peare. The fifth is Arg. three Chaplets Vert, by the name of Richardson of Shropshire. The sixth Azure, a Maunch, Or, by the name of Conyers. The seventh is Gules, three Garters buck∣led and nowed Arg. by the name of Sydemer. The eighth is Gules, six Annulets, three, two, and one, Or, this is quartered by the Earls of Cumberland. The ninth is Gules, three tassals Or, by the name of Wooler.
Of Military things. IN the next, are those that represent exam∣ples of Military things born in Armour, both of Land and Sea. As first Arg. a Tower triple towered, Sab. chained transverse the port Or, by the name of Oldcastle. The second Or, a Castle  towred Gules,
the port displayed of the field leaved, Arg. And here is to be noted, that it is never blazoned a Castle, but when it extendeth it self crosse the whole field, and sometimes you shall find a single Tower not turretted, as the first, in the Coat of Sir Richard Mans∣field. The third is Gules, three single arches Arg. their capitals and pedestals by the name of Arches. The fourth Or, a bridge of three arches in fesse Gules, masoned Sables, the  proper, on it a fane Arg. by the  of Trowbridge of Trowbridge. The fifth Sables, a Cheveron between three tents Arg. by the name of Tenton. The sixth Arg. a sweep Azure, charged with a stone, or by the name of Magnal. The seventh Or, a pillar Sables, enwrapped with an Adder Arg. by the name of . The eighth is Arg. three battering  bar∣wayes proper, headed, Az. armed and  Or, by Robert  Earl of Lyndsey. The ninth Azure, three murthering chain∣shots Or, this is quartered by the Earl of Cum∣berland. There are many other things born; as tilt∣spears, sometimes with penoncels, and some∣times without; Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, Can∣nons, Bows, Arrows, and the like: but their blazon is easie to every eye, that knows any thing of Armory.
Of Maritine things. OF things belonging to the Sea, I have these examples. The first Gules, three pieces of Masts cooped with their tops Arg. by the name of Cromer. The second Gules, three Sayls Arg. by the name of Cavill. The third Azure, a Rudder of a ship Arg.
The fourth Gules, an Anchor in pale Arg. the cros-piece Or, by the name of Goodred. The fifth Or, a Lighter- in fesse Gul. The sixth Gules, the hull of a Ship, having only a main Mast, and a top, without tackling Or. This, saith Guillim, is the Coat-Armor of the Duke of Alasco in Polonia. The seventh is Arg. a ship with three masts a sayl furld and hoysted to the main top shroud∣ed Sables, by the name of Mercers. The eigth his Azure, a Galley passing under sayl, Or. The ninth is Arg. a Cheveron Gules, be∣tween three Murriours Azure, by the Lord Brudenell. Of Mechanical things. THe last example, that I shall insert, is of other more ordinary Mechanical things.
The first is Arg. a Cheveron between three Palmers scrips Sables, the tassels and buckles Or, by Sir Henry Palmer of Kent. The second is Gules, a Cheveron between three Irish Broges, Or. The third is Sables, three Pickaxes Argent, by the name of Pigot. The fourth is Arg. a fesse between three pheans Sables, by the name of Rowdon of York∣shire. The sixth is Sables, three bels Arg. by the name of Porter.
The sixth is Azure, three Howboys between as many crosse crosselets Or, by the name of Bourden. The seventh is Or, on a bend Az. three Ka∣therine Wheels Arg. by the name of Rudhall. The eighth Az. three levels with their plu∣mets, Or, by the name of . The ninth is Arg. three bezants, on a chief , by the name of . And here we are to take notice, that if these roundals are charged in counter-changes as be∣fore, then they are only called Roundals: but if any other , as in this example, they are of a various blazon according to their colors, as thus. If they are Or, then they are called Bezants, Argent, Plates, Sables, Pellets, Gules, Vorteuxes, Ligh-tblew, Hurts. Vert, Pomeyes, Purpure, Golps, Teune, Oranges, Sanguine, Gules. And thus much I think sufficient to be said of the examples of Charges in Coat-Armor. In the next place, I am to shew the differences of Helms, which distingnish in some part the ho∣nor of the bearer in his degree. The Crowns and , differing more particularly the highest
degrees of Nobility, I shall also exemplifie in the conclusion of this discourse; and I hope shall raise, in some measure, a relation to the old proverb, Finis coronat opus. Of Helmets. THe differences of Helms is always exprest, when the Crest is given: and by this diffe∣rence a Gentleman is known in his degree by his hatchment, as much as these following ex∣amples . These Helmets are sometimes called cask and timbers; by the French, Helenum; by the Ro∣mans, Cassidem; by the Greeks, Galeam, a Co∣vering for the head in time of war; and our man∣ner of bearing crests on them is from their an∣cient fancy of adorning their Helmets with some kind of monstrous Device: as the Head or mouth of a Lyon, the paws or horns of cer∣tain beasts; to appear more terrible. And that which we call Mantle, is not, as some doe ridiculously suppose, the Vestment which they usually had to wear over their atms in War; or, as some would have it, to secure their shield from weather; but from this originall, that Princes and chief Commanders used to adorn their Helmets (according to their qualities) with rich buckles, studs, and circlets of gold, garnished with rich and costly stones, and on
the top or crests of them, wreaths of corded Favin p. 1. ca. 3. fol. 24 ; being the Liveries of their Ladies and Mistrisses, as also some curled  of hair, and those Cordons (like waving scarfs) dangled down behinde them on the Cruppers of their Horses, the ends being fairly tasselled and en∣riched, many times with Pearls and precious Stones: and thus especially they rid upon dayes of Triumph. But in Germany and many other places where the laws of Honour and Armory are severely ob∣setved, a mean Gentleman or new Atchiever is Ib. p. 25. not permitted to bear Helm, Mantle, or Crest, but by special favour. The first differs from the 2. in that it is a side
standing helmet with the Beaver close, which is for all Esquires and Gentlemen. The second, is the common fashion of Knights, which is a helmet standing direct forward with the  open without guards. The third, is a side-helmet open-faced guarde∣visure, which is proper for all persons of the Nobility, beneath a Duke and above a Knight. The fourth is the Helmet of Persons exe∣cuting Soveraign Authority, which is a Helmet which is full forward open-faced, guarde-vi∣sure: which belongeth also to Princes and Dukes. In this manner are all Degrees obviously differenced to every mans judgement in all hatchments. And, if they be above the degree of a Knight, that these do not distinguish to par∣ticulars; then they are also understood by their  and Crowns.
Of Crowns and Coronets. The first whereof is the Crown of the Em∣pire of Germany, which is but little different from that of England in the second, which is Emperial too. The third is that Coronet of the Prince which is the same with the Kings, only the arches, mound, and crosse, wanting. The fourth is the Crownet of an Archduke,
which is the same with a Duke, the Arch only added. The fifth is a Crownet floral, only proper to a Duke. The sixth is the Crownet of a Marquesse, which differs thus, It is of leaves and points, the leaves or flowers above the points. The seventh is proper to an Earl, which hath points and flowers; but the points are above the flowers. The eighth is due to a Viscount, which is a Circulet or Coronet pearled, and neither flow∣ers nor points. The last is the form of that Crown, which is found to be in fashion in the time of William the Conqueror. Which I have inserted to shew the difference betwixt the Crown Imperial of England then, and now. As to the antiquity of these Crowns or Diadems, as notes of Regality: I finde not any where a just authority to assure me of their Origination: but, that there were Crowns, long before Tragedies were in use, is to me very evident; though Sir William Segar is of opinion, the use of them came from thence. Hon. Mil. & Civ. p. 213. Yet, that the use of them in these parts of the World, might come from the giving of Crowns in Triumph, and Lawrels or Wreaths for Vertue, is very probable, which was a thing very frequent, and of very great anti∣quity among the Romans; and hath conti∣nued,
and been exercised in the Empire since the translation to Germany, and that with much Ceremony, as in the example of Joannes Cru∣sius, his receiving the Laurel as Stratsburgh an. 1616. See Mr. Selden his Titles of Honor, where it is at large, fol. 402. Which custom hath since been in these parts, and indeed long before that time were Crowns given to Poets here; as, witnesse the example in St. Mary Overies Church, where one John Gower a Poet in Richard the seconds time hath a Statue crowned with Ivie mixed with Roses; but since it is more commonly used of Laurel. Though the Crown of Laurel or Bayes was first appropriated to him that triumphed for victory in the field. At which time, distincti∣ons of Crowns were observed according to the variety of merit. As Corona Muralis, this was due to him that was first seen upon the Wall of the Enemy. Corona Castrensis, for him that made a breach in the Castle of the Enemy; the first a Crown embattail'd, or made with battailment being of Gold, the other of Tow∣ers; And then they had Corona Navalis, gar∣nished with Fore-castles for service at Sea, made of Gold too. Then Corona Ovalis of Myrtle; for victory, gotten with little hazard: Corona Obsidialis, which was made of grass for him that had preser∣ved an Army besiged. Corona Civica, for him that saved a Citizen from the Enemy, made of Oaken
boughs: Corona Olivaris of Olive leavs, for vi∣ctory in the Olympick games: And Corona Po∣pulea, for young men that were found industri∣ous and studious in the exercises of vertues. But I find that amongst these rewards of ho∣nor, the Crown made of Ivy, called Corona Hederalis was only appropriated to the Poets; and here we see the great encouragement given to Vertue, which was an age doubtlesse, when it was much exercised in all its species. When vertuous moderation received an estimation in the minds of young Nobility, before  voluptuousnesse. And Honor more aimed at by steps of Vertue, than the engros∣sing parsimoniousnesse, or expending profuse∣nesse of the  and unsatisfying uncertainty of riches;  doubtlesse a most Noble Age. And why should any man make himself so  concern'd in the true honor of his creation, as to set himself so little before the irrational , as the Examples of ou idle and  Age do too often demonstrate, whilest all men naturally are ambitious of honor? And why should not any man blush to be seen reaching at it (that is only the recompence of vertue) till by some virtuous testimony he hath declared his desert? Certain I am, no generous and noble spirit ever breathed in any age, that did not present some opportunities of exercising virtue in one degree or other; and the reward in some measure is ever a con∣comitant
to Heroick and Ingenious merit. Or should it, in some case, fail the truly generous soul, though it misse its reward, yet it thinks it honor to have deserved Honor, and satisfies it self with that encouragement. Thus I have given a succinct account of all manner of Bearings. Some will here ex∣pect, that I should now lay down rules to dis∣cover the worth of the Atchiever, by the na∣ture of the Atchivement; as Guillim, and others have . It may be conjectured, how far a Coat-Armor is more or lesse honorable, by  of worth in the thing born; but  farther, from thence to a  of the quality of the merit, for which that  was a reward, is altogether uncer∣tain. Therefore; for conclusion, I shal instance one Escutcheon of Examples more, which I think (though not difficult to blazon) not easily reducible to any such judgement, yet the Families well known of noble and  Descent. The first is Sab. a Crosse engrailed Or, in the dexter Cant on a mullet Arg. an Inescut∣cheon of Ulstre, the addition of a Knight Baro∣net, being the Coat-Armor of Sir, Tho. Peyton of Knolton in East-Kent, Knight and . The second is Ermin on a chief Azure, three Lyoncels Rampant Or. The atchivement of Sir Anthony Aucher of Little-bourn in East-Kent. The third is barry of twelve Or, and Sable, by Sir James and Sir Thomas Thynne of Long leak in Wiltshire.
The fourth is Arg. on a Cheveron Sab. three Escollop-shels Or, between three peelets, char∣ged with as many Martlets of the first; all with∣in a border Vert, by Anthony Hammon of St. Albons in East-Kent Esq. The fifth is Arg. on a bend Az. three  heads cabossed Or. On an Escutcheon of pre∣tence, Arg. a Cheveron Sab. betwixt three Ra∣vens, by Thomas Stanley of Cumberlow in Hert∣fordshire Esq the paternal coat his right by de∣scent, (with the distinstion of the third house)
of the Earls of Derby, the Escutcheon of pre∣tence as by match with the daughter and heir of Sir James Enyon of Flower in Northampton∣shire. Where observe, that although a man marry the daughter and heir of a Coat-Armor, yet he hath not the power of quartering it, but on∣ly to empale it, or bear it thus in an  of pretence; the liberty of quartering, being in the heir, who enjoyes both their Coats by right of blood. Observe also, that if any thing be thus hid by an addition either Can∣ton or Escutcheon of pretence, it is notwith∣standing to be nominated, That no detriment be to the Coat. The sixth is Gules, three barbed arrows Arg. headed Or, by Edward Hales of Tunstal in Kent, Esq The seventh is Arg. a Cheveron between three Milrines, Sab. by Roger James, of Rigale in Surrey, Esquire. The eighth within a bordure bezanty Sab. Arg. an Imperial Eagle, by the Family of the Killigrews, in Cornwall. The ninth Arg. a fesse Ermines between six Mullets, Sab. by Steven Penckhurst of Bux∣sted in Sussex, Esquire. And now I hope I have not passed by any one thing that can be called pertinent to this discourse without some touch: perhaps, satis∣factory enough to any indifferent contemplati∣on. The End of Armory.
The Orders of Knighthood in most places of Christendome, and in particular first of the Order of St. George in England. The Creation Robe of a Knight of ye Garter
AS to Knighthood in generall, enough hath been already discoursed in the first part of this Treatise. I come now, to speak of the severall Otders, and especially those that are called Soveraign: amongst which I must needs esteem that of the Garter, or St. George in England to be as Noble as any in the World; not from that epidemick humor of most Writers, because it is of my own Nation; but for the excellency of it self: especially, in that according to the Articles of its foundation, none are to be admitted to the Honor, but such as are Peers of the Realm. For the first occasion of the erecting these So∣veraign Orders of Knighthood, above the more common, was, that as all Honors were insti∣tuted for the reward and encouragement of de∣serving persons, so these for persons of more eminence, or more excellent merit, to receive a character that might in a higher nature
than ordinary blazon their merit to the world. And that Order or fraternity must needs be esteemed of greatest honor, where the King shall submit himselfe to the badge of it. This Order of the Garter we find to be in∣stituted by Edward the third, after a return from the Warrs against the French and Scots, with eminent victories. The occasion Sir Willi∣am Segar says was but slight; alluding as I con∣ceive to the story of the King's taking up the Countesse of Salisburies Garter; Which he wearing on his own leg, caused a jealousie in the Queen. And from thence received the mot∣to life, Hony soit qui mal y pens, Evill to him that evill imagines. But I am of opinion that this humor arose from the French stories only, who would be apt enough to endeavour an abatement of the honor of it, lest its glory should appear too illustrious in the eye of the World; and out-shine or eclipse their then blazing Star. And that we may a little examine the truth, let us observe the ridiculousnesse of the co∣herence of these merry scandalizers. First they differ in their time, as shall appear anon; then concerning the Lady, they take notice of to make up the pretty Romance, the mistake is very great and plain; for in some places they say it was the Queen's Garter, and if so, what needed then the Motto? But most common∣ly they say, it was the Countesse of Salisburies';
whom they name sometimes Alice, and some∣times Joan; when her name was Katherine, and Mistris, and after wife to the Black Prince Heylyn. fol. 325. & 326. Son of the said King, as is well observed in Heylyn's History of St. George. By which, Froysart's error must appear very perspicuous, who was the first and most eminent Author of this mighty fable. Mounsier Favin in his Theater of Honor, quotes Froysart, and Polydore Virgil, for the like account. But I am apt to collect another reason from Mr. Selden's discourse (an autho∣rity that I think needs no Apology) and to think Edward the third, being to engage a field, Seld c. 5. fol. 792. gave St. George for the word, (long time be∣fore, the Patron-Saint of England) in which battail he gained a great victory; which was about the year 1349. and at his return in the year one thousand three hundred and fifty, established thisOrder to the honor of St George, which agrees with the black Book of Windsor that Chronologizes it on the three and twenty∣eth day of April in the year one thousand three hundred and fifty, being the three and twenty∣eth of that King's Reign. And I understand not, but that the addition of the Gartet might be after added to the En∣signes of the Order: for the firstEnsign together with the Robes was the Crosse of Saint George, yet in use amongst them. And some do adde that the Garter was from a Martiall rise also, as that a leather-garter
upon the left leg was a mark given to some of the eminent Commanders with promise of en∣riching it on those that performed honorably in the charge. For the account of the time according to other Authors, it is left disputable. Mr. Sel∣den takes notice of some of the French Authors, that affirm it to be erected in Anno 1344. yet after his victories; as in the relations of the same Froysart, and Thomas of Walsingam: And Polydore Virgil, (to whom Favin subscribes) Fav. fol. 68. & 70. will have it in An. 1347. Yet in another place he sets it down in the year one thousand three hundred and forty four. Oportet mendacem me∣morem esse. And one other observation I collect from some of these Authors; that the Order was established before either of these passages; on∣ly as a Seminary to draw other Knights of the world into these parts; which caused the French King to do the like the same year of another Order by way of prevention; this is averred by some. Which is, I conceive by other circumstances, a mistake upon a Just or Turn∣ment proclaimed by the said King Edward (about the year one thousand three hundred forty and four) in all places beyond the Seas, to be held at Windsor; about which time he caused to be built a very large round table for the entertaining of such Princes and Persons of great quality, as should repair thither; when the Earl of Salisbury was so bruised at
the Justing, that he dyed. At the news of which meeting; the French King sodainly after did the like, to obstruct the concourse of great soldiers and honorable Personages that this would have produced. The patron of this order is St. George; who suffered Martyrdome at Nicomedia, and was Heylyn. Hist. de St. Geo. cap. 1. fol. 142. buryed at Lydda in Capadocia according to Dr. Heylin: but Mr. Selden sayes, he suffered at Lydda, under Diocletian, about the  of Christ one hundred and ninty. Whose fame was so great in the world, that many Temples were built to his name, as that of Justinian in Armenia; and in Venice the chief Church for the Grecians; Jo. Eucaitensis built a Monastery Cedton. pag. 650. to the honor of St. George in the time of Con∣stantine. Into which the Emperors after were wont to make a solemn procession every Saint Georges day. In Carinthia, there is an Order of Knighthood of St. George, in very much esteem. And Eusebius speaks also of another De vit. Const. l 1. l. 32. Order of St. George among the Greeks whose Ensign is a red Crosse with this Motto Sub hec signo vinces, begun by Constantiue the Great. When first it came into this Nation, is by the best Antiquaries left disputed; but that he hath been long honored as Patron-Protector of England, is proved by all, and by Mr. Selden, before the Conquest; The three and twentyeth day of April, being constantly celebrated to his memory. And it is no marvail (saith the same Author)
that so warlike a Nation should chuse to them∣selves the name of such a souldier Saint, known by the particular name of Tropheophorus, and of greater eminence in both the Eastern and Western Churches then any other Souldier-Saint. The Soveraign of this order is the King of England; the number of the Fellowship is twenty six, besides the Soveraign; of which when any of them dye, the place is to be sup∣plyed by another elected by the Soveraign, with the consent of the Fraternity, as it was antiently; chosen and estalled at Windsor: but since it is referred to the entire disposing of the King. They have many Articles confirmed, to which all that are enstalled subscribe; and have an oath to which they swear that, to their power, during the time they shall be fellows of the Order, they will defend the honor, qua∣rels, rights and Lordships of the Soveraign, and that they will endeavour to preserve the honor of the said Order, and all the Statutes of it without fraud or covin. Quinam perju∣rati? The Officers of the Order are a Prelate, which is alwayes the Bishop of Winchester; a Chan∣cellor Register, a King of Arms called Garter; and an Usher called the Black Rod, added by Henry the eighth. Their habit is a Cassock of Crimson Velvet, and a Mantle of Purple Velvet lined with
white Sarcenet, on the left shoulder whereof is an Escutcheon of S. George embroydered with∣in a Garter with the Motto: the Escutcheon is Argent, a plain Crosse Gules. Above all, about the neck they wear a collar of the Order weighing thirty ounces of Gold Troy weight, composed of Garters and Knots enamel'd, and with Roses red and white; and since the coming in of King James, there hath been an intermixture of Thistles. At this collar hangeth the Image of St. George on horseback, enriched with precious stones. And about the left leg they wear a Garter enamelled and enriched with gold, pearl, and stones of great value with the same Motto of Hony soit qui mal y pens. For their ordinary Ensign they wear a blew ribbon over their left shoulder; and another on their left leg; and a Star of silver embroy de∣ry on the same side of their cloak with the Scutcheon of St. George in the Center of it. And sometimes at their Ribbon a George also, and then they wear it about their necks. Their feast is yearly at Windsor Castle on St. Georges day. In which place upon the foun∣dation of it was a Church erected with Dean and Prebends; as also thirteen poor aged Gen∣tlemen, established to be maintained with sti∣pends by the name of Knights of Windsor: who had appointed to them robes of cloath accor∣ding to the manner of the Order, which were to pray for the Order.
Of the Knights of the Round Table in England. IT is said by many writers, that the Order of the  was inftituted in imitation  the Round Table: but I can give no great assurance of it; only I believe it probable enough; the beginning of them both agreeing also in some kind of Analogy. This of the Round Table, (for so much as is remaining in History) appears to me to have been the most noble in the world, either before or since, for ought yet I can understand. And pity it were the memory of it should perish, as it is almost; being buried in the metamorphosis of ridiculous fables; and by that means only , with the shadowie reputation of a Romance, in the minds of many, and indeed most men. It was erected by King Arthur, who reigned in the year of our Redemption 490. and conque∣red Norway, Scotland, and so much of France that he was crowned King of Paris: as both ours and the French annals testifie. Of this King many fabulous things have been writ; but we may collect so much from the more serious, as may assute us that without doubt many noble and (beyond ordinary) heroick acts were
performed by this generous Prince. Which caused the society of this Order to shine with so much the more splendor than the ordinary stars of this sublunary world: insomuch that it is recorded in some Chronologies, that at one time summoning them to a meet∣ing at a place in Wales, called Carlion, or Car∣lignion, there resorted to him ten Kings, thir∣teen Earls, and many Barons, and other per∣sons of great quality that were of the Frater∣nity. This I have also in Sir William Segar; and in Seg. f. 155. a very antient Chronicle which I have seen my selfe in Manuscript in that Country; which was much the same with the relations I have since met with, of this Order. And that these Kings were not petty Kings must be understood, since there was at that time no Heptarchy, or Provincial Kings, but all Mo∣narchies, much in the same nature as they have been in our ages. This King is generally reported by Chrono∣logers (and some of them solid too) to be taken alive from the earth; or at least miracu∣lously disposed of, invisibly: but this is a riddle too great for me to unfold. Many of them  this fable I conjecture from an Epitaph that Merlin writ on him, Hic jacet Arturus, Rex quondam, Rex{que} futurus. Which very thing to my Judgement must make clear that he was buryed; which is their argument that he was not.
The Order or Fraternity however, was certainly in very great repute in the world, and being only a banquet of Honor could not but whet the emulations of all generous spi∣rits; for none were admitted to it but such as had shewed their merit by some eminent ex∣ploit. Their place of convention was Winchester; where they had their Round Table, and at the Feast of Pentecost they alwayes met and feasted. So saith Sir William Segar, (in whose Orders of Knighthood the articles of this Order are set down): but others are of another opinion, and tell us that Windsor Castle was the most peculiar place, where a Round Table was erect∣ed Heyly n-Hist. de St. Georg. fol. 318. for their meeting, being a Castle built by the same King; and the Records of the place shew us as much, though Winchester may sometimes have been the place, according as the time of Geof. of Mun∣mouth. the Kings being in progresse or keeping his Court accidentally there; as sometimes it was at Carleon; and sometimes in the North. Knights of St. Andrew in Scotland. THe Scots ever since the reign of Hungus Aubertus Maereus, fol. 145. the Pict have received St. Andrew for their Tutelar-Saint. Who, as it is reported in their
Histories making war on the English, saw in the skie a bright Crosse of St. Andrew; which is in the Shape of the Saltire, and in that battail after gained a very great victory. From which time ever since they flye that Crosse in their Banners. And from thence erected the Or∣der of St. Andrew. But I find nothing in Favin, Aubertus, Mereus, or the Scotch Wri∣ter , that can satisfie me in what time it began. Only it was refined by James the fifth. Who being honored with the Garter from England, the Toyzon d'or from the Emperor, and St, Michael from France, celebrated the Festivals of them all; and setting up their se∣veral Lesleus,  9. pa. 193. arms with their orders about them, over the gate of , erected his own also with the order of Saint Andrew in the midst: which Order is ensigned with a Collar of Rue, and Thistles, with a Medal of St. Andrew hanging at it; and this Motto, Nemo me im∣pune . Of the Golden Fleece in the Empire. THis Order of the Toyzon d'Or was institu∣ted by Philip Duke of Burgundy, an. 1429. upon his expedition to the Holy Land, in me∣mory of Gideon, who with three hundred men
fought against, and overthrew, a mighty Army Favin. l. 4. fol. 14. of the Midianites, as Favin is of opinion. Which perchance may be true: he marching upon a great enterprise with a smal Army, might do it to raise courage and emulation in his Commanders. The Patron is St. Andrew, the Soveraign Segar. the Dukes of Burgundy: the number twenty four, besides the Soveraign, all of Noble blood. Their habit is a Cassock of Crimson Velvet, and over it a Mantle of the same, lined with white; which openeth on the right fide, and is turned upon the left over the shoulder, embroy∣dered round about with a bordure of flames, fusils, and fleeces; and a Hood of Crimson Velvet on their heads. The Collar of the Order is of gold, wrought with flames, fusils, and fleeces; which they are bound to wear alwayes, upon a penalty. The power of making new is in the Soveraign only. And who ever enters into it renounces all other orders of Knighthood, unlesse the Sove∣raigns be Emperors, Kings, or free Princes. To the order belongs a Chancellor, a Trea∣surer, Register, and a King of Armes called Toyzon Dor. At the Collar hangs a golden Fleece. And formerly there was an Impresse peculiar to it; which was an instrument to strike fire, with his Motto, Ante ferit, quàm flamma micet.
The Emperor Charles the fifth, being after∣wards Soveraign as Duke of Burgundy, did much increase the Order. The severall Orders of Knighthood in France. Knights of the Star. THis order I find of very great eminence Seld. Title of Honor ca.  p. 55. in France, called the Star of the Sea; and sometimes also of the Virgin Mary. It was in∣stituted by King Robert, an. . And himself, and succeding Kings were of the Fraternity. Their Ensigne was a Star; which they wore was their Hoods, or Caps. But this Order in time grew so common, and distributed so im∣meritorioufly, Bodin. de rep. lib. 5. cap. 4. that Charles the seventh (as  at it) commanded every Yeoman of his Guard to wear a Star in like manner; which the Knights seeing, presently left it off, and so the Order fell.
Knights of St. Michael. JN the stead of the Knighthood of the Star the same King Charles erected the order of of St. Michael as some suppose: but more truly Lewis the eleventh at Amboys an. 1469. upon the occasion of a Vision (as their Historians relate) of the Archangel's appearance on Orleans Bridge as their Tutelar against the English. Seld. pars: sec. cap 3. fol. 552. At which time the famous Amazon, Joan of France, lived, who did many Heroick exployts, leading an Army her self in the field against the English. For which the English after ha∣ving vanquisht her (much to our disparage∣ment I think) in revenge caused her to be burnt for a Witch in the Market-place of Or∣leans: in which place is since a Conduit erect∣ed to her memory. This order of Monsieur St. Michael Arch∣angel is of thirty six Knights, and a Soveraign, which is the King. The Cognisance of the Order is a Collar of gold made of cockle-shels Favin l. 3. pag. 372. and knots, with the Image of St. Michael pendant at it, which Collar ought to weigh two hundred Crowns in gold, and not above nor under. For the wearing of this Collar there was a very strict article; as that, Every man that did not wear it every day was to cause a masse to
be said, and to pay seaven shillings six pence Turnoys of forfeiture: except in Arms, and then they were permitted to wear only the Image of the Angel on a chain or ribbon: the Motto of the order is, Immensi tremor Oceani. To this order is established a Herald called Mon. St. Michael, a Treasurer, a Chancellor, and a Register. Their habit according to the constitution of Henry the second of France was, his doublet, hose, shooes, scabbard, hat-band, and feather, all white; a Surcoat with sleeves, of cloth of silver; over it a Mantle of the same turned up over the left shoulder, and tyed over the right, embroydered with a bordure like the Collar. Over his shoulder lay a hood of cloth of silver spreading over his back, the tippet hanging down before, and over all the Collar. Knights of the Holy Ghost, or St. Esprit. TO this order of St. Michael did Henry the third, in honor of Whit-Sunday, (on which day he was chosen King of Poland) institute the order of Chivaleir du benoist sante Esprit: Joyning both this and the other into one, an. 1578. as they continue to this day.
In this discourse of this order by Monsieur Favin, is set down the Oathes, Ceremonies, Pensions, Accompts, and all the duties: all which should I insert would be too  for my intention. The manner of their procession to Hon. Mil. & Civ. lib. 2. p. 87 88, 89. Court, and many other particulars, is set down concerning them in Sir William Segar. Their robe is like that of St. Michael; only of black Velvet embroydered all about with gold and silver of Flowers-de-lysse, and knots of gold between sundry cyphers of silver, and flames of gold, seamed: garnished also with a Mantle of green cloth of silver, wrought over with the same manner of embroydery with the Mantle both lined with Orange coloured Sat∣tin. The great Mantle they wear turned up over the left shoulder, and open on the right: their hose and doublet white, and black bonnets with white plumes; the Collar over all, wrought in the same manner as the embroydery. They have a crosse hanging at it, with a Dove in the Center of it, as in another place shall be de∣scribed. Of the Order of the Gennet. THis by the Annals of France is reckoned the first Order that ever was instituted in that Country. But I have not given it the first place, because it is now extinguished, and
its essence only remaining in the Chronolo∣gie of Fame. It was ordained by Charles cal∣led Fav. lib. 3. fol. 312. & Aubert. Meraeus. pag. 62. the Tyrant, before his usurpation called Charles Martell Seneschall, or High Steward of France. Who in a battel against the Moores, gaining a Victory, had, amongst many other spoyls, a great number of Genets skins, and some of the beasts; In memory of which victo∣ry he instituted this Order, about the year of our Lord 726. The number was 16. to whom he gave Collars of gold made of a triple chain enterwoven with enameld red Roses, at the end whereof hung a Gennet of gold enamelled black and red, upon a Terrasse or bank of flowers fairly enamel'd: This continued till King Robert, and then the Star of the Sea e∣clipsed it. Fol. 63. These Knights saith Aubertus Meraeus, had other Ensignes appropriated also, as a Ring af∣ter the manner of the Romans; and certain habits for the body. About which time, or not long after, Char∣lemain created another Order called of the Crown Royall: but that was not so much in esteem, being only for a reward of service in Friezland, the Governour of the Country ha∣ving the power of creating the Knights.
Knights of the Broomeflower; And also of the Ship. LEwis the ninth in his time instituted two Orders of Knighthood; one called of the Broomeflower in the Cod, and the other of the Ship, called also of the Crescent, or half Moon. The first he instituted at his Coronation, and it continued till the end of the reign of Charls the fifth, and extinguished with his life. The collar of the Order was composed of Cods of Broomeflowers intermixed with Lozanges en∣amelled with flowers-de-lysse; and at it, hung a Crosse formy flory, with this Motto; Exaltat humiles. The other of the Ship he erected upon the occasion of the second voyage into Egypt, to encourage the Nobility that went with him. The collar of the Order was enterlaced with double Scallops, and double Crescents inter∣woven with a meddal hanging at it, with a Ship enamelled under sayl. This King Lewis returning from his voyage Knights of St. La∣zarus. against the Turks, an. 1554 brought home with him a Troop of Knights, called of St. Lazarus, to whom he gave large possessions: But afterwards, this Order fell again, and their revenues were given to the Knights
of Malta: untill the time of Henry the fourth who instituted that of Mount-Carmel, and re∣vived Knights of Mount Carmel. that of St. Lazarus. There are many other ancient Knighthoods recorded in France, but as they were of lesse esteem, so are they also out of date; and I shall only name them, most of which were more private Orders, and had subjects for their So∣veraigns: There was of the Porcupine: Of Porcu∣pine. Thistle. Croissant. Ermin. Cock and dog. Seld. pag. 554, 555. the Thistle of Bourbon: of the Croissant of Anjou: of the Ermin of Britagne. Of which examin Monsieur Favin his Theatre of Honor. There was also an order of the Dog and Cock, appropriated to the family of Monmoren∣cy, and another of de la dame blanke al' escue verd; or the order of the Fair Lady of the green Field; instituted by Jean de Boucicaut Marshal of France under Charles the sixth, who were sworn unto divers Articles, as that they should assist all Ladies, and Gentlewomen wronged in their honors or fortunes, answer challenges of Armes, supply one anothers necessary ab∣sence, that if any Lady or Gentlewoman, re∣quired aid of any of them, and after any Knight or Esquire should challenge him, he should first right the Lady; and then perform the  or if a chalenge preceded such other accident, it was at their pleasure which to undertake first; and many more such, which would be too tedious for this place. They are at large in Mauchaut Sieur de Roman ville his history of Boucicat.
Of Military Orders in Spain. Of the Order of the Lilly. THis Order was erected in  by Garcia the sixth, of the name surnamed Naiera, in honor of the Virgin Mary; and upon a miracle so great as might make this Lilly one of the primest flowers in her little garden. A Book of devoti∣on full of improba∣ble  licen∣cedby the Church of Rome. The substance of it this: The King having been ve∣ry sick; in the extremity of his disease sent to St. Saviour de Leyra, and other places of devotion, that prayers and interercessions might be made for his recovery; In which time was discovered in the City of Naiera, (where or∣dinarily he kept Court) the Image of the Virgin Mary issuing out of a Lilly, holding her Son berwixt her arms. And suddenly af∣ter the discovery of this, the King recovered his health; and many other miracles were done on diseased people in that place, as sup∣posed by vertue of the Virgin Mother; whom Fau. l. 6. fol. 11. they tearmed the Lilly of the Vallyes. In ho∣nor whereof the said King erected this Order, and made himself Soveraign of it, and his Sucessors after him. These Knights did wear
on their breasts a Lilly embroydered in silver; and on festivall dayes a double chain of gold in∣terlaced with letters M, after the manner of the Gotish letter; with an Oval meddal hanging at it with a Lilly enamelled. Knights of San Jago, or St. James. THis was erected by the resolution of Gen∣tlemen, being either Barons, or men of Segar. great quality, that (jupon the conquering of their Country by the Arabians) retired into the Mountains of Asturia; and residing there made an engagement of War against the Moors; agreeing upon religious Rules of Knighthood, yet reserving to themselves li∣berty of marriage: but this Order Favin speaks to be erected by Alphonso the ninth, an. 1158. Favin. l. 6. fol. 138. and that it was confirmed in 1175, by Pope Alexander the third, Their Governor is called great Master, their feast is on All-Saints day; when they meet in very great magnificence, having very great re∣venues: their Ensign a red Crosse shaped like a Sword, with an Escollop's shell on it, in imita∣tion Ibid. f. 137 of the badge of the Pilgrims that go to Jerusalem, and to the Sepulchre of St. James the Apostle.
Now the great Master of this Order hath alwayes neer him thirteen Knights where ever he goes for his aid, and Councill; and so all the other Orders in Spain. Of the Order of Calatrava. THis was begun an. 1158. in imitation of Aub Mae. foi. 99. that of St. Jago, by Don Sanctio the third, King of Toledo, and it takes it name from the place of its establishment: their habit is a black garment, and on the breast thereof a red Crosse; they have many great priviledges, and possessi∣ons in Spain, the form of their Crosse is set down in the end of this discourse; which if we will believe Monsieur Favin, and Aubertus Maereus, is quite another then that which Sir William Segar describes. Knights of Alcantara. THese also derive their denomination from the place of their institution, and Segar. living under the same orders with those of Ca∣latrava, doe wear the same fashioned Crosse, only the Colour is green They have a very glorious Church at Alcan∣tara in Castiglia upon the river Tago, endowed
with rich possessions, where their great meet∣ings are. These were first of the order of St. Julian, Favin. l. 6. fol. 142. called the order of the Pear-tree, Ferainando the second King of , and Gallicia, being the first great Master. 1176. Knights of the Band. SIR William Segar attributes the originall of this Ordsr to Alphonso King of Spain, an. 1268. But Favin sets it down in an. 1330. Ibid. fol. 163, 164. from the testimony of Don Antonio de Gueva∣ra, Bishop of Mondognedo; But by the same person Alphonso the eleventh, of which Order (that it might receive the more reputation) he enrolled himselfe and his Son. And yet (as Fa∣vin sayes) None were to be admitted but younger brothers, and mean Gentlemen of poor and slender sufficiency, who must have been ten years followers of the Court; or at the least had fought three times against the Moors. They wear a red Scarfe or Ribon, crosse the left shoulder, like our Knights of the Bath, the breadth of three inches. Their articles are too many to be inserted here. Sir William Segar and Favin have them at large.
D' Avis in Portugal. THere was an Order in Portugal, erected in the year 1147. called D' Avis, by Alphon∣so Aub. Maer. fol. 119. the first, who were seatrd in the City Ebora, and so called from the Virgin Mary, being Pa∣tronesse of the City. They had a great Master, and were called Fratres, and the place of their convention was called Frieria. Their Ensign is the same Crosse with Calatrava vert, and in the centre of it a Pear-tree. Of the Order of Jesus Christ. SInce, in the year 1320. was erected another Order of more esteem amongst the Portu∣gals called of Jesus Christ, by Dionysius King of that Country, and nephew to Alphonso the tenth of Castile; to which Order was given much of the revenue of the Knights Templars, that lay in that Countrey, the Kings of Portu∣gal are ever the Soveraigns of the Order to this day: The Ensign of the Order is a red crosse surmounted or intersected with another white, on a black vestment; and they have many privi∣ledges, and Articles amongst them.
Of this order was Don Pantaleon, (Brother to the Portugal Embassadour) who was beheaded at Tower-Hill, July 10. 1654. Knights of Montesia. THis order was much about the time of those of Calatrava and received their Seg. name from the place of their residence in Va∣lentia, and do wear for their Ensign a plain crosse Gules. This order was established in the year 1317. Aub. . and had much of the revenue of the Knights Templars also, setled on them. Knights of Redemption: THese Knights called of Redemption, were erected by James King of Aragon, upon the conquering the Islands of Majorica, in the year 1212. Their Articles are many, but the chief is, they are to redeem prisoners; from whence their title is derived: their habit is a white garment, with a black crosse; and their Governour is alwayes resident at Barcco, na.
D'Espuella D' Orada, or, Of the Goldeu Spnr. THere is another Order in Spain, of far more honor called  D' Espuella D' Orada. Which was created with much cere∣mony; as bathing (like our Knights of the Bath), then being laid on a rich bed, after brought to the Chappel or Church, where he performs his Vigils, confesses, and supplicates for power to observe the duty belonging to the order; then his gold spurs are put on, and a Mr. Seld. Title of Honor, fol. 576. sword girt about him, and the sword being drawn, is delivered into his right hand; in which posture standing, he takes an Oath, never to refuse to dye in defence of his Law, King, and Country. And then receiving a kisse from all the rest of the order, in testimony of the amity betwixt them, he is compleat. Other orders there are there, as that of Ca∣valeri Armadi, Cavaleri  Alarde, and some more antient; as the Order os the Dove or Ho∣ly Ghost in Castile; of St. Saviour of Mont Re∣al in Aragon; but these are either out of date, or of low reputation.
Knights of the Annun∣tiation. THis Order, saith Sir William Segar, was erected about the same time with that of St. Michael, but how I shall engage my faith to this article I know not; for I find much un∣certainty in the relation, the institution of St. Michael being in an. 1469. according to his own account; and of the Annuntiation, an. 1434. Besides, there is a greater error yet, in computation; for Monsieur Favin, (who hath some reason in this case to be understood, aud hath been esteemed authentick) affirms it to be by Amedis the fifth, called also the Green, or Verd: whom he Chronologizes to live in an. 1355. which makes a vast difference: and again Aubertus Maereus, in his Symbola Equest. Ordinum gives the honor of its birth to Amedis the sixth, Earl of : by which I must con∣fesse so great an uncertainty appears, as affrights me from any conclusion; but that by their general , defacto, I am assured such an Order was. And that in memory of Amedis the fifth, who most couragiously defended Rhodes against the Turks, where he took the bearing of Gules a plain crosse Argent, which the Dukes of Savoy have continued till this day.
This order was first called of the snares of favin. l. 8. . 310. love, from the receiving from his Lady the favour of a bracelet made of her hair in∣to love-knots, and it was constantly celebrated on St. Maurices day, who is Patron-Saint of Savoy. He composed it to consist of fifteen Knights, comprehending himself a chief Master. The place of their celebration is the Church of Pietra, in the Castle of Bellies; unto which at the institution of this Order was given cer∣tain lands for the maintenance of fifteen Chap∣lains: and continually every Knight at his death gives to the Church an hundred Flo∣rins. And one other Article was, that at the fune∣ral of every Knight ceremoniously performed at the Castle of Pietra, every Knight of the order should wear black; (whereas their mourn∣ing was a white Gown) and leave off the Col∣lar for certain dayes: and that at the enterment of the Soveraign, every Knight according to Segar. fol. 66. their seniority in order should offer up his Col∣lar. Every Knight was sworn to wear this order dayly, and to accept of no other. And that no person stained with reproach or dishonor should be admitted: or if found so after, to be degraded. Of these past Knighthoods, these four, of the Garter in England; the Toyzon in Burgndy;
St. Michael, and of St. Esprit in France; and this of the  in Savoy, are the most honorable, and yet in being. Of the Knights Templars. THis Order as it hath been most famous in the world (though now extinct) I think ought to be preserved with an honora∣ble memory. It was erected in a pious de∣sign, perpetrated with a glorious fame; though extinguished in an ignoble and injust strata∣gem, of the Devil, the Pope, and the King of France. Its first rise was from an accident of cer∣tain Vid. Aub. Maer. f. 77. & 78. Gentlemen meeting in the Holy Land, (some say nine) an. 1117. Who hearing of the great disturbance of the Country by the in∣cursion of Turks and swarmings of Pickaroons, engaged a confederacy, with the hazzard of their lives to suppresse them. Which reso∣lution being known was so approved of by the Patriarch, that he commanded accommoda∣tion for them in the Temple neer the Sepul∣chre. And the King of Jerusalem appointed them all appertinencies for so religious an en∣terprize. From whence they received the name of Knights-Templars. And thus going on with much resolution and courage; many Christians came in to thrir assistance, and
many brave exploits were performed by them: Insomuch that in nine years time they had erected such a structure of honor, as set all the world at gaze, and establisht their Countrey in a happy peace. For a reward whereof, Pope Honorius, at the suit of the Patriarchof Jerusa∣lem, prescribed unto them a peculiar Order of life; and distinguished their order by wearing a white Garment, and Pope Eugenius ad∣ded a red Crosse; after which prosperity they elected a Head whom they called Great Ma∣ster. Yet not long after this, Jerusalem and a great part of the Countrey was lost for want of supply from other parts of Christendome. How∣ever they still made war upon the Turks for 120. years, and added new breath to the Trump of Fame, purchasing large revenues to the Or∣der in most Kingdoms of Europe, being the exercise of love in all Christian Princes, and of emulation in every Heroick spirit: Insomuch that Vitriacus gives this character of them: they were, saith he, Leones in bello, agni man∣sueti Hist. orient. cap. 65. & 66. in domo, in expeditione milites asperi, in Ecclesia vel ut Eremitae & Monachi; inimicis Christi duri & feroces, Christianis autem be∣nigni & mites, &c. But this great glory could not shine for ever, without an eclipse; nor such favorites of fortune live without envy, as well as emu∣lation; and their fall was so much the more sodain and violent, by how much their fame
was higher. For in England, France, and al∣most all parts of Christendome, was it at an in∣stant (as it were) and in one very day, by sen∣tence of Pope Clement the first, (to satisfie the the base avarice of Philip de Beau the Roy of France) totally disolved and supprest. The pretence was upon certain Articles ex∣hibited against them; which have been by all the world, almost not only adjudged false, but . fol. 92. ridiculous. As that they used Pagan ceremo∣nies in the election of their great Master: that they lost the Holy Land, (when they alone en∣deavoured to preserve it): that they held some Heretical opinions: that they worshipped an Image apparelled in a mans skin: and that they drunk mans blood to confirm their oath of Con∣federacy. When indeed itwas most certain, that the crime for which they suffered was their vast wealth; and their fidelity to the Patriarch, whom they owned before the Pope: cause suf∣ficient to set the one to solicite, and the other to grant, a monstrous doom, which they suf∣fered under; for what will not pride and ava∣rice do? The Great Master himselfe and sixty others of the Order were commited to the mercy of fire in Paris at one time, and the rest persecu∣ted, if not executed, in most places; all of them dying without any acknowledgement of any one allegation, and with the same Christian and heroick spirits they had lived in,
and by the account of Favin (a French writer and one I think in this not too impartial) there was, at twice after, one hundred or above burn∣ed to death in Paris, all dying with innocence in their mouths; and in the same place many after. But as such notorious evils are ever the Ush∣ers of God's infinite judgements, it was not far off here: for the two Knights imployed in the accusation, were one hanged, and the other slain, in a short time after. How the Revenues prospered in the hands of the new possessors, I know not; or the possessors in the enjoyment of them; but I believe like those of Church lands in this Nation: And the account of stories and tra∣ditions I have seen and heard in particular of it, makes me with confidence say, Very unfortu∣nately. Many of their Territories and Castles in some places were given to an order of Knight∣hood called the Joannites, Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, and particularly in Eng∣land, who were after Knights of Rhodes, and lastly of Malta, being conferred by Act of 7 of Ed. 2. Parliament, (how taken from them I cannot say), and in Vienna by order of a great Coun∣cel.
Of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, Rhodes, and Malta. SOme have been of opinion that this Or∣der was originally from the time of the Holy War, an. 1099. When, by the conduct Segar. fol. 66, 67. of one called Peter the Hermit, Robert Duke of Normandy, Son to William the Conqueror, God∣frey Duke of Lorrain, and some other Noble persons, Jerusalem was  from the Sara∣cens; being called Knights of St. John Baptist and of Jerusalem. But it is more certainly related, that certain  Christians going to visit the Holy Sepulchre, obtained leave of the Caliph of Egypt, to build a little Cottage to live in by it: paying a due tri∣bute for their liberty as for their own resi∣dence, and for the entertaining such as should adventure to joyne with them in their devout life; which, Monsieur Favin relates to be Neo∣politans. After this, their number so encrea∣sed that they built another to entertain wo∣men, more large and stately; and enlarged their Oratory; and another for men in the nature of a Colledge or Hospital, where they established a Rector or Master, and from the
great charity among them, their religious life, and good deeds to Pilgrims, they were called brethren Hospitallers of St. John Baptist of Je∣rusalem. And upon the Conquest of the Ciry, they had great Franchises granted them, and large revenues, with liberty to mannage armes, Favin. l. 9. fol. 388. and were instituted to be Knights of St. John, An. 1164. And for their distinction they wore a black garment, with a white ankerd Crosse, with eight points; but in War they wore a red Coat of Arms with the same white Crosse See the example of the Crosses at the end of this discourse. After their successe in the Holy War grew very famous, and that they had done very great exploits, almost over all Palestine; in the year 1308, they wonne the City of Rhodes from the Turks. And as valiantly maintained it against them afterwards, who four times  it in vain; and the fifth time also was O taman himself repulsed, with the losse of 40000 Mahometans. But being constantly op∣pressed, and not encouraged with any reliefe from the Christians of other parts, after three moneths siege they lost it, and ever since have remained in Malta. Into this Order no man was admitted but he was first to approve himself a Gentleman before the Rector. The Son of a Moore was not to be admitted, nor of a Jew or Mahome∣tan, though the Son of a Prince, and a Christi∣an
himselfe: and they were sworn to fight for the Christian faith, to do Justice, defend the op∣pressed, relieve the poor, persecute the Ma∣hometans, live vertuously, and protect Widows and Orphans. Of Knights Teutonicks. THis order of the Teutonici was founded by an Almain, who remaining in Jerusalem, after the taking of it, gave great and liberal en∣tertainment to all Christians that came to him, and in a short time had drawn such a resort; that from thence arose a Fraternity that bound themselves under certain Articles, and elect∣ed a great Master or Governor; every man of that association, apparelling himself in white with a black crosse pattee voyded with a crosse patonce. Which Fraternity afterwards grew a very great Order; and purchased a noble fame: But Jerufalem being taken by the Turks again, they removed, and pitcht their settle∣ment in Ptolemaida; and that being also taken by the Saracens, they retired to Germany; and engaging a War against the Prusians, they got great victories, and having the Em∣perours Grant for enjoying what by the sword they wonne, with expence of some blood, they purchased great revenues in Prusia: and
built many illustrious , with Churches, and some Cathedrals, establishing Bishops to them, whom they enjoyned to wear the habit of the Order: this was about the year 1220. Fre∣derick the second, being then Emperor. The chief Church appropriate to this Order . l. 2. ol. 105. is Marcenburg. The Knights besides their large possessions are Lords of Livonia, and they have a Governour, which they still call the Great Master. Knights of St. Sepulcher. THis was antiently an honorable Knight∣hood, but it is since extinguisht, and no∣thing but the memory of it remaining, and that inclusively in those of Malta. The En∣sign Ibid fol. 106. of the Order is yet extant amongst them, as a relique of antiquity; which is a double Crosse, , as it were, two conjoyned Gules, as   Segar relates: But Favin speakes , as that their Crosse was a Crosse , in each Canton of the same a small Crosse plain; being the same as the armes of the Kings of Jerusalem: and from this origi∣nall that Godfrey of Bullein gave great goods to , especially in his last Will and Testa∣ment; by which also he ordained that him∣self, and the successors Kings of Jerusalem, should be buryed in their Cathedrall Church,
which was joyning to the Sepulchre; that their Patriarch should have the Prerogative of crown∣ing them. And Baldwin his immediate succes∣sor establisht them an Order of Knighthood, (being before put regular Chanons) appointing Favin lib. fol. 381. the Patriarch of Jerusalem their Great Master: Thus Favin relates. Knights of St. Mary. THese were a religious Order, erected by Seg fol. 107. certain Gentlemen of , and Ma∣dona; for which they obtained a licence of Pope Urban, but with mony only, calling themselves Knights of St. Mary, but were commonly called Cavaleri de Madona; and indeed pro∣perly enough, for whereas they professed to fight against Infidels, they lived allwayes at home in peace, plenty, and ease, for which they gained the heroick character of Fratres gaudenti, or good-fellow Brethren. Their habit was very rich, and on it they wore a Crosse, like that of St. John of Jerusalem.
Knights of St. Lazaro. THe Knights of St. Lazaro challenge a great antiquity, so high as St. Basil; They had great possessions, and honorable reputation; but, like the Knights Templars, were suddenly eclipsed, and had as absolutely been smother∣ed in the Funeral croud of obscured honor, had not Pope Pius Quartus a little revived them. This Order does own obedience to a great Master also, and are engaged to the obser∣vance of many Articles; especially they are to be of lawful birth, and Gentlemen by dou∣ble descent, and of Christian parents; to wear a green Crosse in the manner of a Crosse Pattee fimbriated, as Sir William Segar describes; but Aubertus Maereus otherwise, as is exemplified hereafter. Of the Knights of the Bear, called also of St. Gall. IN the year 1213. the Emperour Frederick Favin. l 7. fol. 273. the second, going in Pilgrimage to the Abbey of St. Gall, gave great priviledges in
acknowledgment of their assistance in pulling down the Emperor , and establishing him. Whereupon also he established an Order of Knighthood, called of the Bear; which Knights were yearely to meet at the Abbey of St. Gall, on the 16. of October; where all new Knights were to receive the order from the Abbot. Aub Maer. lib. 2. f. 79 This Order he called of the Bear in honor of St. Ursus that was martyred at Soleure. Un∣to this Order he gave a collar and  of gold, at which hung a figure of a Bear ena∣melled Sable. Of the Order of the Ele∣phant. IN Denmark is a Military order, called of the Elephant, and also of the blessed Vir∣gin Mary: who have for their Collar a chain of gold interwoven with Elephants and Spurs, and at it hangeth a meddal of the Virgin Ibid. sol. 150. Mary, encompassed about with Rayes of the Sun; at the neather part whereof hangeth ano∣ther circle enclosing three nayles, which  term Symbola omnia Christianae . Who was the Founder is left : the Ele∣phants are figured with Castles on theis backs, which some doe suppose to be the  or designment of Christernus. 4.
Of the Order of Mantua. JN Mantua, some Fryers doe report to be some of the bloud of our Saviour kept, with a piece of the Spunge in which he re∣ceived the Vinegar and Gall. Which Reliques they say, doe daily work extraordinary mira∣cles. Favin. fol. 392. In honor of which bloud Vincentio de Gon∣zaga, fourth Duke of Mantua, did institute an Order of Knighthood, calling them Knights of the bloud, of our Saviour Jesus Christ, making himself the Great Master of the Or∣der; which was confirmed by Pope Paul the fifth. The originall of it was about the year 1608. when he created fifteen Knights, giving them collars composed of Ovals of Gold, some the length one way, others another; in one of which were these words, Domine probâsti; and in the other, flames of fire, flashing about a crucible or melting-pot full of sticks of Gold; and at the same hangeth before another large Oval, where∣in are designed two Angels standing upright, holding a Chalice, and pix, crowned; on the table of it, are seen enamelled  drops of blood; And about this Oval is this Inscription, Nihil I sto triste recepto.
Knights of St. Stephano. THis Order was erected in the year 1561. by Cosmo Duke of Florence; ordaining amongst them such articles almost as those of the Order of Malta: their residence is Pisa; where the said Duke erected a Church to the honor of the Order, and is himselfe the Great Master. Other Orders of Knighthood there are, and have been in the Holy Land, and other parts: As of St Thomas Apostle; St. Kathe∣rine of Mount Sinai: Of the white Eagle in Polonia: Of the Swan in Cleveland: The Bre∣thren Sword-bearers in Livonia: Of St. Blase in Armenia: Of St. John of Acres, and of St. Gerian, which was instituted by Frederick , to which order none were ad∣mitted but Germaine Gentlemen. But these are all, or most of them, out of date, and not so considerable as to trouble an inge∣nious brain with, in this place. Favin and others have discoursed enough of them, to which (if the reader be desirous of further knowledge) I refer him. There is also ano∣ther Order called of the white Dragon in Germany, erected by the Emperour Sigismond, upon a resolution of extirpating heresie and
schism throughout all his Dominions, who had for their Ensign a white Dragon: and in Swe∣then another, which is called of the Seraphins: who had at their institution appointed them collars of Seraphins heads, intermixed with Crosses. And now, if I have not been too tedi∣ous in this discourse of Knighthood, I have I hope said enough, and conclude with the de∣scription of the severall forms of their Crosses before mentioned. The first is of St. Esprit, the second, of St. Michael, the third of Calatrava, the fourth of St. John of Jerusalem, the fifth of St. Lazarus
the sixth of the Teutonicks, the seventh of St. Andrew, the eighth of the Sepulchre, the ninth of Christus d' Avis. And so I take leave of Knighthood: and in the next place only cursorily run through the antiquity of Heralds, and the Inns of Court and Chancery with their foundations; for which last (though not very pertinent to my businesse,) yet I may expect an excuse, since it hath nor yet been any way done. The End of Knighthood.
OF HERALDS. THe word Herald (saith Verstegan) Verst. . 321. is derived from the Saxon , and by abbreviation ; and Herald which in that language signifies the Champian of an Army: and growing to be a name of Of∣fice, it was given to him that in the Army had the  charge of challenging to battail or combat. Sir Henry Spelman cals him Nuncius sacer, and speaking of the signification of the word, Gloss. f. 336. says, quidam enim Herault , some doe write Herault, that is, Dominus celsus, an emi∣nent Lord, some Herold, which is an old Lord; and some Heral, hoc est, says he, ministrum , an Officer of an Army, which last he supposes the most proper. These are Officers of great antiquity (saith Dune mensis) who writes that they are as anci∣en as Kings, and were tearmed of the Romans, , & Caduceatores. And doubtlesse thee ection of our Heralds was in imita∣tion
of them; though their authority be not so great with us, as it seems theirs was; whose Of∣fice was established by Numa Pompilius and a Vid. Pomp. . de magist. Rom. p. 5. colledge or hostell erected of twenty wise and reverend men; per quos fiebat, ut Justum indi∣ceretur Bellum, & ut Foedere, fides pacis consti∣tueretur: ordering that it was and should be un∣lawfull to take armes against an enemy without their consent and appointment. Which Fecialians, when the popular Estate was changed into a Monarchy again, wore the Coats of Arms of Purple and Scarlet, fringed with gold, and an Eagle of the same embroyde∣red thereon, and the Emperors name then reign∣ing: and they had one Principall which was called by the people Pater patratus, whom they ever reverenced as sacred, and it was a rule or law among them, that Fecialium sacra violare, nefas erat. Since when, as the Office now is, they have been esteemed as Embassadors, and sometimes have been made so; however, are the Messen∣gers of Princes and great Monarchs, and what Favin. l. 4. cap. 4. ever their message have been, priviledged in the same degree with Embassadors, and not only in our parts, but all over the world have been in being (though not as now in re∣gular Office) ever since there have been Kings. In every City of Greece (as saith Ulpian the Interpreter of Demosthenes) they were called Ceryces, and had in much honor of all men,
and maintained out of the Publique Trea∣sury. In Rome, and most other places they carry∣ed as Ensignes of their Office  Rods in imitation of the Poeticall fiction of Mercu∣ry, Ibid. who is styled the Herald of the Gods: those of Rome wreathed with two Serpents; and the ancient Druides of wreaths of Vervine, imita∣ting the same. In France, (where a long time this office hath been in much honor) not only  Ibid. St. Dennis the principal King of Arms; but the other Heralds, and Pursevants are to be of no∣ble ; and Mountjoy to be of three de∣scents, as well of his Fathers as of his Mothers side, of Noble linage, and Coat-Armor. Their Office or Colledge is in the Church of St. Anthony the lesse in Paris. And they are allowed the priviledge of entrance into any Prince's Court; and an injury offered to them is a publique injury in all parts of the world. But I do not finde they were in this  and establishment, till the time of Favin. l. . c. 4 f. 36. Philip de Valloys. The revenues of them in France was very great, as to Mountjoy in parti∣cular 2000. l. Lands in free tenure, and 1000 pound per annum stipend, as Favin relates. And the others 1000 pound per annum stipend, be∣sides, other profits (and they are many): be∣sides their priviledges are very great, which in the same Author are at large set down: in which Author I cannot but observe the ridi∣culousnesse
of their humor in the christening of their Pursevants (for they call it christen∣ing, and the Ceremony is performed with the powring a pot of Wine on their heads); they name them at their own pleasure, and some they call Plain-way, Jolly-heart, No-lyar, Tell∣troth, Chearfulnesse, Fair-seeming, Lofty∣foot, and the like. But to come neerer to our own concern∣ment, I think to proceed with the same Office in our own Nation, where they are now in lesse esteem, I confesse, then they have been in former ages; yet have ever been honored with messages between Potentates for matter of Honor and Arms. Ceremoniarum Ministri, as in the Coronation of Kings and Queens, en∣stalment of Princes, and creation of Noble dignities of honor, in Triumphs, Justs, Com∣bats, Marriages, Christenings, Interments; and to attend all solemn Assemblies of State and honor, and by some of them ought the proclamations of all great matters of State to be promulged, causes of Chivalry, and Gen∣tility are referred to their care, as in the right of bearing of Arms, in Shields, Scutcheons, Targets, Banners, Penons, Coats, and such like; correcting of Arms in visitations: and observing descents and pedigrees of Noblemen and Gentlemen. They are the Protonotaries, Griffiers, and Registers of all acts, and proceedings in the Court of the High  and Lord Marshall
of Engiand, or of such as have their authority; and in their books and Records they are to preserve to perpetuall memory all facts and memorable designments of honor and Arms. They have been long establisht in England; but I find not that they were incorporated into a Collegiate Society till Richard the third's time; when they were incorporated by Charter, and placed at Coleharbor, from whence they often removed, untill they became setled, where now at this time they are placed, by the honorable endeavour of that Illustrious family of the Howards, formerly Dukes of Norfolk, and Earls Marshals of England; the house be∣ing before called Darby house. Which was established to them in the time of King Philip and Queen Mary, and in these tearms incorpo∣rated; by the names of Garter King of Arms of England; Clarenceux King of Arms of the South parts, and the Heralds and Pursevants for ever; and to have and use a common Seal to purchase Lands to sue and be sued by. Edward the sixth in his third year granted them many priviledges, viz. In these words: Forasmuch as sundry records and testimonies of great antiquity, and of no lesse credit have now lately reduced to our perfect knowledge the Kings of Armes, Heralds, and  of Arms elected as persons vertuous, and for their good qualites, knowledge, and experience to serve in the affairs of the Common-wealth,
have been alwayes heretofore by Emperors, Kings, and Princes of Christian Realms upon most worthy and just considerations not only maintained and supported, as well with yearly stipends and pensions, as daily profits, advanta∣ges, and commodities, sufficient to the necessity of the decent and convenient living of them and theirs in honest state. (Which daily profits, advantages, and commodities are now lately much decayed, to their hindrance, especially in this our Realm) but also have been by the said Emperors, Kings, and Princes, enriched and adorned, time out of mans memory, with divers kinds of priviledges, liberties, and franchises; as, among others, that they and every of them be free, exempt, quite, and dis∣charged not only from subsidies, dismes, fifths, tenths, reliefs, contributions, taxes, profits, grants, benevolences, and generally from all other manner of charges, as well in time of War as Peace, in all such Realms and Domi∣nions, wherein they made their demour; but also in all Market Towns, and all other places, from Tolls, Fines, Customes, Impositions, and Demands; and aswell from Watch and Ward in all Cities, Towns, and Castles, Borroughs, and Villages; and from the election or appoint∣ment to any Office, of Mayor, Sheriff, Bayliffe, Constable, Scavenger, Church-warden, or any other publick Office in Citties, Towns, Castles, , and Villages whatsoever. And forasmuch also as we understand all Kings of
Arms, Heralds, &c. have alwayes heretofore from the beginning of the Office of Arms en∣joyed, and do presently enjoy, all and singular the priviledges, liberties, and franchises afore∣said, with many other, in all Christian Realms, without any disturbance, , or molestation; We therefore considering the same, and ear∣nestly minding as well the advancement of the said Office of Arms, as the quiet and honest supportance of our Servants, and Ministers thereof; do, of our speciall Grace, certain knowledge, and meer motion, by the advice and consent of our most dearly beloved Uncle Edward Duke of Somerset, and our Protector of our Realms and Dominions and Subjects, and of the rest of our Councel, by these , not only confesse and generally approve, give, grant, and confirm to the said Kings He∣ralds, &c. and to every of them and their suc∣cessors for ever, for us and our Successors, all and singular the premises before recited, al∣though here not recited, as have been of hono∣rable antiquity upon just  to them granted, by Emperors, Kings, and  right famous memory heretofore: But  especially by these presents, pardon, ,  utterly for us and our heires, release the said Kings of Arms, Heralds, &c. aswell all , sums of money and demands whatsoever , assessed, &c.
The Officers are thus distinguished. Kings of Arms Garter General & indefinite. Of the south p. of Eng. Beyond Trent northw. Norroy Heralds York sometimes styled Dukes of Arms. Windsor Lancaste. Richmond Chester Pursevants Portcullis   Blewmantle   Raugh dragon   croixe.   And there are commonly two Pursevants extraordinary; whose names, I finde to have va∣rved, therefore I name them not. The Office of Garter was first instituted by Henry the fifth, and though the other received Ordination long before, yet is honored with the precedency; and, hath the prehemimency in all Charters and Assemblies, Creations of No∣bility, and honorable processions, especially all concernments of the order of the Garter either in Elections, or Funerals. The other of Clarenceux and Norroy by  have power, Clarenceux over all England
on this side , Norry beyond; to enter in∣to all Churches, Castles, Houses, and any o∣ther places to survey and review all Arms, Re∣cognizances, and Crests; to make visitations, and to register the pedegrees and marriages of the Nobility and Gentry: and at their  or upon suit in their Office to punish with disgrace and  all such as shall intrude so much upon Honor, as to usurp other mens At∣chievements, or phansie to themselves new, against the law of Armes; to reverse and  them, and to make infamous by  at  or Sessions all such as  unduly take upon them the title of Esquire or Gentleman, and such as shall use, or wear mourning Apparell, as Gown, Hoods, &c. contrary to the Order limited in the time of Henry the seventh, and to  all  and other Artificers in the setting  of Arms. In the execution of which commission they have power to command all Justices, Sheriffes, Mayors, Baliffs, and other officers and sub∣iects to be aiding and assisting to them. And if upon summons any Knight, Esquire, or Gentleman do refuse to come and appear be∣fore him, and give an account of their Arms and Gentility, they have power in their re∣spective Provinces, to summon them by a Suppaena of what penalty they think sit, before the Earl Marshal of England for their  therein.
And they have the ordering of all Funerals of the Gentry within their respective Province, from a Baron downwards, taking other Heralds in their courses with them. As also the ordering of all Combats, Lists, and Triumphs with the Fees belonging to them: And they have for stipend out of the Exchequer 100 marks a piece annuity. The six Heralds are all in equall degree, only preceding according to the seniority of their creation; their Patents, being under the  Seal of England, and their annual sti∣pend is forty marks, besides theirs profits and Fees, The  have their Patents in like , a stipend of twenty pound per annum, out of the Exchequer; but those extraordinary have neither Patent nor Fee. The Arms of the Office is Arg. a Crosse  between four , Azure. The whole Company are subordinate unto the High Constable or Earl Marshall of Eng∣land, and by him every of them is at his first entry commended to the King, by a Bill signed with his hand. Which done, the King signes the same, and so it passes the Privy Seal and broad Seal; and, that once obtained, they are to be  and created by the King himself, or the Earl Martiall, in  following A King of Arms is brought into the King  Lord Marshall, led between a King and a Herald, or two Heralds, in their Coats; the
other Heralds  Pursevants going before in their Coats carrying the severall necessary in∣struments to  used: on  the Coat of Arms wherewith  new King is to be invested, ano∣ther  Crown; another the Patent; another he ; another the Book and Sword: another the Book where his Oath is received; all making severall , and then he kneels down with those two that led him; one of which holds the Book and  whereon he swears, the other speaks his Oath; then his Pa∣tent is read; and at the word Creamus, and In∣vestimus, his Coat is put on; and at non vio∣lante nomine, &c. the the water is poured on his head, and then he is perfect. There is belonging to this Office a Register, Marshal, and other officers and servants; and, amongst those Painters called Heralds-Painters, every King of Arms hath power to Commissi∣on one whom he pleases, as appropriate to his businesse: and so much for Heralds. And thus much for Heraldry.
The Names of the several Hou∣ses and Innes of Court, Chancery, and other Hostels in and about the City of LONDON. Two called Serjeants Inne 1. In . 2. In Chancery lane. The two Temples Inner Temple. Middle Temple. Lyncolns Inne. Grays Inne. Innes of Chancery Davies Inne. Furnivals Inne. Bernards Inne. Staple Inne. Cliffords Inne. Clements Inne. New Inne. Lyons Inne. Chesters, or Strond Inne. The six Clerks Office or Inne. Cursiters Inne. The Rolls, Doctors Commons. Gresham Colledge. The Exhequer Office: Osbournes Office. St. Kather. by the Tower.
The Inns of Court and Chan∣cery in their order. FIrst it is to be understood the four Colledges or Innes of Court, may be tearmed Collegia Jurisconsulto∣rum, that is, Colledges of Lawyers. The Romans did call such houses Diversoria, ordained to entertain strangers, which in our English are called Inns: and have been acknowledged with us in England, to be the residing houses of the Noblest Peers, viz. Oxford Inn, Warwick Inn, Ely Inn; and now called Oxford house, Warwick house, and Ely house: Somewhat according to the French, whose houses of Nobility (in Paris) are called Hostels, (in Latine Hospitium) in English, Inns. In London and thereabouts, there are fourteen, two Serjeants Innes, four Innes of Court, and eight Innes of Chancery. The most antient Inne of Court, and wherein Serjeants of Law had their first residence, was sometimes over against Saint Andrews
Church in Holborn, and was known by the name of Serjeants Inne: which afterwards came to be the Scroop's, who then were, & have since continued Barons of this land, and it was called Scroops Iune; which is called by another name, the possession being likewise altered out of that Family. And although the Innes of the Serjeants be somwhat antient for time, as also of modern age too: yet it must be granted, that in re∣spect of some others they must be respected but of a noval foundation. Yet forasmuch as they are receptacles and lodging places of the most reverend Judges, and grave Barons of the Ex∣chequer, and other Judge, in Office, and Ser∣jeants at Law; they are by way of decency to be reckoned in the first rank. That Hostel or Inne which now is commonly called Serjeants Inne in Fleetstreet, was some∣time a Messuage appertaining unto the Dean and Prebends of York. And afterwards pur∣chased by the Judges, and Serjeants at Law that lived in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, for a place of residence for them in Tearm time. And that other called Serjeants Inne in Chancery lane, was somtimes a Mesluage be∣longing unto the Bishops of See of Ely; as ap∣peareth by Records. In these said Houses or Innes of Court, commonly called Serjeants Inne, the reverend Judges of this land, and the Serjeants at Law
have for many years lived; and have been lodged within the same; Being (in very deed) although several by distance of place, yet held to be but one entire Society, or Confraternity by the name of Brethren. The Arms of these two Innes of Judges and Serjeants. First Gules two Garbs in Saltyre Or, bands Azure. The Second Or, an Ibis proper, which is a bird neer the colour of a Jay. Next to the two Serjeants Innes in order are the four Innes of Court, that is to say, Inner Temple. Middle Temple. Lyncolns Inne. Grayes Innne. And first of the two houses, or Societies, which are called by the name of Temples or the Templars Inne, The Middle Temple beareth for distinction. Argent on a plain crosse Gules, the holy Lamb . The said two Temples or the Templars Inne, are of any other of the Innes of Court the the most renowned and famous for antiquity: They were at the prime and in their original but one entire foundationand body.
But in processe of time became divided; at first founded by a religious and devout Order of Souldiers, called Templarii that is, to say Templars. Which Knights within the Kingdome of England purchased to themselves certain Lands in Fleetstreet, bordering upon the shore of the River Thames, and thereon (wit hin a short time) built a large Edifice, and with∣all a round Synagogue, like unto a Chappel or Temple, as it is now standing; and was by Heraclius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, Anno Dom. 1185. dedicated to the service of God; In which place these Templars by the space of one hundred years lived in great honor and opulency, enjoying large possessions, and those situate in the best places of the Realm; the like they had in other places; the Prelate of which Order, was ever a Baron of England. Now after the suppression of these Knights Templars, their Colledge or Hostel came to the hands of Thomas Plantagenet Earl of Lan∣caster, who being attainted for Disloyalty and Treason, the same became invested to the Crown. And afterwards the Earls Hugo le Dispencer Earl of Chester obtained the posses∣sion of the same house; who for the like transgression was justly attained also, and then it came to Damare de Valence Earl of Pem∣brook, the Lusignian family in France: who lodged therein but for a small season, so that
in the reign of Edward the third, the Sages and worthy professors of the Common Laws of this Realm obtained a long lease of this house for 10. l. per annum. A third part whereof, cal∣led the outward Temple, one Doctor Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, in the dayes of King Ed∣ward the second, procured for a residing Mansion to him and his successors, Bishops of that See; and it was called Exeter Inne: And so continued untill the dayes of Queen Mary, when the Lord Paget, her principal Secretary of State, and obtained the said third part cal∣led Exeter house, to him, and his heirs, and did re-edifie the same. After whom the said house, or the third part of the said Templars house, came to Thomas late Duke of Nor∣folk, and was by him conveyed to Sir Robert Dudley Knight, al. Sutton, Earl of Lieoester, who bequeathed the same to Sir Robert Dudley Knight, his Son; and lately came by pur∣chase to Robert Devoreux late Earl of Essex, that dyed in the reign of the late Queen Eli∣zabeth; and it is called to this day, Essex house. And not to omit what is written touch∣ing the antiquity of the Coat of Arms be∣longing to this house; it is warranted by the same, was, and yet is, to be seen purtraicted in an old Manuscript, written many years since, concerning the foundati∣on of that Order, and which Manuscript now
is, or of late was in the custody of the Right Honorable Lord William Howard a lover of Nobility and honorable Arms. It is to be understood that before the Order of Knight Templars assumed to themselves the said Coat Armour they now wear, that they did em∣brace as to them appropriate this En∣sign, A Horse galloping with two Men on his back. The which Ensign was usually engraven on their Signet or Common Seal: It hath been conjectured that the significancy there∣of was, that the Originall of this Order be∣gan in poverty and want: So that when they were to undertake any expedition of Chri∣stian service, they were enforced for want of ability, to ride two of them upon one horse: But it is more truly conceited that the same was rather an  of Love, and Charity, and was a true Hieroglyphick of an ingenious disposition, and of a  kindnesse, used amongst noble and free∣hearted Souldiers; whereof none were of greater note then this Order. Who being professed  and honorable spirits when they should come to the rescue of a Christian Souldier, who might happen to be wounded, or sick, and comfortlesse in the
field, they would relieve him, and set him behinde one of them upon his own horse, and by that means conveigh him to some place of safety; where they should likewise take some speedy course for his re∣lief. Neither was this work of Chariy, on∣ly practised by the Christian Knights in those ages; but it was used by the very In∣fidels, and Pagans, who also usually were exercised in the same works of Charity, as may be observed, and read, out of the famous and renowned Poet Ariosto; who re∣lates, that Reginaldo and Fernand, two Knights Charlemaine did fight together, and each of them was mortally wounded, and there∣fore, they agreed to adjourne the Combate till another day. And that, during the space of the Parly Reginaldo's Palfrey strayed away, and could not be found; whereupon Fer nand proffered Reginaldo a part of his horse to ride upon, and willed him to mount up be∣hind him, with assurance he would convey him safe to the place he desired, which Re∣ginaldo accepted, and Fernand performed: This History is writ by Ariosto in the Italian language, and not unworthy observation to this intent. The Knights Templars took their ori∣ginall about the year of Grace, . and upon this occasion many Noble
men, who were religiously bent, ob∣liged themselves by speciall vows to serve Christ as regular Cannons in Chastity, and Obedience; and to re∣nounce their own proper will for ever. The first of that Order was Hugo Paganus, and Godfrido de Sancto Hadomaro. Their habit was prescribed by Pope Hono∣rius to be a white habit; and after, by order from Pope Eugenio, these Knights had their first habitation appointed them by Baldwin King of Jerusalem, neer unto the holy Temple; there they were ever after saluted by the names of Knights Templars. This Order in processe of time did grow so universally great, that many great  and Townes of Christendome received their Order of the Knights Templars, as well in this our Nation, as in other parts, where they enjoyed fair revenewes and large possessions; for in England this University, called the Temple, was the feat and habitation of divers Knights of that Order. But it hath of late by the Princely donation of King James our late Soveraign been confirmed to the professors of the Common Law, under the great Seal of England. The Society of said the Inner Temple hath lately assumed to themselves a Pegasus,
whereof in particular I spare to relate any more; for the same is vulgarly known to all. To the Inner House was also appropriated di∣vers learned Legists from time to time, which in number, continuance, and gifts of Nature, did exceed every other of the said Innes of Court: And therefore was anciently tearmed Inner Temple Boun Pleader. Which continu∣eth to this very day; and it is withall much e∣steemed of, beautified, and graced with a spe∣cial Garden plot, famous for its situation, neatnesse and nearnesse of the River. The Ensign is Azure, a Pegasus Argent. Lincolns Inne. This House, owning a right to the Arms as well as name of the Lacyes Earls of Lin∣colne, have set up over the Gate the Lyon Rampant purpure; committing a great mi∣stake in that, if Sir John Fern's account of that Familie of the Lacyes be true, (which hath passed for authentick): for he tels us that Or, a Lyon Rampant purpure was his right; but it was only a quartering, and not the paternall Coat: for his first and principall bearing was party per Crosse, Gules &  a
bend Sables, over all a file or three Labels Arg. and this was the proper Coat of those Lacyes, the other was the Coat of the Lord Nigeld or Neal, Baron of Halton. This Society of Lincolnes Inne, the next for antiquity, and ancient Ally to the Mid∣dle Tenple, is situate in a Street or Lane known formerly by the name of New-street, and now Chancery lane being once the Mansion∣house of a Gentleman called William de Ha∣vershall, Treasurer to King Henry the third, who for disloyalty to his Soveraign, was by the said King attainted of Treason, so that thereby his house and lands became annext to the Crown. And thereupon the King gave this house to Ralph de Nova villa, vulgo Nevill, Chancellor of England, as appeareth by an an∣cient Record: Who also was Bishop of Chi∣chester, and kept his habitation or place of abode in that place. This House came afterwards to the hands of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, by reason whereof it was called Lincolns Inne and keep∣eth the style to this day. This Earl Henry deceased in that house about the year of our Lord 1310. Neverthelesse this house did af∣terwards continue to the Bishops of Chichester untill the  of King Henry the eighth, and the interest thereof came by conveyance to Justice Gullyard and other Feoffees, who du∣ring his life, and after him his posterity, held
it untill the reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, and then Sir Edw. Gullyard Knight, (to whom the same did successively descend by Inheri∣tance) sold the same with the Inheritance thereof to the Benchers and Society thereof. There is no memory of any florishing E∣states of the Students and professors of the Common Lawes resident in this Colledge, until the reign of King Henry the sixth, when it ap∣peareth by the Rolls and remembrances of that house, that the same became somewhat to be famous. But now of late time this house hath been much enlarged and beautified, with ranks of goodly Edifices, and also with a fair and goodly Chappel. The first of the chiefest build∣ings thereof was begun at the cost of Sir Tho∣mas Lovell Knight, then or before a fellow of that Society, who erected that fair Gate-house into Chancery lane, of brick and free stone, whereupon is engraven the Arms of Lacy Earl of Lincoln, together with his own. The said Chancery lane is so called, for that King Edward the third, in the fifteenth year of his reign annexed the house of Covents by Patent to the Office of Chancery, now called the Rolls.
Grays Inne Beareth Sables a Griffin Rampant, Or. This house was sometimes the abiding Man∣sion of the Noble Family of Gray, from whence the name of the house is deduced. It is situate within the Mannor Poorpoole, a Prebendary antiently belonging to the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, London. In the reign of King Ed∣ward the third, the Gentlemen Students of that Society (as is confidently affirmed) took a Grant of this house from the said Baron Gray who lived in those dayes. And it is held pro∣bable that the Grayes Armes have been anciently by this fellowship maintained; and are still taken up, and kept as the proper and peculiar Ensigne of that Colledge or house, and thus the same is found portraited. Barry of six Arg. & Azure, a bordure quar∣terly Or, and of the second. But now of late yeares this honorable Socie∣ty have assumed for their proper Coat Armor, or Ensign of honor, A Griffin Or, in a field Sables.
Thavies Inne Beareth Azure, two Garbes, Or, on a bend Gules. On a Chief Sable, a letter T. Arg. Hereafter ensue the inferior Hostels ordained for Students that professe the practice of the Common Law of this Realm, to the end they may the better obtain unto themselves the un∣derstanding of the Principles & grounds of the same Laws; and be thereby the better prepa∣red for to manage the causes of the Subjects in the severall Courts of Justice within the Do∣minions, whether at Westminster, or elsewhere: and also by their labour, and Industry to become graduates and be the better enabled to be en∣tred into the Innes of Court. These inferior Courts being Nurseries: and are entituled Inns of Chancery. And first for this Thavies Inne, It is pro∣bable that the house by all conjecture is the most ancient of all others of that nature, and it doth in that regard challenge the precedency in this rank. This house was in the raigne of King Ed∣ward the third, (as is by  to be found)
the dwelling, and mansion house of one John Thavye Citizen and Armourer of London; and was by the then Apprentices of the Law held of him at a certain Rent annual, as by a Re∣cord yet to be seen in the Husting Courts of London, doth appeare and may be verified for antiquity: But since that time the House hath been purchased by the Benchers or the Anti∣ents of Lincolns Inne, which about the raign of King Henry the seventh, to the end that there might be entertained in that place a So∣ciety of Students, practisers, and Professors of the Common Laws of this Realm. And this house still retaineth the name of the said Tha∣vies, who was the first owner of it, as is before mentioned. Furnivals Inne Beareth Arg. a bend betwixt six Martlets within a bordure Azure. This house was sometime the Mansion of Sir William Furnivall in the raign of King Ri∣chard the second, as by Record appeareth. He was afterwards Lord Furnival; his heir general married to Sir John Talbot, created Earl of Shrewsbury by King Henry the sixth, by reason whereof this Mansion house came to
the family of the , Earls of Salop: and afterwards of later years, in the raign of Queen Elizabeth, the same house was by the Bench∣ers or the Ancients of Lincolns Inne purchased for the serting into the same a Society of Stu∣dents of the Common Lawes, from George Lord Talbot Earl of Salop; as by sundry deeds in the possession of the late right honorable Gilbert Earl of Shrewbury doth appear. Bernards Inne Beareth party per pale indented Ermin and Sab. a Cheveron Gul. fretty. This house was in the thirteenth year of the reign of King Henry the sixth, a messuage be∣longing to one John Mackworth then Dean of the Cathedral Church of Lincoln; and in that time in the holding of one Lyonel Bernard, who next before the conversion thereof into an Inne of Chancery, dwelt there. And it hath ever since retained the name of Bernards Inne, or Bernards house.
Staple Inne: Port de vert un pacquet de doyne Arg. This House was sometimes belonging to the English Merchants of the Staple, as it hath been by ancient Tradition held. It is of late adorned with a convenient large Garden-plot to walk in, and is at this day rightly esteemed for the most ample and beautifull Inne of Chancery, within this Academy. Clifford's Inne Reareth Checky Or & Azure, of fesse Gul. within a bordure of the third, charged with a Bezanet. This House albeit it followeth in an after rank from the former, yet it is worthy to be reputed amongst the formest, as being in re∣putation with the best, both for conve∣niency and quiet situation thereof, as for worth and good government; It was also sometime the dwelling house of Maccoln de Hersey, and came to the King for debts, and
was after sometimes the house of the Lord Clifford, as by Inquisition, which was taken that year, and remaining on Record, doth ap∣peare, which hath these words, Isabella quae fuit Roberti Clifford,  cum perti∣nent. quod Robertus habuit in parochia Sancti Dunstani West' in suburb. Londini &c. tenuit, & illud demisit post mortem dicti Roberti,  de Bancho pro  l. per annum, &c. ut pat. per Inquisitionem, cap. 18. Edwardi 3. post mortem dict. Roberti Clifford. This House at this day is the Inheritance of that antient and right honorable family of Cliffords Earls of Cumberland, for which there is an annual Rent still rendered to the Earles of Cumberland for the time being. Clements Inne Beareth Argent, Anchor without a stock in pale proper, entertaining a C. for Cle∣ment into the body thereof. This House sometimes was a messuage be∣longing to the Parish Church of St. Clement Danes, from whence it took its denomination; neer to this house is that Fountain which is called Clements Well. This Anchor is engraven in stone over the
gate of the first entrance into the house, and is an Hieroglyphick, figuring thereby that Pope Clement, as he was Pope, was reputed Caput Ecclesiae Romanae, for the Roman Priest∣hood, or Anchorage of Christendome, figured by the Anchor, and by the text C. the Sacer∣dotal dignity. Some hold that the device of the Anchor was rather invented upon this reason; of the Martyrdome of Pope Clement, as Jacobus de Voragia writeth, that he received his Mar∣tyrdome being bound to a great Anchor, and cast into the Sea by the command of the Em∣peror Trajane. New Inne Beareth Vert, a Flower-pot Arg. main∣taining Jully flowers, Gules. This house is so called by reason of its then late or new Creation, being in the reign of King Henry the seventh; therefore the same is not of late a foundation, as some imagine, which is, that the late dissolution of Strond Inne, being by the Duke of Somerset Uncle to King Edward the sixth, this house in lieu there∣of was instituted for the dispersed Gentlemen Professors and Students of the Common Laws
of this Realm. It is certain that Sir Thomas Moor Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, in the reign of King Henry the seventh was a fel∣low student of this Society; and in the reign of King Henry the eighth, removed his study into that of Lincolns Inne. This house was sometimes called by the name of our Ladies Inne, for that the Picture of our Lady was pourtraicted at the doore thereof. And in the reign of King Edward the fourth was  by Sir John Fyncaullxe, Knight, Chief Justice of England, or of the Kings Bench, or 6. l. per annum, wherein he placed Students, and practisers of the Com∣mon Lawes; who before that time had a house in the  Bayly called St. Georges Inne: the passage thereunto was over against St. Se∣pulchers Church, and by some is reputed to be the first and most ancient of all other Innes of Chancery: but the same house at this day is converted into severall Tenements and Gar∣den plots. Lyons Inne Beareth Checkie Or, and Arg, a Lyon Sali∣ant, Sab. langued and armed Gules. This house received its foundation of mo∣dern
time; and lately before the acquiring thereof, it was a dwelling house, known by the name of the Black Lyon; and in the reign of King Henry the seventh, was purchased by divers Gentlemen, Students, and Professors of the common Lawes: The first Treasurer of this Society was one John Bidwell. The greatest number of this Society are the na∣tives of the West parts, viz Devonshire and Cornwall; but for the most part Devonshire Gentlemen. Chesters Inne, or Strond Inne Beareth Azure within a bordure Gules, three garbes, Or, in a bend of the se∣cond. In the reign of King Henry the eighth, this house (for that Sir Bevis St. Marrour Knight Duke of Somerset kept there his Court) was an Inne of Chancery called Strond Inne, and be∣fore that time belonged to the Bishop of Che∣ster, after to the Bishop of Worcester, and unto the Bishop of Landaffe, with the Parochiall Church of St. Maries adjoyning thereunto; All which were swallowed up in An Dom. 1549. for to build an ample and spacious Edifice to the use of the said Duke, the mater∣nall Uncle to King Edward the sixth.
The Six Clerkes Office, otherwise called Riderminster's Inne Beareth Azure, two Cheveronels, Or, be∣tween three Bezants Arg. charged with. eight pellets. This House though it be not saluted by the name of an Inne of Chancery, as the others are, which are of like name and nature, yet is the same more properly to be called an Inne of Chancery then any of the rest; for that the Chancery Officers do there reside, namely Attourneys, commonly called the Six Clerks of the Chancery, and are to this day a society of Gentlemen well learned in the Laws: These were at the first Sacerdotall, and therefore called Clerks. And in those days when the Institution of them was first established, they were all of them Church-men. This house was acquired and gotten for the society by one John Riderminster Esquire, a member thereof; who in his time was a very skilfull and well Learned man, and both faith∣full and just, as well to his Client as to his friend. It was antiently the Inne, or the
Mansion of the Abbot of Norton in Lincoln∣shire, and since that time it hath been the dwelling-house of one Andrew Hersfleet, and is most proper to be called an Inne of Chancery, for the Officers of Chancery only reside there: the House is situate in Chancery lane, where the causes appertaining to Chancery are only hand∣led and discust. Cursitors Inne: Beareth Gules on a chief Arg. two Mul∣lets Sables, within a bordure Compone Or and Azure. This Edifice was, in  dayes of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, built by the Right Honourable and Grave Counsellor of State Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord keeper of the Great Seal of England, for the benefit and decency of a new contrived Office, now called Cursitors, therein to lodge and to keep their severall Offices; These Cursitors have the making of all Originall Writs; (according to the Register) which are sued out, and taken forth in causes commenced by the Stu∣dents at the common Law. In times past the chiefe Officer of the Court of Chancery was ever a Bishop, and termed Cancellarius, be∣cause
he sat in Cancellis, that is to say, in Chan∣cels, or places letticed after the manner of Chancels in Churches, as Petrus  a lear∣ned writer hath left to posterity. The Masters of this Court were for the most part Doctors of Divinity, and had Prebendaries in Churches, and other dignities and promo∣tions. The Cursitors, or rather the Choristers, as it befitteth a Chorus, there being no honourable Cathedrall or Collegiate Church la Esglise which can be vvell without them. And in for∣mer dayes both antient and modern, the Ghost∣ly Fathers or Confessors were examiners in Chancery, as men held most conscionable, and thereupon fittest for that function. But fince in those dayes all the former Ecclesia∣sticall persons, are become meerly lay-men, and yet no doubt held to be as Godly, Consciona∣ble, and Honest, as any; provided ever that they be men of skill, persons who are of great Inte∣grity, and able of understanding. Nam ad pietatem requiritur Scientia.
The Colledge called Doctors Commons Beareth Gules on a bend Argent, three tree∣foils; within a bordure Vert. The Professors of the Civil Law, or the Im∣perial, being also in some sort Canonists and professors of the Laws , have their Hostels or residing place upon St. Bennets hill, neer Pauls Chain. This house was by the industry and cost of Mr. Henry Harvey Doctor of the Civil or Ca∣non Law, and at that time Master  Trinity  in Cambridge, and Dean of the Arches, institu∣ted for the Company and Society of the said Doctors, professors of the same study. Gresham Colledge Beareth Argent a  Erminoys be∣tween three Mullets Sables. This famous work, and most worthy Col∣ledge scituate in Bishopsgate street, had its foun∣dation
laid by that worthy Merchant Sir Tho∣mas Gresham Knight, about the year of our Lord 1579. who ordained therein seven Lectures of seven severall Arts to be there publickly read, . Divinity, Civill Law, Phyfick, Rhetorick, Astronomy, Geometry, Musick. And this to be performed by seven severall persons, learned professors thereof; only in the time of the Terms at Westminster. The annual stipendary to every Lecturer is 50. l. by annual pay, and each of the Lecturers hath a convenient lodging provided for his use there in the same Colledge. The Office of the Remem∣brancers of the Exchequer at Westminster Beareth, Or, a Cheveron Gules, and a Canton Ermin in a bordure Compony, Argent and Azure. This house wherein now the Kings Remem∣brancer keepeth his Office was sometimes anti∣ently the Inne belonging to the Barons of Stafford, & was in former time called Staffords Inne, which said house, and that other in Ivie∣lane, where Mr. Osborn the King's Remem∣brancer
keepeth his Office, or rather the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, and the house cal∣led Hospitium Johannis de  Laurentio, wherein  Brainthwait Serjeant at the Law,  his abode and dwelling in Amen-Corner, the Bishop of Elyes house, now Statio∣ners-hall; the Three Tuns Tavern, the Bull-head Tavern, the Chamber belonging to Diana, the next house to Doctors Commons called the old Camera , were of antient times the lodg∣ing for the Residents, and Canons, and Pre∣bends of St. Pauls, who belonged unto that fa∣mous Cathedrall Church of St. Paul. St. Katherine's Hospitall Beareth party per fesse, Gules and Azure: in  a Sword bar-wise Argent, pomelled and hilt Or: in poynt a demy Catharine wheel of the fourth. By the Licence of the Prior of the Co∣vent, and the Society of holy Trinity in London, the said Hospitall called St. Katherines was founded by Queen Matilda wife to King Stephen. The ground whereon this Hospitall is , was then the proper inheritance of the said Prior and Covent, and the said Hospitall
was after enlarged by Queen Elianor Wife to Edward the first, and after Philippa Wife to Edward the third, founded there a Chancery, and it hath been of late a free Chappell or Hos∣pital for poor sisters. FINIS. ERRATA. Page. 41. l. 4. a mistake in the last quarter of the cut. p. 52. a mistake in the cut, the eighth quarter should have been the last.
