1158 99836345 610
Imprimatur. THO. WYKE R. P. Episc. Lond. Cap. domest. Decemb. 29. 1637.
HISTORY NATURALL And Experimentall, Of Life and Death. OR Of the Prolonga∣tion of Life. Written in Latine by the Right Honorable FRANCIS Lo. Verulam, Vis-Count St. ALBAN. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Haviland for William Lee, and Humphrey Mosley. 1638.
TO THE READER. I AM to give Advertise∣ment, that there came forth, of late, a Transla∣tion of this Booke, by an unknowne PERSON; Who
though he wished well to the propa∣gating of his Lord∣ships Works, yet he was altogether un∣acquainted with his Lordships Stile, and Manner of Ex∣pressions; And so published a Trans∣lation, Lame, and Defective, in the whole. Where∣upon, I thought fit, to recommend
the same, to bee translated anew, by a more Diligent, and Zealous Pen; which hath since travailed in it: And though it stil comes short of that Lively, and Incomparable Spi∣rit, and Expres∣sion, which lived and died with the Authour; yet I dare avouch it, to
bee much more warrantable, and agreeable, than the Former. It is true, this Booke was not intended to have been pub∣lished in English; But seeing it hath beene, alreadie, made free of that Language; What∣soever Benefit, or Delight, may re∣dound from it;
I commend the same to the Cour∣teous, and Judici∣ous Reader. W. R.
To the present Age, and Posteritie, GREETING. ALthough we had ranked the Histo∣rie of Life and Death, as the last, a∣mongst our six Mo∣nethly Designati∣ons; yet wee have
thought fit, in respect of the prime use thereof; (In which the least Losse of Time ought to bee esteemed precious;) to invert that Or∣der, and to send it forth in the second place. For we have hope, and wish, that it may conduce to a Common Good; And that the Nobler sort of Physicians
will advance their Thoughts; And not employ their Times wholly in the Sor∣didnesse of Cures; Neither bee Ho∣noured for Neces∣sitie only; But that they will become Co∣adjutours and Jn∣struments of the Di∣vine omnipotence and Clemencie, in Prolonging and Renewing the,
Life of Man; Espe∣cially seeing we pre scribe it to be done by Safe, and Conve∣nient, and Civill wayes, though hi∣therto un-assayed. For though wee. Christians doe con∣tinually aspire, and pant afterthe Land of Promise; Yet it will bee a Token of Gods Favour to∣wards us, in our
Journeyings thorow this worlds wil∣dernes, to have our Shooes, and Gar∣ments, (I meane, those of our Fraile Bodies) little worn, or impaired. FR. St. ALBAN.
THE History of Life and Death. The Preface. IT is an ancient Say∣ing, and Complaint; That Life is Short, and Art Long. Wherefore, it behoveth us, who make it our chiefest Aime, to per∣fect Arts; to take upon us, the Consideration, of Pro∣longing Mans Life; God
the Author, of all Truth, and Life, prospering our Endevours. For though the Life of Man bee no∣thing else, but a Masse, and Accumulation, of Sins, and Sorrowes; And they that looke for an Eternall Life, set but light by a Tempora∣rie; Yet the Continuation of workes of Charity, ought not to be contemned, even by us Christians. Besides, the Beloved Disciple of our Lord, survived the other Disciples; And many of the Fathers of the Church, especially of the Holy Monkes, and Hermits, were
long liv'd; which shewes, that this Blessing of Long life, so often promised in the old Law, had lesse A∣batement after our Savi∣ours Dayes, than other Earthly Blessings had. But to esteeme of this, as the chiefest Good, we are but too prone. Onely the Inquirie is difficult, how to attaine the same; And so much the rather, because it is corrup∣ted, with false opinions, and vaine Reports. For both, those Things, which the Vulgar Physitians talke, of Radic all Moisture, and Naturall Heat, are but
meere Fictions; And the Immoderate praises  Chymicall Medicines, first puffe up with vain hopes, and then faile  Admirers. And as for that Death, which is caused by Suffoca∣tion, Putrefaction, and se∣verall Diseases, wee speake not now; For that pertains to an History of Physick; But onely of that Death which comes by a totall De∣cay of the Body, and the Inconcoction of old Age. Neverthelesse, the last Act of Death, and the very Ex∣tinguishing of Life it selfe;
which may so many wayes bee wrought, outwardly, and inwardly; (which not∣withstanding have, as it were, one common Porch, before it comes to the point of Death;) will bee perti∣nent, to be inquired of in this Treatise; But wee reserve that for the last place. That which may bee re∣paired by Degrees, without a Totall waste of the first Stocke, is potentially eter∣nall; As the Vestall Fire. Therefore, when Physici∣ans, and Philosophers saw, that Living Creatures were nourished, and their
Bodies repaired; But that this did last only for a time; And afterward came old Age, and, in the end, Dis∣solution; they sought Death in somewhat, which could not properly bee repaired; Supposing a Radical Moi∣sture incapable of solid Reparation; And which, from the first infancie, re∣ceived a Spurious Additi∣on, but no true Reparation; wherby it grew daily worse and worse; And, in the end, brought the Bad, to None at all. This conceit of theirs, was both ignorant and vain. For all Things, in Living
Creatures, are, in their youth, repaired entirely; Nay, they are, for a time, increased in Quantitie, bet∣tered in Qualitie; so as the Matter of Reparation might be Eternall, if the Manner of Reparation did not faile. But this is the Truth of it: There is, in the Declining of Age, an unequall Repa∣ration; Some Parts are re∣paired easily, others with Difficultie, and to their losse; So as, from that time, the Bodies of Men begin to endure the Torment of Mezentius; That the Li∣ving die in the Embraces
of the Dead; And the Parts easily reparable, through their Conjunction with the Parts hardly re∣parable, doe decay. For the Spirits, Bloud, Flesh, and Fat, are, even after the De∣cline of yeares, easily repai∣red; But the Drier, and more Porous parts, (As the Membranes; All the Tu∣nicles; The Sinewes, Ar∣teries, Veines, Bones, Cartilages; Most of the Bowels; In a word, almost all the Organicall parts;) are hardly Reparable, and to their losse. Now these hardly Reparable Parts,
when they come to doe their office, of Repairing the o∣ther, which are easily repa∣rable, finding themselves deprived of their wonted Abilitie, and strength, cease to performe any longer, their proper Functions. By which meanes, it comes to passe, that in processe of time, the whole tends to Dissolution; And even those very Parts, which in their owne nature, are, with much case, Repa∣rable; Yet through the De∣cay of the Organs of Re∣paration, can no more receive Reparation; But decline and, in the end, utterly fail.
And the cause of the Ter∣mination of Life, is this For that the Spirits, like a gentle Flame, continually preying upon Bodies; Con∣spiring with the outward Aire, which is ever Suc∣king, and Drying of them; Doe, in time, destroy the whole Fabricke of the Bo∣die; As also the particular Engines, and Organs ther∣of; And make them unable, for the worke, of Repara∣tion. These are the true wayes, of Naturall Death, well, and faithfully, to bee revolved in our Mindes. For He that knowes not the
wayes of Nature, how can he succour her, or turne her about? Therefore, the Inquisi∣tion ought to bee two-fold: The one touching the Con∣sumption, or Depredati∣on, of the Body of Man; The other, touching the Re∣paration, and Renovati∣on of the same: To the end, that the Former may, as much as is possible, be for∣bidden and restrained; And the Latter, comforted. The Former of these, pertaines especially, to the Spirits, and Outward Aire; By which the Depredation,
and Waste, is committed; The Latter, to the whole Race of Alimentation, or Nourishment; whereby, the Renovation, or Restitution, is made. And as for the For∣mer part, touching Con∣sumption; This hath ma∣ny Things common, with Bodies Inanimate, or without Life. For such Things, as the Native Spi∣rit, (which is in all Tangi∣ble Bodies, whether Li∣ving, or without Life;) And the Ambient, or Ex∣ternall, Aire, worketh up∣on Bodies Inanimate; The same it attempteth, up∣on
Animate, or Living Bo∣dies; Although the Vi∣tall Spirit super added, doth partly breake, and bridle, those Operations; Partly exalt, and advance them wonderfully. For it is most manifest, that Inanimate Bodies, (most of them,) will endure a long time, without any Reparation; But Bodies Animate, without Food, and Repara∣tion, suddenly fall, and are extinguished; As the Fire is. So then, our Inquisi∣tion shall be double; First we will consider the Bodie of Man, as Inanimate,
and not Repaired by Nou∣rishment; Secondly, as Animate, and Repaired by Nourishment. Thus ha∣ving prefaced these Things, we come now to the Topick Places of Inquisition.
The Particular Topick Places: Or, Articles of Inqui∣sition, Touching Life and Death. 1 FIrst inquire, of Na∣ture Durable, and Not Durable; In Bodies Inanimate, or without Life; As also in Vegetables: But that, not in a large, or Just Treatise; But, as in a Briefe, or Summary, onely. 2 Also inquire diligently, of
Desiccation, Arefaction, and Consumption, of Bodies Inan∣mate; And of Vegetables; And of the wayes, and Processes by which they are done: And further of Inhibiting, and De laying, of Desiccation, Arefacti∣on, and Consumption; And the Conservation of Bodies, in their proper State: And a gaine, of the Inteneration, E∣mellition, and Recovery of Bo∣dies to their former Fresh∣nesse, after they be once dried and withered. Neither need the Inquisition, touching these Things, to be full, or exact; seeing they pertaine rather, to their proper Title, of Nature Durable; seeing also, they are not Principals, in this Inquisition; But serve onely, to give Light, to the
Prolongation, and In∣stauration of Life, in Li∣ving Creatures. In which, (as was said before,) the same Things come to passe, but in a Peculiar manner. So from the Inquisition touching Bodies Inani∣mate, and Vegetables; Let the Inquisition passe on to other Living Crea∣tures, besides Man. Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortnesse of Life, in Living Creatures; with the due Circumstances, which make most, for their long, or Short, Lives. 4 But because the Duration of Bodies, is twofold; One in Identitie, or the selfe-same substance; The other, by a Re∣novation, or Reparation; whereof the Former, hath
place onely, in Bodies Inani∣mate; The Latter in Vegeta∣bles, and Living Creatures; And is perfected by Alimenta∣tion, or Nourishment; There∣fore it will be fit to inquire of Alimentation; And of the wayes, and Progresses there∣of: Yet this, not exactly; (be∣cause it pertaines properly to the Titles of Assimilation, and Alimentation) But as the rest, in progresse only. From the Inquisition, tou∣ching Living Creatures, and Bodies repaired by Nourishment, passe on to the Inquisition touching Man. And now being come to the principall Sub∣ject of Inquisition, the In∣quisition ought to bee, in all points, more precise, and accurate.
5 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortnesse of Life, in Men, according to the Ages of the world; The severall Re∣gions, Climates, and Places, of their Nativity, and Habita∣tion. 6 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortnesse of Life, in Men, according to their Ra∣ces, and Families; As if it were a Thing Hereditary: Also ac∣cording to their Complexions, Constitutions, and Habits of Body; Their Statures; The Manner, and Time, of their Growth; And the Making, and Composition, of their Mem∣bers. 7 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortnesse, of Life, in Men, according to the Times of their Nativitie; But so, as you omit, for the pre∣sent,
all Astrologicall Obser∣vations, and the Figures of Heaven, under which they were borne: Onely insist up∣on the vulgar, and manifest Observations; As, whether they were borne, in the Se∣venth, Eighth, Ninth, or Tenth, Moneth; Also, whe∣ther by Night, or by Day; And in what Moneth of the yeare? 8 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortnesse, of Life, in Men, according to their Fare, Diet, Government of their Life, Exercises, and the like. For as for the Aire, in which Men live, and make their Abode, we account that proper to be inquired of, in the above-said Article, touching the Places of their Habitation. 9 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortnesse of Life,
in Men, according to their siu∣dies; Their severall Courses of Life; The Affections of the Minde; And divers Accidents befalling them. 10 Inquire apart, touching those Medicines, which are thought, to prolong Life. 11 Inquire, touching the Signes, and Prognosticks, of Long, and Short Life; Not those which betoken Death, at hand; (for they belong to an Historie of Phisick;) But those, which are seene, and may bee observed, even in Health; whether they bee Physiognomicall signes, or any other. Hitherto have beene propoun∣ded, Inquisitions tou∣ching Length, and Short∣nesse of Life, besides the Rules of Art, and in a
confused manner; Now wee thinke to adde some, which shall be more Art∣like, And tending to Pra∣ctice, under the name of Intentions. Those Inten∣tions are, generally, three: As for the particular Di∣stributions of them, we will propound them, when wee come to the Inquisition it selfe. The three generall Intentions are, Toe For∣bidding of Waste and Consumption; The Per∣fecting of Reparation; And the Renewing of Oldnesse. 12 Inquire, touching those things, which Conserve and Exempt the body of man, from Arefaction, and Con∣sumption; At least, which put off, and protract the
inclination thereunto. 13 Inquire, touching those things, which pertaine to the whole Processe of Alimenta∣tion; (By which the body of man is repaired;) that it may bee good, and with the best improvement. 14 Inquire, touching those things, which purge out the old Matter, and supply with New: As also, which do Intene∣rate, and Moisten, those parts, which are already Dryed, and Hardned. But because it will be hard, to know the wayes of Death, unlesse you search out, and discover, the Seat, or House, or rather Den of Death; It will bee conve∣nient to make Inquisition of this Thing; yet not of every kinde of Death, but
of those Deaths, which are caused, by want, and Indi∣gence of Nourishment, not by violence: For they are those Deaths only, which pertaine to a Decay of Nature, and meere old Age. 15 Inquire, touching the point of Death; And the porches of Death leading thereunto from all parts: so as that Death be caused, by a Decay of Na∣ture, and not by violence. Lastly; Because it is behoove∣full, to know the Chara∣cter, and Forme, of Old Age; which will then best be done, if you make a Col∣lection, of all the Differen∣ces, both in the State, and Functions, of the Body,  Youth, and Old Age; That by them, you
may observe, what it is that produceth such mani∣feld Effects; let not this Inquisition be omitted. 16 Inquire diligently, touching the Differences, in the State of the Body, and Faculties of the Minde, in Youth, and old Age; And whether there bee any, that remaine the same with∣out Alteration, or , in old Age. Nature Durable, and Not Durable. The Historie. MEtals are of that long To the I Artic. lasting, that Men can∣not trace the Begin∣nings of them. And when
they doe decay, they decay through Rust, not through Perspiration into Aire. Yet Gold decayes neither way. 2 Quick-silver, though it bee an Humide, and Fluide Body: And easily made volatile by Fire; yet, (as farre as wee have observed) by Age a∣lone, without Fire, it nei∣ther wasteth, nor gathereth Rust. 3 Stones, especially the harder sort of them, and many other Fossiles, are of long lasting: And that, though they be ex∣posed to the open Aire; Much more, if they bee buried in the Earth. Notwithstanding Stones gather a kinde of Nitre; which is to them, in stead of Rust. Precious Stones, and Cry∣stals, exceed Metals in long Lasting; But then, they grow
dimmer, and lesse Orient, if they be very old. 4 It is observed, that Stones, lying towards the North, doe sooner decay with Age, than those that lie towards the South; And that this ap∣peares manifestly, in Pyra∣mids, and Churches, and other ancient Buildings: Contrari∣wise, in Iron, that exposed to the South, gathers Rust soo∣ner; And that to the North, later; As may be seene, in the Iron Barres of windowes. And no marvell, seeing in all Pu∣trefaction, (as Rust is) Moi∣sture hastens Dissolution; In all simple Arefaction, Dri∣nesse. 5 In Vegetables, (wee speak of such as are feld, not Grow∣ing,) the stocks, or Bodies, of harder Trees, and the Timber
made of them, last dive Ages: But then, there is Dif∣ference, in the Bodies of Trees Some Trees are, in a  Spongie; as the Elder; In which the pith, in the Midst is sost, and the outward part harder; But in timber trees as the Oake, the inner part, (which they call, Hart of Oake lasteth longer. 6 The Leaves, and Flowers, and Stalks, of Plants, are but of short Lasting; But dissolve into Dust, unlesse they putri∣fie: the Roots are more durable. 7 The Bones of living Crea∣tures last long; as we may see it, of mens Bones, in charnell Houses: Hornes also last very long; so doe Teeth; as it is seene in Ivorie; and the Sea. horse Teeth. 8 Hides also, and Skins, endure
very long; as is evident in old Parchment Books: paper likewise, will last many Ages; though not so long às Parch∣ment. 9 Such Things, as have possed the Fire, last long; as Glasse, and Bricks: Likewise, Flesh, and Fruits, that have passed the fire, last longer, than Raw: And that, not onely, because the Baking in the Fire, for∣bids putrefaction; But also, because the watrie Humour being drawne forth, the oyly Humour supports it selfe the longer. 10 Water, of all Liquors, is soo∣nest drunk up by Aire; Con∣trariwise, Oyle latest: which wee may see, not onely in the Liquors themselves; But in the Liquors mixt with other Bodies: For Paper wet with
water, and so getting some Degree of Transparency, will soone after wax white, and loose the Transparencie again the watrie vapour exhaling: But oiled Paper will keepe the Transparencie long, the  not being apt to exhale: And therefore they, that counter∣feit Mens Hands, will lay the oiled Paper upon the writing they meane to counterfe  and then assay to draw the lines. 11 Gummes, all of them, last ve∣ry long; The like doe, Wax and Honey. 12 But the Equall, or Vnequali∣use, of Things, conduceth no lesse, to long Lasting, or short Lasting, than the Things them∣selves. For Timber, and Stones, and other Bodies, standing continually in the Water, or
continually in the Aire, last longer than if they were sometimes wet, sometimes drie. And so Stones continue longer, if they be layed to∣wards the same coast of Hea∣ven, in the Building, that they lay in the Mine. The same is, of Plants removed, if they be coasted just, as they were before. Observations. 1 LEt this be laid for a Foun∣dation, which is most sure; That there is, in every Tan∣gible Body, a Spirit, or Bo∣dy Pneumaticall, en∣closed, and covered, with the Tangible parts; And that, from this Spirit, is the Beginning of all Disso∣lution, and Consumption:
so as the Antidote  them, is the Detaining  this Spirit. 2 This Spirit is detained  wayes; Either by astraigh Inclosure, as it were in Prison; Or by a kinde  Free, and voluntarie De∣tention. Again, this volun∣tarie stay is perswaded  wayes: Either if the Spi∣rit it selfe, be not too Move∣able, or Eager to depart; Or if the Externall  importune it not too  to come forth. So then,  sorts of substances are Du∣rable; Hard Substance and Oyly: Hard Sub∣stance bindes in the spi∣rit close, Oyly, partly en∣ticeth the Spirit to stay; partly, is of that nature, that it is not
by Aire: For Aire is Con∣substantiall to Water, and Flame to Oile. And touching Nature Dura∣ble, and Not Durable, in Bodies Inanimate, thus much. The Historie. 13 HErbs, of the Colder sort, dye yearly, both in Root, and Stalk; As Lettice, Purslane; Also Wheat, and all Kinde of Corne. Yet there are some Cold Herbs, which will last three, or foure yeares, As the Violet, Strawberrie, Burnet, Prime-rose, and Sorrell But Bo∣rage, and Buglosse, which seeme so alike, when they are alive, differ in their Deaths; for Bo∣rage will last but one yeare, Buglosse will last more.
14 But many Hot Herbs, beare their age, and yeares, better Hyssope, Thyme, Savourie, Pot Marjoram, Balme, Wormewood, Germander, Sage; And the like, Fennell, dies yearly in the Stalk, Buds againe from the Root. But Pulse, and sweet Mar∣joram, can better endure age, than Winter; For being set, in a very warme place, and well senced, they will live more than one yeare. It is knowne that a Knot of Hyssope, twice  yeare shorne, hath continued forty yeares. 15 Bushes, and Shrubs, live three∣score yeares; and some dou∣ble as much. A Vine may at∣taine to threescore yeares, and continue Fruitfull in the old age. Rose mary, well pla∣ced, will come also to three∣score yeares. But White Thorne,
and Ivie, endure above an hundred yeares. As for the Bramble, the age thereof is not certainly knowne; Be∣cause bowing the head to the Ground, it gets new Roots; so as you cannot distinguish, the Old, from the New. 16 Amongst great Trees, the longest Livers are; The Oake, the Holme, the Wild-Ash, the Elme, the Beech-tree, the Chest∣nut, the Plain-tree, Ficus Rumi∣nalis, the Lote-tree, the Wild∣olive, the Olive, the Palme-tree, and the Mulberrie-tree: Of these, some have come to the Age of eight hundred yeares; But the least Livers of them, doe attaine to two hundred. 17 But Trees Odorate, or that have sweet woods; And Trees Rozennie, last longer, in their Woods, or Timber, than
those above said, but they are not so long liv'd; as the Cy∣presse-tree, Maple, Pine, Box, Iuniper. The Cedar, being borne out, by the vastnesse of his body, lives well-neare  long as the former. 18 The Ash, fertile, and forward in Bearing, reacheth to an hundred yeares, and some∣what better; which also, the Birch, Maple, and Service-tree, sometimes doe: But the Pop∣lar, Lime-tree, Willow, and that which they call the Cyco∣more, and Wall-nut-tree, live not so long. 19 The Apple-tree, Peare-tree, Plum-tree, Pomegranate-tree, Citron-tree, Medlar-tree, Black∣Cherrie-tree, Cherrie-tree, may attaine to fiftie, or sixtie yeares; Especially, if they be cleansed from the Mosse,
where with some of them are cloathed. 20 Generally, Greainesse of Bo∣dy, in Trees, if other things be equall, hath some congruitie, with Length of Life: So hath Hardnesse of Substance: And Trees, bearing Mast, or Nuts, are commonly longer livers, than Trees, bearing Fruit, or Berries: Likewise, Trees put∣ting forth their Leaves late, and shedding them late againe, live longer than those, that are early, either in Leaves, or Fruit: The like is of Wilde trees, in comparison of Orchard Trees: And lastly, in the same kinde, Trees that beare a Sowre Fruit, out-live those that beare a sweet Fruit.
An Observation. 3 ARistotle noted well  difference between Plants. and living Creatures, in  of their Nourishment, and Re∣paration; Namely, that the Bo∣dies of living Creatures, an confined within certain Bounds and that after they bee come to their full Growth, they are con∣tinued and preserved by Nou∣rishment, but they put forth no∣thing New, except Haire and Nailes; which are counted for no better than Excrements; so as the juyce of living Crea∣tures, must, of necessitie, sonner wax old: But in Trees, which put forth yearly, new Boughes, new Shoots, new Leaves, and new Fruits; It comes to passe, that all these parts in Trees,
are once a yeare young and re∣newed; Now it being so, that whatsoever is fresh and young, drawes the Nourishment more lively and cheerfully to it, than that which is Decayed and Old; It happens withall, that the Stock and Body of the Tree, through which the Sap posseth to the Branches, is refreshed and , with a more bountifull and vigorous Nourishment, in the Passage, than otherwise it would have beene. And this appeares notably, (though Ari∣stotle noted it not; Neither hath bee expressed these things so clearly, and perspicuously;) In Hedges, Copses, and Pol∣lards, when the plashing, shed∣ding, or lopping, comforteth the old Stemme or Stock, and maketh it more flourishing, and longer liv'd.
Desiccation; prohibiting  Desiccation; And Inteneration of that, which is desicca∣ted and dried. The Historie. 1 FIre, and strong Heats To the 2 Artic. dry some things, and mels others: Limus ut hic durescit, &  Cera liquescit, Vno eodemque Igne. How this Clay is hardned, and how this wax is melted, with one, and the same thing, Fire; It dryeth Earth, Stones, Wood, Cloth, and Skins, and whatso∣ever is not liquefiable; and it melteth Metals, Wax, Gums,
Butter, Tallow, and the like. 2 Notwithstanding, even in those things, which the Fire melteth, if it bee very vehe∣ment, and continueth, it doth at last dry them. For Metall, in a strong Fire, (Gold onely excepted,) the volatile part being gone forth, will become lesse ponderous, and more brittle: and those Oyly, and fat Substances, in the like Fire, will burne up, and bee dried, and parched. 3 Aire, especially open Aire, doth manifestly dry, but not melt: as High wayes, and the upper part of the Earth, moistned with showers, are dryed;  Clothes, washed, if they bee hanged out in the Aire, are likewise dried; Herbs, and Leaves, and Flowers, laid forth in the shade, are dryed.
But much more suddenly doth the Aire this; If it bee either inlightned with the Sun-beames, (so that they cause not putrefaction;) Or if the Aire bee stirred; as when the Winde bloweth; Or in Roomes open, on all sides. 4 Age, most of all, but yet slowest of all, dryeth; as in all bodies, which (if they be not prevented by putrefaction) are dryed with Age. But Age is nothing of it selfe; being onely the measure of time: That which causeth the Ef∣fect, is the native Spirit of bodies, which sucketh up the moisture of the body, and then, together with it, flyeth forth; and the Aire ambient, which multiplieth it selfe, upon the native Spirits, and
jayees of the body, and prey∣eth upon them. 5 Cold, of all things, most pro∣perly, dryeth; for Drying is not caused, but by Contraction; Now Contraction is the proper work of Cold. But because we Men have Heat in a high De∣gree, namely that of Fire; but Cold in a very low Degree, none other than that of Win∣ter; Or perhaps of Ice, or of Snow, or of Nitre: therefore the Drying caused by Cold, is but weak, and easily resolved. Notwithstanding wee see the Surface of the Earth, to bee more dryed by Frost, or by March windes, than by the Sunne; seeing the same winde, both licketh up the moisture, and affecteth with Coldnesse. 6 Smoak is a Dryer; as in Bacon, and Neats Tongues
which are hanged up in chim∣neys: and perfumes of Oliba∣num, or Lignum Aloes, and the like, dry the Braine, and cure Catarrhs. 7 Salt, after some reasonable continuance, dryeth; not on∣ly on the outside, but in the inside also; as in Flesh and Fish salted, which if they have continued any long time, have a manifest hardnesse within. 8 Hot Gummes, applied to the skin, dry, and wrinkle it: and some Astringent waters also doe the same. 9 Spirit of strong wines, imi∣tateth the Fire in Drying: For it will both potch an Egge, put into it; and toast Bread. 10 Powders dry like Sponges, by Drinking up the Moisture, as it is in Sand, throwneupon
Lines, new written. Also Smoothnesse, and Politenesse of Bodies, (which suffer not the Vapour of Moisture, to goe in by the Pores,) Drie by ac∣cident, because it exposeth it to the Aire; As it is seene in Precious Stones, Looking-Glas∣ses, and Blades of Swords; Up∣on which if you breathe, you shall see at first a little Mist; But soone after it vanisheth, like a Cloud. And thus much for Desiceation, or Drying. 11 They use at this day, in the East parts of Germany, Garners, in Vaults under Ground; wher∣in they keepe wheat, and o∣ther Graines; Laying a good Quantity of Straw, both un∣der the Graines, and about them, to save them from the Danknesse of the Vault: By which Device, they keepe
their Graiaes twenty, or thir∣tie yeares. And this doth not only preserve them from Eu∣stinesse, but (that which per∣taines more to the present In∣quisition,) preserves them also in that Greennesse, that they are fit, and serviceable to make Bread. The same is re∣ported, to have beene in use, in Cappadocia, and Thracia, and some parts of Spaine. 12 The placing of Garners, on the Tops of Houses, with Windowes towards the East, and North, is very commo∣dious. Some also make two Sollars; An Upper, and a Lower; And the upper Sol∣lar hath an Hole in it; tho∣row which the Graine conti∣nually descendeth, like Sand in an Houre-glasse; And after a few dayes, they throw it up
againe with Shovels; That so it may be in continuall Moti∣on. Now it is to bee noted, that this doth not onely pre∣vent the Fustinesse, but con∣serveth the Greennesse, and slacketh the Desiccation of it: The cause is that Which we no∣ted before; That the Dischar∣ging of the watry Humor, Which is quickned by the Motion, and the Winds, preserves the Oily Humour in his Being; Which otherwise would fly out, to∣gether with the Watry Hu∣mour. Also in some Moun∣taines, where the Aire is very pure, Dead Carkases may bee kept for a good while, with∣out any great Decay. 13 Fruits; As Pomegranates, Cytrons, Apples, Peares, and the like. Also Flowers; As Roses, and Lilies; may bee kept, a
long time, in Earthen Vessels close stopped. Howsoever they are not free from the In∣juries of the outward Air which will affect them, wit. his unequall Temper, thorow the sides of the Vessell; As  is manifest, in Heat and cold Therefore it will bee good to stop the Mouthes of the Vessels carefully, and to bury them within the Earth. And it will be as good: Not to bu∣ry them in the Earth, but to sinke them in the Water, so as the place be shady; As in Wels: Or Cisternes placed within Doores: But those that bee sunke in Water, will doe better in Glasse vessels, than in Ear∣then. 14 Generally, those Things which are kept in the Earth,  in Vaults under Ground, or in
the Bottome of a Well, will preserve their Freshnesse lon∣ger, than those Things that are kept above Ground. 15 They say, it hath been obser∣ved; That in Conservatories of Snow, (whether they were in Mountaines, in Naturall Pits, or in Wells made by Art, for that purpose) an Ap∣ple, or Chest-nut, or Nut, by chance falling in, after many Moneths, when the Snow hath melted, have beene found in the Snow, as fresh and faire, as if they had been gathered the day before. 16 Country people keep Clu∣sters of Grapes in Meale; which though it makes them lesse pleasant to the taste, yet it preserves their Moisture, and Freshnesse. Also the Harder sort of Fruits may bee kept
long, not onely in Meale, but also in Saw-dust, and in  of Corne. 17 There is an opinion held; That Bodies may be preserved Fresh in Liquours of their own kind; As in their proper  As to keepe Grapes in wine, Olives in Oyle. 18 Pomegrants, and Quinces, are kept long, being lightly dipped in Sea water, or Salt∣water; And soone after taken out againe; and then dryed in the open Aire, so it bee in the Shade. 19 Bodies put in Wine, Oyle, or the Lees of Oyle, keepe long; Much more in Honey, or Spi∣rit of Wine; But most of all, as some say, in Quick-silver. 20 Fruits enclosed in Wax, Pitch, Plaister, Paste, or any the like Case, or Covering,
keep green very long. 21 It is manifest, that Flyes, Spiders, Ants, or the like small Creasures, falling by chance into Amber, or the Gums of Trees, and so fin∣ding a Buriall in them, doe never after corrupt, or rot, al∣though they be soft and ten∣der Bodies. 22 Grapes are kept long by be∣ing hanged up in Bunches; The same is of other Fruits. For there is a twofold commodity of this Thing; The one, that they are kept without Pres∣sing, or Bruising; which they must needs suffer, if they were laid upon any hard substance; The other, that the Aire doth encompasse them, on every side alike. 23 It is observed, that Putrefa∣ction, no lesse than Desiccation,
in Vegetables, doth not  in every part alike; But chief∣ly in that part, where, being alive, it did attract Nourish∣ment. Therefore some ad∣vise, to cover the Stalkes  Apples, or other Fruits, with Wax, or Pitch. 24 Great Wiekes of Candles,  Lamps, doe sooner  the Tallow, or Oyle, than  Wiekes: Also Wieks of Cotton sooner than those of Rush,  Straw, or small Twigs: And in Staves of Torches, those of Iuniper, or Firre, sooner than those of Ash: Likewise, Flame, Moved, and Fanned with the Wind, sooner than that which is still; And therefore Can∣dles, set in a Lanthorne, will last longer, than in the Open Aire. There is a Tradition, that Lamps set in Sepulchers,
will last an incredible time. 25 The Nature also, and Prepa∣ration of the Nourishment, con∣duceth no lesse, to the Lasting of Lamps, and Candles, than the Nature of the Flame: For Wax will last longer than Tal∣low; And Tallow a little wet, longer than Tallow dry; And Wax Candles old made, longer than Wax Candles new made. 26 Trees, if you stir the Earth about their Roots, every yeare, will continue lesse time; If once in foure, or perhaps in ten yeares, much longer: Al∣so Cutting off the Suckers, and Young Shoots, will make them live the longer: But Dunging them, or laying of Marle a∣bout their Roots, or much Watring them, addes to their fertility, but cuts off from their long Lasting. And thus
much, touching the Prohibi∣ting of Desiccation, or Consump∣tion. The Inteneration, or making Tender, of that which  Dryed, (which is the chiefe Matter,) affords but a small Number of Experiments: And therefore some few Experi∣ments wch are found in  Creatures, and also in Man shall be joyned together. 27 Bands of Willow, wherewith they use to bind Trees, laid in water, grow more Flexible. Likewise, they put Boughes of Birch, (the ends of them) in earthen Pots filled with wa∣ter, to keepe them from wi∣thering; And Bowles cleft with Drinesse, steeped in water, close againe. 28 Boots, growne hard and ob∣stinate with age, by greasing
them before the Fire with , wax soft; or being on∣ly held before the Fire, get some softnesse: Bladders, and Parchments, hardened also, be∣come tender, with warme wa∣ter, mixed with Tallow, or any Fat Thing; But much the bet∣ter, if they be a little Chofed. 29 Trees growne very old, that have stood long without any Culture, by Digging, and Ope∣ning the Earth, about the Roots of them, seeme to grow young againe, and put forth young Branches. 30 Old Draught Oxen, worne out with labour, being taken from the yoke, and put into fresh Pasture, will get young and tender Flesh againe; In so much, that they will eat, as Fresh and tender, as a Steere. 31 A strict Emaciating Dyet, of
Guaiacum, Bisket, and the like; (wherewith they use to cure the French Pox, old Catarrhs, and some kinde of Dropsies,) doth first bring men to great Povertie and Leannesse, by wasting the Juyces and Hu∣mours of the Body; which after they begin to be repai∣red againe, seeme  more vigorous and young: Nay, and we are of Opinion, that Emaciating Diseases, af∣terwards well cured, have ad∣vanced many in the way of Long Life. Observations. 1 MEn see clearly, like Owles in the Night, of their owne Notions; But in Experi∣ence, as in the Day-light, they winke, and are but halfe-sighted.
They speake much, of the Elemen∣tary Quality of Siccity, or Dri∣nesse; And of Things Desicca∣ting; And of the Naturall Pe∣riods of Bodies, in which they are Corrupted, and consumed: But meane while, either in the Beginnings, or Middle Pas∣sages, or Last Acts, of Desic∣cation, and Consumption, they observe nothing, that is of Mo∣ment. 2 Desiccation, or Consumption, in the Processe thereof, is finished by three Actions; And all these, (as was said before,) have their Originall, from the Native Spi∣rit of bodies. 3 The First Action is, the At∣tenuation of the Moisture into Spirit; The Second is, the Issu∣ing forth, or Flight of the Spi∣rit; The third is, the Contracti∣on, of the Grosser Parts of the
Body, immediately after the Spi∣rit issued forth: And this last, is that Desiccation, and Indu∣ration, which we chiefly handle; The Former Two consume only. 4 Touching Attenuation, the matter is manifest. For the Spirit, which is enclosed in every Tan∣gible Body, forgets not his Na∣ture; But whatsoever it meets withall in the Body, (in which it is enclosed,) that it can disgest, and master, and turne into it selfe; That it plainly alters, and subdues, and multiplies it selfe upon it, and begets new Spirit. And this is evicted, by one Proofe, in stead of many; For that those Things, which are  Dryed, are Lessened in their Weight; And become Hollow, Porous, and Resounding from within. Now it is most cer∣taine, that the Inward Spirit of
any Thing, confers Nothing to the Weight; But rather Ligh∣tens it; And therefore it must needs be, that the same Spirit, hath turned into it, the Moisture and Juyce of the Body, which weighed before; By which Meanes the Weight is lessened. And this is the first Action; The Attenuation of the Moi∣sture, and Converting it into Spirit. 5 The second Action, which is the Issuing forth or Flight of the Spirit, is as manifest also. For that Issuing forth, when it is in throngs, is apparent even to the Sense; In Vapours, to the Sight; In Odours, to the Smel∣ling: But if it issueth forth slowly; (As when a Thing is decayed by Age,) then it is not apparent to the Sense; But the Matter is the same. Againe, where the Com∣posure
of the Body, is either so Strait, or so Tenacious, That the Spirit can finde no Pores, or Passages, by which to depart, Then, in the striving to get out, it drives before it the grosser Parts of the Body; And pro∣trudes them beyond the Super∣ficies, or Surface of the Bodit; As it is in the Rust of Metals; And Mould of all Fat Things. And this is the second Action; The Issuing forth, or Flight of the Spirit. 6 The third Action, is some∣what more obscure, but full as certaine: That is; The Contra∣ction, of the Grosser Parts, af∣ter the Spirit issued forth. And this appeares first, in that Bo∣dies after the Spirit issued forth, doe manifestly Shrinke, and  a lesse Roome; As it is in the Kernels of Nuts, which after
they are dryed, are too little for the Shells; And in Beames, and Planchers of Houses, which at first lay closo together, but after they are dryed, gape; And like∣wise in Bowles, which through Drought, grow full of Cranies, The Parts of the Bowle contra∣cting themselves together, and af∣ter Contraction must needs be emptie Spaces. Secondly, it ap∣peares by the Wrinkles of Bo∣dies Dryed: For the Endevour of Contracting it selfe, is such; That by the Contraction, it brings the Parts nearer together, and so lifts them up; For what∣soever is Contracted on the sides, is lifted up in the Midst; And this is to be seene, in Pa∣pers, and old Parchments; And in the Skins of Living Crea∣tures; And in the Coats of Soft Cheeses; All which, with
Age, gather wrinkles. Thirdly this Contraction shewes  selfe Most, in those Things, which by Heat, are not only wrinkled but ruffled, and plighted, and,  it were, rowled together; As it is in Papers, and Parchments, and Leaves, brought neare the Fire. For Contraction, by Age, which is more Slow, commonly causeth wrinkles; But Contra∣ction, by the Fire, which is  speedie, causeth Plighting. Now in most Things, where it  not to Wrinkling, or Pligh∣ting, there is simple Contracti∣on, and Angustiation,  Straitning, and Induration  Hardning, and Desiccation; As was shewed in the first place: But if the Issuing forth of the Spirit; and Absumption, or waste of the Moisture, bee so great; That there is not left Bo∣die
sufficient, to unite, and con∣tract it selfe; Then, of Necessitie, Contraction must cease; And the Bodie  Putride; And nothing else, but a little Dust, cleaving together, which with a light touch, is dispersed, and fal∣leth asunder; As it is in Bodies that are Rotten, and in Paper burnt; And Linnen made into Tinder; And Carkaises Embal∣med, after many Ages. And this is the Third Action; The Con∣traction of the Grosser Parts, after the Spirit issued forth. 7 It is to be noted; That Fire, and Heat, dry only by Accident. For their proper Worke is, to at∣tenuate, and dilate the Spirit, and Moisture; And then it fol∣lowes by Accident, that the other Parts should contract themselves; Either for the Flying of Vacuum alone; Or for some other Motion
withall; Whereof we now speake not. 8 It is certaine that Putrefacti∣on, takes his Originall, from the Native Spirit, no lesse than A∣refaction; But it goeth on a far different way; For in Putrefa∣ction, the Spirit, is not simply vapoured forth; But being de∣tained in Part, workes strange Garboises; And the Grosser Parts, are not so much locally contracted, as they congregate themselves to Parts of the same Nature.
Length, and Shortnesse of Life in living Creatures. The Historie. TOuching the Length, To the 1. Arti∣cle. and Shortnes of Life, in Living Creatures, the Information, which may bee had, is but Slender; Observation is Negligent; And Tradition Fa∣bulous: In Tame Creatures, their  Life, corrupteth them; In wilde Creatures, their Exposing to all weathers, often in∣tercepteth them. Neither doe those Things, which may seeme Conco∣mitants, give any Furtherance, to this Information, (The Great∣nesse of their Bodies; Their Time of Bearing in the Womb;
The Number of their Young ones; The Time of their Growth, And the Rest;) In re∣gard that these Things are Inter∣mixed, And sometimes they con∣cur, sometimes they sever: 1 Mans Age, (as farre as can be gathered by any certaine Narration,) doth exceed the Age, of all other Living Crea∣tures; Except it be, of a very few only. And the Concomi∣tants in him, are very equally disposed; His Stature, and Proportion, large; His Bearing in the Wombe, nine Moneths; His Fruit, commonly, one, at a Birth; His Pubertie at the Age of Fourteen yeares; His Time of Growing, till Twenty. 2 The Elephant, by undoub∣ted Relation, exceeds the Or∣dinary Race of Mans life: But his Bearing in the Wombe,
the space of ten yeares, is fa∣bulous; Of two yeares, or at least, above one, is certaine: Now his Bulke is great; His Time of Growth, untill the thir∣tieth yeare; His Teeth excee∣ding hard: Neither hath it beene unobserved; That his Bloud is the coldest of all Creatures: His Age, hath sometimes reached, to two hundred yeares. 3 Lions are accounted long Li∣vers, because many of them, have been found Toothlesse; A signe not so certaine; For that may bee caused, by their strong Breath. 4 The Beare is a great Sleeper; A Dull Beast, and given to ease; And yet not noted for long Life: Nay hee hath this signe of short Life; That his Bearing in the Wombe is but
short; scarce full forty dayes. 5 The Fox seemes to bee well disposed, in many Things, for long life; He is well skinned, feeds on Flesh, lives in Dens; And yet hee is noted not to have that propertie. Cer∣tainly, hee is a kinde of Dog; And that kinde is but short liv'd. 6 The Camell is a long Liver: A lean Creature, and Sinewy: So that he doth ordinarily at∣taine to Fifty; And some. times to an hundred yeares. 7 The Horse lives but to a mo∣derate Age; searce to fortie yeares; His ordinarie Period is Twentie yeares. But per∣haps, he is beholding, for this shortnesse of his Life, to Man: For we have now no Horses of the Sunne; That live freely, and at pleasure, in good pa∣stures.
Notwithstanding the Horse growes, till hee bee six yeares old; And is able for Generation, in his Old Age. Besides, the Mare goeth lon∣ger with her young one, than a Woman; And brings forth two at a Burthen more rare∣ly. The Asse lives commonly to the Horses Age; But the Mule out-lives them both. 8 The Hart is famous amongst Men, for long Life; yet not upon any Relation, that is undoubted. They tell of a certaine Hart, that was found with a Coller about his Neck, and that Coller hidden with Fat. The long Life of the Hart, is the lesse credible, because hee comes to his per∣fection at the Fifth yeare; And not long after, his Hornes, (which hee sheds, and
renewes yearely) grow more Narrow at the Root, and lesse Branched. 9 The Dag is but a short Li∣ver: He exceeds not the Age of Twentie yeares; And for the most part lives not to fourteen yeares. A Creature of the hottest Temper, and living in extremes; for he is commonly, either in vehe∣ment Motion, or Sleeping Besides, the Bitch, bringeth forth many at a Burthen, and goeth nine weekes. 10 The Oxe likewise, for the Greatnesse of his Body, and Strength, is but a short Liver; About some sixteen yeares: And the Males live longer than the Females: Notwith∣standing, they beare, usually, but one at a Burthen, and goe nine Moneths. A Creature
dull, and fleshy, and soone fat∣ted, and living onely upon Herby substances, without Graine. 11 The Sheep seldome lives to ten yeares; Though hee bee a Creature, of a moderate size, and excellently clad: And, that which may seeme a won∣der, being a Creature with so little Gall, yet hee hath the most curled coat of any o∣ther; For the Haire, of no Creature, is so much curled, as Wooll is. The Rams generate not before the third yeare; And continue able for Gene∣ration, untill the eighth: The Ewes beare young, as long as they live. The Sheep is a diseased Creature; And rare∣ly lives to his full Age. 12 The Goat lives to the same Age, with the Sheepe; And is
not much unlike in other Things; Though hee bee a Creature more Nimble, and of somewhat a firmer Flesh; And so should bee longer liv'd: But then hee is much more lascivious; And that shortens his Life. 13 The Sow lives to fifteen yeares, sometimes to twentie: And though it be a Creature of the Moistest Flesh; yet that seemes to make nothing to Length of Life. Of the Wilde Boare, or Sow, we have nothing certaine. 14 The Cats Age, is betwixt six, and ten yeares. A Crea∣ture nimble, and full of spirit, whose seed, (As Aelian repot∣teth) burneth the Female. Whereupon it is said; That the Cat conceives with paine, and brings forth with ease. A crea∣ture
ravenous in eating; Ra∣ther swallowing downe his Meat whole, than Feeding. 15 Hares and Conies attaine scarce to seven yeares: Being both Creatures Generative, and with young ones, of se∣verall conceptions, in their bellies: In this, they are un∣like, that the Coney lives under Ground, and the Hare above Ground; And againe, that the Hare is of a more duskish Flesh. 16 Birds, for the size of their Bodies, are much lesser than Beasts: for an Eagle, or Swan, is but a small Thing, in compa∣rison of an Oxe, or Horse; And so is an Estrich, to an Elephant. 17 Birds are excellently well clad; For Feathers, for warmth, and close sitting, to the Body, exceed wooll, and Haires.
18 Birds, though they hatch ma∣ny young ones together, yet they beare them not all in their Bodies at once; Butlay their Egges by turnes; where∣by, their Fruit hath the more plentifull nourishment,  it is in their bodies. 19 Birds chew, little, or no∣thing; but their Meat is found whole in their crops; Not∣withstanding they will breake the shels of Fruits, and pick out the Kernels: They are thought to bee, of a very hot, and strong concoction. 20 The Motion of Birds, in their Flying, is a mixt Motion Consisting, of a moving of the Lims, and of a kinde of Car∣riage, which is, a most whole∣some kinde of Exercise. 21 Aristotle noted well, tou∣ching the Generation of
Birds; (But hee transferred it ill to other living Creatures;) That the seed of the Male, confers lesse to Generation, than the Female. But that it rather affords Activity, than Matter: so that Fruitfull Egges, and unfruitfull Egges, are hardly distinguished. 22 Birds, (almost all of them,) come to their full Growth, the first yeare, or a little after: It is true, that their Feathers, in some kindes, and their Bils, in others, shew their yeares; But for the Growth of their Bodies, it is not so. 23 The Eagle is accounted a long Liver; yet his yeares are not set downe. And it is al∣ledged, as a signe of his long life; That he casts his Bill; whereby hee growes young againe. From whence comes
that Proverb; The Old Age of an Eagle. Notwithstanding, perchance, the matter may be thus; That the Renewing of the Eagle doth not cast his Bill; But the casting of his Bill, is the Renewing of the Eagle: For after that his Bill is growne, to a great crooked∣nesse, the Eagle feeds, with much difficultie. 24 Vultures also are affirmed to bee long Livers; Insomuch, that they extend their Life, well-neare to an hundred yeares: Kites likewise, and so all Birds that feed upon Flesh, and Birds of prey, live long. As for Hawkes, because they lead a degenerate, and servile life, for the Delight of Men; The Terme of their Naturall Life is not certainly knowne: Notwithstanding, amongst
Mewed Hawkes, some have beene found, so have li∣ved thirty yeares. And a∣mongst wilde Hawkes, forty yeares. 25 The Raven likewise, is re∣ported to live long; Some∣times, to an hundred yeares. Hee feeds on Carrion; And flies not often, but rather is a se dentarie, and Melancholy Bird; And hath very black flesh. But the Crow, like unto him in most Things; (Except in Greatnesse, and voice;) lives not altogether so long; And yet is reckoned amongst the long Livers. 26 The Swan, is certainly found, to bee a long Liver; And exceeds, not unfrequent∣ly, an hundred yeares. He is a Bird excellently plumed; A Feeder upon Fish; And is al∣wayes
carried; And that in Running Waters. 27 The Goose also may passe amongst the Long-livers; Though his food bee com∣monly Grasse, and such kinde of Nourishment: Especially, the Wilde-Goose; whereupon, this Proverb grew amongst the Germans; Magis senex quam Anser Nivalis; Older than a Wilde-Goose. 28 Storks must needs bee Long-livers; If that bee true, which was anciently observed of them; That they never came to  because that Citie was of∣ten sacked. This if it were so; Then either, they must have the knowledge of more Ages than one; Or else the old Ones, much tell their young, the Historie. But there
is Nothing more frequent, than Fables. 29 For Fables doe so abound, touching the Phoenix; That the Truth is utterly lost, if any such Bird there be. As for that, which was so much ad∣mired; That shee was ever seen abroad, with a great Troope of Birds about her, it is no such wonder: For the same is usually seene, about an Owl flying in the Day time, or a Parret, let out of a Cage. 30 The Parret, hath been cer∣tainly knowne, to have lived threescore yeares in England; How old soever hee was, be∣fore he was brought over. A Bird, eating almost all kinde of Meats, chewing his Meat, and renewing his Bill; Like∣wise, curst, and mischievous,
and of a black Flesh. 31 The Peacock lives Twentie yeares; But hee comes not forth with his Argus Eyes, be∣fore he be three yeares old: A Bird slow of pace, having whi∣tish Flesh. 32 The Dunghill Cock, is vene∣reous, Martiall, and but of a short life; A cranck Bird; Ha∣ving also white Flesh. 33 The Indian Cock, common∣ly called, The Turkey-Cock. lives not much longer, that the Dunghill-Cock: An Angry Bird; And hath exceeding white Flesh. 34 The Ring-Doves, are of the longest sort of Livers; Inso∣much, that they attaine, some∣times, to fiftie yeares of Age: An Aëry Bird; And both Builds, and Sits, on high: But Doves, and Turtles, are but
short liv'd, not exceeding eight yeares. 35 But Pheasants, and , may live to sixteen yeares: They are great Breeders; But not so white of Flesh, as the ordinarie Pullen. 36 The Black-Bird is reported to be, amongst the lesser Birds, one of the longest livers: An unhappy Bird, and a good Singer. 37 The Sparrow is noted to be of a very short Life; And it is imputed, in the Males, to their Lasciviousnesse. But the Linnet, no bigger in Body, than the Sparrow, hath beene observed, to have lived twen∣tie yeares. 38 Of the Estrich, we have no∣thing certaine: Those that were kept here, have beene so unfortunate, that no long life
appeared by them. Of  Bird Ibis, wee finde only,  long; But his yeare are not recorded. 39 The Age of Fishes is  uncertaine, than that of Ter∣restriall Creatures; Because living under the water,  are the lesse observed.  of them breath not; By  meanes, their vitall  more closed in: And there fore, though they  some Refrigeration, by  Gils; yet that Refrigeration is not so continuall, as  it is by Breathing. 40 They are free, from the D∣iccation, and Depredation,  the Aire Ambient,  they live in the water:  there is no Doubt, but the Water Ambient, and piercing
and received into the pores of their Body, doth more Hurt, to long Life, than the Aire doth. 41 It is affirmed too, that their  is not Warme: Some of them: are great Devourers, even of their owne kinde. Their Flesh is softer, and more tender, than that of Terrestriall Creatures. They grow exceedingly fat; Inso∣much, that an Incredible Quantitie of Oyle will be ex∣tracted out of one Whole. 42  reported to live about thirty yeares: Of which Thing, a Triall was taken, in some of them, by cutting off their Tailes: They grow un∣till ten yeares of Age. 43 That which they report, of some Fishes, is strange; That after a certaine Age,
their Bodies will waste, and grow very slender; Onely their Head, and Taile, retai∣ning their former Greatnesse. 44 There were found, in Caesars Fish-ponds, Lampreys to have lived threescore yeares: They were growne so familiar, with long use, That Crassus the O∣rator, solemnly lamented One of them. 45 The Pike, amongst Fishes li∣ving in fresh water, is found to last longest; sometimes  forty yeares: He is a  of a Flesh, somewhat Dry, and Firme. 46 But the Carp, Breame, , and the like; Are no held to live, above ten yeares 47 Salmons are Quicke of Growth, short of Life; So are Trouts: But the Perch is slow of Growth, long of life.
48 Touching that monstrous Bulk, of the Whale, or Orke; How long it is wielded by vitall Spirit; Wee have recei∣ved Nothing certaine: Nei∣ther yet, touching the Sea-calf, and Sea Hog, and other innu∣merable Fishes. 49 Crocodiles are reported to be exceeding long liv'd; And re famous, fer the Time of their Growth; For that they, amongst all other Creatures, are thought to grow, during their whole life. They are of those Creatures, that lay Egges; Ravenous, cruell, and well fenced against the wa∣ters. Touching the other kindes of Shell. Fish, wee finde Nothing certaine, how long they live.
Observations. To finde out a Rule, tou∣ching Length, and Shcrt∣nesse, of Life, in Living Crea∣tures, is very difficult; By rea∣son of the Negligence of Obser∣vations, and the Intermixing of Causes: A few Things wee will set downe. 1 There are more kindes of Birds, found to bee long liv'd, than of Beasts; (As the Eagle the Vultur, the Kite, the Peli∣can, the Raven, the Crow, the Swan, the Goose, the Storke, the Crane, the Bird called the Ibis, the Parret, the Ring Dove, with the rest;) Though they come to their full Growth, within a yeare; And are lesse of Bodies. Surely, their Clothing is excellent good against the Di∣stemperatures
of the wether; And besides, living, for the most part, in the open Aire, they are like the Inhabitants of pure Mountaines, which are long liv'd. Againe, their Motion; which, (as we else where said,) is a mixt Motion; Compounded of a Moving of their Lims, and of a Carriage in the Aire; doth lesse wearie, and weare them; And is more wholesome. Neither doe they suffer any Compression, or want of Nourishment, in their Mothers Bellies; Because the Egges are laid by Turnes: But the chiesest cause of all, I take to be this; That Birds are made more of the substance of the Mo∣ther, than of the Father; where∣by their Spirit is not so eager, and hot. 2 It may bee a position; That Creatures, which partake more
of the substance of their Mother than of their Father, are longer liv'd; As Birds are; which  said before. Also that those which have a longer time of Bea∣ring in the wombe, doe  more of the substance of the Mo∣ther, lesse of the Father; And si are longer liv'd: Insomuch  wee are of opinion, that even  mongst Men, (which wee  noted in some,) those that resem∣ble their Mothers most, are lon∣gest liv'd: And so are the children of old Men, begotten upon young wives; If the Fathers be sound not Diseased. 3 The First Breeding of Crea∣tures, is ever most Materiall, ei∣ther to their Hurt, or Benefit And therefore it stands with Reason; That the lesser Com∣pression, and the more liberall Alimentation, of the young
one, in the wombe, should con∣ferre much to Long Life; Now this happens, when either the young ones are brought forth successively, as in Birds; Or when they are single Births; As in Creatures bearing but one at a Burthen. 4 But long Bearing, in the wombe, makes for Length of Life, three wayes. First, for that the young one partakes more of the substance of the Mother; As hath beene said. Secondly, that it comes forth, more strong, and able. Thirdly, that it under∣goes the predatorie Force of the Aire, sater. Besides it shewes, that Nature intendeth to finish her periods, by larger Cir∣cles. Now though Oxen, and Sheepe, which are borne in the wombe, about six Moneths, are but short liv'd: That hap∣pens
for other Causes. 5 Feeders upon Grasse, and  Herbs, are but short Li∣vers; And Creatures, feeding upon Flesh, or Seeds, or Fruits, long Livers; As some Birds are. As for Harts, which are long liv'd; They take the one Halfe of their Meat, (As men use to say,) from above their Heads. And the Goose, besides Grasse, findeth something in the water, and stubble, to feed upon. 6 Wee suppose, that a good Clo∣thing of the Body, maketh much to long Life: For it Fenceth, and Armeth, against the Intempe∣rances of the Aire, which dot wonderfully Assaile, and Decay, the Body: which Benefit Birds especially have. Now that Sheep, which have so good Fleeces, should bee so short ; That is to bee impated to Diseases, whereof
that Creature is full; and to the bareeating of Grasse. 7 The Seat of the Spirits, without doubt, is principally the Head: Which though it bee usually un∣derstood, of the Animall Spi∣rits onely, yet this is all in all. Againe, it is not to bee doubted, but the Spirits doe, most of all, waste, and prey upon the Body; so that, wher they are either in grea∣ter plentie; Or in greater In∣flammation, and Acrimonie; There the life is much shortned. And therefore wee conceive, a great Cause of long life, in Birds, to bee; The Smalnesse of their Heads, in comparison of their Bodies: For even Men, which have very great Heads, wee sup∣pose to be the shorter Livers. 8 We are os opinion; That Car∣riage, is of all other Motions, the most helpfull to long life; which
we also noted before. Now there are carried; Water-fowles, up∣on the water; As Swans; All Birds in their flying, but with a strong Endevour of their Lime; And Fishes, of the length of whose Life, wee have no certain∣tie. 9 Those Creatures which are long, before they come to their perfection; (Net speaking of Growth in stature onely, but of other steps to Maturitie; As Manputs forth, First his  Next the Signes of Pube, tie; Then his Beard; And so for∣ward;) are Long-liv'd. For it shewes, that Nature finisheth her Periods, by larger Circles. 10 Milder Creatures, are not long-liv'd; As the Sheepe, and Dove: for Choler is as the Whetstone, and Spur, to many Functions in the Body.
11 Creatures, whose Flesh is more Duskish, are longer liv'd, than those that have white Flesh: for it sheweth, that the Iuyce of the Body is more firme, and lesse apt to dissipate. 12 In every Corruptible Body, Quantitie maketh much, to the Conservation of the whole: For a great fire is longer in Quen∣ching; A small portion of water is sooner evaporated; The Body of a Tree withereth not so fast as a Twig: And therefore general∣ly; (I speak it of Species, not of In∣dividuals;) Creatures that are large in Body, are longer liv'd than thos that are small; unlesse there be some other potent Cause, to hinder it.
Alimentation, or Nourish∣ment; And the way of Nourishing. The Historie. 1 NOurishment ought to To the 4. Arti∣le. bee of an Inferiour nature, and more sim∣ple substance, than the Thing Nourished. Plants are nouri∣shed with the Earth and Wa∣ter; Living Creatures with Plants; Man with Living Creatures: There are also certain Creatures Feeding up∣on Flesh; And Man himselfe, takes Plants, into a part of his Nourishment: But Man, and Creatures feeding upon Flesh,
are scarcely nourished with Plants alone. Perhaps, Fruits, or Graines, baked, or boyled, may, with long use, nourish them; But Leaves, of Plants, or Herbs, will not doe it; As the Order of the Foliatanes, shewed by Experience. 2 Over-great Affinity, or Con∣substantiality of the Nourish∣ment, to the Thing nourished, proveth not well: for Crea∣tures, feeding upon Herbs, touch no Flesh; And of Crea∣tures feeding upon Flesh, few of them eat their owne kinde. As for Men, which are Canni∣bals, they feed not ordinarily upon Mens Flesh; But reserve it as a Dainty, either to serve their Revenge upon their E∣nemies, or to satisfie their Ap∣petite at some times. So the Ground is best sowne, with
Seed growing else-where; And Men do not use to Graft, or Inoculate, upon the same stocke. 3 By how much the more the Nourishment is better Prepa∣red, and approacheth nearer in likenesse, to the Thing nourished; By so much the more, are Plants more Fruit∣full; And Living Creatures in better liking, and plight. For a young Slip, or Cions, is not so well nourished, if it bee pricked into the Ground; As if it be grafted into a Stecke, agreeing wich it in Nature; And where it findes the Nou∣rishment alreadie disgested, and prepared: Neither, (as is reported,) will the Seed of an Onion, or some such like, sown in the bare earth, bring forth so large a Fruit, as if it be put
into another Onion; Which is a new kind of Grafting; In∣to the Root, or under ground: Againe it hath beene found out lately; That a Slip of a Wilde Tree; As of an Elme, Oake, Ash, or such like, grafted into a Stock of the same kind, wil bring forth larger Leaves, than those that grow without Grafting: Also Men, are not nourished so well with Raw Flesh, as with that which hath passed the Fire. 4 Living Creatures are nouri∣shed by the Mouth; plants by the Root; Young ones in the Womb, by the Navill: Birds, for a while, are nourished with the Yolke in the Egge; whereof some is found in their Crops, after they are hatched. 5 All Nourishment moveth, from the Center, to the Cir∣cum
cumference; Or, from the In∣ward, to the Outward: yet it is to be noted; That in Trees, and Plants, the Nourishment passeth, rather by the Barke, and outward Parts, than by the Pith, and inward parts: For if the Barke be pilled off, though but for a small bredth, round, they live no more: And the Bloud, in the Veines of Living Creatures, doth no lesse nourish the Flesh be∣neath it, than the Flesh a∣bove it. 6 In all Alimentation, or Nou∣rishment, there is a two-fold Action; Extrusion, and At∣traction: whereof the Former proceeds from the Inward Function, the latter from the Outward. 7 Vegetables assimilate their Nourishment simply, with∣out
Excerning: For Gums, and Teares of Trees, are ra∣ther Exuberances, than Ex∣crements: And knots, or knobs, are nothing but Disea∣ses. But the substance of Li∣ving Creatures is more per∣ceptible, of the like; And therefore it is conjoyned with a kinde of Disdaine; where∣by it rejecteth the Bad, and as∣similateth the Good. 8 It is a strange Thing, of the Stalkes of Fruits; That all the Nourishment, which produ∣ceth, sometimes, such great Fruits, should bee forced to passe thorow so narrow Necks: For the Fruit is ne∣ver joyn'd to the Stock, with∣out some stalke. 9 It is to be noted; That the Seeds of Living Creatures, will not be fruitfull, but when
they are new shed; But the Seeds of Plants, will be fruit, full, a long time, after they are gathered. Yet the Slips, or Cions of Trees, will not grow, unlesse they be grafted green; Neither will the  keepe long Fresh, unlesse they be covered with earth. 10 In Living Creatures, there are Degrees of Nourishment according to their Age: In the Wombe, the young one is nourished with the Mo∣thers Bloud; when it is new borne, with Milke; After∣ward, with Meats, and Drinks; And in old Age, the most Nourishing, and Savourie Meats, please best. 11 Above all, it maketh to the present Inquisition; To inquire diligently, and Attentively; whether a Man may not re∣ceive
Nourishment from with∣out; At least some other way, beside the Mouth? Wee know, that Baths of Milke are used in some Hectick Fevers, and when the Body is brought extreme low; And physiti∣ans doe prescribe Nourishing Clysters: This Matter would be well studied; For if Nou∣rishment may be made, either from without, or some other way, than by the Stomach, Then the weaknesse of Con∣coction, which is incident to old Men, might be recompen∣ced by these Helps; And Con∣coction restored to them, in∣tire.
Length and Shortnesse of Life in Man. The Historie. 1 BEfore the Floud, as the To the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 11. Article. Sacred Scriptures re∣late, Men lived many Hundred yeares: Yet none of the  attained to a full Thousand. Neither was this Length of Life,  only to Grace, or the Holy  For there are reckoned, of the Fa∣thers, untill the Floud, eleven Generations; But of the Sons of Adam, by Cain, only eight Generations; So as the Poste∣ritie of Cain may seeme the longer liv'd. But this Length of Life, immediately after the
Floud, was reduced to a Moi∣tie; But in the Post-Nati: For Noah, who was borne before, equalled the Age of his, An∣cestours; And Sem saw the sixth hundred year of his life. Afterward, three Generations being run, from the Floud; The Life of Man was brought downe, to a Fourth Part of the Primitive Age; That was, to about two Hundred years. 2 Abraham lived an hundred seventie and five yeares: A Man of an High Courage, and prosperous in all Things. Isaac came to an Hundred and eightie yeares of Age; A chaste Man, and enjoying more Quietnesse, than his Fa∣ther. But Iacob, after many Crosses, and a numerous Pro∣genie, lasted to the Hundred fortie seventh yeare of his
Life: A Patient, Gentle, and wise Man. Ishmael, a Militar Man, lived an Hundred thir∣tie and seven yeares. Sarah, (whose yeares only, amongst women, are recorded,) died in the Hundred twentie se∣venth yeare of her Age: A Beautifull, and Magnanimous Woman; A singular good Mother, and Wife; And yet, no lesse Famous, for her Li∣bertie, than Obsequiousnesse towards her Husband. Ioseph also, a Prudent, and Politicke Man, Passing his youth in Af∣fliction, afterwards advanced to the Height of Honour and Prosperitie, lived an hundred and ten yeares. But his Bro∣ther Levi, elder than himselfe, attained to an Hundred thirty seven yeares; A Man Impa∣tient of Contumely, and Re∣vengefull.
Neare unto the same Age, attained the Sonne of Levi: Also his Grand Child; The Father of Aaron, and Moses. 3 Moses lived an Hundred and Twenty years: A Stout Man, and yet the Meekest upon the Earth; And of a very Slow Tongue. Howsoever Moses, in his Psalme, pronounceth; That the life of Man is but seven∣tie yeares; And if a Man have Strength, then eighty; Which Terme of Mans Life standeth firme, in many particulars, even at this Day. Aaron, who was three yeares the Elder, died the same yeare, with his Brother: A Man of a readier Speech, of a more facile Dis∣position, and lesse Constant. But Phineas, Grand-child of Aaron, (perhaps, out of extra∣ordinary
Grace,) may be col∣lected, to have lived three hundred yeares; If so be, the War of the Israelites, against the Tribe of Benjamin; (In which Expedition, Phineas was consulted with,) were performed, in the same order of Time, in which the Histo∣rie hath ranked it: He was a Man of a most Eminent Zeale. Ioshua, a Martiall Man, and an excellent Leader, and ever∣more victorious, lived to the Hundred and Tenth yeare of his Life. Caleb was his Con∣temporany; And seemeth to have beene of as great yeares. Ehud the Judge, seemes to have beene no lesse than an hundred years old; In regard, that after the Victory over the Moabites, the Holy Land had rest, under his Government,
eightie yeares: He was a Man Fierce, and undaunted; And one, that in a sort, neglected his Life for the good of his People. 4 Iob lived, after the Restau∣ration of his Happinesse, an Hundred and Fortie yeares; Being, before his Afflictions, of that Age, that he had sons at Mans Estate: A Man Po∣litick, Eloquent, Charitable, and the Example of Patience. Eli the Priest, lived Ninetie eight yeares; A corpulent Man, Calme of disposition, and Indulgent to his children. But Elizeus the Prophet, may seeme to have died, when he was above an hundred yeares old; For he is found to have lived after the Assumption of Elias, sixty yeares; And at the Time of that Assumption,
he was of those yeares, that the Boyes mocked him, by Name of Bald-head; A Man vehement, and severe, and of an Austere life, and a Contemner of Riches. Also, Isaiah the Prophet, seemeth to have beene an Hundred years old: For he is found, to have exercised the Function of a Prophet, Seventie yeares toge∣ther; The yeares, both of his Beginning to Prophecie, and of his Death, being uncertain: A Man of an Admirable E∣loquence; An Evangelicall Prophet; Full of the Promises of God, of the New Testa∣ment, as a Bottle with sweet Wine. 5 Tobias the Elder, lived an Hundred fifty eight yeares; The younger, an Hundred twenty seven; Mercifull Men,
and great Almes-Givers. It seemes, in the time of the Captivitie, many of the Iewes, who returned out of Babylon, were of great yeares: Seeing they could remember both Temples, (there being no lesse than seventie yeares betwixt Them;) And wept for the unlikenesse of Them. Many Ages after that, in the Time of our Saviour, lived old Si∣meon, to the Age of Ninetie yeares: A Devout Man, and full, both of Hope, and Ex∣pectation. Into the same time also, fell Anna the Prophetesse; who could not possibly bee lesse than an Hundred yeares old: For shee had been seven yeares a Wife; About eighty foure yeares a Widow; Be∣side the yeares of her Virgi∣nitie; And the time that she
lived after her Prophecie of our Saviour. Shee was an Ho∣ly Woman; And passed her dayes in fastings and Prayers. 6 The Long Lives of Men, mentioned in Heathen Au∣thors, have no great certain∣tie in Them: Both for the In∣termixture of Fables, where∣unto those kind of Relations were very prone; and for their false Calculation of yeares. Certainly, of the AE∣gyptians, we finde nothing of Moment in those workes that are extant, as touching Long Life; For their Kings, which reigned longest, did not ex∣ceed fifty, or five and fiftie yeares, which is no great mat∣ter; Seeing Many at this Day, attaine to those yeares. But the Arcadian Kings, are fabu∣lously
reported to have lived very long. Surely, that Coun∣try was Mountainous, Full of Flocks of Sheep, and brought forth most wholesome Food. Notwithstanding, seeing Pan was their God, wee may con∣ceive, that all Things about them were Panick, and vaine, and subject to Fables. 7 Numa, King of the Romans, lived to eightie yeares; A Man peaceable, Contempla∣tive, and much devoted to Religion. Marcus Valerius Cor∣vinus, saw an hundred yeares compleat; There being be∣twixt his First and Sixth Con∣sulship, Forty six yeares; A Man Valourous, Affable, Po∣pular, and alwayes Fortunate. 8 Solon of Athens, the Law∣giver, and one of the seven Wise Men, lived above eighty
yeares; A Man of an High Courage, but Popular, and af∣fected to his Country: Also Learned, given to Pleasures, and a soft kind of Life. Epime∣nides the Cretian, is reported to have lived an hundred fifty se∣ven yeares: The Matter is mixt with a Prodigious Relati∣on; For fifty seven of those yeares, he is said to have slept in a Cave. Halfe an Age after, Xenophanes the Colophonian, li∣ved an hundred & two yeares, or rather more; For at the Age of Twenty five yeares, he left his Country; Seventy seven compleat yeares he tra∣velled; And after that retur∣ned: But how long hee lived after his Returne, appeares not: A Man, no lesse wan∣dring in Mind, than in Body; For his Name was changed,
for the Madnesse of his Opi∣nions, from Xenophanes to  A Man, no doubt, of a vast Conceit, and that minded nothing but Infini∣tum. 9 Anacreon, the Poet, lived eighty yeares, and somewhat better: A Man Lascivious, Voluptuous, and given to Drinke. Pindarus, the Theban, lived to eighty yeares; A Poet of an high Fancie, singu∣lar in his Conceits, and a great Adorer of the Gods. Sophocles the Athenian, attained to the like Age; A lofty Tragicke Poet, given over wholly to Writing, and Neglectfull of his Family. 10 Artaxerxes, King of Persia, lived ninety foure yeares: A Man of a Dull wit, Averse to the Dispatch of Businesse,
Desirous of Glory, but rather of Ease. At the same time lived Agesilaus, King of Spar∣ta, to eighty foure yeares of Age: A Moderate Prince; As being a Philosopher amongst Kings; But not withstanding Ambitious, and a Warrier; And no lesse stout in Warre, than in Businesse. 11 Gorgias, the Sicilian, was an hundred and eight yeares old; A Rhetorician, and a great  of his Faculty; One that taught Youth for profit, Hee had seene many Countries; And a little before his Death said, That hee had done no∣thing worthy of Blame, since he was an old Man. Protago∣ras of Abdera, saw Ninetie yeares of Age, This Man was likewise a Rhetorician; But professed not so much to teach
the Liberall Arts, as the Art of Governing Common∣wealths, and States: Notwith∣standing, he was a great Wan∣derer in the World, no lesse than Gorgias. Isocrates, the A∣thenian, lived Ninety eight yeares: He was a Rhetorician also, but an exceeding modest Man, One that shunned the publike Light; And opened his Schoole only in his owne House. Democritus of Abdera, reached to an hundred and nine yeares: Hee was a great Philosopher; And, if ever any Man amongst the Grecians, a true Naturalist: A Surveyour of many Countries, but much more of Nature; Also a dili∣gent searcher into Experi∣ments; And, (as Aristotle ob∣jected against him,) One that followed Similitudes, more
than the Laws of Arguments. Diogenes the Sinopean, lived ninety yeares: A Man, that used Liberty towards Others, but Tyranny over Himselfe; Of a course Diet, and of much Patience. Zeno of Citium, lac∣ked but two yeares of an hun∣dred: A Man of an High Minde, and a Contemner of other Mens Opinions; Also of a great Acutenesse, but yet not Troublesome, choosing rather to take Mens Mindes, than to enforce them: The like whereof afterward was in Seneca. Plato the Athenian, at∣rained to eighty one yeares: A Man of a great Courage, but yet a Lover of  In his Notions Sublimed, and full of Fancie: Neat and D I cate in his Life; Rather Calme, than Merry; And one, that
carried a kinde of Majestie in his Countenance. Theophrastus the Etesian, larrived at eightie five yeares of Age; A Man sweet for his Eloquence; Sweet also for the Varietie of his Matters; And who sele∣cted the pleasant Things of Philosophy; And let the Bit∣ter and Harsh goe. Carneades of Cyrene, many yeares after, came to the like Age, of eigh∣tie five yeares: A Man of a fluent Eloquence; And one, who by the acceptable, and pleasant Varietie of his Knowledge, delighted, both himselfe, and others. But  who lived in Cicero's time; No Philosopher, or Rhe∣torician; But a Grammarian; Attained to an hundred yeares of Age: He was first a Souldier, then a Schoole-ma∣ster;
A Man by nature tart, both in his Tongue, and Pen; And severe towards his Schollers. 12 Quintus Fabius Maximus, was Augur sixty three yeares; which shewed him to bee above eighty yeares of Age, at his Death: Though it bee true, that in the Augurship, Nebilitie was more respe∣cted, than Age. A wise Man, and a great Deliberatour, and in all his proceedings Mode∣rate, and not without Affabi∣litie severe. Masinissa, King of Numidia, lived ninetie yeares; And being more than eightie five, got a Sonne: A Daring Man, and trusting upon his Fortune; who in his youth, had tasted of the Inconstancie of Fortune; But in his suc∣ceeding Age, was constantly
Happy. But Marcus Porcius Cato, lived above ninetie yeares of Age: A man of an Iron Body and Minde; Hee had a bitter Tongue, and lo∣ved to cherish factions: Hee was given to Husbandry; And was to Himselfe, and his Family, a Physician. 13 Terentia, Cicero's wife, lived an hundred and three yeares: A woman afflicted with ma∣ny Crosses; First, with the Banishment of her Husband; Then with the Difference betwixt them; Lastly, with his last Fatall Misfortune: Shee was also oftentimes vexed with the Gout. Luceia must needs exceed an hun∣dred, by many yeares; For it is said, That shee acted, an whole hundred yeares, upon the stage; At first, perhaps,
representing the person of some young Girle; At last, of some Decrepit old Woman. But Galeria Copiola, A Player also, and a Dancer, was brought upon the Stage as a Novice, in what yeare of her Age, is not knowne; But ninetie nine yeares after, at the Dedication of the Theater, by Pompey the Great, shee was shewne upon the Stage againe; Not now for an Actresse, but for a Won∣der; Neither was this all; For after that, in the , for the Health and Life of Au∣gustus, she was shewne upon the Stage the third time. 14 There was another Actresse, somewhat Inferiour in Age, but much Superiour in Dig∣nity, which lived well-neare ninety yeares: I meane Livia lulia Augusta, wife to Augu∣stus
Cesar, and Mother to Ti∣berius. For if Augustus his Life were a play; (As himselfe would have it; when as upon his Death-bed, hee charged his Frineds, they should give him a Plaudite, after hee was Dead,) certainly this Lady was an excellent Actresse; who could carry it so well with her Husband, by a dissembled Obedience; And with her Sonne, by power and autho∣ritie: A woman Affable, and yet of a Matronall Carriage, Pragmaticall, and upholding her power. But Iunia, the wife of Caius Cassius, and sister of Marcus Brutus, was also ninetie yeares old; For shee survived the Philippick Bat∣taile, sixty foure yeares: A Magnanimous woman; In her great wealth Happy; In
the Calamity of her Husband, and neare Kinsfolkes, and in long widowhood, unhappy; Notwithstanding much Ho∣noured of all. 15 The yeare of our Lord seven∣tie six, falling into the Time of Vespasian, is Memorable; In which wee shall finde, as it were, a Calender, of long liv'd Men: For that yeare, there was a Taxing; (Now a Tax∣ing, is the most Authenticall, and truest Informer, touching the ages of men;) And in that part of Italie, which lieth be∣twixt the Apennine Moun∣taines, and the River Po, there were found, an hundred and foure and twenty persons, that either equalled, or excee∣ded, an hundred yeares of Age: Namely, of an hundred yeares just, fiftie foure per∣sons;
Of an hundred and ten, fiftie seven persons; Of an hundred and five and twenty, Two onely; Of an hundred and thirty, foure men; Of an hundred and five and thirtie, or seven and thirtie, foure more; Of an hundred and fortie, three men. Besides these, Parma in particular, af∣forded five, whereof three fulfilled an hundred & twen∣tie yeares; and two, an hun∣dred and thirty: Bruxels af∣forded one, of an hundred and twentie five yeares old: Pla∣centia one, aged an hundred thirty and one: Faventia, one Woman, aged one hundred thirtie and two: A certaine Towne, then called Velleiaci∣um, scituate in the Hils, about Placentia, afforded ten; where∣of Six fulfilled an hundred
and ten yeares of age; Foure, an hundred and twentie: Lastly, Rimino one, of an hundred and fiftie yeares; whose Name was Marcus Apo∣nius. That our Catalogue might not be extended too much in length, wee have thought fit, as well in those whom we have rehearsed, as in those whom we shall rehearse, to offer none under eighty yeares of Age. Now wee have affixed to every one a true and short Cha∣racter, or Elogie; But of that sort, whereunto, in our Iudge∣ment, Length of Life, (which is not a little subject to the Man∣ners and Fortunes of Men,) hath some Relation: And that in a twofold Respect: Either that such Kinde of Men, are for the most part long liv'd; Or that such Men may sometimes bee of long
Life, though otherwise not well disposed for it. 16 Amongst the Roman and Grecian Emperours; Also the French and Almaine; To these our Dayes; which make up the Number of well-neare two hundred Princes; There are only foure found, that li∣ved to eightie yeares of Age: unto whom we may adde the two first Emperours; Augustus, and Tiberius; whereof the lat∣ter fulfilled the seventie and eighth yeare, the former the seventie and sixth yeare of his Age; And might both per∣haps have lived to foure∣score, if Livia and Caius had been pleased. Augustus (as was said) lived seventie and six yeares: A Man of a Mode∣rate Disposition; In accom∣plishing his Designes, vehe∣ment,
but otherwise Calme, and Serene; In Meat and Drink sober; In Venerie In∣temperate; Through all his Life time Happy: And who about the thirtieth year of his Life, had a great and dange∣rous sicknesse; Insomuch that they despaired of Life in him; whom Antonius Musa the Physician, when other Physi∣cians had applied Hot Medi∣cines, as most agreeable to his Disease, on the contrarie cu∣red with cold Medicines; which perchance might bee some Help, to the prolong∣ing of his Life. Tiberius lived to bee two yeares older: A Man with Leane chaps; As Augustus was wont to say; For his speech stuck within his Jawes, but was weightie, Hee was Bloudy, a Drinker,
and one that tooke lust into a Part of his Diet: Notwith∣standing, a great Observer of his Health; Insomuch, that hee used to say; That hee was a Foole, that after thirtie yeares of Age, tooke advice of a Physician. Gordian the El∣der, lived eightie yeares; And yet died a violent Death, when he was scarce warme in his Empire: A Man of an High Spirit, and Renowmed; Lear∣ned, and a Poet; And con∣stantly happy, throughout the whole course of his Life, save only, that he ended his dayes by a violent Death. Valerian the Emperour, was seventie six yeares of Age, before hee was taken Prisoner, by Sapor King of Persia: After his Captivi∣tie hee lived seven yeares in Reproches; And then died a
violent Death also: A Man of a poore Minde, and not va∣liant; Notwithstanding lif∣ted up in his owne, and the opinion of Men, but falling short in the performance. A∣nastasius, surnamed Dicorus, li∣ved eightie eight yeares: He was of a setled Minde, but too abject, and superstitious, and fearefull. Anicius Iustinianus, lived to eightie three yeares: A Man Greedy of Glorie; Performing Nothing in his owne Person, but in the va∣lour of his Captaines Happie and Renowmed; Uxorious: And not his owne Man, but suffering others to lead him. Helena of Britaine, Mother of Constantine the Great, was four-score yeares old: A Wo∣man, that intermedled not in Matters of State, neither in
her Husbands, nor Sonnes ; But Devoted her  wholly to Religion, Magnanimous, and  Flourishing. Theodora the ; (who was Sister to , wife of Monomachus; And reigned alone after her Decease;) lived above eightie yeares: A Pragmaticall Wo∣man; and one that tooke  in Governing; Fortu∣nate in the Highest degree, and through her good  Credulous. 17 We will proceed now from these Secular Princes, to the Princes in the Church. S. Iohn,  Apostle of our Saviour, and the Beloved Disciple, lived ninetie three yeares: He was rightly denoted under the  of the Eagle, for his
piercing fight into the Divi∣nitie; And was as a  amongst the Apostles in  spect of his Burning Love Saint Luke the Evangelist, ful∣filled fourescore and four∣yeares: An Eloquent Man And a Traveller; Saint Paul inseparable Companion; And a Physitian. Simeon the Sonne of Cleophas, called the Brother of our Lord, and Bishop of His rusalem, lived an hundred and twenty yeares; Though he was cut short by  dome; A Stout Man, and Constant, and full of Good works. Polycarpus, Disciple  to the Apostles, and Bishop Smyrna, seemeth to have  his Age, to an hun∣dred yeares, and more Though hee were also cut  by Martyrdome: A Man
High Minde, of an  patience, and unwearied  Labours. Dionysius  Contemporany to the Apostle S. Paul, lived ninetie cares: Hee was called The  of Heaven, for his High lying Divinitie; And was famous, as well for his Holy Life, as for his Meditations. Aquila and Priscilla, first Saint Paul the Apostles Hosts; Afterward his Fellow-Hel-bers; lived together, in an happy and famous wedlock, at least, to an hundred yeares of Age, a peece: For they were both alive, under Pope  the First: A Noble paire, and prone to all kinde of Charitie; who amongst other their Comforts; (which no doubt were great, unto the first Founders of the Church;)
Had this added; To enjoy each other so long, in an  marriage. Saint Paul, the Hermite, lived an hundred and thirteen yeares: Now hee  in a Cave; His Diet was so slender and strict, that was thought almost Imposs∣ble, to support Humane Na∣ture therewithall: He  his yeares onely in Meditati∣ons, and Soliloquies; yet he was not Illiterate, or an  but Learned. Saint  the first Founder of Monks, or (as some will have it,) the Restorer onely;  to an hundred and five yeares of Age: A Man Devout, and Contemplative Though not unfit for Civil Affaires; His Life was Au∣stere, and Mortifying; Not∣withstanding hee lived in
kinde of glorious solitude; and exercised a Command; or he had his Monks under ; And besides, many  and Philosophers  to visit him, as a living mage, from which they  not without some . Saint Athanasius ex∣ceded the Terme of eightie : A Man of an  Constancie; Comman∣ing Fame, and not yeelding  Fourtune; Hee was free to∣wards the Great Ones; With he people Gracious, and ; Beaten and  to Oppositions; And in  himself from them, out, and wise. S. Hierome,  the consent of most , exceeded ninety yeares of Age: A man powerfull in is Pen, and of a Manly Ele∣quence;
quence; variously learne both in the Tongues and  Also a Traveller,  that lived strictly towards  old Age; In an estate  and not dignified, hee  high Spirits; And shined  out of Obscuritie. 18 The Popes of Rome, are  Number to this Day,  hundred fortie and one:  so great a Number, five one have attained to the Age  fourscore yeares, or upward But in many of the first  their ful Age was intercepte by the prerogative and  of Martyrdome. Iohn the  ty three, Pope of Rome,  the ninetieth yeare of  Age: A Man of an  Disposition, and one that  died Noveltie; Hee  many Things, some to the
Better, others onely to the New; A great  of Riches and Treasure. Gregorie, called the twelfth, created in schisme, and not fully acknowledged Pope; Died at ninetie yeares; Of him, in respect of his short Papacie, wee  Nothing, to make a judgement upon. Paul the third, lived eightie yeares and one: A temperate Man, and of a profound wisdome; He was Learned, an Astrolo∣ger; and one that tended his Health carefully; But after the Example of old Eli the Priest, over-Indulgent to his Family. Paul the fourth, at∣tained to the Age of eightie three yeares: A Man of an Harsh Nature, and severe; Of an Haughtie Minde, and Im∣perious; prone to Anger; his
speech was Eloquent, and Ready. Gregorie the thir∣teenth, fulfilled the like Age, of eightie three yeares: An absolute good Man; Sound in Minde, and Body; Poli∣tick, Temperate, full of good workes, and an Almes-giver. 19 Those that follow are to be more Promiscuous in their or∣der; More doubtfull in their faith; And more barren of Ob∣servation. King Arganthonius, who reigned at Cadiz in Spaine, lived an hundred and thirtie; Or, (as some would have it,) an hundred and forty yeares; Of which he reigned eightie. Concerning his Manners, In∣stitution of his Life, and the Time wherein hee reigned, there is a generall Silence. Cy∣niras, King of Cyprus, Living
in the Island, then termed the Happie and Pleasant island, is affirmed, to have attained to an hundred and fifty, or sixty yeares. Two Latine Kings in Italy, the Father and the Son, are reported to have lived, the one eight hundred, the other six hundred yeares: But this is delivered unto us by certain Philologists; Who though o∣therwise Credulous enough; yet themselves have suspected the Truth of this Matter, or rather condemned it. Others record some Arcadian Kings to have lived three hundred years: The Country, no doubt, is a place apt for long life; But the Relation I suspect to be Fabulous. They tell of one Dando, in Illyrium; That li∣ved, without the Inconveni∣ences of old Age, to five hun∣dred
yeares. They tell also  the Epians, a Part of AEtolia That the whole Nation  them were exceeding long liv'd; In so much, that many of them were two hundred yeares old: And that one principal Man amongst them, named Litorius, a Man of  Giant-like Stature, could have told three hundred yeares. It is recorded, that in the Top of the Mountaine  anci∣ently called Tempsis, many of the Inhabitants lived to  hundred and fiftie yeares. We reade that the Sect of the Es∣seans, amongst the Iewes, did usually extend their Life to an hundred yeares: Now that Sect, used a single, or Abstemi∣ous Diet; After the Rule of Pythagoras. Apollonius  exceeded an hundred yeares;
His Face bewraying no such Age; Hee was an Admirable Man; Of the Heathens reputed to have something Divine in him; Of the Christians, held for a Sorcerer: In his Diet Py∣thagoricall, A great Traveller; Much Renowmed; And by some adored as a God: Not∣withstanding, towards the end of his life, he was subject to many Complaints against him, and Reproaches; All which he made shift to escape. But lest his Long Life should be imputed to his Pythagori∣call Diet, and not rather that it was Hereditary, his Grand∣father before him, lived an hundred and thirty yeares. It is undoubted, that Quintus Metellus lived above an hun∣dred yeares; And that after severall Consalships happily ad∣ministred;
In his old Age he was made Pontifex Maximus; And exercised those Holy Duties, full two and twentie yeares; In the performance of which Rites, his Voice never failed, nor his Hand trembled. It is most certaine, that  Caesus was very old, but his yeares are not extant; The most part whereof he passed, after he was Blinde: Yet this Misfortune no whit softened him, but that hee was able to governe a numerous Family, a great Retinue and Depen∣dance, yea, even the Com∣mon-wealth it selfe with great Stoutnesse. In his extreme old Age, he was brought in a Litter into the Senate-House; And vehemently disswaded the Peace with Pyrrhus: The Beginning of his Oration was
very Memorable, shewing an Invincible Spirit, and strength of Minde; I have, with great Griefe of Minde, (Fathers Con∣sript,) these many yeares, borne my Blindnesse; But now I could wish, that I were Deafe also; when I heare you speake to such Dishonourable Treaties. Mar∣cus Perpenna lived ninety eight yeares; Surviving all those, whose Suffrages he had gathe∣red, in the Senate House, be∣ing Consul; I meane, all the Senators at that time. As also all those, whom a little after, being Censour, hee chose into the Senate; Seven only being excepted. Hiero, King of Si∣cely, in the time of the second Punick Warre, Lived almost an hundred yeares; A Man Moderate, both in his Go∣vernment, and in his Life; A
Worshipper of the Gods, and a Religions Conserver  Friendship; Liberall, and con∣stantly Fortunate. Statilia, descended of a Noble Fami∣ly, in the Dayes of  Lived ninety nine yeares. , the Daughter of Ofilius an hundred and Fifteene. Xe∣nophilus, an Ancient Philoso∣pher, of the Sect of Pythagoras. attained to an hundred and six yeares: Remaining Health∣full, and vigorous in his old Age; And Famous amongst the Vulgar, for his Learning. The Islanders of Corcyra were Ancienely accounted Long liv'd; But now they live af∣ter the rate of other Men. Hip∣pocrates Côus, the Famous Phy∣sician, lived an hundred and foure yeares; And approved and credited his own Art, by
so long a life: A Man, that coupled learning and wisdom together; Very conversant in Experience and Observation; One that hunted not after Words, or Methods; But se∣vered the very Nerves of Sci∣ence, and so propounded them. Demonax, a Philoso∣pher, not only in Profession, but Practice, lived in the Daies of Adrian, almost to an Hun∣dred yeares: A Man of an High Minde, and a Vanqui∣sher of his owne Mind; And that, truly, and without Affe∣ctation, A Contemner of the World, and yet Civill and courteous: when his Friends spake to him, about his Buri∣all, he said; Take no Care for my Buriall; For Stench will bury a Carleaise: They replyed; Is it your Minde then, to be cast out,
to Birds, and Dogs? He said a∣gaine, Seeing, in my life time, I endevoured to my uttermost, to benefit Men, what hurt is it, if, when I am dead, I benefit  Certain Indian People, called Pandorae, are exceedingly long Liv'd; Even to no lesse than Two Hundred yeares. They adde a Thing more Marvel∣lous; That having, when they are Boyes, an Haire, some∣what whitish; In their old Age, before their gray haires, they grow coale blacke: Though indeed this be every where to be seene; That they which have white  whi∣lest they are Boyes, in their Mans estate, change their Haires into a Darker colour. The Seres, another People of India, with their Wine of Palmes, are accounted Long
Livers; Even to an hundred and thirtie yeares. Euphranor, the Grammarian, grew old in his Schoole; And taught Schollers, when he was above an hundred yeares old. The Elder Ovid, father to the Poet, lived Ninety yeares: Dif∣fering much from the disposi∣tion of his Son; For hee con∣temned the Muses, and dis∣swaded his Son from Poetry. Asinius Pollio, intimate with Augustus, exceeded the Age of an Hundred years: A Man of an unreasonable Profuse∣nesse, Eloquent, a Lover of Learning; But Vehement, Proud, Cruell; And one that made his Private Ends the Center of his Thoughts. There was an Opinion, that Seneca was an extreme Old Man; No lesse than an Hun∣dred
and fourteene yeares  Age: Which could not  be; It being as  that a Decrepit old  should bee set over  Youth; As, on the contrary it was true, that he was able to manage, with great  the Affaires of State: Be∣sides, a little before, in the Midst of Claudius his Reigne, hee was banished Rome,  Adulteries committed with some Noble Ladies; which was a Crime, no wayes com∣petible with so extreme old Age. Ioannes de Temporibus, amongst all the Men of our latter Ages, out of a common Fame, and vulgar Opinion, was reputed Long-liv'd, even to a Miracle; Or rather, even to a Fable; His Age hath been. counted, above three Hun∣dred
yeares: He was by Nati∣on a French Man; And fol∣lowed the Warres, under Charles the Great. Gartius A∣retine, Great Grand-Father to Petrarch, arrived at the Age of an Hundred and foure yeares. He had ever en∣joyed the Benefit of good Health; Besides, at the last, He felt rather a Decay of his strength, than any Sicknesse or Maladie; which is the true Resolution, by old Age. A∣mongst the Venetians, there have been found, not a few long Livers; and those of the more eminent sort: Franciscus Donatus, Duke; Thomas Con∣tarenus, Procuratour of Saint Marke; Franciscus Molinus, Pro∣curatour also of Saint Mark; Others. But most Memora∣ble is that of Cornarus the Ve∣netian;
who being in his youth of a sickly Body, began first to eat and drink by measure, to a certaine weight; Thereby to recover his Health; This Cure, turned, by use, into a Diet; That Diet to an extra∣ordinary Long Life; Even of an Hundred years and better, without any Decay in his Sen∣ses; And with a constant En∣joying of his Health. In our Age, William Postell, a French-Man, lived to an hundred, and well nigh twenty yeares; The Top of his Beard, on the up∣per Lip, being black, and not Gray at all: A Man crazed in his Braine, and of a Fancie not altogether Sound; A great Traveller, Mathemati∣cian, and somewhat stained with Heresie. 20 I suppose there is scarce a
Village, with us in England, if it be any whit populous, but it affords some Man or Woman of Fourescore yeares of Age: Nay, a few yeares since, there was in the Countie of Here∣ford, a Maygame, or Morris∣Dance, consisting of Eight Men, whose Age computed together, made up eight hun∣dred yeares; In so much, that what some of them wanted of an hundred, others exceeded as much. 21 In the Hospitall of Bethleem, corruptly called Bedlam, in the Suburbs of London, there are found, from time to time, ma∣ny Mad Persons, that live to a great Age. 22 The Ages of Nymphs, Fawns and Satyres, whom they make to be, indeed, Mortall, but yet exceedingly Long-Liv'd; (A
Thing, which Ancient Super∣stition, and the Late Creduli∣tie of some, have admitted;) we account but for Fables and Dreames: Especially, being that, which hath neither Con∣sent with Philosophie, nor with Divinity. And as touching the Historie of Long-Life in Man, by Individuals, or next unto Individuals, thus much: Now we will passe on to Observati∣ons, by certaine Heads. 23 The Running on of Ages, and Succession of Generations,  to have no whit abated from the Length of Life; For wee see, that from the Time of Moses, unto these our Dayes, the Terme of Mans life hath stood about Fourescore years of Age; Neither hath it decli∣ned, (As a man would have
thought) by little and little. No doubt, there are Times, in every Country, wherein Men are longer, or shorter liv'd. Longer, for the most part, when the times are barbarous, and Men fare lesse delicious∣ly, and are more given to Bo∣dily Exercises: Shorter, when the Times are more Civill, and Men abandon themselves to Luxury and Ease. But these Things passe on by their Turnes; The Succession of Generations alters it not. The same, no doubt, is in other li∣ving Creatures; For neither Oxen, nor Horses, nor Sheep, nor any the like, are abridged of their wonted Ages at this Day. And therefore, the Great Abridger of Age was the Floud: And perhaps, some such Notable Accidents; (As
particular Inundations, Long Droughts, Earth-quakes, Or the like,) may doe the same again And the like Reason is, in the Dimension and Stature of Bodies; For neither are they lessened, by succession of Ge∣nerations; Howsoever Virgil, (following the vulgar Opini∣on,) Divined, that After-A∣ges would bring forth lesser Bodies, than the then pre∣sent; whereupon speaking of Plowing up the Emathian and Emonensian Fields, He saith; Grandia{que} effossis mirabitur of∣sa sepulchris; That After  shall admire the Great Bones digged up in ancient Sepulchers. For wheras it is manifest, that there were, heretofore, Men of Gigantine Statures, (such as, for certaine, have beene found in Sicely, and else∣where,
in ancient Sepulchres,  Caves,) yet within these  three Thousand yeares; A Time, whereof we have sure Memory; Those very Places  produced none such: Although this Thing also hath  Turns and Changes,  the Civillizing of a  no lesse than the Former. And this is the rather to be , because Men are  carried away with an ; That there is a  Decay by succession of Ages, as well in the Terme of Mans life, as in the Stature and strength of his Body; And that all Things decline, and change to the worse. 24 In Cold, and Northerne , Men live longer, , than in Hot: which must needs be, in respect; The
Skin is more Compact  close; And the Juyees of the Body lesse dissipable; And the Spirits themselves lesse Eage to consume, and in better  position to repaire; And the Aire, (As being little  by the Sun-Beames,)  Predatory. And yet, under the AEquinoctiall Line,  the Sunne passeth to and  and causeth a double Sum∣mer, and double Winter And where the Dayes and Nights are more Equall;  other Things be concurring they live also very long:  Pern, and Taprobane. 25 Islanders are, for the  part, longer liv'd, than  that dwell in Continents:  theylive not so long in Russia as in the Orcades; Nor so long in Africa, though under the
same Parallel, as in the  and Tercera's; And the , are longer liv'd,  the Chineses; Though  Chineses are madde upon Long Life. And this thing is  Marvell; Seeing the Aire  the Sea doth heat and  in cooler Regions, and  in hotter. 26 High Situations, doe rather  long Livers, than Low; Especially, if they bee not Tops of Mountaines, but  Grounds, as to their  Situations: Such as was  in Greece; And that Part of AEtolia, where we  them, to have lived so . Now there would be the same Reason, for  themselves, because of the purenesse and clearenesse of the Aire, but that they are
corrupted by accident; Name∣ly, by the Vapours,  thither out of the Vallies, and Resting there. And therefore in Snowy Mountaines, there  not found any Notable long Life; Not in the Alps, not  the Pyrenean Mountaines,  in the Apennine: Yet in the Tops of the Mountaines, run∣ning along towards  and the Abyssines; where by reason of the Sands beneath little or no Vapour riseth to the Mountains, they live long even at this very Day; Attai∣ning, many times, to an Hun∣dred and fifty yeares. 27 Marshes, and Fens, are Pro∣pitious to the Natives,  Malignant to Strangers,  touching the Lengthning and Shortning of their lives: And that which may seeme more
Marvellous, Salt Marshes, where the Sea ebs and flowes,  lesse wholesome, than  of Fresh water. 28 The Countries, which have beene observed, to produce Long Livers, are these; , AEtolia, India on this side , Brasil, Taprobane, , Ireland, with the Islands of the Orcades, and Hebrides:  as for AEthiopia, which by one of the Ancients, is  to bring forth long ; It is but a Toy. 29 It is a Secret; The  of Aire, especially in  Perfection, is better found by Experiment, than by  Or Coniecture. You may make a Triall by a Locke of Wooll, exposed, for a few dayes, in the open Aire; If the weight be not much increa∣sed:
Another by a peece Flesh, exposed likewise,  corrupt not over-soone: other by a Wether-Glasse the water interchange  suddenly. Of these and like, enquire further. 30 Not only the Goodnesse, Purenesse of the Aire, but  the Equality of the Aire, Materiall to long Life.  mixture of Hils and Dales, pleasant to the fight, but spected for Long Life. Plaine, moderately dry;  yet not over-barren, or  nor altogether without  and Shade; Is very  for Length of Life. 31 Inequality of Aire, (as  even now said;) in the  of our Dwelling, is  But Change of Aire by Trave∣ling, after one be used unto
good: And therefore great Travellers have beene Long Liv'd. Also those that have  perpetually in a little Cortage, in the same place,  been Long Livers: For Aire Accustomed, consumeth esse; but Aire changed, , and repaireth more. 32 As the Continuation, and Number of Successions, (which we said before,) Makes no∣thing to the Length or Short∣nesse of Life; So the Imme∣diate Condition of the Parents, as well the Father, as the Mo∣ther, without doubt, availeth much. For some are begotten of Old Men, some of Young Men, some of Men of Middle Age; Againe, some are be∣gotten of Fathers Healthfull, and well Disposed, Others of
Diseased and languishing: A∣gaine, some of Fathers, immediately after Repletion,  when they are Drunke; O∣thers, after Sleeping, or in the Morning: Againe, some after a long Intermission of  Others upon the Act : Againe, some in the  of the Fathers Love (As it is commonly in ;) Others after the Coo∣ling of it, as in long Married Couples. The same Things may bee considered on the Part of the Mother: Unto which must bee added, the Condition of the Mother whilest shee is with child;  touching her Health; As tou ching her Diet: The Time  her Bearing in the Wombe To the Tenth Moneth, or earlier. To reduce these
Things to a Rule, how farre they may concerne Long Life,  hard: And so much the Har∣der, for that those Things, which a Man would conceive to be the best, will fall out to the contrary: For that Ala∣crity in the Generation, which begets lusty and Lively Chil∣dren, will bee lesse Profitable to long Life, because of the Acrimony, and Inflaming of the Spirits. We said before; That to partake more of the Mothers Bloud, conduceth to long Life. Also, we suppose all Things in Moderation, to bee best; Rather Conjugall Love, than Meretricious; The Houre for Generation to be the Morning; A state of Bo∣die, not too Lusty, or Full; And such like. It ought also to be well observed; That a
strong Constitution in the Parents, is rather good for them, than for the Childe; Especially in the Mother. And therefore Plato thought ignorantly enongh;  the vertue of Generation halted, because the wo∣men used not the same Exer∣cises, both of Minde are Body, with the Men: The contrarie is rather true. For the Difference of  betwixt the Male, and the  male, is most profitable for the Childe; And the  women, yeeld more to wards the Nourishment  the Childe; which also hold in Nurses. Neither did   women, which  not before twentie two,  as some say, twenty five (And therefore were
Man-like women;) Bring forth a more Generous, or Long-liv'd Progenie; Than the Roman, or Athenian, or Theban women did, which were ripe for Marriage, at twelve, or fourteene yeares. And if there were any Thing emi∣nent in the Spartans; That was rather to bee imputed, to the Parcimony of their Diet, than to the late Marriages of their women. But this we are taught by experience; That there are some Races, which are long liv'd, for a few De∣scents; So that Long Life, is like some Diseases, a Thing Hereditarie, within certaine Bounds. 33 Faire in Face, or Skin, or Hoire, are shorter Livers; Black, or Red, or Freckled, lon∣ger.
Also too Fresh a Colour in youth, doth lesse promise long Life, than Palenesse. A hard Skin, is a signe of long Life, rather than a Soft: But wee understand not this of a Rugged Skin, such as they call a Goose Skin, which is, as it were, Spongie, but of that which is Hard, and Close. A Forehead with deep Furrowes and Wrinkles, is a better Signe, than a smooth and plaine Forehead. 34 The Haires of the Head hard, and like Bristles, doe betoken longer Life, than those that are soft, and Deli∣cate. Curled Haires betoken the same Thing, if they bee Hard withall; But the Contrarie, if they bee Soft and Shining. The like, it the curling bee rather thick,
than in large Bunches. 35 Early, or Late, Baldnesse, is an Indifferent Thing; Seeing many which have beene Bold betimes, have lived long. Al∣so early Gray Haires, (How∣soever they may seeme Fore∣runners of Old Age appro∣ching,) are no sure Signes; For many that have growne gray betimes, have lived to great yeares. Nay, Hasty Gray Haires, without Bald∣nesse, is a Token of long Life; contrarily, if they bee accom∣panied with Baldnesse. 36 Hairinesse of the upper Parts, is a Signe of Short life; And they that have extraord narie much Haire on their Breasts, live not long: But Hairinesse of the Lower Parts, as of the Thighes, and Legs, is a Signe of long Life.
37 Talnesse of Stature, (if it be not Immoderate,) with a con∣venient Making, and not too slender; Especially if the Bo∣dy bee Active withall; Is a signe of long Life. Also on the contrarie, Men of low stature live long, if they be not too Active, and stirring. 38 In the proportion of the Body; They which are short to the Wastes, with long Legs, Are longer liv'd than , which are long to the Wastes, and have short Legs: Also they which are large in the Neather parts, and streight in the upper; (The Making of their Body, rising, as it were into a sharp Figure;) Are longer liv'd than they, that have broad Shoulders, and are slender down-wards. 39 Leannesse, where the Affecti∣ons
are setled, calme, and peaceable; Also a more Fat Habit of Body, joyned with Choler, and a Disposition stir∣ring, and peremptorie, signi∣fie long Life. But Corpulen∣cie in youth, fore-shewes short Life; In Age, it is a Thing more Indifferent. 40 To bee Long, and Slow, in Growing, is a signe of long Life; If to a Greater Stature, the Greater Signe; If to a les∣ser Stature, yet a signe though: contrarily, to grow quickly, to a great Stature, is an evill Signe; If to a small Stature, the lesse evill. 41 Firme Flesh; A Raw-boned Body; And veines lying higher than the Flesh; Beto∣ken long Life: The contrarie to these, short Life. 42 A Head some what
an to the proportion of the Body; A moderate Neck, nor long, nor slender, nor fat, nor too short, wide Nostrils, what soever the Forme of the Nose be, A large Mouth, An  Gristly, not Fleshy;  strong, and contiguous, not small, or thin-set; Foretoken long Life: And much more, if some new Teeth put  our elder yeares. 43 A broad brest, yet not Bea∣ring out, but rather Bending Inwards; shoulders somewhat crooked, and (as they call such persons) Round-Back'd; A  Belly; A Hand large, and with few Lines in the Palme: A short, and round Foot; Thighes not Fleshy; And Calves of the Leg not hanging over, but neat; Are signes of long Life.
44 Eyes somewhat large, and the Circle of them inclined to Greennesse; Senses not too quick; The pulse in youth slower, towards old Age quic∣ker; Facilitie of Holding the Breath, and longer than usuall; The Body in youth inclined to bee bound, in the Decline of yeares more Laxative; Are also Signes of long Life. 45 Concerning the Times of Nativitie, as they referre to long Life, nothing hath beene observed worthy the setting downe; save onely Astrologi∣call Observations, which wee rejected in our Topicks. A Birth at the eighth Moneth, is not only not Long-lived, but not likely to live. Alos winter∣Births are accounted the Lon∣ger liv'd.
46 A Pythagoricall, or Monast call Diet, according to  Rules, and alwayes  Equall, (As that of  was) seemeth to be very effe∣ctuall for long Life. Yet  the contrarie, amongst those that live freely, and after the common sort, such as have good Stomacks, and feed more plentifully, are often the Lon∣gest liv'd. The Middle Diet which wee account the Tem∣perate, is commended, and conduceth to good Health, but not to long Life; For the Spare Diet, begets few Spi∣rits, and dull; And so wasteth the Body lesse: And the Li∣berall Diet, yeeldeth more am∣ple Nourishment; And so re∣paireth more: But the Middle Diet doth neither of both: for where the Extremes are
Hurtfull, there the Meane is best; But where the Ex∣tremes are Helpfull, there the Meane is Nothing worth. Now to that Spare Diet, there are Requisite, Watching, lest the Spirits being Few, should bee oppressed with much sleep; Little Exercise, lest they should Exhale; Abstinence from Venerie, lest they should bee exhausted: But to the Li∣berall Diet, on the other side, are Requisite, Much Sleepe, frequent Exercises, and a seaso∣nable use of Venerie. Baths, and Annointings, (such as were an∣ciently in use,) did rather tend to Deliciousnesse, than to prolonging of Life. But of all these Things, wee shall speak more exactly, when we come to the Inquisition, according to Intentions. Meane while,
that of Celsus, who was not only a Learned Physician, but a wise Man, is not to be omit∣ted. Who adviseth Inter∣changing, and Alternation of the Diet, but still with an In∣clination to the more Be∣nigne: As that a Man should sometimes accustome him∣selfe to watching, sometimes to sleepe; But to sleepe  Againe, that hee should sometimes give himselfe to Fasting, sometimes to Fea∣sting; But to Feasting ofte∣nest: That hee should some∣times inure himselfe to great Labours of the Minde, some∣times to Relaxations of the same, But to Relaxations oftnest. Certainly, this is without all question; That Diet well ordred beares the greatest part in the Prolon∣gation
of Life; Neither did I ever meet, an extreme long∣lived Man; But being asked of his course, hee observed something peculiar; Some one Thing, some another. I remember an old Man, above an hundred yeares of Age, who was produced as a wit∣nesse, touching an Ancient Prescription; when hee had finished his Testimonie, the Iudge familiarly asked him, How he came to live so long; He answered, beside Expecta∣tion, and not without the Laughter of the Hearers; By Eating before I was Hungrie, and Drinking before I was Drie. But of these Things, wee shall speak hereafter. 47 A Life led in Religion, and in Holy Exercises, seemeth to
conduce to long Life. There are in this kinde of Life, these Things; Leisure; Admiration and Contemplation of Hea∣venly Things; Joyes not sen∣suall; Noble Hopes; Whole∣some Feares; Sweet Sor∣rowes; Lastly, continuall Re∣novations, by Observances, Pennances, Expiations; All which are very powerfull to the Prolongation of Life. Un∣to which if you adde that au∣stere Diet, which  the Masse of the Body, and humbleth the spirits, no mar∣vel, if an extraordinary length of life doe follow; Such as was that of Paul the , Simeon Stilita the  Anchorite; And of many o∣ther Hermites, and Anche∣rites. 48 Next unto this, is the Life
led in good letters; Such as was that of Philosophers, Rhetoricians, Grammarians. This life is led also in feisure; And in those Thoughts, which, seeing they are seve∣red from the Affaires of the world, bite not; But rather delight through their Varie∣tie, and Impertinencie. They live also at their pleasure; Spending their Time in such Things, as like them best; And for the most part in the com∣pany of young Men; which is ever the most cheerefull. But in Philosophies, there is great Difference betwixt the Sects, as touching long Life. For those Philosophies, which have in them a Touch of Su∣perstition, and are conversant in High Contemplations, are the best; As the Pythagori∣call,
and Platonick: Also those, which did institute a perambulation of the world; And considered the Varietit of Naturall Things; And had Retchlesse, and High, and Magnanimous Thoughts: (As of Infinitum, of the Stars, of the Heroicall Vertues, and such like;) were good for lengthening of Life; Such were those of , Philolaus, Xenophanes, the A∣strologians, and Stoicks: Also those, which had no profound speculation in them; But dis∣coursed calmly on both sides, out of common sense, and the Received Opinions, without any shapr Inquisition; were likewise Good; Such were those of Carneades, and the Academicks; Also of the Rhetoricians, and Grammari∣ans.
But contrarily, Philoso∣phies conversant in perplex∣ing subtilties; And which pronounced peremptorily; And which examined and  all Things, to the Scale of Principles; Lastly, which were Thornie, and Narrow; were Evill; Such were those commonly of the Peripateticks, and of the Schoolemen. 49 The Countrie Life also, is well fitted for long Life: It is much abroad, and in the open Aire; It is not sloth∣full, but ever in Employ∣ment: It Feedeth upon Fresh Cates, and unbought; It is without Cares, and Envie. 50 For the Militar Life, wee have a good opinion of that whilest a Man is young: Cer∣tainly, many excellent
riers have beene long liv'd Corvinus, Camillus,  Agesilaus; with others,  Ancient, and Moderne: No doubt, it furthereth long life. to have all Things from our youth, to our Elder Age, Mend and Grow to the Bet∣ter; That a youth full of Crosses may minister sweet∣nesse to our Old Age. Wee conceive also, that  Affections, inflamed with a Desire of Fighting, and Hope of Victorie, doe infuse such a Heat into the Spirits, as may be profitable for long Life.
Medicines for long Life. THe Art of Physick, which To the 10. Ar∣ticle. we now have, lookes no fur∣ther, commonly, than to Con∣servation of Health, and Cure of Diseases; As for these Things, which tend properly to long Life, there is but slight mention, and by the way onely. notwithstan∣ding, we will propound those Me∣dicines, which are Notable in this Kinde; I  those, which are called Cordials. For it is consonant to Reason, that those Things, which being taken in Cures, doe defend and fortifie the Heart; or, more truly, the Spirits; against Poysons, and
Diseases; Being transferred with judgement and choice,  Diet, should have a good effect in some sort towards the pro∣longing of Life. This wee will doe, not heaping them promiscu∣ously together, (as the manner is,) but selecting the best. 1 Gold is given in three Formes; Either in that, which they call Aurum potabile; Or in Wine wherein Cold hath beene quenched; Or in Gold, in the Substance; such as are Leafe Gold, and the Filings  Gold. As for Aurum . it is used to bee given in de∣sperate or dangerous Dis∣eases; And that not without good successe. But wee sup∣pose, that the Spirits of the Salt, by which the Gold is dis∣solved, doe rather minister that vertue, which is found in it
than the Gold it selfe: Though this Secret be wholly suppres∣sed. Now if the Body of Gold could be opened, with∣out these Corrosive waters; Or by these Corrosive Waters, (so the venemous Qualitie were wanting,) well washed, wee conceive, it would bee no un∣profitable Medicine. 2 Pearles are taken, either in a fine powder, or in a certaine Masse, or Dissolution, by the Juyce of sowre and new Li∣mons: And they are given sometimes in Aromaticall Confections, sometimes in Li∣quour. The Pearle, no doubt, hath some affinitie, with the Shell, in which it groweth; And may be of the same qua∣litie, with the Shels, of Crey∣Fishes. 3 Amongst the Transparent
precious Stones, two onely are accounted Cordiall; The Eme∣raud, and the  which are given under the same Formes, that the Pearles are; Save only, that the Dissoluti∣ons of them, as farre as wee know, are not in use. But wee suspect these Glassy Iewels, left they should be cutting. Of these which we have men∣tioned, how farre, and in what manner, they are helpfull, shall be spoken . 4 Bezear Stone is of approved Vertue; For refreshing the Spirits, and procuring a gen∣tle sweat. As for  Horne, it hath lost the Credit with us, yet so, as it may keep Rank with Harts Horne; And the Bone in the Heart of a Hart; And Ivorie; And such like.
5 Amber Grise, is one of the best, to appease, and Comfort, the Spirits. Hereafter follow the Names onely, of the Sim∣ple Cordials, seeing their Ver∣tues are sufficiently knowne. Hot. Cold. Saffron. Nitre. Folium In∣dum. Roses.   Violets. Lignum Aloes. Straw-berrie leaves. Citron-Pill, or Rinde. Straw-berries. Balme. Iuyce of sweet Limons. Basill.   Clove Gilly∣Flowers. Iuyce of sweet Orenges. Orenge Flo∣wers. Iuyce of Per∣maines. Rosemarie. Borrage. Mint. Buglosse. Betony. Burnet. Carduus Bene∣dictus. Sanders.   Camphire.
Seeing our Speech now is of those Things, which may be trans∣ferred into Diet; All Hot Wa∣ters; And Chymicall Oyles; (which  a certaine Trifler saith, are under the Planet Mars; And have a Furious, and Destructive Force;) As also all Hot, and Biting Spices; Are to be rejected: And a Consideration to bee had, how Waters and Li∣quours may bee made of the For∣mer Simples; Not those Phleg∣matick Distilled Waters; Nor againe those Burning Waters, of Spirit of Wine; But such as may be more temperate, and yet live∣ly, and sending forth a Benigne Vapour. 6 Wee make some Question, touching the Frequent Let∣ting of Bloud, whether it con∣duceth to long Life or no; And wee are rather in the
Opinion, that it doth, if it be turned into an Habit, and other Things be well dispo∣sed: For it letteth out the old Juyce of the Body, and brin∣geth in new. 7 We suppose also, that some Emaciating Diseases, well cu∣red, doe profit to long Life; For they yeeld New Juyce the old being consumed; And, (as he saith,) To recover a sicknesse, is to renew youth: Therefore it were good to make some Artificiall Disea∣ses; which is done by strict, and Emaciating Diets; Of which wee shall speak hereaf∣ter.
The Intentions. HAving finished the Inqu∣sition, To the 12, 13, and 14. Artic. according to the Subjects; As Namely, of In∣animate Bodies, Vegetables. Living Creatures, Man; Wee will now come nearer to the Mat∣ter, and order our Inquisition by certaine Intentions; Such as are true, and proper, (as wee are wholly perswaded;) And which are the very paths to Mor∣tall Life. For in this part, No∣thing that is of worth, hath  beene inquired; But the Contemplations of Men have beene, but simple, and non-pro∣ficients. For when we heare Mer∣en the one side, speak of Com∣forting Naturail Heat, and the Radicall Moisture; And of Meats, which breed good Bloud;
Such as may neither be Burnt, nor Phlegmatick; And of the Cheering and Recreating of the Spirits; Wee sappose them, to be no bad Men, which speak these Things: But none of these  effectually towards the end. But when, on the other side, wee heare severall Discourses; tou∣ching Medicines made of Gold, because Gold is not sub∣ject to Corruption; And tou∣ching Precious Stones, to re∣fresh the Spirits by their Hidden Properties, and Lustre: And that, if they could be taken, and retained in Vessels, the Bal∣sames, and Quint-essences of Living Creatures, would make Men conceive a proud hope of Im∣mortalitie: And that the Flesh, of Serpents, and Harts, by a cer∣taine consent, are powerfull to the Renovation of Life; Because the
one casteth his Skin, the other by Hornes; They should also have added the Flesh of Eagles, be∣cause the Eagle changeth  Bill: And that a certaine Man. when he had found an Ointment hidden under the Ground; And had annointed himselfe there with from Head to Foot; (excepting only the Soles of his Feet) Did, by this Annointing, live three hundred yeares, without any Disease, save onely some Tu∣mours, in the Soles of his fect: And of Artefius, who when bee found his Spirit, ready to depart, drew into his Body the Spirit of a certaine young Man; And there∣by made him Breathlesse, But Himselfe lived many yeares by another Mans Spirit: And of Fortunate Houres, according to the Figures of Heaven, in which Medicines, are to bee ga∣thered,
and compounded, for the prolongation of Life: And of the Seales of Planets, by which Ver∣tues may be drawne, and fetched downe from Heaven, to prolong Life: And such like fabulous, and superstitious Vanities; Wee wonder exceedingly, that men should so much dote, as to suffer themselves to bee deluded with these Things. And againe, wee doe pittie Mankinde; that they should have the Hard Fortune, to bee besieged with such frivo∣lous, and senselesse Apprehensi∣ons. But our Intentions, doe both come home to the Matter; And are far from vaine and cre∣dulous Imaginations: Being also such, as wee conceive, posteritie, may adde much to the Matters, which satisfie those Intentions; But to the Intentions them∣selves but a little. Notwithstan∣ding
there are a few Things, and those of very great Moment, of which we would have Men to bee fore-warned. First, wee are of that Opinion, that wee esteeme the Offices of Life, to bee more worthy than Life it selfe. Therefore, if there be any Thing of that kinde, that may indeed exactly answer our Intentions, yet so, that the Offi∣ces, and Duties of Life, bee thereby hindred; whatsoever it be of this kind; wee reject it. Per∣haps, wee may make some light Mention, of such Things, but wee  not upon them. For wee make no serieus, nor diligent Discourse; Either of hading the life in Caves, where the Sunne∣Beames, and severall changes of the Aire, pierce not; Like  his Cave; Or of perpe tuall Baths, made of Liquour,
prepared; Or of Shirts, and Seare-cloathes, so applied, that the Body should bee alwayes, as it were, in a Box; Or of thick Pain∣tings of the Body, after the man∣ner of some Barbarous Nations; Or of an exact Ordering, of our Life, and Diet, which aimeth on∣lyat this, and mindeth nothing else, but that a Man live; (As was that of Herodicus, amongst the Ancients; And of Corna∣rus the Venetian; in our Dayes, but with greater Moderation;) Or of any such prodigie, Tedious∣nesse, or Inconvenience: But wee propound such Remedies, and , by which the Offices of Life may neither be deserted, nor receive any great Interrup∣tions, or Mo'estations. Secondly, on the other side, wee denounce unto Men, that they would give over ; And
not imagine, that so great a Works as the Stopping, and Turning back, the powerfull Course of Na∣ture, can bee brought to passe by some Morning Draught, or the Taking of some precious Drug; But that they would bee assured, that it must needs be, that this is a work of labour; And consisteth of many Remedies, and a fit Con∣nexion of them amongst them∣selves; For no Man can bee so stupid, as to imagine, that what was never yet done, can bee done, but by such wayes, as were never yet attempted. Thirdly, we ingenuously pro∣fesse; That some of those Things, which we shall propound, have not been tried by us, by way of Expe∣riment; (For our Course of life doth not permit that;) But are derived, (as wee suppose) upon good Reason, out of our Princi∣ples
and Grounds; (of which, some we set downe, others we re∣serve in our Minde;) And are, as it were, cut, and digged out of the Rocke, and Mine of Nature Her selfe. Neverthelesse, wee have been carefull, and that with all Providence and Circumspecti∣on; (Seeing the Scripture saith of the Body of Man; That it is more worth than Raiment;) To propound such Remedies; as may at least be safe, if peradven∣ture they be not Fruitfull. Fourthly, we would have Men rightly to observe, and distin∣guish; That those Things which are good for an Healthful Life, are not alwayes good for a Long Life. For there are some Things which doe further the Alacrity of the Spirits, and the Strength and Vigour of the Functions, which, notwithstanding, do cut off from
the summe of Life. And  other Things, which are  ble to Prolongation of Life;  are not without some Perill  Health, unlesse this Matter  salved by fit Remedies: Of  not withstanding, as occasien shal bee offered, wee will not omit,  give some Cautions, and . Lastly, we have thought good to propound sundry  according to the severall Inten∣tions; But the choice of those Re∣medies, and the Order of them to leave to Discretion. For to so downe exactly, which of them a∣greeth best, with which Constitu∣tion of Body, which with the se∣verall Courses of Life; which with each Mans particular Age And how they are to be taken, out after another; And how the whole Practicque of these Things
be administred and governed; would both be too long; Neither it fit to be published. In the Topicks, we  three Intentions. The  of Consumption; The Perfecting of Reparation; And the Renewing of Oldnesse. But, seeing those Things, which  be said, are Nothing lesse  words; Wee will deduce  three Intentions, to Ten Operations. 1 The First is, the Operation upon the Spirits, that they may  their Vigour. 2 The Second Operation is, upon be Exclusion of Aire. 3 The Third Operation is, upon the Bloud, and the Sanguifying Heat. 4 The Fourth Operation is, up∣on the Juyces of the Body.
5 The Fifth Operation is,  the Bowels, for their  on of Aliment. 6 The Sixth Operation is, upon the Outward Parts, for  Attraction of Aliment. 7 The Seventh Operation upon the Aliment it selfe,  the Insinuation thereof. 8 The Eighth Operation is,  on the last Act of Assimilatioc 9 The Ninth Operation is, up on the Inteneration of the Part after they begin to be Dried. 10 The Tenth Operation is, on the Purging away of  Juyce, and Supplying of  Juyce. Of these Operations, the  first belong to the First Intenti∣on; The foure next to the  Intention; And the two last, the Third Intention. But because this Part, tou∣ching
the Intentions, doth tend to Practice; under the Name of Historie, we will not onely com∣prise Experiments and Obser∣vations; But also Councels, Remedies, Explications of Causes, Assumptions, and whatsoever hath Reference here∣unto. The Operation upon the Spirits, that they may remaine youthfull, and renue their Vigour. The Historie. 1 THe Spirits are the Ma∣ster-workmen of all Effects in the Bodie.
This is manifest by Consent And by Infinite Instances. 2 If any Man could procure that a young Mans Spirit: could be conveyed into  Mans Body; It is not unlike∣ly, but this great Wheele of the Spirits, might turne  the lesser wheele of the  And so the Course of  become Retrograde. 3 In every Consumption whether it be by Fire, or by Age, the more the Spirit of the Body, or the Heat, prey∣eth upon the Moisture,  lesser is the Duration of the Thing. This occurres every where, and is manifest. 4 The Spirits are to be  such a Temperament, and Degree of Activitie;  they should not, (as He  Drinke or Guzzle the
of the Body; But Sippe them onely. 5 There are two Kinds of Flames; The one Eager and weak, which consumes slight Substances, but hath little power over the Harder; As the Flame of Straw, or small Sticks; The other strong, and constant, which converts Hard and obstinate substances; As the Flame of Hard wood, and such like. 6 The eager Flames, and yet lesse Robust, doe drie Bodies, and render them exhaust and Baplesse; But the stronger Flames, doe  and melt them. 7 Also in  Medi∣ines, some vapour forth the  part of the Tumours, or Swellings; and these  the Tumour; Others po∣tently
discusse, and these Sof∣ten it. 8 Also in Purging and Abster∣ging Medicines; some carry a∣way the Fluide Humours vio∣lently; others draw the more Obstinate and viscous. 9 The Spirits ought to be in∣vested, and armed with such a Heat; That they may choose rather to stirre and  Hard and obstinate Matters; Than to discharge, and carry away the thin and prepared: For by that meanes, the Body becomes Greene and Solide. 10 The Spirits are so to be wrought and tempered; That they may be; In Substance, Dense,  Rare; In Heat, Strong,  Eager In Quantity, Suffici∣ent for the Offices of Life,  Redundant, or Turgide∣In Motion, Appeased;
Dancing, or Unequall. 11 That Vapours worke power∣fully upon the Spirits, it is ma∣nifest; By Sleepe; by Drun∣kennesse; by Melancholy Pas∣sions; By Laetificant Medi∣cines; By Odours calling the Spirits back againe, in Swou∣nings, and Faintings. 12 The Spirits are condensed foure wayes; Either by Put∣ting them to Flight; Or by Re∣frigerating and Cooling them; Or by Stroaking them; Or by Quieting them. And first of their Condensation, by putting them to Flight. 13 Whatsoever putteth to Flight on all parts, driveth the Body into his Center; And so condenseth. 14 To the Condenfution of the Spirits by Flight, the most Powerfull and Effectuall, is
Opium; And next, Opiates; And generally, all  Things. 15 The force of Opium, to the Condensation of the Spirits,  exceeding strong; When as perhaps, three graines thereof will, in a short time, so Coa∣gulate the Spirits, that they returne no more, but are ex∣tinguished, and become Im moveable. 16 Opium, and the like, put not the Spirits to Flight, by their Coldnesse; For they have Parts manifestly Hot; But,  the contrary, coole, by their putting the Spirits to Flight. 17 The Flight of the Spirits, by Opium, and Opiate Medicines,  best seene, by applying  same outwardly; For the  straight withdraw them∣selves; And will returne
more; But the Part is Morti∣fied; And turnes to a Gan∣grene. 18 Opiates, in Grievous Pains, as in the Stone, or the Cutting off, of a Lunme, mitigate paines; Most of all, by put∣ting the Spirits to Flight. 19 Opiates obtaine a good Ef∣fect, from a bad Cause; For the Flight of the Spirits is Evill; But the Condensation of them, through their Flight, is Good. 20 The Grecians attributed much, both for Health, and for Prolongation of Life, to Opiates; But the Arabians, much more. In so much, that their Grand Medicines, (which they called, the Gods Hands;) Had Opium, for their Basis, & principall Ingredient, other Things being mixed, to abate and correct the Noxious Qua∣lities
thereof: Such were Treacle, Mithridate, and the rest. 21 Whatsoever is given, with good successe, in the curing of pestilentiall and Malignant Dis∣eases; To stop and Bridle the Spirits, lest they grow Tur∣bulent, and Tumultuate, May, very happily, be transferred to Prolongation of Life: For one Thing is effectuall unto both; Namely, the Condensation of the Spirits: Now there is nothing better for that, than Opiates. 22 The Turkes finde Opium, even in a reasonable good quantitie, Harmelesse, and Comfortable; In so much, that they take it, before their Battell, to excite Courage; But to us, unlesse it be in a ve∣ry small Quantity, and with
good Correctives, it is Mor∣tall. 23 Opium, and Opiates, are ma∣aifestly found to excite Venus; Which shewes them to have force, to corroborate the Spi∣rits. 24 Distilled mater of wilde Pop∣pie, is given with good suc∣cesse, in Sursets, Agues, and divers Diseases. Which, no doubt, is a Temperate kinde of Opiate: Neither let any man wonder at the various use of it; For that is Familiar to Opiates; In regard that the Spirits, corroborated and Con∣densed, will rise up against any Disease. 25 The Turkes use a kinde of Herb, which they call Caphe; which they dry, and powder; And then drinke it in warme water; Which they say, doth
not a little sharpen them, both in their Courage, and in their Wits; Notwithstanding, if it be taken in a large Quantity, it affects, and disturbs the Minde; Whereby it is mani∣fost, that it is of the same Na∣ture with Opiates. 26 There is a Root, much re∣nowmed in al the Easternparts, which they call Betel; Which the Indians, and others, use to carry in their Mouths, and to champ it: And by that cham∣ping, they are wonderfully enabled, both to endure La∣bours, and to overcome Sick∣nesses, and to the Act of car∣nall Copulation: It seemes to be a kinde of Stupefactive, be∣cause it exceedingly blacks the Teeth. 27 Tobacco, in our Age, is im∣moderately growne into use;
And it affects Men with a se∣cret kinde of Delight; In so much, that they who have once inured themselves to it, can hardly afterwards leave it: And, no doubt, it hath power to lighten the Body, and to shake off wearinesse: Now the vertue of it, is com∣monly thought to be, because it opens the Passages, and void. Humours: But it may more rightly bee referred to the Condensation of the Spirits; For it is a kinde of Henbane; And manifestly troubles the Head, as Opiates doe. 28 There are sometimes Hu∣mours engendred in the Bo∣die, which are, as it were, O∣piate themselves; As it is in some kinde of Melancholies; With which if a Man be affe∣cted, it is a signe of very Long Life.
29 The Simple Opiates, (which are also called Stupefactives,) are these; Opium it self, which is the Juyce of Poppy; Both the Poppies, as well in the Herb, as in the Seed; Henbane; Man∣drake; Hemlock; Tobacco; Night-shade. 30 The Compound  are, Treacle; Mitbridate; Tri∣fera; Ladanum Paracelsi; Dia∣codium; Diascordium; Philoni∣um; Pills of Hounds-Tongue. 31 From this which hath been said, certaine Designations, or Councels, may be deduced, for the Prolongation of Life, according to the present In∣tention; Namely, of  the Spirits by Opiates. 32 Let there be therfore, every yeare, from Adult yeares of Youth, an Opiate Diet; Let it bee taken about the end
of May; Because the Spirits in Summer, are more Loose, and Attenuated; And there is lesse Danger from Cold Hu∣mours: Let it bee some Magistrall Opiate, weaker than those that are commonly in use, both in rtspect of a smal∣ler Quantity of Opium, and of a more sparing mixture of ex∣treme Hot Things: Let it be taken in the Morning betwixt sleeps. The Fare for that time would bee more simple, and sparing, than or linary, with∣out Wine, or Spices, or Va∣porous Things: This Medi∣cine to be taken onely each O∣ther Day; And to bee conti∣nued for a Fortnight. This Designation, in our Judge∣ment, comes home to the In∣tention. 33 Opiates also may bee taken,
not onely by the Mouth, but also by Fumes; But the Fumes must bee such, as may not move the Expulsive Facultie too strongly, nor force downe Humours; But only taken in a Weft, may worke upon the Spirits, within the Braine: And therefore, a Suffumiga∣tion of Tobacco, Lignum Alce; Rose-Mary Leaves dr ed, and a little Myrrhe, snuffed up in the Morning, at the Mouth and Nosthrils, would bee very good. 34 In Grand Opiaces; Such as are Treacle, Mithridate, and the rest; It would not bee amisse (especially in Youth,) to take rather the Distilled Waters of Them, than themselves, in their Bodies: For the Vapour, in Distilling, doth rise; But the Heat of the Medicine,
commonly, : Now Distilled Waters, are good, in those vertues, which are con∣veyed by Vapours, In other Things, but weake. 35 There are Medicines, which have a certaine weak, and hid∣den Degree; And therefore safe; Toan Opiate Vertue. These send froth a Slow,  Copious Vapour, but not , as Opiates doe: There∣fore they put not the Spirits to ; Notwithstanding they congregate them, and somewhat thicken them. 36 Medicines in Order to Opi∣ates, ate: Principally Saffron; Next Folium Indum; Amber∣Grise; Coriander-Seed prepared; Amomum, and ; Lignum-Rhodium; Orenge∣Flower Water; And much more, the infusion of the same
Flowers, new gathered, in Oyle of Almonds; Nutmegs pricked full of Holes, and macerated in Rose water. 37 As Opiates are to be taken very sparingly, and at certaine times, as was said; So these Secundaries may be taken fa∣miliarly, and in our daily Diet; And they will be very effectuall to prolongation of life. Certainly, an Apothecarie of Calecute, by the use of Am∣ber, is said to have lived,  hundred and sixtie yeares; And the Noble Men of Bar∣barie, through the use thereof, are certified to be very long liv'd; whereas the meane people are but of short life: And our Ancestours, who were longer liv'd than wee, did use Saffron much; In their Cakes, Broathes, and the like. And
touching the first way, of Con∣densing the Spirits, by Opiates, and the Subordinates thereto. thus much. 38 Now we will inquire of the second way, of Condensing the Spirits, by Cold. For the pro∣per worke of Cold is Condensa∣tion; And it is done, without my Malignitie, or adverse Qualitie; And therefore it is a fafer Operation, than by Opiates; Though somewhat lesse powerfull, if it bee done by Turnes only, as Opiates are: But then againe, because it may bee used familiarly, and in our daily Diet with Mode∣ration; It is much more pow∣erfull for the Prolongation of Life, than by Opiates. 39 The Refrigeration of the Spi∣rits, is effected three wayes;
Either by Respiration; or by ; or by Aliment. The first is the best, but, in a sort, out of our power; The second is po∣tent, but yet ready, and at hand; The third is weake, and somewhat about. 40 Aire cleare and pure; And which hath no Fogginesse in it, before it bee received into the Lungs; And which is least exposed to the Sun-beames; Condenseth the Spirits best; Such is found, either on  Tops of Drie Mountaines, or in , open to the windes, and yet not without some shade. 41 As  Refrigeration, and  of the Spirits, by Vapours; The Root of this Operation wee place in Nitre; As a Creature purposely made, and chosen, for this
end; Being thereunto lead, and perswaded, by these Argu∣ments. 42 Nitre is a kinde of Coole Spice: This is apparent to the sense it selfe; For it bites the Tongue, and Palate, with Cold, as Spices doe with Heat: And it is the onely Thing, as  as wee know, that hath this propertie. 43 Almost all cold Things, (which are cold properly, and not by Accident, as Opium is,) are poore, and jejune, of Spi∣rit; Contrarily, Things full of Spirit, are almost all Hot: Only Nitre is found amongst Vegetables, which  with Spirit, and yet is Cold. As for Camphire, which is full of Spirit, and yet performeth the Actions of Cold, it coo∣leth by Accident onely; As
namely, for that by the Thin∣nesse thereof, without Acri∣monie, it helpeth Perspira∣tion, in In flammations. 44 In Congealing, and Freezing. of Liquours; (which is latel growne into use;) By Laying Snow, and Ice, on the Out∣side of the Vessell; Nitre is also added; And, no doubt, it exciteth, and , the Congelation. It is , that they use also, for this worke, ord∣narie Bay-salt; which doth rather give Activitie, to the Coldnesse of the Snow, than coo'e by it selfe: But, as I have  in the Hotter Re∣gions, where snow fals not the Congealing is wrought by Nitre alone; But this I can not certainly affirme. 45 It is affirmed, that , which consisteth princi∣pally
of Nitre, being taken in drink, doth conduce to Va∣lour; And that it is used of∣tentimes, by Mariners, and Souldiers, before they begin their Battels, as the Turks doe Opium. 46 Nitre is given, with good successe, in Burning Agues, and Pestilentiall Fevers, to mitigate, and Bridle, their per. nicious Heats. 47 It is most manifest, that , in Gunpowder, doth migh∣tily abhorre Flame; From whence is caused, that Horri∣ble Crack, and Puffing. 48 Nitre is found to bee, as it were, the Spirit of the Earth; For this is most certaine; That any Earth, though pure, and unmixt with Nitrous Mat∣ter, if it bee so laid up, and co∣vered, that it be free from the
Sun-beames, and putteth forth no Vegetable, will ga∣ther Nitre, even in good A∣bundance. By which it is clear, That the Spirit of Nitre, is not only inferiour to the Spirit of living Creatures, but also to the Spirit of Vegetables. 49 Cattell, which drink of Ni∣trous water, doe manifestly grow Fat; which is a Signe, of the Cold, in Nitre. 50 The Manuring of the Soile, is chiefly, by Nitrous Sub∣stances; For all Dung is Ni∣trous: And this is a signe, of the Spirit, in Nitre. 51 From hence it appeares, that the Spirits of Man, may be cooled, and condensed, by the Spirit of Nitre; And bee made more Crude, and lesse∣eager: And therefore, as strong wines, and spices, and
the like, doe burne the Spirits, and shorten life; So, on the contrary side, Nitre doth com∣pose, and represse them, and furthereth to long Life. 52 Nitre may be used; In Meat, mixed with our Salt, to the tenth part of the Salt; In Broaths, taken in the Mor∣ning, from three Graines to ten; Also in Beere; But how∣soever it be used, with Mode∣ration, it is of prime Force, to long Life. 53 As Opium holds the prehe∣minence, in Condensing the Spirits, by putting them to Flight; And hath withall his Subordinates; lesse potent, but more safe; which may bee ta∣ken, both in greater Quanti∣tie, and in more frequent use; Of which wee have formerly spoken; So also Nitre, which
condenseth the Spirits by Cold and by a kinde of Frescour. (as we now adayes speak)  also his Subordinates. 54 Subordinates to Nitre are All those Things, which yeeld an Odour, some what Earthy; Like the smell of Earth, pure, and good, newly digged or turned up: Of this sort, the chiefe are; Boragi Buglesse, Langue de Boe uf, But∣net; Strawberrie Leaves, and Strawberries, Frambois, or Raspis; Raw Cucumbers; Ram Permaines; Vine-leaves, and Buds; Also Violets. 55 The next, in order, are those, which have a certaine Freshnesse of smell, but some∣what more inclined to Heat; yet not altogether void, of that vertue, of Refreshing by Coolenesse: Such as are
Balme; Greene Citrons; Greene Orenges; Rose-water distilled; Roasted Wardens; Also, the Dimask, Red, and Musk Rose. 56 This is to bee noted; That Subordinates to Nitre, doe, commonly, conferre more, to this Intention, Raw, than having passed the Fire; Be∣cause that Spirit of Cooling, is dissipated by the Fire: Therefore, they are best ta∣ken, either infused in some Li∣quour, or Raw. 57 As the Condensation of the Spirits, by Subordinates to O∣pium, is, in some sort, perfor∣med by Odours; So also that, which is by Subordinates to Nitre: Therefore, the smell, of new, and pure Earth, taken, either by following the plough, or by Digging, or by Weeding, excellently
sheth the Spirits: Also, the Leaves of Trees, in Woods or Hedges, falling towa  the Middle of Autumne,  a good Refreshing to the ; But none so good,  Strawberrie Leaves Dying Likewise, the smell of  or Wall-flowers, or , or Sweet Briar, or , suckles, taken, as they grow,  passing by them only, is of the like Nature. 58 Nay, and we knew a certain great Lord, who lived long that had, every Morning, in∣mediately after Sleepe, a  of fresh Earth, laid in a  Napkin, under his Nose,  he might take the smell them of. 59 There is no doubt, but  Cooling, and Tempering,  the Bloud, by Coole Thing
Such as are, Endive, Succourie, Liver-wort; Purslaine, and the like; Doth also, by Conse∣quent, coole the Spirits: But this is about, whereas vapours coole immediately. And as touching the Con∣densing of the Spirits, by Cold, thus much: The Third way, of Condensing the Spirits, wee  to be, by that which wee call, Stroaking the Spirits: The fourth, by Quieting the Ala∣critie, and Vnrulinesse of them. 60 Such Things, Stroake the Spirits, as are pleasing, and friendly to them, yet they al∣lure them not, to goe abroad but rather prevaile, that the Spirits, contented, as it were, in their owne societie, doe enjoy themselves; And be∣rake
themselves into their proper Center. 61 For these, if you  those Things, which were formerly set down, as Subordi∣nates, to Opium, and Nitre, there will need no other In∣quisition. 62 As for the Quieting, of the Vnrulines, of the spirits, we  presently speak of that, when we inquire, touching their Motion. Now then, seeing we have spoken, of that Conden∣sation of the Spirits, which per∣taineth to their Substance, we will come to the Temper of Heat, in them. 63 The Heat of the Spirits, as wee said, ought to bee of that kinde, that it may be  not Eager, And may delight rather, to master the  and Obstinate, than to carrie
away, the thin, and light Hu∣mours. 64 We must beware of Spices, Wine, and strong Drinks; That our use of them be very Tem∣perate, and sometimes dis∣continued: Also of Savorie, Wilde-Marjoram, Pennie-roy∣all; And all such, as bite, and heat the Tongue. For they yeeld unto the Spirits, an Heat, not Operative, but . 65 These yeeld a Robust Heat, Especially Elecampane, Gar∣lick,  Benedictus, Wa∣ter-Cresses, while they are young; Cermander, Angelica, , Vervin, Valerian, Myrrhe, Pepper-mort, , Garden-Chervile; The  of these things with , and judgement, some∣times in Sallets, sometimes in
Medicines, will satisfie this Operation. 66 It fals out well, that the Grand Opiates, will also serve excellently for this Operation, In respect, that they yeeld such an Heat by Composition, which is wished, but not to be found in simples. For the  of those Excessive  Things; (Such as are; Eu∣phorbium, Pellitory of Spain Stavis-acre, Dragon-mort,  Castoreum, Aristolochian Opoponax, Ammoniacum, , and the like; which of themselves, cannot bee ta∣ken inwardly,) To  and abate the  Vertue of the Opium; The doe make such a constitutia of a Med, cament, as we  require, which is excellent seene in this; That
and Mithridate, and the rest, are not sharp, nor bite the Tongue; But are onely some∣what bitter, and of strong seat; And at last manifest their Heat, when they come into the stomack; and in their subsequent Operations. 67 There conduce also, to the  Heat of the Spirits, , often excited, rarely per∣formed; And, no lesse, some of the Affections, of which shall be spoken hereafter. So touching the Heat, of the , Analogicall to the Pro∣ongation of Life, thus much. 68 Touching the Quantitie of he Spirits, that they bee not , and ; But other Sparing, and within a Meane, (seeing a small flame,  not devoure so much, as
a great flame,) the  will be short. 69 It seemes to bee approved by Experience; That a  Diet, and almost a ; Such as is either prescri bed by the strict Rules of Monasticall Life, or practised by Hermites, which have Ne cessitie, and Povertie, for their Rule; Rendreth a Man long liv'd. 70 Hitherto appertaine;  king of water; A Hard Bed Abstinence from Fire; A  Diet; (As namely,  Herbs; Fruits; Flesh, and  rather powdred, and , that Fresh, and Hot;) An  Shirt; frequent Fastings; fre∣quent watching; few  pleasures; And such like:  all these diminish the Spirit and reduce them to such
Quantitie, as may be sufficient only for the Functions of life; whereby the Depredation is the lesse. 71 But if the Diet shall not bee  so Rigorous, and ; yet notwithstan∣ing, shall bee alwayes equall,  constant to it selfe, it  the same effect. We see in Flames; That a Flame somewhat bigger, (so it bee alwayes alike, and quiet,)  lesse of the Fewell,  a lesser Flame, blowne with Bellowes; And by Gusts , or weaker: That which the Regiment, and Diet,  Cornarus the Venetian  plainly; who did eat, and , so many yeares , by a just weight,  hee exceeded an hundred yeares of Age, strong in Lims,
and entire in his senses. 72 Care also must bee taken that a Body, plentifully Nou∣rished, and not emaciated by any of these aforesaid Diet omitteth not a seasonable use of Venus; lest the Spirits in∣crease too fast, and soften, and destroy the body: So then tou∣ching a Moderate  of Spirits, and (as we may say) Frugall, thus much. 73 The Inquisition, touching Brideling the Motion of the Spirits, followeth next.  Motion, doth manifestly , and Inflame them.  Brideling is done, by  Meanes: By Sleepe; By A∣voiding of vchement  Immoderate Exercise, and, a word, all Lassitude; And by Refraining Irksome
And first, touching Sleep. 74 The Fable tels us, that  many yeares to∣gether, in a Cave; And all that  needed no Meat;  the Spirits waste not much in sleep. 75 Experience teacheth us,  certaine Creatures, as , and , Sleepe, in  close places, an whole Winter together; Such is the Force of Sleepe, to restraine all  Consumption. That which Bees, and Drones, are also thought to doe; Though sometimes destitute of : And likewise Butterflies, and other Flies. 76 Sleepe after Dinner, (The Stomack sending up no un∣pleasing Vapours to the Head, as being the first Dewes of our Meat,) is good for the
Spirits, but derogatorie and hurtfull, to all other points of Health. Notwithstanding it extreme Old Age, there is the same Reason, of Meat, and Sleepe; For both, our Meales, and our Sleeps, should be then frequent, but short, and little: Nay, and towards the last Pe∣riod of Old Age, a meere Rest, and, as it were, a perpetuall Repasing, doth best; Especial∣ly in Winter time. 77 But as Moderate Sleepe, con∣ferreth to Long Life; So much more, if it be Quiet, and not Disturbed. 78 These procure Quiet Sleep Violets, Lettuce, especially boi∣led; Syrupe of Dried Roses: Saffron; Balme; Apples at out going to Bed; A Sop of  in Malmesey, especially where∣in Musk Roses have beene first
; Therefore, it would  be amisse, to make some , or a small Draught, of  things, and to use it . Also those Things,  shut the Mouth of the  close; As Coriander  prepared; Quinces; and , roasted; doe induce  Sleepe: But above all things, in youth, and for those that have sufficient strong Stomacks, it will bee best, to take a good Draught, of Cleare, Cold, Water, when they goe to Bed. Touching voluntarie, and pro∣cured Traunces; As also Fixed, and Profound Thoughts, so as they be without Irksomenesse; I have nothing certaine: No doubt, they make to this Intention; And condense the Spirits; And that more potently, than Sleepe;
Seeing, they lay asleepe, and  the senses, as much, or more. Touching them, let further In∣quiry be made. So farre touching Sleepe. 79 As for Motion, and Exercises; Lasfitude hurteth; And so doth all Motion, and Exer∣cise, which is too Nimble, and Swife; As Running; Tennis; Fencing; And the like: And againe, when our strength is extended, and strained, to the uttermost; As Dancing; Wrestling; and such like: For it is certaine, that the Spirits, being driven into streights, either by the swift∣nesse of the Motion, or by the straining of the Forces; Doe afterward become more Ea∣ger, and Predatorie. On the other side, Exercises, which stirre up a good strong Mo∣tion;
But not over swift, or to our utmost strength, (such is are Leaping, Shooting, Ri∣ding, Bowling, and the like,) doe not hurt, but rather bene∣fit. We must come now to the Affections, and Passions of the Minde; And see, which of them are Hurtfull to long Life; which profitable. 80 Great joyes attenuate and dif∣fuse the Spirits, and shorten Life: Familiar Cheerfulnesse strengthens the Spirits, by calling them forth, and yet not resolving them. 81 Impressions of joy in the sense, are naught; Ruminati∣ons of joy in the Memory; Or Apprehensions of them, in Hope, or Fancie, are good.
82 Ioy suppressed, or communi∣cated sparingly, doth more comfort the Spirits, than Joy powred forth and publi∣shed. 83 Griefe and Sadnesse, if it be void of Feare, and  not too much, doth rather prolong Life; For it contra∣cteth the Spirits, and is a kind of Condensation. 84 Great Feares shorten the Life; For though Griefe and Feare doe both streighten the Spirit, yet in Griefe there is a simple Contraction; But in Feare, by Reason of the Cares taken for the Remedy, and Hope, intermixed, there is a Turmoile and Vexing of the Spirits. 85 Anger soporessed, is also a kinde of Vexation, and cau∣seth the Spirit to feed upon
the Juyces of the Body; But let loose, and breaking forth, it helpeth; As those  doe, which induce a Ro∣bust Heat. 86 Envie is the worst of all ; And feedeth upon the Spirits; And they againe up∣on the Body; And so much the more, because it is perpetuall, And as is said, Keepeth no Holy∣dayes. 87 Pity of another Mans Mis∣fortune, which is not likely to befall our selves, is good; But Pity, which may reflect, with some similitude, upon the Par∣ty pitying, is naught, because it exciteth Feare. 88 Light Shame hurteth not, seeing it contracteth the Spi∣rits a little, and then straight diffuseth them; In so much, that Shamefast Persons com∣monly
live long: But  for some great Ignominie, and which afflicteth the Minde long, contracteth the , even to suffocation; And is Pernicious. 89 Love, if it be not unfortu∣nate, and too deeply woun∣ding, is a kinde of Ioy; And  subject to the same Lawes, which wee have set downe touching Ioy. 90 Hope is the most Beneficial of all the Affections; And doth much to the Prolongation of Life, if it bee not too often Frustrated; But entertaineth the Fancie, with an Expecta∣tion of Good: Therefore they which fix, and propound to themselves, some End, a the Marke and Scope of their Life; And continually, and by Degrees, goe forward
the same; Are, for the most , long Liv'd: In so much, that when they are come to the Top of their Hope; And  goe no Higher therein; They commonly droope, and Live not long after: So that Hope is as a Leafe-Ioy; Which may be beaten out, to a great Extension, like Gold. 91 Admiration, and Light Con∣templation, are very powerfull, to the prolonging of Life; for they hold the Spirits, in  Things as Delight them; And suffer them not to tu∣multuate or to carry them∣selves unquietly, and way∣wardly. And therefore, all the Contemplatours of Naturall Things, which had so many, and so eminent Objects to ad∣mire; (As Democritus, Plato, Parmenides, Apollonius,) were
long Liv'd: Also , which tasted but lightly of Things; And studied ra∣ther Exornation of Speech, than profundity of Matters, were also long Liv'd; As Gor∣gias, Protagoras, I socraetes, Se∣neca: And certainly, as old Men are, for the most part, Talkative; So Talkative Men, doe often grow very old: For it shewes a Light Contemplati∣on; And such as doth not much straine the Spirits,  them. But Subtill, and Acute, and Eager Inquisition. shortens Life; For it tireth the Spirit, and wasteth it. And as touching the Moti∣on of the Spirits, by the Affe∣ctions of the Minde, thus much Now we will adde certaine o∣ther Generall Observations touching the Spirits, beside
the former; Which fall not  the Precedent Distribu∣tion. 92 Especiall Care must be ta∣ken, that the Spirits bee not too often Resolved; For  goeth before Resolu∣tion; And the Spirit once , doth not very easily retire, or is Condensed: Now Resolution is caused, by Over∣great Labours; Over-vehe∣ment Affections of the Mind; Over-great Sweats; Over∣great Evacuations; Hot Baths, And an untemperate, and un∣seasonable use of Venus: Also by Over-great Cares, and Car∣pings, and Anxious Expecta∣tions: Lastly, by Malignane Diseases, and Intolerable Paines and Torments of the Body; All which, as much as
may bee, (which our Vulga Phyficians also advise,) must be avoided. 93 The Spirits are delighted, both with Wonted Things, and with New: Now it makert wonderfully to the Conserva∣tion of the Spirits, in  That wee neither use  Things, to a Satiety, and  Nor New Things, be∣fore a quick, and strong Ap∣petite: And therefore, both Customes are to be broken off with Judgement, and Care, before they breed a Fulnesse, And the Appetite, aster New Things, to be restrained for a Time, untill it grow more Sharp and jocund: And, moreover, the Life, as much as may be, so to be ordered; That it may have many Renovati∣ons; And the Spirits, by per∣petuall
Conversing in the same Actions, may not wax Dull. For though it were no ill  of Seneca's; The Fools doth  begin to Live; Yet this Fol∣ly, and many more such, are good for long Life. 94 It is to bee observed,  the Spirits; (though the Contrary useth to be done;) That when Men perceive their Spirits to be in a good,  and Healthfull State; (That which will be seene, by the Tranquillitie of their  and cheerefull ) That they cherish them, and not change them: But when, in a Turbulent, and untoward State; (Which will also appeare by their Sad∣nesse, Lumpishnesse, and o∣ther Indisposition of their Minde;) That then they
straight overwhelme them and alter them. Now the Spi∣rits are contained in the same state; By a Restraining of the Affections; Temperatenes of Diet; Abstinence from ; Moderation in Labour; Indifferent Rest and Repose: And the Contrary to these, do alter and over-whelme the Spirits; As Namely, Vehe ment Affections; Profuse Fea∣stings; Immoderate Venus; Difficult labours; Earnest Studies, and prosecutions of Businesse. Yet Men are wont when they are Merriest, and best disposed, then to apply themselves to Feastings,  Labours, Endevours, Bu∣sinesses; whereas, if they have a regard to long Life; (which may seeme strange,) they should rather Practise the
Contrary. For wee ought to  and preserve good Spirits; And for the evill di∣sposed Spirits, to discharge and alter them. 95  saith not unwisely; That Old Men, for the Com∣forting of their Spirits, ought often to remember, and  upon the Acts of their Childhood and Youth. Certain∣ly, such a Remembrance, is a  of Peculiar , to every Old Man: And therefore it is a Delight to Men, to enjoy the Societie of them, which have beene brought up together with them; And to visit the places of their Education. Vespasian did attribute so much to this Matter; That when hee was , hee would, by no meanes, bee perswaded to
leave his Fathers House, though but meane; Lest bee should lose the wonted Ob∣ject of his Eyes, and the Me∣mory of his child-hood:  besides, he would drinke,  Woodden Cup, tipped with  which was his Grand∣mothers, upon Festivall Dayes. 96 One Thing, above all, gratefull to the Spirits;  there be a Continuall Progresse to the more Benigne. There∣fore, wee should lead, such Youth, and Manhood, the our Old Age should find  Solaces; Whereof the  is, Moderate Ease. And there fore, Old Men, in Honourable Places, lay violent Hands up on themselves, who retire  to their Ease: whereof  be found an Eminent Exam∣ple in Cassiodorus; who was
Reputation amongst the  Kings of Italy, that he  as the Soule of their : Afterwards, being neare  yeares of Age, he  himselfe to a ; Where he ended not his , before he was an  years old. But this Thing  require two Cautions; , that they drive not off,  their Bodies bee utterly  out, and Diseased; For  such Bodie, all Mutation,  to the more Benigne,  Death: The other,  they surrender not them∣selves to a Sluggish Ease; But  they Embrace some∣thing, which may entertaine their Thoughts, and Minde, with Contentation: In which , the chiefe Delights, are Reading and Contemplation;
And then, the Desires of  ding, and Planting. 97 Lastly; The same  Endevour, and Labour, under taken Cheerefully, and with good will, doth Refresh  Spirits; But, with an  tion and Vnwillingnesse,  Fret, and Deject them.  therefore, it conferreth  long Life; Either that a  hath the Art, to institute  Life so, as it may be Free,  Sutable to his owne  Or else to lay such a Com∣mand upon his minde, that whatsoever is imposed by For∣tune, it may rather lead him than drag him. 98 Neither is that to be  ted, towards the Government of the Affections, That espe ciall care bee taken, of  Mouth of the Stomach; Espe
cially,that it be not too much ; For that part hath a greater Dominion over the Affections; Especially the Daily Affections; Than ei∣ther the Heart, or Braine: On∣ly those Things excepted, which are wrought by potent Vapours; As in Drunkennesse, and Melancholy. 99 Touching the Operation up∣on the Spirits, that they may remaine Youthfull, and Renew their Vigour, thus much. Which wee have done the more accurately, for that there , for the most part, amongst Physicians, and other Authors,  these Operations, a deepe silence: But especially, because the Operation upon the Spirits, and their Waxing  againe, is the most Rea∣ly, and Compendious way, to
long Life: And that, for a two-fold Compendiousnesse; One, because the Spirits work compendiously, upon the Bo∣dy; The other, because V∣pours, and the Affections,  compendiously upon the Spi∣rits: So as these attaine the end, as it were, in a right line: Other Things, rather in lines Circular.
The Operation upon the Exclusion of the Aire. 2. The Historie. 1 THe Exclusion of the Aire, Ambient, ten∣deth to Length of Life, two wayes; First, for  the Externall Aire, next  the Native Spirit, ( the Aire may be said to  the Spirit of Man;  conferreth not a little to ;) Doth most of all  upon the Juyces of the ; And hasten the Desic∣tion thereof; And , the Exclusion of it, is ef∣fectuall
to Length of Life. 2 Another Effect, which fol∣loweth the Exclusion of Aire is much more subtill and pro∣found; Namely, that the Be∣die closed up, and not persp∣ring by the Pores, detaineth the Spirit within, and turneth it upon the Harder Parts of the Body; Whereby the Spi∣rit Mollifies, and Intenerate them. 3 Of this Thing, the  is explained in the  of Inanimate Bodies, And it  an Axiome almost infallible That the Spirit Discharged and Issuing forth, dryeth Bo∣dies, Detained, melteth,  intenerateth them: And it further to bee assumed;  all Heat doth properly  nuate and moisten; And co∣tracteth, and Drieth only Accident.
4 Leading the Life in Dens and , where the Aire receives not the Sun-beams, may be ef∣fectuall to long Life: For the Aire, of it selfe, doth not much towards the Depredation of the Body, unlesse it be stirred up by Heat. Certainly, if a Man shall recall Things past to his Memory, it will appeare, that the Statures of Men, have beene anciently much greater, than those that succeeded; As in Sicely, and some other Pla∣ces. But this kind of Men led their Lives, for the most part, in Caves. Now Length of Life, and largenesse of Lims, have some Affinity. The Cave also, of Epimenides, walkes a∣mongst the Fables. I suppose like wise, that the Life of  Anchorites, was a Thing Resembling the Life
in Caves; In respect, the Sun∣beams could not much pierce thither; Nor the Aire receive any great changes, or Inequa∣litles. This is certaine; Both the Simeon Stylita's, as well Daniel, as Saba; And other Columnar Anchorites, have been exceedingly long Liv'd. Likewise, the Anchorites in our dayes, closed up, and im∣mured, either within Walls, or Pillars, are often found to be long Liv'd. 5 Next unto the Life in  is the Life on Mountaines: For as the Beames of the Sun, doe not penetrate into Caves; So on the Tops of Mountaines, being destitute of Reflexion, they are of small force. But this is to be understood  Mountaines, where the  is cleare, and pure; Namely
whether, by reason of the Dri∣nasse of the Valleyes, Clouds, and Vapours, doe not ascend: As it is in the Mountaines, which encompasse Barbary; Where, even at this day, they live, many times, to an Hun∣dred and fifty yeares; As hath been noted before. 6 And this kinde of Aire; Of Caves, and Mountaines, of his owne proper Nature, is little or nothing Predatory: But  such as ours is, which is Predatory through the Heat of the Sunne, ought, as much  is possible, to be excluded from the Body. 7 But the Aire, is prohibited,  excluded two waies; First,  Closing the Pores; , by Filling them up. 8 To the Closing of the Pores,  Coldnesse of the Aire;
Going Naked, whereby the Skin is made Hard; Washing in Cold Water; Astringents applyed to the Skin; Such as are, Mastick, Myrrhe, Myrtle. 9 But much more may we sa∣tisfie this Operation, by  yet those rarely used, (especi∣ally in Summer;) which are made of Astringent Mineral waters, such as may safely be used; As Waters participa∣ting of Steele and Coppera; For these do potently contract the Skinne. 10 As for Filling up the Pores; Paintings, and such like  ous Dawbings; And, (which may most commodiously be used) Oyle, and Fat Things; Do nolesse conserve the Sub∣stance of the Body, than  colours and Vernish doe pre∣serve Wood.
11 The Ancient Britons pain∣ted their Bodies with Woad, and were exceeding long Liv'd: The Picts also used Paintings; And are thought, by some, to have derived their Name from thence. 12 The Brasilians, and Virgini∣ans, Paint themselves, at this day; Who are, (especially the former,) very long Liv'd. In so much, that sive yeares agoe, the French Iesuites had speech with some, who re∣membred the Building of ; which was done an hundred and twenty years since: And they were then at Mans estate. 13 Ioannes de Temporibus, who is reported to have extended his Life to three hundred yeares; Being asked, How he preserved himselfe so long;
Is said to have answered; By Oyle without, and by Honey within. 14 The Irish, especially the wilde-Irish, even at this day, live very long. Certainly, they report, that within these few yeares, the Countesse of Desmond lived to an hundred and forty yeares of Age, and bred Teeth three times. Now the Irish have a fashion, to chafe, and, as it were, to baste themselves with old Salt-but∣ter, against the Fire. 15 The same Irish, use to weare Saffroned Linnen, and Shirts; Which though it were, at first, devised to prevent Vermine, yet, howsoever, I take it, to be very usefull for Lengthe∣ning of Life: For Saffron,  all Things that I know, is the best Thing for the Skin, and
the Comforting of the Flesh; Seeing it is both notably A∣stringent; And hath besides, an Oseosity, and subtile Heat, without any Acrimony. I re∣member a certaine English∣Man, who, when he went to Sea, carried a Bagge of Saffron next his Stomach, that he might conceale it, and so es∣cape Custome; And where∣as he was wont to be alwayes exceeding Sea-sick; At that time he continued very well, and felt no provocation to vomit. 16 Hippocrates adviseth, in Win∣ter to weare cleane Linnen; And in Summer, fonle Lin∣nen, and besmeared with Oyle: The Reason may seeme to be, because in Summer, the Spirits exhale most; There∣fore, the Pores of the Skinne
would bee filled up. 17 Hereupon wee are of Opi∣nion, that the use of Oyle, ei∣ther of Olives, or sweet Al∣monds, to annoint the skin therewith, would principally conduce, to long Life: The Annointing would bee done every Morning, when we rise out of Bed, with , in which a little Bay-salt, and Saffron, is mixed. But this Annointing must bee lightly done,  Wooll, or some soft Sponge, Not laying it on thick, but gently touching, and wetting the skin. 18 It is certaine, that , even the Oyly themselves, in great Quantities, draw some what from the Body; But contrarily, in small Quanti∣ties, are drunk in by the Bo∣dy; Therefore the annoin∣ting
would bee but Light, as we said; Or rather the  it selfe, would be besmeared with Oyle. 19 It may haply bee objected, that this Annointing with Oyle, which wee commend; (Though it were never in use with us; And amongst the Italians is cast off againe;) was anciently very Familiar, amongst the Grecians, and Ro∣mans; And a part of their Diet; And yet Men were not longer-liv'd, in those dayes than now. But it may right∣ly be answered; Oyle was in use, only, after Baths; unlesse it were, perhaps, amongst Champions. Now Hot Baths, are as much contrarie to our Operation, as Annointings are congruous, Seeing the one opens the passages, the other
stops them up. Therefore the Bath, without the An∣nointing following, is utterly bad; The Annointing with∣out the Bath, is best of all. Be∣sides the Annointing amongst them, was used onely for De∣licacie; Or, (if you take it at the best) for Health; But, by no meanes, in Order, to long Life. And therefore they used then withall precious Oint∣ments; which were good for Deliciousnesse, but Hurtfull to our Intention, in regard of their Heat; So that  seemeth, not to have said a∣misse; Nec Casiâ liquidi corrumpi∣tur usus Olivi. That Odoriferous Casia,  not supplanted the use of  Oyle-Olive. 20 Annointing with Oyle,
to Health; Both in Winter, by the Exclusion of the Cold Airc; And in Sum∣mer, by Detaining the spirits within; And prohibiting the Resolution of them; And keeping off the force of the Aire, which is then most pre∣datorie. 21 Seeing the Annointing with Oyle, is one of the most po∣tent Operations to long Life; wee have thought good, to adde some Cautions, lest the Health should bee endange∣red. They are Foure, accor∣ding to the Foure Inconvience, which may follow thereupon. 22 The First Inconvenience is; That by repressing Sweats, it may engender Diseases, from those Excrementitious Hu∣mours. To this a Remeby
must be given, by Purges, and Clysters; That Evacuation may bee duely performed. This is certaine, that Evacua∣tion by Sweats, commonly advanceth Health, and dero∣gateth from long Life: But Gentle Purgers, work upon the Humours, not upon the Spi∣rits, as Sweat doth. 23 The Second  is; That it may heat the , , in time, inflame it: For the Spirits shut in, and not Breathing forth, acquire Heat. This Inconvenience may  prevented; If the ,  nsually,  to the Col∣der part; And that at times some proper Cooling  bee taken, of which, wee shall straight speak, in the Oper∣tion upon the Bloud. 24 The Third is, That it may
the Head: For all  from without, strikes back the Vapours, and sends them up unto the Head: This Inconvenience is remedied, by Purgers; Especially, Clysters; And by shutting the Mouth of the Stomach, strongly, with Stipticks; And by Combing, and Rubbing the Head, and washing it with convenient Lyes, that something may ex∣hale; And by not omitting, competent, and good Exerci∣ses, that something also may perspire, by the Skin. 25 The Fourth Inconvenience, is a more subtile Evill; Name∣ly, that the Spirit, being de∣tained by the Closing up of the Pores, is likely to multiply it selfe too much: For when lit∣tle issueth forth, and new Spi∣rit is continually engendred,
the Spirit increaseth too fast, and so preyeth upon the Bo∣dy more plentifully. But this is not altogether so; For all Spirit, closed up, is dull; (For it is Blowne, and Excited, with Motion, as Flame is;) And therefore, it is lesse Active, and lesse Generative of it selfe: Indeed, it is thereby increased in Heat, (as Flame is,) but slow in Motion: And therefore the Remedy to this Inconvenience, must be by Cold Things; Being sometimes mix∣ed with Oyle; Such as are, Re∣ses, and Myrtle: For wee must altogether disclaime Hot Things; As was said of C∣sia. 26 Neither will it bee unprofi∣table, to weare next the Bo∣dy, Garments, that have in them, some Vnctuosity, or Oleo∣sitie,
not Aquositie; For they will exhaust the Body lesse:  are those of Woollen; ra∣ther than those of Linnen;  it is manifest in the Spirits of Odours; That if you lay sweet-powders a∣mongst Linnen, they will much sooner lose their smell, than amongst Wollen. And therefore, Linnen is to be pre∣ferred, for Delicacie, and Neatnesse; But to bee  for our Operation. 27 The Wilde Irish, as soone as they fall sick; The first Thing they doe, is to take the sheets off their Beds; and to wrap themselves in the woollen cloathes. 28 Some report, that they have found great Benefit in the conservation of their Health, by weating Scarlet Wast-coats,
next their skin, and under their shirts; As well downe to the nether parts, as on the upper. 29 It is also to be observed; That Aire, accustomed to the Body, doth lesse prey upon it, than New Aire, and often changed. And therefore poore people, in small cot∣tages, who live alwayes with∣in the smell of the same chim∣ney; And change not their seats; Are commonly longest∣liv'd: Notwithstanding, to other Operations, (especial∣ly for them whose Spirits are not altogether dull,) wee judge change of Aire to bee very profitable. But a Mean must be used, which may sa∣tisfie on both sides; This may bee done by Removing our Habitation, foure times a
yeare, at constant and set Times, unto convenient seats; That so the Body may nei∣ther be in too much Peregri∣nation, nor in too much Sta∣tion. And touching the O∣peration, upon the Exclusion of Aire, and Avoiding the pre∣datorie force thereof, thus much.
The Operation upon the Bloud, and the Sangui∣fying Heat. 3. The Historie. 1 THe two Following Operations, answer to the two precedent; And are in the Relation of Passives to Actives: For the two precedent, intend this; That the Spirits, and Aire, in their Actions, may bee the lesse Depredatorie; And the two latter, that the Bloud, and Iuyce of the Body, may be the lesse Depredable. But be∣cause the Bloud is an Irrigati∣on, or Watering, of the Juy∣ces,
and Members; And a  to them; Therefore  will put the Operation up∣on the Bloud, in the first place. Concerning this Operation, we will propound certain Coun∣sels; Few in number, but very powerfull in vertue. They are three. 2 First, there is no doubt, but that if the Bloud be brought to a cold Temper, it will bee so much the lesse Dissipable. But because the Cold Things, which are taken by the Mouth, agree but ill, with many other In∣tentions; Therefore it will be best, to finde out some such Things, as may be free from these Inconveniences. They are two. 3 The first is this. Let there be brought into use, especial∣ly in youth, Clysters; Not Pur∣ging
at all, or Absterging; But onely Cooling, and some what Opening: Those are approved, which are made of the juyces of Lettuce, Purstaine, Liver∣wort, Houseleek, and the  of the Seed of Flea-wort, with some temperate opening Decoction; And a little Can∣phire: But in the Declining Age, let the , and Purslaine, beo left out; And the Juyces of Borrage, and , and the like, bee put in their Roomes: And let these Clysters be retained, if it may be, for an houre, or more. 4 The other is this. Let there be in use, especially in Sum∣mer, Baths of Fresh water, and out Luke-warme; Altogether without Emollients; As Mal∣lowes, Mercurie, Milk, and the like; Rather take new Whey,
in some good Quantitie; And . 5 But, (that which is the Prin∣cipall in this Intention, and New,) wee advise; That  the Bathing, the Body be  with Oyle, with some Thickeners; whereby the Qua∣litie of the Cooling may bee received, and the water exclu∣ded: yet let not the pores of the Body, bee shut too close; For when the outward Cold, closeth up the Body too strongly; It is so farre from Furthering Coolenesse; That it rather forbids it, and stirs up Heat. 6 Like unto this, is the use of Blodders, with some Decoctions, and Cooling Iuyces; Applied to the Inferiour Region of the Body; Namely, from the Ribs, to the privie parts: For
this also is a kinde of Bathing where the Body of the Li∣quour is for the most part ex∣cluded; And the Cooling Qualitie admitted. 7 The Third Counsell re∣maineth; which belongeth not to the Qualitie of the Bloud, but to the Substance thereof; That it may be made more Firme, and lesse Dissipa∣ble; And such, as the Heat of the Spirit, may have the lesse power over it. 8 And as for the use, of the Filings of Gold, Leafe-Gold, Powder of Pearle, Precious stones, Corall, and the like; wee have no opinion of them, at this day; unlesse it be only, as they may satisfie this present operation. Certainly, seeing the Arabians, Grecians, and  Physicians, have
such vertues to these Things; It cannot be altoge∣ther Nothing, which so great Men have observed of them. And therefore omitting all  Opinions about them, we doe verily beleeve; That if there could bee some such Thing conveighed into the whole Masse of the Bloud, in Minute, and fine Portions; Over which the Spirits, and Heat, should have little, or no power; Absolutely, it would not onely resist Putrefaction, but Arefaction also, And be a most effectuall Meanes, to the prolongation of Life. Ne∣verthelesse, in this Thing, se∣verall Cautions are to bee . First, that there be a most  Comminution. Second∣ly, that such Hard and solide Things, be void of all Malig∣nant
Qualitie; Lest while they be dispersed, and lurk in the veines, they breed some Inconvenience: Thirdly, that they be never taken together with Meats, nor in any such manner, as they may stick long; Lest they beget dange∣rous Obstructions, about the Mesentery: Lastly, that they be taken very rarely, that they may not congregate, and  together, in the veines. 9 Therefore let the manner of Taking them, be Fasting; in White wine; A little Oyle of Almonds mingled there∣with; Excrcise used immedi∣ately upon the Taking of them. 10 The Simples, which may sa∣tisfie this Operation, are; In stead of all, Gold, Pearles, and Corall: For all Metals, ex∣cept
Gold, are not without some Malignant Qualitie, in the Dissolutions of them; Neither will they bee beaten, to that exquisite Finenesse, that Leafe-Gold hath: As for all Glassie, and Transparent  wee like them not, (as wee said before,) for feare of Corrosion. 11 But in our judgement, the , and more effectuall way, would be, by the use of Woods,  Infusions, and Decoctions; For there is in them suffici∣ent, to cause Firmnesse of ; And not the like dan∣ger, for breeding Obstructi∣ons: But especially, because they may bee taken, in Meat, and Drink; whereby they will finde the more easie En∣trance into the veines; And not be voided in Excrements.
12 The Woods, fit for this pur∣pose, are; Sanders, the Oake, and Vine: As for all Hot Woods, or something Rosennie, wee reject them: Notwith∣standing, you may adde the Wooddy Stalks of Rose-Marie dried; For Rose-Marie is a Shrub, and exceedeth, in Age, many Trees: Also, the Wood∣dy Stalks of Ivie; But in such quantitie, as they may not yeeld an unpleasing taste. 13 Let the Woods be taken, ei∣ther boiled in Broathes; Or infused, in Must, or Ale, be∣fore they leave working: But in Broathes, (as the custome is, for Guaiacum, and the like,) they would be infused a good while, before the Boyling; That the firmer part of the Wood, and not that only which lieth loosely, may bee drawne
forth. As for Ash, though it be  for Cups, yet wee like it . And touching the  upon the Bloud, thus much. The Operation upon the Juyces of the Bo∣dy. 4. The Historie. 1 THere are two kindes of Bodies, (As was said before in the , touching Inanimates) which are hardly consumed; Hard Things; and Fat Things; As is seene, in Metals, and Stones; and in Oyle, and Wax. 2 It must be ordered there∣fore,
that the Iuyce of the Bo∣dy, be somewhat Hard; And that it bee Fattie, or Sub-ro∣scide 3 As for Hardnesse; It is cau∣sed three wayes; By Aliment of a firme Nature; By Cold con∣densing the Skin, and Flesh; And by Exercise Binding, and Compacting, the Juyces of the Body, that they bee not Soft, and Frothy. 4 As for the Nature of the A∣liment, it ought to be such, as is not easily Dissipable: Such as are, Beefe, Swines-Flesh, Deere, Goat, Kid, Swan, Goose, Ring-Dove; Especially, if they bee a little powdered; Fish likewise Salted, and Dried; old Cheese; And the like. 5 As for the Bread; Oaten Bread; Or Bread with some Mixture of Pease in it;
Or Barley Bread; Are more solide, than Wheat  And in wheat Bread, the course Cheat Bread, is more solide, than the pure 6 The Inhabitants of the Or cades which live upon Salted Fish; And generally, all Fish∣Eaters, are long-liv'd. 7 The Monks, and Her mites, which fed sparingly, and upon dry Aliment, at∣tained commonly to a great Age. 8 Also Pure Water, usually drunk, makes the Juyces of the Body lesse Frothy; unto which, if for the Dulnesse of the Spirit, (which, no doubt, in Water, is but little Penetra∣tive;) you shall adde, a little Nitre, wee conceive it woold be very good. And touching
the Firmnesse of the Alimens thus much. 9 As for the Condensation, of the Skin, and Flesh, by Cold: They are longer liv'd, for the most part, that live abroad in the open Aire, than they that live in Houses; And the In∣habitants of the Cold Coun∣tries, than the Inhabitants of the Hot. 10 Great Store of Cloathes, ei∣ther upon the Bed, or Back, doe resolve the Body. 11 Washing the Body in Cold Wa∣ter, is good for length of Life; Use of Hot Baths, is naught. Touching Baths, of Astringent Minerall Waters, we have spo∣ken before. 12 As for Exercise; An Idle Life, doth manifestly make the
Flesh Soft, and Dissipable:  Exercise, (so it be, with∣out overmuch Sweating, or Wearinesse,) maketh it Hard, and Compact: Also Exercise, within Cold water, as swim∣ming, is very good: And ge∣nerally, Exercise abroad, is better than that within Houses. 13 Touching Frications, (which are a kinde of Exercise.) be∣cause they doe rather call forth the Aliment, than Har∣den the Flesh; wee will in∣quire hereafter, in the Due place. 14 Having now spoken, of Hardning the luyees, of the Body; we are to come next to the Oleositie, or Fattinesse of them: Which is a more per∣fect, and potent Intention,
than Induration; Because it hath no Inconvenience, nor Evill annexed: For all those Things, which pertaine to the Hardning of the Iuyces, are of that nature, that while they prohibite the Absumption of the Aliment, they also hin∣der the Reparation of the same: Whereby it happens, that the same Things, are both propitious, and adverse, to Length of Life: But those Things, which pertaine to making the Iuyces Oyly, and Roscid, help on both sides; For they render the Aliment, both lesse Dissipable, and more Reparable. 15 But whereas we say, that the Iuyce of thē Body, ought to be Roscide, and Fat; It is to bee noted, that we meane it not, of a visible Fat, But of a Demi∣nesse
dispersed, or (if you will call it) Radicall, in the very Substance of the Body. 16 Neither, again, let any Man thinke, that Oyle, or the Fat of Meats, or Marrow, doe en∣gender the like, and satisfie our Intention; For those Things, which are once per∣fect, are not brought backe againe; But the Aliments ought to be such, which after Disgestion and Maturation, doe then in the end, engender, Oleosity in the Iuyces. 17 Neither, again, let any Man thinke; that Oyle, or Fat by it selfe, and Simple, is Hard of Dissipation; But, in Mixture, it doth not retaine the same Nature; For as Oyle, by it s lfe, is much longer in Con∣suming than Water; So in , or , it sticketh lon∣ger,
and is later dried; As we noted before. 18 To the Irroration of the Body, Roasted Meats, or Baked Meats, are more effectuall than Boiled Meats: And all Prepa∣ration of Meat, with Water, is Inconvenient; Besides, Oyle, is more plentifully extracted out of Dry Bodies, than out of Moist bodies. 19 Generally to the Irroration of the Body, much use of Sweet Things is prositable; As of Su∣gar, Honey, sweet Almonds, Pine-Apples, Pistaccio's, Dates, Raisins of the Sunne, Corrans, Figs, and the like. Contrari∣ly, all Soure, and very Salt, and very Biting Things, are oppo∣site to the Generation of Ros∣cide Iuyce. 20 Neither would wee bee thought to favour the Mani∣chees,
or their Diet; Though wee commend the frequent use of all kindes of Seeds, and  and Roots, in Meats, ; Considering all Bread, (and Bread is that, which maketh the Meat Firme) is made either of Seeds, or of Roots. 21 But there is Nothing makes so much to the Irroration of the Body, as the Quality of the Drinke; Which is the Con∣voy of the Meat: Therefore, let there be in use such Drinks, as without all Acrimony, or Sourenesse, are notwithstan∣ding subtill; Such are those Wines, which are, (as the old Woman said in Plautus:) Ve∣tustate Edentula; Toothlesse with Age; And Ale of the same kinde. 22 Mead, (as wee suppose,)
would not bee ill, if it were strong and old: But because, all Hony hath in it some sharp Parts; (as appeares by that sharp water, which the Chy∣mists extract out of it, which will dissolve Metals;) It were better to make the same Poti∣on of Sugar; Not lightly in∣fused in it, but so incorpora∣ted, as Honey useth to be in Mead; And to keepe it, to the Age of a yeare, or at least, six Moneths, whereby the Water may lose the Crudity, and the Sugar acquire sub∣tiltie. 23 Now Ancientnesse in Wine or Beere, hath this in it; That it engenders subtilty in the Parts of the Liquour, and Acrimony in the Spirits; Whereof, the First is Profita∣ble, and the second Hurtfull:
Now to rectifie this Evill Commixture; Let there be put into the Vessell, before the Wine be separated from the , Swines-flesh, or , well boyled; That the  of the Wine may have whereupon to ruminate, and seed; And so lay aside their Mordacity. 24 In like manner, if Ale should be made, not onely with the Graines of wheat, Barly, Oats, Pease, and the like; But also, should admit a part, (suppose a third part, to these Graines,) of some Fat Roots; (such as are Potado Roots, Pith of , Burre-Roots, or some other sweet and Esculent Roots;) we suppose it would be a more usefull Drinke, for long Life, than Ale made of Graines only.
25 Also, such Things as have very thin Parts; Yet not with∣standing, are without all A∣crimony, or Mordacity, Are very good in Sallets: Which vertue, we finde to be, in some Few of the Flowers; Namely, Flowers of Ivy, which infused in Vineger, are pleasant even to the Taste; Marigold leaves, which are used in Broaths; And Flowers of Betony. And touching the Operation, upon the Iuyces of the Body, thus much.
The Operation upon the Bowels, for their Ex∣trusion of Ali∣ment. 5. The Historie. 1 WHAT those Things are, which comfort the Principall Bowels; Which are the Fountaines of ; Namely, the , Liver, Heart and Brain; To performe their Functions well; (whereby Aliment is distributed in to the Parts,  are dispersed, and the  of the whole Body is accomplished;) May be deri∣ved from Physisians; And
from their Prescripts and Ad∣vices. 2 Touching the Spleene,  Kidneyes, Mesentery, Guts, and Lungs, we speake not; For these are Members, Ministring to the Principall: And where as speech is made touching Health, they require some∣times a most especiall Consi∣deration; Because Each of these have their Diseases, which unlesse they be cured, will have Influence upon the Principall Members; But as touching the Prolongation of Life; And Reparation by A∣liments; And Retardation of the Inconcoction of Old
3 And as for those Things, which according to the diffe∣rent State of every Mans Bo∣dy, may bee transferred into his Diet, and the Regiment of his Life; He may collect them out of the Bookes of  which have written of the Comforting and Preser∣ving the Foure Principall  For Conservation of Health, hath commonly need of no more, than some Short Courses of Physicke; But Length of life cannot be ho∣ped, without an orderly Diet, and a Constant Race of  Medicines: But we will propound some few; And
the House; And whose Strength and Goodnesse,  fundamentall to the other Concoctions;) ought so to be guarded and confirmed; That it may be without  Hot; Next A∣stricted or Bound, not Loose: Furthermore, Cleane, not sur∣charged with Foule Humours; And yet, (in regard, it is nou∣rished from it selfe, not from the Veines,) not altogether Emptie, or Hungry: Lastly, it is to be kept, ever, in  Because Appetite; sharpens Disgestion. 5 I wonder much, how that same  bibere. To drink  Drinke; (which was in use amongst the Ancients,) is laid downe againe. I knew a Physician, that was very Fa∣mous, who, in the Beginning
Dinner and Supper, would  eat a few spoonfuls of very Warm Broath, with much  And then would presently wish, that it were out againe; saying, He had no  of the Broath, but onely of the Warmth. 6 We doe verily conceive it good, that the First Draught,  of Wine, or Ale, or any other Drink, (to which a Man  most accustomed) be taken at Supper, Warme. 7 Wine, in which Gold hath been quenched, we conceive, would be very good, once in a Meale:  that we  the Gold conferreth an Vertue thereunto; But that we know, that the  of all Mettals, in any kinde of Liquour, doth leave a most potent Astriction: Now we
chuse gold, because besides that Astriction, which we desire, it leaveth nothing else behinde it, of a Metalline Impression. 8 Wee are of opinion, that Sops of Bread dipped in Wine, taken at the Midst of the Meale, are Better than Wine it selfe; Especially, if there were infused into the Wine, in which the Sops were dipped, Rose-Mary, and Citron-Pill; And that with Sugar, that it may not Slip too fast. 9 It is certaine, that the use of Quinces is good to streng∣then the Stomach: But we take them to be better, if they be used, in that, which they call Quiddeny of Quinces, than in the Bodies of the Quinces themselves; Because they lie heavie in the Stomach. But those Quiddenies are best ta∣ken
after Meales, alone;  Meales, dipped in 10 Such things as are good for the Stomach, above other Sim∣ples, are these; Rose-Mary, , Maslicke, , Sage, Mint. 11 Wee allow Pills of Aloes, Mastick, and Saffron, in Win∣ter-time, taken before Din∣ner; But so as the Aloes be not only oftentimes washed in Rose-Water, but also in Vineger, in which Tragacanth hath been infused; And after that, be  for a few Houres, in Oyle of Sweet Almonds, new drawne, before it be made in∣to Pills. 12 Wine or Ale, wherein  hath been infused, with a  Elecampane, and Yellow , will doe well, taken
at times; And that especially in Winter. 13 But in Summer, a Draught of White-wine, allayed with Strawberry-water; In which Wine, Powder of Pearles, and of the shells of Crey-fishes, ex∣quisitely beaten; And (which may perhaps seeme strange;) a little Chalke have been infu∣sed; Doth excellently refresh and strengthen the Stomach. 14 But generally, all Draughts in the Morning, (which are but too frequently used,) of Cooling Things; (As of Juyces, Decoctions, Whey, Barley-wa∣ters, and the like;) Are to be avoided; And Nothing is to be put into the Stomach, Fa∣sting, which is purely Cold: These Things are better gi∣ven, (if need require,) either at five in the afternone: of
else, an Houre, after a light Breakfast. 15 Often Fastings are bad for Long Life; Besides, all Thirst  to be avoyded; And the  is to be kept Cleane,  alwayes Moist. 16 Oyle of Olives, new, and good; In which a little Mi∣thridate hath been dissolved,  upon the Backbone, just against the Mouth of the , doth wonderfully  the Stomach. 17 A small Bagge filled with Locks of Scarlet Wooll, steeped in Red-wine; In which Myr∣tle, and Citron-Pill, and a little , have been infused, may be alwayes worne upon the Stomach, And, touching those Things which Comfort the Stomach, thus much; See∣ing many of those Things al∣so,
which serve for other Ope∣rations, are Helpfull to this. 18 The Liver, if it bee Preser∣ved from Torrefaction, or ; And from Obstructi∣on; It needeth no more: For that Loosenesse of it, which be∣gers Aquosities, is plainly a Disease; But the other two, Old Age approaching indu∣ceth. 19 Hereunto appertaine, most especially, those things which are set downe in the Operati∣on, upon the Bloud: wee will adde a very few Things more, but those selected. 20 Principally, let there be in use, the Wine of Sweet ; Or if that cannot be had, the Iuyce of them, newly expressed; Let it be taken in the Morning, with a little Sugar:
And into the Glasse, into which the Expression is made, put a small peece of Citron∣pill, greene; And three or foure whole Cloves: Let this be taken from February, till the end of April. 21 Bring also into use, above all other Herbs, Water-cresses; But young, not old: They may be used, either Raw in Sallets, or in Broaths, or in Drinkes; And after that, take -wort. 22 Aloes, howsoever washed, or corrected, is hurtfull for the Liver; And therefore it is ne∣ver to bee taken ordinarily: Contrariwise, Rhubarbe is So∣veraigne for the Liver; So that these three Cautions be interposed. First, that it bee taken before Meat, lest it dry the Body too much, or leave
some Impressions of the Stip∣ticitie thereof. Secondly, that it be macerated an Houre or two in Oyle of sweet Almonds, new drawne, with Rose-water, before it bee infused in Li∣quour, or given in the proper Substance. Thirdly, that it be taken by turnes, one while Simple, another while with Tartar, or a little Bay-Salt; That it carry not away the lighter Parts onely, and make the Masse of the Humour more obstinate. 23 I allow Wine, or some De∣coction, with Steele, to be ta∣ken three or foure times in the yeare, to open the more strong Obstructions; Yet so, that a Draught, of two or three spoonfuls of Oyle of sweet Almonds, new drawne, ever goe before; And the ,
of the Body, especially; of the Armes and sides, constant∣ly follow. 24 Sweetned Liquours, and that with some Fatnesse, are Prin∣cipally, and not a little effe∣ctuall to prevent the , and Saltnesse, and Torre∣faction, and in a word, the Old∣nesse of the Liver; Especially, if they be well incorporated with Age: They are made of sweet Fruits and Roots; As namely, the Wines, and Julips, of Raisins of the Sun, new; Iujuba's, Dried Figges, Dates, Parsnips, Potado's, and the like; with the mix∣ture of Licorish, sometimes: Also a Julip, of the Indian Grain, (which they call Maiz,) with the Mixture of some sweet Things, doth much to the same end. But it is
to be noted, That the Inten∣tion of preserving the Liver, in a kinde of Softnesse and Fatnes, is much more power∣full, than that other, which Pertaines to the Opening of the Liver; which rather ten∣deth to Health, than to length of Life; Saving, that that ob∣struction, which induceth Tor∣refaction, is as opposite to long Life, as those other Arefa∣ctions. 25 I commend the Roots of Snecory, Spinage, and Beets, clea∣red of their Piths, and Boiled, till they be tender, in Water, with a third part of white∣wine, for ordinary Sallets, to be eaten with Oyle and Vine∣gar: Also Asparagus, Pith of Artichoakes, and Burre-Roots, boiled, and served in, after the same manner; Also Broaths,
in the Spring-time, of Vine , and the greene Blades of . And touching the pre∣serving of the Liver, thus much. 26 The Heart receiveth Bene∣fit, or Harme, most, from the Aire, which we breath; From Vapours; And from the Affe∣ctions. Now many of those Things, which have been for∣merly spoken, touching the Spirits, may be transferred hi∣ther: But that Indigested Masse of Cordials, collected by Physicians, availes little to our Intention: Notwith∣standing, those things, which are found to be good against Poysons, may, with good Judgment be given to streng∣then and fortifie the Heart; Especially, if they be of that
kinde, that they doe not so much resist the particular poi∣sons, as arme the Heart and Spirits against poison in gene∣rall. And touching the seve∣rall Cordials, you may repaire to the Table, alreadie set downe. 27 The Goodnesse of the Aire, is better knowne by Experi∣ence, than by signes. We hold that Aire to be the best, where the Countrey is levell and plaine; And that layeth open on all sides: So that the Soile be dry, and yet not barren, or sandy: Which puts forth Wild Thime, and Eye-bright, and a kinde of Marioram, and here and there Stalks of Calamint: Which is not altogether void of wood but  set with some Trees, for shade: where the Sweet-Brier-Rose,
smelleth something Muskie, and Aromatically; If there be Rivers, we suppose them rather  than good, un∣lesse they bee very small, and cleare, and Gravelly. 28 It is certain, that the Mor∣ning Aire, is more Lively and Refreshing, than the Evening Aire; Though the latter bee preferred out of Delicacie. 29 We conceive also, that the Aire,  with a Gentle wind, is more wholesome than the Aire of a Serene and  Skie: But the best is, the Wind blowing from the West in the Morning and from the North in the Afternoone. 30 Odours, are especially pro∣fitable for the Comforting of the Heart; yet not so, as though a good Odour, were the Prerogative of a good
Aire: For it is certaine, that as there are some Pestilentiall Aires, which smell not so ill, as others that are lesse hurtful; So, on the Contrary, there are some Aires, most wholesome, and Friendly to the Spirits, which either smell not at all, or are lesse Pleasing, and Fra∣grant to the Sense. And ge∣nerally, where the Aire is good, Odours should be taken but now and then: For a con∣tinuall Odour, though never so good, is burthensome to the Spirits. 31 We commend above all o∣thers, (as wee have touched before) Odour of Plants grow∣ing, and not Plucked, taken in the open Aire; The Principall of that kinde are Violets; Gil∣ly-Flowers, Finkes, Bean-Flow∣ers, Lime-Tree-Blossomes, Vine∣Buds,
Hony-suckles, Yellow , Musk-Roses; (For o∣ther Roses growing, are fast of theirSmels;) Strawberry-leaves, especially Dying; sweet Briar, principally in the early spring; Wilde-Mint, Lavender Flowred: And in the Hotter Countries, Orenge-Tree, Citron-Tree, Myrtle, Laurell: Therefore to walk, or sit, neare the Breath of these Plants, would not bee neglected. 32 For the Comforting of the Heart, we preferre Coole smels, before Hot Smels: Therefore the best perfume is, either in the Morning, or about the Heat of the Day, to take an equall portion, of Vineger, Rose-water, and Claret Wine; And to poure them upon a Fire-pan, somewhat heated.
33 Neither let us be thought; to sacrifice to our Mother, the Earth; Though wee advise, that in Digging, or Plowing the Earth, for health, a good quan∣titie of Claret Wine, be powred thereon. 34 Orenge-Flower Water, pure and good, with a small por∣tion of Rose-Water, and Brist Wine, snuffed up into the ; Or put up into the Nosthrils, with a Syringe, af∣ter the Manner of an Errhine; (but not too frequently,) is very good. 35 But Champing, (though wee have no Betel;) Or Holding in the Mouth only, of such Things as cheere the Spirits, (even daily done,) is excee∣ding comfortable. Therefore, for that purpose, make Grains, or little Cakes, of Ambre-Grise,
Marke, Lignum Aloes, Lignum , Orris powder, and ; And let those Grains, or , be made up, with Rose∣water, which hath passed through a little Indian Bal∣same. 36 The Vapours, which arising from Things inwardly taken, doe fortifie, and cherish the Hart, ought to have these three properties; That they be Friendly, Cleare, and Coo∣ling. For  Vapours are Nought; And Wine it selfe, which is thought to have on∣ly an Heating Vapour, is not altogether void, of an opiate Qualitie. Now we call those Vapours: Cleare; which have more of the Vapour, than of the Exhalation; And which are not Smoakie, or Fu liginous, or Unctuous; But
Moist, and Equall. 37 Out of that unprofitable Rabble of Cordials, a few ought to bee taken into daily Diet: In stead of all, Ambre. Grise, Saffron, and the Graine of Kermes, of the Hotter sort; Roots of Buglosse, and Borrage; Citrons, Sweet Limons, and Per∣maines, of the Colder sort. Al∣so that way, which we said, Both Gold, and Pearles, work a good effect, not onely within the veines, but in their pas∣sage, and about the parts neare the heart; Namely, by Coo∣ling, without any Malignant Qualitie. 38 Of Bezoar Stone, we beleeve well, because of many Trials: But then, the Manner of Ta∣king it, ought to bee such, as the vertue thereof, may more easily be communicated to
the Spirits. Therefore we ap∣prove not the Taking of it, in , or Syrrupes, or in Rose∣water, or any such like; But only in Wine, Cynnamon- or the like distilled water; But that, Weak, or Small, not Burning, or Strong. 39 Of the Affections we have spoken before, we only adde this; That every Noble, and Resolute, and, (as they call it,) Heroicall Desire, strengthe∣neth, and enlargeth, the pow∣ers of the Heart; And, tou∣ching the Heart, thus much. 40 As for the Braine; where the Seat, and Court of the A∣nimall Spirits, is kept; Those Things, which were inquired before, touching Opium, and Niter, and the Subordinates to them Both; Also touching
the procuring of placide Sleepe, May likewise be referred hi∣ther. This also is most cer∣taine; That the Braine is in some sort, in the Custody of the Stomach; And therefore those Things, which comfort, and strengthen the Stomach, doe help the Braine, by Con∣sent; And may, no lesse, bee transferred hither. We will adde a few Observations; Three Outward, one Inward. 41 We would have Bathing of the Feet, to be often used; At least, once in the week; And the Bath to be made, of Lye, with Bay-salt; And a little Sage, Camomile, Fennell, Sweet. Marioram, and Pepper-wort; With the Leaves of Angelica, green. 42 We commend also, a Fume, or Suffumigation, every Mor∣ning
of dried Rose-Mary,  dried, and Lignum : For all Sweet Gums, op∣presse the Head. 43 Especially Care must bee taken, that no Hot Things, bee applied to the Head, outward∣ly; Such are kindes of Spi∣ces, the very Nutmeg not ex∣cepted: For those Hot Things, wee debase them, to the soales of the Feet, and would have them applied there onely: But a light an∣nointing of the Head, with Oyle, mixed with Roses,  and a little Salt, and Saf∣fron, we much commend. 44 Not forgetting those Things, which wee have be∣fore delivered, touching Opi∣ates, Nitre, and the like; which so much condense the Spirits; wee think it not impertinent
to that Effect; That once in fourteen dayes, Broath be ta∣ken in the Morning, with three, or foure, Graines of Ca∣storeum, and a little  Seed, and Calamus; Which both fortifie the Braine; And in that aforesaid Density, of the Substance, of the Spirits; (so necessarie to Long Life;) Adde also a Vivacitis of  and Vigour, to them. 45 In Handling, the , of the foure Principall Bowels, wee have propounded those Things, which are both pro∣per, and choice, and may safe∣ly, and conveniently, be trans∣ferred into Diet, and Regi∣ment of Life: For Varietie of Medicines, is the Daughter of Ignorance; And it is not more true; That Many Dishes have caused many Diseases; As
the Proverb is; Then this is , That Many Medicines have caused few Cures. And  the Operation, upon the principall Bowels, for their , of Aliment, thus much. The Operation upon the Outward Parts, for their Attraction of Ali∣ment. 6. The Historie. 1 ALthough a good Con∣coction, performed by the Inward Parts, bee the principall, towards a perfect Alimentation; yet the Actions, of the Outward Parts, ought also to concurre;
That like as the Inward Facul∣tie, sendeth forth, and extru∣deth the Aliment; So the Fa∣cultie of the Outward Parts, may call forth, and attract the same: And the more weake the Facultie of Concoction, shall be; The more need is there, of a Concurring Helpe, of the Attractive Facultie. 2 A Strong Attraction, of the Outward Parts, is chiefly cau∣sed, by the Motion, of the Bo∣dy; By which, the Parts being Heated, and Comforted; Doe more cheerfully, call forth, and attract, the Aliment, unto themselves. 3 But this is most of all, to be foreseen, and avoided; That the same Motion, and , which cals the new Juyce to the Members; Doth not againe despoile the Member
of that Juyce, wherewith it had beene before refreshed. 4 Frications, used in the Mor∣ning, serve especially, to this Intention; But this must ever∣more accompany them; That after the Frication, the Part be lightly annointed with Oyle; Left the Attrition, of the Out∣ward Parts, make them by Perspiration, Dry, and Juyce∣lesse. 5 The next is Exercise, (by which the Parts confricate, and chafe themselves;) so it bee Moderate; And which, (as was noted before,) be not Swift, nor to the utmost Strength, nor unto wearinesse. But in Exercise, and in Frica∣tion, there is the same Reason, and Caution; That the Bo∣dy, may not perspire, or , too much: Therefore,
Exercise is better in the oper Aire, than in the House; And better in Winter, than in Summer: And againe, Exer∣cise is not onely to be conclu∣ded with Vnction, as Frication is; But in vehement Exercises, Vnction is to bee used, both in the Beginning, and in the End; As it was anciently to Champions. 6 That Exercise, may resolve, either the Spirits, or the Juy∣ces, as little as may be, it is ne∣cessarie, that it be used, when the Stomach is not altogether Emptie. And therefore, that it may not bee used, upon full Stomach, (which doth much concerne Health;) Nor yet upon an Emptie Sto∣mach, (which doth no lesse concerne Long Life;) It is best, to take a Breakfast in the
Morning; Not of any Physi∣call Drugs, or of any Li∣quours, or of Raisins, or of Figs, or the like; But of plaine Meat, and Drink; yet that very light, and in mode∣rate Quantitie. 7 Exercise, used for the Irri∣gation of the Members, ought to be Equall, to all the Mem∣bers: Not, (as Socrates said,) that the Legs should move, and the Armes should rest; Or, on the contrarie; But that all the Parts may participate of the Motion. And it is altogether requisite to long Life, that the Body should never abide long in one posture, But that every halfe houre, at least, it change the posture; Saving only in Sleepe. 8 Those Things, which are used to Mortification, may bee
transferred to Vivification: For both Haire Shirts, aud , and all vexations of the outward parts, doe fortifie the Attractive Force of them. 9 Cardan commends Netling: Even to let out ; But of this we have no Expe∣rience; And besides, we have no good opinion of it, lest through the venemous Qua∣litie of the Nettle, it may with often use, breed Itches, and other Diseases of the Skin. And touching the Operation, upon the Outward Parts, for their Attraction of Aliment, thus much.
The Operation upon the Aliment it selfe; for the In∣sinuation there∣of. 7. The Historie. 1 THe vulgar Reproofe, touching many Di∣shes, doth rather be∣come a severe Reformer, than a Physician; Or howsoever it may be good, for preservation of Health, yet it is Hurtfull to length of Life: By reason, that a various Mixture of A∣liments, and somewhat Hete∣rogeneous, findes a passage into the veines, and juyces of the Body, more lively and
cheerfully, than a Simple, and Homogeneous Diet doth: Besides, it is more Forcible, to stirre up Appetite; which is the Spur of Disgestion. There∣fore we allow, both a Full Ta∣ble, and a continuall changing of Dishes, according to the Sea∣sons of the yeare, or upon other occasions. 2 Also that Opinion, of the Simplicitie of Meats, without Sawces, is but a Simplicity of Judgement: For good, and well chosen, Sawces, are the most wholesome preparati∣ons of Meats; And conduce, both to Health, and to Long Life. 3 It must bee ordered that with Meats, hard of Disgesti∣on, be conjoyned, strong Li∣quours; And Sawces, that may penetrate, and make way; But
with Meats more easie of Dis∣gestion, smaller Liquours, and Fat Sawces. 4 Whereas wee advised be∣fore, that the first Draught at Supper, should bee taken warne; Now wee adde, that for the preparation of the Stomach, a good Draught of that Liquour, (to which every Man is most accustomed,) be taken warme, halfe an Houre before Meat also; But a little spiced, to please the Taste. 5 The Preparation, of Meats, and Bread, and Drinks; That they bee rightly handled, and in order to this Intention; Is of exceeding great Moment; Howsoever it may seeme a Mechanicall Thing, and sa∣vouring of the Kitchin, and Buttrie: yet it is of more con∣sequence, than those Fables,
of Gold, and Precious Stones, and the like. 6 The Moistning, of the Iuyces, of the Body, by a Moist prepara∣tion of the Aliments, is a chil∣dish Thing: It may be some∣what availeable against the Fervours of Diseases; But it is altogether adverse, to a Ros∣cide Alimentation. Therefore, Boyling of Meats, as concer∣ning our Intention, is farre in∣feriour, to Roasting, and Baking, and the like. 7 Roasting ought to bee with a quick fire, and soone dispat∣ched; Not with a dull Fire, and in long time. 8 All Solide Fleshes, ought to be served in, not altogether Fresh, but somewhat powde∣red, or Corned: The lesse Salt may bee spent at the Table, with them, or none at all: For
Salt, incorporated with the Meat before, is better distri∣buted in the Body, than eaten with it at the Table. 9 There would bee brought into use severall and good , and Infusions of Meats, in convenient Li∣quours, before the Roasting of them; The like whereof are sometimes in use, before they bake them; And in the Pickles of some Fishes. 10 But Beatings, and as it were Scourgings, of Flesh Meats, be∣fore they bee boiled, would work no small Matter. Wee see, it is confessed, that Per∣tridges, and Pheasants, killed with an Hawke; Also Bucks, and Stags, killed in Hunting; (If they stand not out too long,) eat better, even to the Tast. And some Fishes, Scour∣ged,
and Beaten, become more tender, and wholesome. Also Hard, and Sowre Peares, and some other Fruits, grow sweet with Rowling them. It were good to practise some such Beating, and Bruising, of the Harder kindes of Fleshes, be∣fore they bee brought to the Fire. And this would bee one of the best preparations of all. 11 Bread, a little leavened, and very little salted, is best: And which is baked in an oven, thorowly heated, and not with a faint Heat. 12 The Preparation of Drinks in order to long Life, shall not exceed one precept. And as touching Water Drinkers, wee have Nothing to say; Such a Diet, (as wee said before,) may prolong life to an Indif∣ferent
Terme, but to no Emi∣nent length: But in other Drinks, that are full of Spirit; (Such as are, wine, Ale, Mead, and the like,) This one Thing is to bee observed, and pur∣sued, as the summe of all; That the parts of the Liquour, may bee exceeding Thin, and Subtile; And the Spirit, ex∣ceeding Mild: This is Hard to be done, by Age alone; For that makes the Parts a little more subtile; But the Spirits much more sharp, and eager: Therefore of the Infusion in the vessels, of some Fat Sub∣stance, which may restraine the Acrimonie of the Spirits, counsell hath beene given be∣fore: There is also another way, without Infusion, or Mix∣ture: This is, That the Li∣quour might bee continually
agitated; Either by Carriage upon the water; Or by Car∣riage by Land; Or by Han∣ging the Vessels upon Lines, and daily stirring them; Or some such other way: For it is certaine; That this  Motion, doth both subtilize the parts; And doth so In∣corporate, and Compact the Spirits, with the parts; That they have no leisure to turne to sowrenesse, which is a kind of Putrefaction. 13 But in extreme old Age, such a preparation of Meats, is to be made, as may be almost in the Middle-way to Chylus And touching the Distillati∣ons of Meats, they are meere Toyes; For the Nutritive part, at least the best of it doth not ascend in Vapours. 14 The Incorporating of
and Drink, before they meet in the Stomach, is a Degree to Chylus; Therefore let Chic∣kens, or Pertridges, or , or the like, bee taken; And boiled in Water, with a little Salt; Then let them be cleansed, and dried; After∣ward, let them be infused in Must, or Ale before it hath done working, with a little Sugar. 15 Also, Gravies of Meat, and Mincings of them small, well seasoned; Are good for old Persons; And the rather, for that they are destituted of the Office of their Teeth, in chew∣ing; which is a principall kinde of preparation. 16 And as for the Helps of that Defect, (Namely, of the Strength of Teeth, to grinde the Meat,) There are three
Things, which may conduce thereunto. First, that New Teeth may put forth; That which seemes al together Dif∣ficult, and cannot bee accom∣plished, without an Inward, and powerfull Restauration of the Body. Secondly, that the Iawes be so confirmed by due Astringents, that they may in some sort supply the office of the Teeth; which may pos∣sibly bee effected. Thirdly, that the Meat bee so prepared that there shall be no need of chewing; which Remedy  ready, and at Hand. 17 We have some Thought also, touching the Quantitie of the Meat, and Drinke; That the same taken in larger Quantitie, at some times, is good for the Irrigation of the Body. Therefore both Greas
Feastings, and Free Drinkings, are not altogether to be inhi∣bited. And touching the O∣peration upon the Aliments, and the Preparation of them, thus much. The Operation upon the Last Act of Assimila∣tion. 8. TOuching the last Act of Assimilation, (unto which the three Operations, imme∣diately preceding, chiefly tend) our Advice shall be briefe, and single. And the Thing it selfe, rather needs Explication, than any various Rules. 1 IT is certaine, that all Bodies are endued with some Desire of
Assimilating those things which are next them: Tuis the Rare, and Pneumaticall Bodies; As Flame, Spirit, Airt performe generously, and with Alacritie; On the con∣trary, those that carrie a Grosse, and Tangible Bulke about them; Doe but weak∣ly: In regard, that the Desire, of Assimilating other Thing, is bound in, by a stronger De∣sire of Rest, and Containing themselves from Motion. 2 Againe, it is certaine, That that Desire of Assimilating, being bound, as wee said, in a Grosse Body, and made ; Is somewhat freed, and stirred up, by the Heat, and Neighbouring Spirit; So that it is then Actuated: which is the onely cause, why Inanimates Assimilate
not, and Animates . 3 This also is certaine, That the Harder the Consistence of the Body is, the more doth that Body stand in need, of a Greater Heat, to prick forward the Assimilation: Which fals out ill for old Men; because in them the Parts are more Obstinate, and the Heat weaker: And there∣fore, either the Obstinacie of their Parts, is to be softned, or their Heat increased. And as touching the Malacissation, or Mollifying of the Members, we shall speak afterward; Having also formerly propounded many Things, which pertaine to the prohibiting, and pre∣venting, of this kinde of Hardnesse. For the other, touching the Increasing of
the Heat, wee will now deli∣ver a single precept; After wee have first assumed this Axiome. 4 The Act of Assimilation, (which, as we said, is excited, by the Heat circumfused,) in a Motion exceeding Accu∣rate, Subtile, and in Little. Now all such Motions doe then come to their Vi∣gour, when the Locall Motion wholly ceaseth, which distur∣beth it. For the Motion of Separation, into Homogeneall parts, which is in Milke; That the Creame should swim above, and the Whey sink to the bottome, will never work, if the Milk bee never so little agitated: Neither will any Puterfaction proceed in Wa∣ter, or Mixt Bodies, if the same be in Continuall Local
Motion. So then, from this Assumption, we will conclude this, for the present Inquisi∣tion. 5 The Act it selfe, of Assimi∣lation, is chiefly accomplished in Sleepe, and Rest; Especial∣ly, towards the Morning, the Distribution being finished: Therefore, we have nothing else to advise, but that Men keep Themselves Hot, in their Sleepe: And further, that to∣wards the Morning, there be used some Annointing, or Shirt  with Oyle, such as may gently stir up Heat; And after that, to fall asleep again. And touching the Last Act of Assimilation, thus much.
The Operation upon the In∣teneration of that, which begins to be Arified; Or the Malacis∣sation of the Body. 9. WEe have inquired for∣merly, touching the In∣teneration from within;  is done by many Windings,  Circuits, as well of , as of Detaining the Spi∣rit from Issuing forth;  therefore is accomplished Slowly. Now we are to inquire, touching that Inteneration, which is  without; And is effected, as  were, Suddenly; Or, touching
the Malacissation, and  of the Body. The Historie. 1 IN the Fable, of Resto∣ring Pelias to Youth againe; Medea, when the Faigned to doe it,  this way, of  the same, That the  Mans Body should be cut into severall Peeces; And  Boyled in a Cauldron, with certaine Medicaments. There may, perhaps, some  bee required to this Matter; But the Cutting into , is not needfull. 2 Notwithstanding, this Cut∣ing into Peeces, seemes, in some sort, to be usefull; Not  a Knife, but with Judge∣ment. For whereas the Con∣sistence
of the Bowels, and  is very divers; It is needfull that the Inteneration of them both, be not effected the same way; But that there be a Cure designed of each in particular, Besides those Things, which pertaine to the Inteneration, of the whole Masse of the Bo∣die; Of which, notwithstan∣ding, in the first place. 3 This Operation, (if perhaps it bee within our power,) is most likely to bee done, by Baths, Vnctions, and the like: Concerning which, these Things that follow, are to be observed. 4 We must not be too for∣ward in Hoping to Accom∣plish this matter from the Ex∣amples of those Things which we see done, in the Imbibiti∣ons, and Macerations of Inani∣mates:
By which they are in∣tenerated: whereof we intro∣duced some Instances before: For this kinde of Operation, is more Easie upon Inanimates, Because they attract, and suck in the Liquour. But upon the Bodies of Living Creatures it is Harder; Because, in them, the Motion rather tendeth outward, and to the Circumfe∣rence. 5 Therefore, the Emollient Baths, which are in use, doe little good, but on the contra∣ry, hurt; Because they rather draw forth, than make en∣trance; And resolve the Stru∣cture of the Body, rather than consolidate it. 6 The Baths, and Vnctions, which may serve to the pre∣sent Operation; (Namely, of Intenerating the Body, truly
and really,) ought to have three properties. 7 The First and Principall, is; That they consist of those Things, which in their Whole Substance, are Like unto the Body, and Flesh of Man; And which have a Feeding, and Nursing Vertue, from with∣out. 8 The Second, is; That they be mixed with such Things, as through the Subtilty of their Parts, may Make Entrance; And so insinuate, and con∣veigh their Nourishing Vertue, into the Body. 9 The Third, is; That they receive some Mixture (though much inferiour to the rest,) of such Things as are Astringent; I meane, not Sowre or Tart Things; But Unctuous, and Comforting; That while the
other two do operate, the  out of the Body, which destroyeth the Vertue of the Things Intenerating, may (as much as is possible,) be prohi∣bited; And the Motion to the Inward Parts, by the Astriction of the Skin, and Closing of the Passages, may be promo∣ted and furthered. 10 That which is most Consub∣stantiall, to the Body of Man, is Warme Bloud, either of Man, or of some other living Crea∣ture: But the Device of Fici∣nus; Touching the Sucking of Bloud out of the Arme of a wholesome young Man; For the Restauration of Strength in Old men; is very Frivolous; For that, which nourisheth from within, ought no way to be Equall, or Homogene∣all to the Body nourished;
But in some sort, Inferiour, and Subordinate, that it may be converted: But in Things applyed outwardly, by how much the Substance is Liker, by so much the Consent is better. 11 It hath been anciently re∣ceived; That a Bath made of the Bloud of Infants will cure the Leprosie, and heale the Flesh already putrified: Inso∣much, that this Thing hath begot Envie towards some Kings, from the Common people. 12 It is reported, that Heradi∣tus, for cure of the Dropsie, was put into the Warme Belly of an Oxe, newly slaine. 13 They use the Bloud of Kit∣lins, warme; To cure the Dis∣ease called Saint Anthonies Fire; And to restore the Flesh and Skin.
14 An Arme, or other Mem∣ber, newly cut off; Or that, upon some other Occasion, will not leave Bleeding; Is, with good successe, put into the Belly of some Creature, Newly ripped up; For it wor∣keth potently, to Stanch the Bloud; The Bloud of the Mem∣ber cut off, by consent sucking in, and vehemently drawing to it selfe, the Warme Bloud of the Creature Slaine; where∣by it selfe is Stopped, and retireth. 15 It is much used in Extreme and Desperate Diseases, to cut in two young Pigeons, yet Li∣ving, and to apply them to the Soles of the Feet, and to shift them one after another; whereby, sometime  fol∣loweth a wonderful case. This is imputed vulgarly, as if they
should draw downe the Ma∣lignitie of the Disease; But howsoever, this Application goeth to the Head, and com∣forteth the Animal Spirits. 16 But these Bloudy Baths and Vnctions, seeme to us Sluttish and Odious; Let us search out some others, which per∣haps have lesse loathsomenesse in them, and yet not lesse Be∣nefit. 17 Next unto Warme-Bloud, Things alike in Substance, to the Body of Man, are, Nutritives; Fat Fleshes; Of Oxen, Swine, Deere: Oisters amongst Fi∣shes; Milke, Butter, Yolkes  Egs: Floure of Wheat, Sweet Wine: Either Sugred, or  it be fined. 18 Such Things as wee would  mixed, to make , are; In stead of all,
Especially, Bay-salt; Also Wine, (when it is full of Spi∣rit,) maketh Entrance; And is an excellent Convoy. 19 Astringents of that Kinde, which we described; Name∣ly, Vnctuous, and Comfortable Things, are; Saffron, Mastick, Myrrhe, and Myrtle-Berries. 20 Of these Parts, in our judge∣ment, may very well be made such a Bath, as wee designe: Physicians, and Posteritie, will finde out better Things here∣after. 21 But the Operation will bee much better & more power∣full; If such a Bath, as we have propounded, (which we hold to be the Principall Matter,) beattended with a Foure-fold Course and Crder. 22 First, that there goe before the Bath, a Frication of the Bo∣die;
And an Annointing with Oyle, with some Thickning Substance: That the Vertue, and Moistning Heat of the Bath, may pierce the Body, and not the watry Part of the Liquour. Then let the  follow, for the space of some two Houres: After the Bath, let the Body bee Emplaistrea with Mastick, Myrrhe, Traga∣canth, Diapalma, and Saffron; That the Perspiration of the Body, may (as much as is pos∣sible,) be inhibited; Till the Supple Matter be by degrees turned into Solide: This to be continued, for the space of twenty foure houres, or more Lastly, the Emplaistring being removed, let there be an An∣nointing with Oyle,  with Salt, and Saffron.  let this Bath, together
the Emplaistring and Vnction, (as before,) be renewed every Fifth day: This Malacissation, or Suppling of the Body, to be continued for one whole Mo∣neth. 23 Also during the Time of this Malacissation, we hold it usefull, and proper, and accor∣ding to our Intention; That Men nourish their Bodies well, and keep out of the Cold Aire; And drink nothing, but Warme Drinke. 24 Now this is one of those Things, (as wee warned, in generall, in the beginning,) whereof wee have made no Triall by Experiment; But only set it downe, out of our Aiming and Levelling at the End. For having Set up the Marke, we deliver the Light to others.
25 Neither ought the Warmths and Cherishings of Living Bo∣dies, to bee neglected. Fi∣cinus saith, and that seriously enough; That the laying of the young Maid in Davids Bosome, was wholesome for him, but it came too late. He should also have added; That the Young Maid, after the manner of the Persian Virgins, ought to have been annointed with Myrrhe, and such like; Not for Deli∣ciousnesse, but to increase the Vertue of this Cherishing by a living Body. 26 Barbarossa, in his extreme old Age, by the advice of a Physician, a Iew, did continu∣ally apply Young Boyes, to his Stomach and Belly, for Warmth and Cherishing: Al∣so some Old Men, lay Wholps, (Creatures of the Hottest
Kind,) close to their Stomachs, every Night. There hath gone a report, almost undoubted; And that under several Names; Of cer∣taine Men that had great Noses; who being weary of the De∣rision of People, have cut off the Bunches, or Hillocks of their Noses; And then making a wide Gash in their Armes, have bold their Noses in the place, for a certain time; And so brought forth faire and comely Noses: Which if it be true, it shewes plainly, the Consent of Flesh unto Flesh, especially in Live Fleshes. 28 Touching the Particular Inteneration, of the Principall Bowels; The Stomach, Lungs, Liver, Heart, Braine, Marrow of the Backbone, Guts, Reines, Gall, Veines, Arteries, Nerves, Car∣tilages,
Bones; The Inquisition and Direction, would bee too long; Seeing we now set not forth a Practique; But certain Indications to the Practique. The Operation upon the Purging away of old Iuyce, and Supplying of new Iuyce; Or of Re∣novation by Turnes. 10. The Historie. ALTHOUGH those Things, which wee shall here set downe, have been, for the most part, spoken of before; yet because
this Operation, is one of the Principall, wee will handle them over againe, more at large. 1 It is certaine, that Draught Oxen, which have been worne out with working, being put into Fresh and Rich Pastures, will gather tender and young Flesh againe; And this will appeare, even to the Taste and Palate; So that the Intenera∣tion of Flesh, is no hard Mat∣ter. Now it is likely, that this Inteneration of the Flesh, being often repeated, will in time, reach to the Inteneration of the Bones and Membranes, and like Parts of the Body. 2 It is certaine, that Diets which are now much in  Principally of  And of , China and  If they be continued
for any time, and according to strict Rules; Doe first Atte∣nuate the whole Iuyce of the Body; And after Consume it, and Drinke it up. Which is most manifest, because that by these Diets, the French Pox, when it is growne even to an Hardnesse; And hath eaten up, and corrupted, the very Marrow of the Body; may be assuredly cured. And further, because it is as manifest, that Men, who by these Diets, are brought to be extreme Leane, Pale, and as it were, Ghosts; Will soone after become Fat, well-coloured, and apparant∣ly Young againe. Wherefore, we are absolutely of opinion,  such kind of Diets, in the  of Age, being used every  yeare, would bee very useful to our Intention;
Like the old Skin, or Spoile of Sarpents. 3 Wee doe confidently af∣firme; (neither let any Man reckon us amongst those He∣retikes, which were called Ca∣thari;) That often Purges, and made even Familiar to the Body, are more availeable to long Life, than Exercises and Sweats. And this must needs be so, if that be held, which is already laid for a Ground; That Vnctions of the Body; And Oppletion of the Passages from without; And Exclusion of Aire; And Detaining of the Spirit, within the Masse of the Body; Doe much conduce to long Life. For it is most cer∣taine, that by Sweats, and Out∣ward Perspirations; not onely the Humours, and excremen∣titious Vapours are Exhaled
and consumed; But together with them, the Juices also, and good Spirits, which are not so easily repaired; But in , (unlesse they be very Im∣moderate,) it is not so; See∣ing they worke  upon the Humours. But the best Purges for this Intention, are those, which are taken im∣mediately before ; Be∣cause they Dry the Body lesse; And therefore, they must be of those Purgers, which doe least trouble the Belly. These Intentions, of the O∣perations, which wee have Pro∣pounded, (as we conceive,) are most true; The Remedies Faithfull to the   is it credible to  (Al∣though not a Few of these Re∣medies may seeme but
with what Care, and Choice, they have beene examined by us; That they might be (the Inten∣tion not at all empeached) both Safe, and Effectuall. Experi∣ence, no doubt, will both verifie, and promote, these Matters. And such, in all things, are the works of every prudent Counsell; That they are Admirable in their Effects, Excellent also in their Order, but seeming vul∣gar in the Way and Meanes. The Proches of Death. WE are now to inquire To the 15. Ar∣ticle. touching the Porches of Death; That is, Touching those Things, which happen unto Men, at the point of Death; Both a little before, and after.
That seeing there are many Paths, which lead to Death, it may be under stood, in what Com∣mon-way, they all end; Especi∣ally, in those Deaths, which are caused by Indigence of Nature, rather than by violence; Al∣though something of this Latter also, must be inserted, because of the Connexion of Things. The Historie. 1 THe Living Spirit, stands in need of three Things, that it may subsist: Convenient Mo∣tion; Temperate Refrigeration; And Fit Aliment. Plame seemes to stand in need, but of two of these; Namely, Mo∣tion, and Aliment: Because Flame is a simple substance, the Spirit a Compounded:
Insomuch, that if it approach somewhat too neare to a Fla∣mie Nature, it overthroweth it selfe. 2 Also Flame, by a greater, and stronger Flame, is extin∣guished, and slaine; As Ari∣stotle well noted; Much more the Spirit. 3 Flame, if it be much com∣pressed, and straitned, is ex∣tinguished; As wee may see in a Candle, having a Glasse cast over it; For the Aire be∣ing dilated by the Heat, doth contrude, and thrust to∣gether the Flame; And so lesseneth it, and in the end ex∣tinguisheth it: And Fires on Hearths will not Flame, if the Fewell bee thrust close toge∣ther, without any space for the Flame to break forth. 4 Also Things Fircd, are extin∣guished
with Compression; As if you presse a Burning Coale hard with the Tongs, or the Foot, it is straight ex∣tinguished. 5 But to come to the Spirit; If Bloud, or Flegme, get into the  of the Braine, it cau∣seth sudden Death; Because the Spirit hath no Roome to move it selfe. 6 Also a great Blow on the Head, induceth sudden Death; The Spirits being straighte∣ned within the Ventrides of the Braine. 7 Opium, and other strong , doe coagulate the Spirit; And deprive it of the Motion. 8 A Venemous Vapour, totally abhorred by the Spirit, cau∣seth sudden Death: As in deadly poisons, which worke
(as they call it,) by a Specificall Malignity: For they strike a Loathing into the Spirit, that the Spirit will no more move it selfe, nor rise against a Thing so much Detested. 9 Also Extreme Drunkennesse, or Extreme Feeding, sometime cause sudden Death: Seeing the Spirit is not only Oppres∣sed with overmuch Conden∣sing, or the Malignity of the Vapour; (As in Opium, and Ma∣lignant Poysons;) But also with the Abundance of the Vapours. 10 Extreme Griefe, or Feare, Especially, if they be sudden; (As it is in a sad and unexpe∣cted ) cause sudden Death. 11 Not only over-much Com∣pression, but also over-much Dilatation of the Spirit, is Deadly.
12 Ioyes excessive, and sudden, have berest many of their lives. 13 In great Evacuations; As when they cut Men for the Dropsie, the waters flow forth abundantly; Much more in great and sudden Fluxes of Bloud oftentimes, present Death followeth: And this happens by the meere Flight of Vacuum, within the Body; All the parts moving, to fill the Emptie places; And a∣mongst the rest, the Spirits themselves. For as for slow Fluxes of Bloud, this Matter pertaines to the Indigence of Nourishment, not to the Dif∣fusion of the Spirits. And tou∣ching the Motion of the Spirit, so farre, either Compressed, of Diffused, that it bringeth Death, thus much.
14 We must come next to the Want of Refrigeration. Stopping of the Breath, causeth sudden Death; As in all Suffocation, or Strangling. Now it seemes this Matter is not so much to be referred to the Impedi∣ment of Motion, as to the Impediment of Refrigeration: For Aire over-hot, though attracted freely, doth no lesse Suffocate, than if Breathing were hindred: As it is in them, who have beene some∣time suffocated, with Burning Coales; Or with Char-coale, Or with Wals newly plaistered, in close chambers, where a Fire is made: which kind of Death, is reported, to have beene the end of the Emperour Iovinian: The like happeneth from Dry Baths, over-heated, which was practised in the killing of
Fausta, wife to Constantine the Great. 15 It is a very small Time, which Nature taketh, to re∣peat the Breathing; And in which she desireth, to expell the Foggie Aire, drawne into the Lungs, and to take in new; Scarce, the third part, of a Minute. 16 Againe, the Beating of the Pulse; And the Motion, of the Systole, and Diastole, of the Heart; are three times quic∣ker, than that of Breathing; Insomuch, that if it were pos∣sible, that that Motion of the Heart could be stopped, with∣out stopping the Breath; Death would follow more speedily thereupon, than by Strangling. 17 Notwithstanding, Vse and Custome prevaile much in this
Naturall Action of Breathing; As it is in the Delian Divers, and Fishers for Pearle; who by long use can hold their Breaths, at least ten times longer, than other Men can doe. 18 Amongst Living Creatures even of those, that have Lungs, there are some that are able to hold their Breaths a long time, and others that cannot hold them so long; Accor∣ding as they need, more, or lesse, Refrigeration. 19 Fishes need lesse Refrigera∣tion, than Terrestriall Creatures; yet some they need, and take it by their Gils: And as Ter∣restriall Creatures, cannot beare the Aire, that is too Hot, or too Close; So Fishes are suffocated in waters, if they be totally, and long Frozen.
20 If the Spirit be assaulted by another Heat, greater than it selfe, it is dissipated, and de∣stroyed. For if it cannot beare the proper Heat without Re∣frigeration, much lesse can it beare another Heat, which is farre stronger. This is to bee seene in Burning Fevers, where the Heat of the Putrified Humours, doth exceed the Na∣tive Heat; Even to Extinction, or Dissipation. 21 The Want also, and Use of Sleepe, is referred to Refrigera∣tion. For Motion doth atte∣nuate, and  the Spirit; And doth sharpen, and in∣crease the Heat thereof; Con∣trarily, Sleepe settleth, and re∣straineth the Motion, and Gadding of the same.  though Sleepe doth strengthen and advance, the Actions
the Parts, and of the livelesse Spirits; and all that Motion, which is to the Circumference of the Body; yet it doth in great part, quiet, and still the proper Motion of the Living Spirit. Now Sleepe, regularly, is due unto Humane Nature, once within Foure and Twen∣tie Houres; And that for Six, or Five Houres, at the least: Though there are, even in this kinde, sometimes Mira∣cles of Nature; As it is recor∣ded of Mecaenas, that he slept not, for a long time, before his Death. And as touching the Want of Refrigeration, for Conserving of the Spirit, thus much. 22 As concerning the third Indigence; Namely, of Ali∣ment; It seemes to pertaine
rather to the Parts, than to the Living Spirit. For a Man may easily beleeve, that the Living Spirit  in Identitie Not by succestion, or Reno∣vation. And as for the  Soule in Man, it is above all question; That it is no engendred of the Soule of the Parents; Nor is repaired; Nor can dye. They speake of the Naturall Spirit of living Creatutes; And also of Ve∣getables, which differs from that other Soule, essentially, and formally. For out of the Confusion of these, that same Transmigration of Soules, and Innumerable other Devices, of Heathens and Hereticks, have proceeded. 23 The Body of Man, doth re∣gularly require; Renovation by Aliment, every day. And
Body in Health, can scarce en∣dure Fasting, three dayes to∣gether; Notwithstanding, Use, and Custome, will doe much, even in this Case; But in Sicknesse, Fasting is lesse grievous to the Body. Also Sleepe doth supply somewhat to Nourishment; And, on the other side, Exercise doth require it more abundantly. Likewise there have some beene found, who have su∣steined themselves, (almost to a Miracle in Nature,) a ve∣ry long time, without Meat or Drink. 24 Dead Bodies, if they bee not intercepted by Putrefaction, will subsist a long time, with∣out any Notable Absumption; But Living Bodies, not above three dayes, (as wee said,) un∣lesse they be repaired by Nou∣rishment:
rishment: which sheweth, that quick Absumption, to bee the work of the Living Spirit; which either repaires it selfe; or puts the Parts into a Ne∣cessitie, of being repaired; Or both. This is testified, by that also, which was noted a little before; Namely, that Living Creatures may subsist some∣what the longer, without Ali∣ment, if they Sleepe. Now Sleepe is Nothing else, but a Recep∣tion, and Retirement, of the Living Spirit, into it selfe. 25 An abundant, and continu∣all, Effluxion of Bloud; which sometimes happeneth in the Hemorrhoides; sometimes in Vomiting of Bloud, the In∣ward Veines being unloc∣ked, broken, sometimes by Wounds; Causeth sudden Death; In regard, that the
Bloud of the Veines ministreth to the Arteries; And the Bloud of the Arteries, to the Spirit. 26 The Quantitie of Meat and Drink, which a Man, eating two Meales a day, receiveth into his Body, is not small; Much more, than he voideth againe, either by Stoole, or by Urine, or by Sweating: You will say; No marvell; Seeing the Remainder goeth into the Juyces, and Sub∣stance, of the Body: It is true; But consider then, that this Addition is made twice a day, and yet the Body a∣boundeth not much: In like manner, though the Spirit be repaired, yet it growes not, Excessively, in the Quanti∣tie. 27 It doth no good, to have
the Aliment ready, in a De∣gree removed; But to have it of that Kinde; And so prepa∣red, and supplied, that the Spi∣rit may work upon it: For the Staff of a Torch alone, will not maintaine the Flame, un∣lesse it be fed with wax: Nei∣ther can Men live upon Herbs alone. And from thence comes the Inconcoction of old Age; That though there bee Flesh, and Bloud; yet the Spirit is become so Penurious, and Thin; And the Juyces, and Bloud, so Heartlesse, and Obstinate, that they hold no proportion, to Alimentation. 28 Let us now cast up the Ac∣counts, of the Needs, and In∣digences, according to the Or∣dinarie, and Usuall Course of Nature: The Spirit hath
need, of Opening, and Mo∣ving it selfe, in the Ventricles of the Braine, and Nerves, even continually; Of the Motion of the Heart, every Third part, of a Moment; Of Breathing, every Moment; Of Sleepe, and Nourishment, once within three Dayes; Of the Power of Nourishing, com∣monly till Eighty yeares bee past. And if any of these In∣digences bee neglected, Death ensueth. So there are plainly three Porches of Death; Desti∣tution of the Spirit; In the Motion; In the Refrigeration; In the Aliment. It is an Errour, to think, that the Living Spirit, is perpetual∣ly generated, and extinguished, as Flame is; And abideth not any notable time. For even Flame it selfe is not thus, out of
his owne proper Nature; But be∣cause it liveth amongst Enemies. For Flame, within Flame, endu∣reth. Now the Living Spirit, li∣veth amongst Friends, and all due Obsequiousnesse. So then, as Flame is a Momentany Sub∣stance; Aire a Fixed Substance; The Living Spirit is betwixt both. Touching the Extinguishing of the Spirit, by the Destructi∣on of the Organs, (which is cau∣sed by Diseases, and Violence,)  inquire not now; As wee foretold in the Beginning; Al∣though that also endeth in the same three Porches. And tou∣ching the Forme of Death it selfe, thus much. 29 There are two great Fore∣runners of Death; The one sent from the Head, the other from the Heart; ,
and the Extreme Labour of the Pulse. For as for the Dead∣ly Hiccough, it is a Kinde of . But the Deadly Labour of the Pulse, hath that unusuall Swiftnesse; Because the Heart, at the point of Death, doth so tremble, that the Systole, and Diastole, there∣of, are almost consounded. There is also conjoyned in the Pulse, aweaknesse, and Low∣nesse, and oftentimes a great Intermission; Because the Mo∣tion of the Heart faileth; And is not able to rise against the Assault, stoutly, or constant∣ly. 30 The Immediate preceding Signes of Death, are; Great Vn∣quietnesse, and Tossing in the Bed; Fumbling with the Hands; Catching, and Grasping hard; Gnashing with the Teeth;
Speaking hollow; Trembling of the Neather Lip; Palenesse of the Face; The Memory confu∣sed; Speechlesnesse; Cold Sweats; The Body shooting in Length; Lifting up the White of the Eye; Changing of the whole Visage; (As, the Nose sharp, Eyes Hollow, Cheekes fallen;) Contraction, and Dou∣bling of the Tongue, Coldnesse in the Extreme Parts of the Bo∣dy; In some, shedding of Bloud, or Sperme; Shriking; Breathing thick, and short; Falling of the Neather Chap; And such like. 31 There follow Death; A Pri∣vation, of all Sense, and Motion; As well of the Heart, and Ar∣teries; As of the Nerves, and Joynts; An Inability of the Body, to support it selfe up∣righ; Stifnesse of the Nerves,
and Parts; Extreme Coldnesse of the whole Body; After a little while, Patrefaction, and Stinking. 32 Eeles, Serpents, and the Inse∣cta, will move a long time, in every part, after they are cut asunder; Insomuch, that Coun∣trey People think, that the Parts strive to joyne together a∣gaine. Also Birds will flutter a great while, after their Heads are pulled off: And the Hearts of Living Creatures will pant a long time, after they are pluc∣ked out. I remember, I have seene the Heart of one that was bowelled; As suffering for High Treason; That being cast into the Fire, leaped, at the first, at least, a Foot and Halfe in Heighth; And after, by degrees, lower and lower; For the space, as we remem∣her
ber, of seven, or eight Minutes. There is also an ancient, and credible Tradition, of an Oxe Lowing, after the  were plucked out. But there is a more certaine Tradition, of a Man; who being under the Executioners Hand, for High Treason; After his Heart was plucked out, and in the Exe∣cutioners Hand; Was heard to utter, three or foure words of Prayer: which therefore, we said to be more credible, than that of the Oxe in Sacri∣fice; Because the Friends of the partie suffering, do usually give a Reward to the Execu∣tioner; To dispatch his Of∣fice with the more speed; That they may the sooner bee rid of their Paine; But in Sa∣crifices, wee see no Cause, why the Priest should bee so
speedy in his Office. 33 For Reviving those againe, which fall into sudden Swow∣nings, and Catalepses, or Asto∣nishments: (In which Fits, many, without present Help, would utterly expire;) These Things are used; Putting into their Mouths, water, distilled of Wine, which they call Hot Waters, and Cordiall Waters; Bending the Body Forwards; Stopping the Mouth, and No∣sthrils, hard; Bending, or Wrin∣ging the Fingers; Pulling the Haires, of the Beard, or Head; Rubbing of the Parts, especial∣ly, the Face, and Legs; sudden Casting of Cold Water upon the Face; shreeking out aloud, and suddenly; Putting Rose-water, to the Nosthrils, with Vinegar, in Faintings; Burning of Fea∣thers, or Cloth, in the Suffo∣cation
of the Mother; But espe∣cially, a Frying Pan, heated red hot, is good in Apoplexies; Also a Close Embracing of the Body, hath helped some. There have beene many Ex∣amples of Men, in shew, Dead; Either laid out upon the Cold Floare; Or carried sorth to ; Nay, of some Buried in the Earth; which notwith∣standing have lived againe; which hath beene found, in those that were buried; (The Earth being afterwards ope∣ned,) By the Bruising, and Wounding of their Head, through the strugling of the Body, within the Coffin: Whereof the most Recent, and Memorable Example, was that of Ioannes Scotus, Cal∣led the Subtile, and a Schoole∣man, who being digged up
againe by his Servant, unfor∣tunately absent at his Buriall; (And who knew his Masters Manner in such Fits;) Was found in that State. And the like happended in our Dayes, in the Person of a Player, bu∣ried at Cambridge. I remem∣ber to have heard of a certaine Gentleman; That would needs make Triall, in Curiositie, what men did feele that were hanged; So hee fastened the Cord about his Necke, raising himselfe upon a Stoole, and then letting himselfe fall; Thinking it should bee in his power, to recover the Stoole at his pleasure; which he fai∣led in; But was helped by a Friend, then present. He was asked afterward, what he felt? He said; Hee felt no paine; But first, he thought, he saw
before his Eyes, a great Fire, and Burning; Then hee thought, he saw all Black, and Darke: Lastly, it turned to a pale Blew, or Sea-water∣Greene; which Colour is also often seene by them which fall into Snownings. I have heard also, of a Physician, yet Living; Who recovered a Man to Life, which had han∣ged Himselfe; And had han∣ged halfe an Houre; By Fri∣cations, and Hot Baths: And the same Physician did pro∣fesse, that he made no doubt, to recover any Man, that had hanged so long, so his Neck were not broken with the first Swing.
The Differences of Youth, and Old Age. 1 THe Ladder of Mans Bo∣die, To the 16. Ar∣ticle. is this. To be Con∣ceived; To be Quick∣ned in the Wombe; To bee Borne; To Sucke; To be Wea∣ned; To Feed upon Pap; To Put forth Teeth, the First time about the Second yeare of Age; To Begin to goe; To Be∣gin to speake; To Put forth Teeth, the Second time, about seven years of Age; To come to Pubertie, about twelve, or fourteene yeares of Age; To be Able for Generation, and the Flowing of the Menstrua; To have Haires about the Legges,
and Arme-holes; To Put forth a Beard; And thus long, and sometimes later, to Grow in Stature; To come to full years of Strength and Agility; To grow Gray, and Bild; The Ceasing of the Menstrua, and Ability to Generation; To grow Decrepit, and a Monster with Three Legs; To Die. Meane while, the Mind also, hath cer∣taine Periods; But they can∣not be described by yeares; As to decay in the Memory, and the like; Of which hereafter. 2 The Differences of Youth and Old Age, are these. As Young Mans Skin is Smooth, and Plaine; An Old Mans, Dry and Wrinkled; Especially about the Forchead and Eyes: A young Mans Flesh is Tender and Soft; An old Mans, Hard: A young Man hath Strength, and Agili∣tie;
An old Man, feeles De∣cay, in his Strength, and is Slow of Motion: A young Man hath good Disgestion; An old Man, Bad: A young Mans Bowells, are Soft, and Succulent: An old Mans, Sale, and Parched: A young Mans Body is Erect, and Straight; An Old Mans, Bowing, and Crooked; A young Mans Limbs are steady; An old Mans, Weake, and Trembling: The Humors in a young Man, are Cholerick, and his Bloud in∣clined to Heat; In an old Man, Phlegmatick and Melancholick, and his Bloud inclined to Cold nesse: A young Man Readie for the Act of Venus; An old Man Slow unto it: In a young Man, the Iuyces of his Bodie are more Roscide; In an old Man, more Crude, and watrish: The Spirit, in a young Man,
Plentifull and Boyling; In an old man, Scarce and Iejune: A young Mans Spirit is Dense, and Vigorous; An old Mans Eager and Rare; A young Man hath his Sens's, Quicke, and Entire; An old Man, Dull and Decayed: A young Mans Teeth, are Strong, and Entire; An old Mans Weak, worne, and Falling out: A young Mans Haire is Coloured; An old Mans, of what Colour soever it were, Gray: A young Man hath Haire; An old Man Bald∣nesse: A young Mans Pulse, is Stronger and Quicker; An old Mans, more Confused, and Slower: The Diseases of young Men are more Acute, and Cu∣rable; Of old Men, Longer, and Hard to Cure: A young Mans Wounds soone Close; An old Mans, Later: A young
Mans Checkes, are of a Fresh Colour; An old Mans, Pale, or with a Black Bloud: A young Man is lesse troubled with Rbeumes; An old Man, More: Neither do we know in what Things old Men do improve, as touching their Body, save only sometimes in Fatnesse: Whereof the Reason is soone given; Because old Mens Bo∣dies doe neither Perspire well, nor assimilate well; Now Fatnesse is Nothing else, but an Exuberance of Nourish∣ment, above that which is voyded by Excrement; Or which is perfectly Assimila∣ted. Also, some old Men improve in the Appetite of Fee∣ding, by reason of the Acide Humours; Though old Men Disgest worse. And all these Things, which we have said,
Physicians, negligently enough, will referre to the Diminution of the Naturall Heat, and Ri∣dicall Moisture; Which are Things of no worth for use. This is certaine, Drinesse in the Comming on of yeares, doth foregoe Coldnesse: And Bodies, when they come to the Top, and Strength of Heat, doe decline to ; And after that followes Cold∣nesse. 3 Now we are to consider the Affections of the Mind. I re∣member, when I was a young Man, at Poictiers, in France, I conversed familiarly, with a certaine French-man; A witty Young Man, but something Talkative; Who afterwards grew to bee a very eminent Man: Hee was wont to in∣veigh against the Manners of
Old Men; And would say, That if their Mindes could be seene, as their Bodies are, they would appeare no lesse defor∣med. Besides, being in Love with his owne Wit, he would maintaine; That the Vices of old Mens Minds, had some correspondence, and were Pa∣ralell, to the Imperfections of their Bodies: For the Dri∣nesse of their Skin, hee would bring in Impudence; For the Hardnesse of their Bowels, Vn∣mercifulnesse; For the Lippi∣tude of their Eyes, an Evill Eye, and Envie; For the Casting downe of their Eyes, and Bow∣ing their Body towards the Earth, Atheisme; (For, saith he, they looke no more up to Heaven, as they were wont;) For the Trembling of their Members, Irresolution of their Decrees,
and Light Inconstancie; For the Bending of their Fingers, as it were, to catch, Rapacitie, and Covetousnesse; For the Back∣ling of their Knees, Fearful∣nesse; For their Wrinkles, Craf∣tinesse, and Obliquity; And o∣ther things, which I have for∣gotten. But to be serious. A young Man, is Modest, and Shamefast; An old Mans Fore∣head is Hardned: A young Man is full of Bounty and Mer∣cie; An old Mans Heart is Brawnie: A young Man is af∣fected with a Laudable Emule∣tion; An old Man, with a Ma∣lignant Envie: A young man is inclined to Religion, and De∣votion, by reason of his Fer∣vencie, and Inexperience of Evill; An old Man Coolerb in Piety, through the Coldnesse of his Charity, and long Con∣versation
in Evill; And like∣wise, through the Difficultie of his Beleefe: A young Mans Desires are Vehement; An old Mans, Moderate: A young Man is Light, and Moveable; An old Man, more Grave and Constant: A young Man is  to Liberality, and Benefi∣cence, and Humanitie; An old Man to Covetousnesse, Wisdome for his owne selfe, and Seeking his owne : A young Man is Confident, and Full of Hope; An old Man Diffident, and Gi∣ven to suspect most Things: A young Man is Gentle, and Ob∣sequious; An old Man Froward and Disdainfull: A young man is Sincere and Open-Hear∣ted; An old Man Cautelous, and Close: A young Man is given to Desire great Things; An old Man, to Regard Things
Necessary: A young Man thinkes well of the Present Times; An old Man, Prefer∣reth Times-past before them: A young Man Reverenceth his Superiours; An old Man is more Forward to tax them: And many other Things, which pertaine rather to Man∣ners, than to the present In∣quisition. Notwithstanding, old Men, as in some things, they improve in their Bodies, so also in their Mindes; Un∣lesse they be altogether out of Date. Namely; That as they are lesse apt for Invention, so they excell in Iudgement; And prefer Safe Things, and Sound Things, before Specious; Also they improve in Garrulity, and Ostentation; For they seeke the Fruit of Speech, while they are lesse able for Action; So
as it was not absurd, that the Poets fained, Old Tithon, to be turned into a Grashopper. Moveable Canons, of the Duration of Life, and Forme of Death. Canon 1. COnsumption is not caused, unlesse that, which bet departed with by one Body, passeth into another. The Explication. THere is, in Nature, no Annihilation, or Redu∣cing to Nothing: Therefore that which is consumed; is
either resolved into Aire, or turned into some Body Adja∣cent. So wee see a Spider, or Fly, or Ant, in Amber, (En∣tombed in a more stately Mo∣nument than Kings are,) to be laid up for Eternitie; Al∣though they bee but tender Things, and soone dissipated. But the mattter is this; That there is no Aire by, into which they should be resolved; And the Substance of the Amber is so Heterogeneous, that it re∣ceives Nothing of them. The like we conceive would be, if a Stick, or Root, or some such thing, were Buried in Quick∣silver. Also wax, and Honey, and , have the same Operation, but In part only.
Canon II. THere is in every Tangi∣ble body a Spirit, Cove∣red and encompassed with the Grosser Parts of the Body; And from it, all Consumption, and Dissolution, hath the Be∣ginning. The Explication. NO Body known unto us, here in the Vpper Part of the Earth, is without a Spirit; Either by Attenuation, and , from the Heat of the Heavenly Bodies; Or by some other way. For the Con∣cavities of Tangible Things, re∣ceive not Vaccum, But either Aire, or the proper Spirit of the Thing. And this Spirit.
where of we speak, is not some Vertue, or Energie, or Act, or Trifle; But plainly a Body, Rare and Invisible; Notwithstan∣ding, Circumscribed by place, Quantitative, Reall: Neither againe, is that Spirit Aire, (no more than Wine is Water;) But a Body Rarified, of kin to Aire, though much different from it. Now the Grosser Parts of Bodies, (being Dull Things, and not apt for Mo∣tion,) would last a long time; But the Spirit is that, which troubleth, and plucketh, and undermineth them; And con∣verteth the Moisture of the Body, and whatsoever it is able to disgest, into new Spi∣rit: And then, as well the Prae-existing Spirit of the Bo∣die, as that newly made, flye away together by Degrees.
This is best seene by the Di∣mination of the Weight, in Bo∣dies dryed, through Perspira∣tion. For neither, all that, which is issued forth, was Spi∣rit, when the Body was Pon∣derous; Neither was it Not Spirit, when it issued forth. Canon III. THe Spirit Issuing forth, Dryeth; Detained, and working within, either Melteth, or Putrifieth, or Vi∣vifieth. The Explication. THere are Foure Processes of the Spirit; To Arefacti∣on; To Colliquation; To Pu∣trefaction; To Generation of Bodies. Arefaction, is not the
proper Worke of the Spirit, but of the Grosser Parts, after the Spirit issued forth: For then they contract them∣selves, partly by their Flight of Vacuum, partly, by the Vnion of Homogeneals; As appeares in all Things, which are Ari∣fied by Age; And in the Drier Sort of Bodies, which have passed the Fire; As , Charocoales, Bread. Colliquation, is the meere Work of the Spi∣rits; Neither is it done, but when they are excited by Heat: For then, the Spirits, dilating themselves, yet not getting forth; Do insinuate, and disperse themselves, a∣mongst the Grosser Parts; And so make them Soft, and apt to Run, As it is, in Metals, and Wax: For Metals, and all Tenacious Things, are apt to
inhibite the Spirit, that, being excited, it iffueth not forth.  is a Mixed work of the Spirits, and of the Gros∣ser Parts: For the Spirit, (which before restrained. and bridled the Parts of the Thing,) being partly issued forth, and partly Enfeebled; All things in the Body doe Dissolve, andreturne to their Homogeneities; Or, (if you will,) to their Elements: That which was Spirit in it, is con∣gregated to it selfe; whereby things Patrified, begin to have an ill Savour: The Oyly Parts to Themselves; Whereby Things Putrified, have that Slipperinesse, and Vnctuositie: The Wairyparts also to them∣selves: The Dregs to Them∣selves: Whence followeth that Confusion, in Bodies putri∣fied.
But Generation, or Vivi∣fication, is a Worke also mixed, of the Spirit, and Grosser parts, but in a far different Manner: For the Spirit is totally detai∣ned, but it swelleth, and mo∣veth locally; And the Grosser Parts are not dissolved; But follow the Motion of the Spi∣rit, and are, as it were, blowne out by it, and extruded into divers figures; From whence commeth that Generation, and Organization: And therefore, Vivification is alwayes done in a Matter Tenacious, and Clammie: And againe, Yeel∣ding and Soft; That there may bee both a Detention of the Spirit; And also a gentle Cession of the Parts, according as the Spirit formes them. And this is seene in the Matter, as well of all Vegetables, as of
Living Creatures; whether they be engendred of Putre∣faction, or of Sperme: For in all these Things, there is mani∣festly seene a Matter, hard to breake thorow, easie to yeeld. Canon. IV. IN all Living Creatures, there are two Kindes of Spi∣rits; Livelesse Spirits, such as are in Bodies Inanimate; And a Vitall Spirit super∣added. The Explication. IT was said before; That to procure long Life, the Body of Man must be considered; First, as Inanimate, and not Repaired by Nourishment: Se∣condly, as Animate, and Re∣paired
by Nourishment: For the Former Consideration, gives Lawes touching Con∣sumption; The latter, touch∣ing Reparation. Therefore we must know; That there are in Humane Flesh, Bones, Mem∣branes, Organs; Finally, in all the parts, such Spirits dif∣fused in the substance of them, while they are alive; As there are in the same Things; (Flesh, Bones, Mem∣branes, and the Rest;) Sepa∣rated, and Dead; Such as also remaine in a Carkase: But the Vitall Spirit, although it tu∣leth them, and hath some Consent with them, yet it is farre differing from them; Being integrall, and subsisting by it selfe. Now there are two especiall Differences, betwixt the Livelesse Spirits, and the
Vitall Spirits: The one, that the Livelesse Spirits, are not continued to Themselves; But are, as it were, cut off; And encompassed with a Grosse Body, which intercepts them; As Aire is mixt in Snow, or Froth: But the Vitall Spirit is all continued to it selfe, by certaine Conduit Pipes, through which it passeth, and is not totally intercepted. And this Spirit is twofold al∣so; The one Branched onely, passing through small Pipes, and, as it were, Strings: The other hath a Cell also; So as it is not onely continued to it selfe, but also Congregared in an Hollow Space, in reaso∣nable good Quantity, accor∣ding to the Analogie of the Body; And in that Cell is the Fountaine of the Rivulers,
which branch from thence. That Cell is, chiefly, in the Ventricles of the Braine; Which, in the Ignobler sort of Creatures, are but Nar∣row; Insomuch, that the Spirits in them, seeme scatte∣red over their whole Body, rather than Celled: As may be seene in Serpents, Eels, and Flies; whereof, every of their parts move long after they are cut asunder. Birds also leape a good while after their Heads are pulled off; Because they have little Heads, and little Cels: But the Nobler sort of Creatures, have those Ventri∣cles larger: And Man the lar∣gest of all. The other Diffe∣rence betwixt the Spirits, is; That the Vitall Spirit, hath a Kinde of Enkindling; And is like a Winde or Breath, com∣pouuded
of Flame and Aire, As the Juyces of Living Crea∣tures, have both Oyle and Wa∣ter. And this Enkindling mi∣nistreth peculiar Motions and Faculties: For the Smoke, which is inflammable, even before the Flame conceived, is Hot, Thin, and Moveable; And yet it is quite another Thing, after it is become Flame: But the Enkindling of the Vitall Spirits, is, by many Degrees, gentler than the so∣ftest Flame; As of Spirit of Wine, or otherwise: And be∣sides, it is in great part mix∣ed with an Aeriall Substance; That it should be a Mystery or Miracle, both of a Flammcous, and Aereous Nature.
Canon V. THe Naturall Actions, are proper to the Seve∣rall Parts; But it is the Vitall Spirit, that excites, and sharpens them. The Explication. THe Actions, or Functions, which are in the severall Members, follow the Nature of the Members Themselves, (Attraction, Retention, Disge∣stion, Assimilation, Separation, Excretion, Perspiration. Even Sense it selfe;) According to the Proprietie of the severall Organs; (The Stomach, Liver, Heart, Spleene, Gall, Braine, Eye, Eare, and the rest.) Yet none of these Actions would
ever have beene actuated, but by the Vigour, and Presence, ofthe Vitall Spirit, and  thereof: As one Iron would not have drawne another Iron, unlesse it had beene ex∣cited by the Load-stone; Nor an Egge would ever have brought forth a Bird; unlesse the Substance of the Hen had beene actuated by the Trea∣ding of the Cock. Canon VI. THe Livelesse Spirits are next Consubstantiall to Aire; The Vitall Spirits, ap∣proach more to the Subsiance of Flame.
The Explication. THe Explication of the precedent Fourth Canon, is also a Declaration of this present Canon: But yet fur∣ther, from hence it is; That all Fat, and Oyly Things, con∣tinue long in their Being; For neither doth the  much pluck them; Neither doe they much desire to  Themselves with Aire. As for that Conceit, it is altoge∣ther vaine; That Flame should bee Aire set on Fire. Seeing Flame, and Aire, are no lesse Heterogeneall, than  and Water. But whereas, it is said, in the Canon, That the Vitall Spirits, approach more to the Substance of Flame, It must bee understood, that
they doe this more, than the Livelesse Spirits; Not that they are more Flamy, than Airy. Canon VII. THe Spirit hath two De∣fires: One, of Multiplying it selfe; The other, of Flying forth, and Congregating it selfe with the Connaturals. The Explication. THe Canon is understood of the Livelesse Spirits: For as for the second Desire, the Vitall Spirit, doth most of all abhorre, Flying forth of the Body; For it findes no Con∣naturals, here below, to joyne withall. Perhaps, it may sometimes flye to the out∣ward
Parts of the Body, to meet that which it loveth; But the Flying forth, as I said, it abhorreth. But in the Live∣lesse Spirits, each of these two Desires holdeth. For to the I ormer this belongeth; Eve∣ry Spirit, seated amongst the Grosser Parts, dwelleth unhap∣pily; And therefore, when it findes not a Like unto it selfe, it doth so much the more la∣bour, to create, and make a Like: As being in agreat So∣litude; And endevours ear∣nestly; To Multiply it selfe; And to prey upon the Volatile of the Grosser Parts; That it may be increased in Quanti∣tie. As for the Second  of Flying forth, And Beta∣king it selfe to the Aire; It is certain, that all Light Things, (which are ever Moveable,)
doe willingly goe unto their Likes, neare unto them: As a Drop of water is carried to a Drop; Flame to Flame: But much more is this done, in the Flying forth of Spirit, in∣to the Aire Ambient; Be∣cause, it is not carried to a Particle, like unto it selfe, but also as unto the Globe, of the Connaturals. Meane while, this is to be noted; That the Going forth, and Flight, of the Spirit into Aire, is a redou∣bled Action; Partly, out of the Appetite of the Spirit; Partly, out of the Appetite of the Aire: For the Common Aire is a Needy Thing; And receiveth all Things greedi∣ly; As Spirits, Odours, Beams, Sounds, and the like.
Canon VIII. Spirit Detained, if it have no possibilitie of begetting new Spirit, intenerateth the Grosser Parts. The Explication. GEneration of new Spirit, is not accomplished, but upon those Things, which are, in some Degree, neare to Spi∣rit: Such as are Humide Bo∣dies. And therefore if the Grosser parts, (amongst which the Spirit converseth,) be in a remote Degree, although the Spirit cannot convert them, yet, (as much as it can,) it weakeneth, and softeneth, and subdueth them; That seeing it cannot increase in
Quantitie, yet it will dwell more at large, and live a∣mongst good Neighbours, and Friends. Now this A∣phorisme is most usefull to our End; Because, it tendeth to the Inteneration of the Obsti∣nate Parts, by the Detention of the Spirit. Canon IX. THe Inteneration, of the Harder Parts, commeth to good effect, when the Spirit neither Flyeth forth, nor be∣getteth new Spirit. The Explication. THis Canon, solveth the Knot, and Difficultie, in the Operation of Intenerating, by the Detention of the Spirit.
For if the Spirit, not flying forth, wasteth all within, there is Nothing gotten, to the In∣teneration of the Parts, in their Subsistence; But rather they are dissolved, and Corrupted. Therefore together with the Detention, the Spirits ought to bee cooled, and restrained, that they may not be too A∣ctive. Canon X. THe Heat of the Spirit, to keepe the Body, Fresh, and Green, ought to be Robust,  Eager. The Explication. ALso this Canon pertai∣neth, to the solving of the knot ; But it is
of a much larger Extent. For it fetteth downe, of what Temporament, the Heat in the Body, ought to be, for the  of Long Life: Now this is usefull, whether the Spi∣rits bee , or whether they be not. For howsoever, the Heat of the Spirits must bee such, as it may rather turne it selfe, upon the Hard Parts, than waste the Soft; For the one Desiccateth, the other Intenerateth. Besides, the same Thing is available, to the well perfecting of As∣similation; For such an Heat, doth excellently excite the Facultie of ; And withall, doth excellently pre∣pare the Matter, to be Assimi∣lated. Now the Properties of this kinde of Heat, ought to be these. First, that it bee
Slow, and heat not Suddenly: Secondly, that it be not very Intense, but Moderate: Third∣ly, that it be Equall; Not In∣composed; Namely, Intending, and Remitting it selfe: Fourthly, that if this Heat, meet any Thing to resist it, it bee not easily suffocated, or languish. This Operation is exceeding subtile, but seeing it is one, of the most usefull, it is not to be deserted. Now, in those Remedies, (which we propounded, to invest the Spirits, with a Robust Heat; Or, that which we call, Operative, not Predatory;) wee have, in some sort, satisfied this Mat∣ter.
Canon XI. THe Condensing, of the Spirits, in their Sub∣stance, is available to long Life. The Explication. THis Canon is subordinate to the next precedent: For the Spirit Condensed, re∣ceiveth all those foure proper∣ties of Heat, whereof wee spake: But the wayes of Con∣densing them, are set downe, in the first, of the Ten Operati∣ons. Canon XII. THe Spirit, in great Quantity hasteneth more to Flying forth, and prey∣eth
upon the Body more, than it small Quantitie. The Explication. THis Canon is cleare, of it selfe, Seeing meer Quan∣titie, doth regularly increase Vertue. And it is to be seene in Flames; That the bigger they are, the stronger they breake forth, and the more speedily they consume. And therefore, over great , or Exuberance of the Spirits, is altogether Hurtfull to Long Life: Neither need one wish a greater store of Spirits, than what is sufficient, for the Fun∣ction of Life, and the Office of a good Reparation.
Canon XIII. THe Spirit equally di∣spersed, maketh lesse Haste to flye forth, and preyeth lesse upon the Body, than unequally placed. The Explication. NOt onely Abundance of Spirits, in respect of the whole, is hurtfull to the Du∣ration of Things; But also the same Abundance, uneven∣ly placed, is, in like manner, hurtfull: And therefore, the more the Spirit is shred, and inserted by small portions, the lesse it preyeth: For Dissolu∣tion ever beginneth at that part, where the Spirit is loo∣ser. And therefore, both Ex∣ercise,
and Frications, conduce much to Long Life; For A∣gitation, doth fineliest dif∣fuse, and commix Things by small Portions. Canon XIIII. THe Inordinate, and Sub∣sultorie, Motion of the Spirits, doth more hasten to Going forth, and doth prey up∣on the Body more, than the Con∣stant, and Equall. The Explication. IN Inanimates this Canon holds for certaine; For In∣equality is the Mother of Dis∣solution; But in Animates, (Be∣cause, not only the Consump∣tion is considered, but the Reparation; And Reparation
proceedeth by the Appetites of Things; And Appetite is sharpened by varietie;) It holdeth not rigorously; But it is so farre forth to be recei∣ved; That this Varietie, bee rather an Alternation, or En∣terchange, than a Confusion; And, as it were, Constant in Inconstancie. Canon XV. THe Spirit, in a Body, of a Solide Composure, is detained, though . The Explication. ALl Things doe abhorre a Solution of their Conti∣nuitie, But yet in proportion, to their Density, or Rarity:
For the more Rare the Bodies be, the more doe they suffer Themselves, to be thrust into small, and narrow Passages; For Water will goe into a pas∣sage, which Dust will not goe into; And Aire, which Water will not goe into; Nay Flame, and Spirit, which Aire will not goe into. Notwith∣standing, of this Thing, there are some Bounds: For the Spirit is not so much transpor∣ted, with the Desire of Going forth, that it will suffer it selfe to be too much disconti∣nued; Or be driven into over∣strait pores and passages: And therefore if the Spirit bee en∣compassed with an Hard Bo∣dy; Or else with an Vnctuous, and Tenacious, (which is not easily divided;) it is plainly Bound, and, as I may say, im∣prisoned;
And layeth downe the Appetite of Going out: Wherefore wee see, that Me∣tals, and Stones, require a long Time, for their Spirit to goe forth; Unlesse either the Spi∣rit bee excited by the Fire; Or the Grosser Parts bee dis∣severed with Corroding, and Strong waters. The like Rea∣son is there, of Tenacious Bo∣dies; Such as are Gums; Save only that they are melted by a more gentle Hear. And therefore, the  of the Body hard, a Close and Com∣pact skin, and the like; (which are procured, by the Drynesse of the Aliment, and by Exer∣cise, and by the Coldnesse of the Aire;) Are good for long Life; Because they detaine the Spirit in close Prison, that it goeth not forth.
Canon XVI. IN Oyly, and Fat, Things, the Spirit is detained wil∣lingly, though they be not Te∣nacious. The Explication. THe Spirit, if it be not ir∣ritated, by the Antipa∣thy, of the Body enclosing it; Nor fed by the over-much Likenesse of that Body; Nor sollicited, or invited, by the Externall Body; It makes no great stir, to get out: All which are wanting to Oyly Bodies: For they are neither so pressing upon the Spirits, as Hard Bodies; Nor so Neare as Watry Bodies; Neither have they any good Agreement with the Aire Ambient.
Canon XVII. THe Speedy flying forth of the Watry Humour, conserves the Oyly, the longer in his Being. The Explication. WE said before, that the Watry Humours, as being Consubstantiall to the Aire, flye forth soonest; The Oyly, later, as having small Agreement, with the Aire: Now whereas these two Humours are in most Bodies, it comes to passe, that the wa∣try, doth, in a sort, betray the Oyly; For that Issuing forth insensibly, carrieth this toge∣ther with it. Therefore, there is Nothing, that more furthe∣reth
the Conservation of Bo∣dies, than a gentle Drying of them; which causeth the Wa∣try Humour to expire, and in∣viteth not the Oyly; For then the Oyly enjoyeth the proper Nature. And this tendeth not only to the Inhibiting of Putrefaction, (Though that also followeth,) but to the Conservation of Greennesse. Hence it is, that Gentle Frica∣tions, and Moderate Exercises, causing rather Perspiration, than Sweating, conduce much to long Life. Canon XVIII. AIre excluded, conftr∣reth to long Life, if  Inconveniences be avoyded.
The Explication. WEe said a little before; That the Flying forth of the Spirit, is a Redoubled Action; From the Appetite, of the Spirit, and of the Aire: And therefore, if either of these bee taken out of the way, there is not a little gal∣ned. Notwithstanding, di∣vers Inconveniences follow hereupon; Which, how they may bee prevented, wee have shewed, in the second, of our ten Operations. Canon XIX. YOuthfull Spirits iuser∣ted into an Old Body, might soone  Na∣tures Course back againe.
The Explication. THe Nature of the Spirits, is as the uppermost wheele, which turneth about the other wheeles, in the Bo∣dy of Man. And therefore, in the Intention of Long Life, that ought to be first placed. Hereunto may bee added; That there is an Easier, and more Expedite way, to alter the Spirits, than to other Ope∣rations. For the Operation up∣on the Spirits, is twofold; The one, by Aliments, which is Slow, and, as it were, about; The other, (and that Two∣fold,) which is sudden, and goeth directly to the Spirits; Namely, by Vapours, or by the Affections.
Canon XX. JUyces of the Body, Hard, and Roscide, are good for long Life. The Explication. THe Reason is plaine; Seeing wee shewed be∣fore; That Hard Things, and Oyly or Roscide, are hardly dis∣sipated. Notwithstanding, there is this Difference, (As wee also noted in the Tenth Operation,) That Iuyce some∣what Hard is indeed lesse Dis∣sipable, but then it is withall lesse Reparable. Therefore a Convenience is interlaced with an Inconvenience; And for this Cause, no wonderfull Matter will be atchieved by
this. But Roscide Iuyce, will admit both Operations. There∣fore this would be principal∣ly . Canon XXI. WHatsoever is of Thin Parts, to penetrate; And yet hath no A∣crimonie, ; Begetteth Roscide Juyces. The Explication. THis  is more Hard to Practise, than to under∣stand. For it is ; Whatsoever  well, but yet with a sting, or ; (As doe all Sharp, and Soure, Things,) It leaveth behinde  wheresoever it goeth, some Mark, or Print, of Drynesse,
Cleaving; So that it  the Iuyces, and  the parts. Contrarily, whatsoever Things penetrate through their Thinnesse meer∣ly, as it were by stealth, and by way of Insinuation, with∣out violence; They bedew, and water, in their passage: Of which sort, wee have recoun∣ted many, in the fourth, and seventh Operations. Canon XXII. ASsimilation  best  when all Locall Moti∣on, is suspended. The Explication. THis Canon, we have suf∣ficiently explained in our Discourse,  the
Canon XXIII. ALIMENTATION from without, at least some other way than by the Stomach, is most profitable for long Life, if it can be done. The Explication. WE see, that all Things, which are done by Nu∣trition, aske a long time; But those, which are done by Em∣bracing of the like, (As it is in Infusions,) require no long time. And therefore, Alimen∣tation from without, would be of principall use; And so much the more, because the  of , decay in old Age; So that, if there could be some; Auxiliary Na∣tritions;
By Bathings, Vnctions, or else by Clysters; These Things, in Conjunction, might doe much, which Sin∣gle, are lesse Available. Canon XXIIII. WHere the Concocti∣on is weake, to thrust forth the Aliment; There the outward Parts should be strengthened, to call forth the Aliment. The Explication. THat which is propoun∣ded in this Canon, is not the same Thing with the for∣mer; For it is one Thing, for the Outward Aliment, to bee attracted inward; Another for the Inward Aliment, to bee at∣tracted
Outward: yet herein they concur, that they both help the weaknesse of the  though by divers wayes. Canon XXV. ALL sudden Renovation of the Body, is wrought; Either by the Spirits; Or by Malacissations. The Explication. THere are two Things, in the Body; Spirits, and Parts; To both these, the way by Nutrition, is long, and about; But it is a short way, to the Spirits, by Vapours, and by the Affections; And to the Parts, by Malacissations: But this is dillgently to be noted;
That by no meanes, wee  Alimentation from , with Malacissation: For the Intention of Malacissa∣tion, is not to nourish the Parts; But onely to make them more fit to bee nouri∣shed. Canon XXVI. MAlacissation is wrought, by Consubstantials; By Imprinters; 3 And by Closers up. The Explication. THe Reason is manifest; For that Consubstantials doe properly supple the Bo∣dy;  doe carry in; Closers up doe retaine, and bridle the Perspiration, which
is a Motion opposite to Ma∣lacissation. And therefore, (as we described in the Ninth O∣peration,) Malacissation cannot well be done at once; But in a Course or Order. First, by Excluding the Liquour, by Thickners; For an Outward, and grosse Infusion, doth not well compact the Body; That which entreth, must be Sub∣tile, and a Kinde of Vapour. Secondly, by Intenerating, by the Consent of Cousubstantials: For Bodies, upon the touch of those Things, which have good agreement with them, open themselves, and relax their Pores. Thirdly, Imprin∣ters are Convoyes, and insi nuate into the Parts, the Con∣substantials; And the Mixture of Gentle Astringents, doth somewhat restraine the Per∣spiration.
But then, in the  place, followes that  Astriction, and Closure up of the Body, by ; And then afterward, by ; Untill the Supple be  into Solide; As wee said in the proper place. Canon XXVII. FRequent Renovation of the Parts Reparable, wa∣tereth and reneweth the lesse Reparable also. The Explication. WE said in the Preface to this History; That the Way of Death, was this; That the Parts Reparable, died in the Fellowship of the Parts lesse Reparable; So that in the
Reparation of these same lesse Reparable Parts, all our Forces would bee employed. And therefore, being admonished by Aristotles Observation, touching Plants; Namely; That the putting forth of new Shoots and Branches, refresheth the Body of the Tree, in the Pas∣sage; Wee conceive, the like Reason might be; If the Flesh and bloud, in the Body of Man, were often renewed; That thereby, the Bones themselves, and Membranes, and other Parts, which in their owne Nature, are Lesse Reparable; Partly by the cheerefull Pas∣sage of the Iuyees; Partly by that new Clouthing of the young Flesh and Bloud; Might be Watred and Renewed.
Canon XXVIII. REfrigeration, or Coo∣ling of the Body, which passeth some other wayes, then by the Stomach, is usefull for Long Life. The Explication. THe Reason is at hand; For seeing a Refrigeration, not Temperate, but Power∣full, (especially of the Bloud,) is above all Things, necessary to long Life; This can, by no means, be effected from with∣in, as much as is requisite, without the Destruction of the Stomach and Bowels.
Canon XXIX. THat Intermixing, or Entangling; That as well Consumption, as Reparation, are the workes of Heat, is the greatest Obstacle to long Life. The Explication. ALmost all great workes are destroyed, by the Natures of Things, Intermixed; when as that, which helpeth in one respect, hurteth in an∣other: Therefore Men must proceed herein, by a sound Judgement, and a discreet Practice: For our Part, wee have done so, as farre as the matter will beare, and our Memory serveth us; By Se∣parating, Benigne Heats, from
Hurtfull; And the Remedies, which tend to both. Canon XXX. CUring of Diseases is ef∣fected by Temporary Medicines; But Leng∣thening of Life requireth Ob∣servation of Diets. The Explication. THose things, which come by Accident, as soone as the Causes are removed, cease againe; But the Continued Course of Nature, like a Run∣ning River, requires a conti∣nuall Rowing, and Sayling against the Streame. There∣fore, we must worke regular∣ly, by Diets. Now Diets are of two Kindes; Set Diets, which
are to be observed at certaine times; And Familiar Diet, which is to be admitted into our Daily Repast: But the Set Diets are the more potent: That is; A Course of Medi∣cines, for a time: For those Things, which are of so great Vertue, that they are able to turne Nature backe againe; Are, for the most part, more strong, and more speedily Al∣tering, than those, which may, without danger, be received into a Continual use. Now in the Remedies, set downe in our Intentions; You shall find on∣ly three Set Diets: The Opiate Diet; The Diet Malacissant, or Suppling; And the Diet E∣maciant, and Renewing. But a∣mongst those, which wee Pre∣scribed for Familiar Diet, and to be used daily, the most ef∣ficacious
are these that follow: Which also come not farre Short of the Vertue of Set Diets. Nitre, and the Subordi∣nates to Nitre; The Regiment of the Affections, and Course of our Life;  which passe not by the Stomach; Drinkes Roscidating, or Eng n∣dring Oyly Iuyces; Besprinkling of the Bloud with some Fir∣mer Matter, as Pearles; certaine Woods; Competent Vnctions, to keepe out the Aire, and to keepe in the Spirit; Heaters from without, during the Assi∣milation after Sleepe; Avoi∣ding of Those Things, which Enflame the Spirit, and put it into an Eager Heat, as Wine, and Spices: Lastly, a Moderate and Seasonable use of those Things, which endue the Spi∣rits with a Robust Heat; As
Saffron, Cresses, Garlick, E∣lecampane, and Compound Opiates. Canon XXXI. THe Living Spirit is in∣stantly extinguished, if it be deprived either of Motion; or of Refrigeration; Or of Aliment. The Explication. NAmely, these are those three, which before we called the Porches of Death; And they are the Proper and Immediate Passiōs of the Spi∣rit. For all the Organs of the principall parts, serve hereun∣to; That these three Offices be performed; and againe, all destruction of the Organs,
which is Deadly, brings the Matter to this point, that one or more of these three faile. Therefore, all other Things are the divers Wayes to Death, but they end in these three. Now the Whole Fabricke of the Parts, is the Organ of the Spirit; As the Spirit is the  of the Reasonable Soule; which is Incorporeous and Di∣vine. Canon XXXII. FLame is a Momentany Substance; Aire a Fix∣ed; The Living Spirit, in Creatures, is of a Middle Na∣ture.
The Explication. THis Matter stands in need both of an higher Indaga∣tion, and of a longer Explica∣tion, than is pertinent to the present Inquisition. Meane while, we must know this; That Flame is almost every Moment generated and extin∣guished; so that it is continu∣ed onely by succession:  Aire is a Fixed Body, and is not Dissolved; For though Aire begets new Aire, out of watry Moisture, yet notwith∣standing the old Aire still re∣maines; whence commeth that Super-Oneration of the Aire, where of we have spo∣ken, in the Title, De Vent is: But Spirit is participant of both Natures; both of Flame
and Aire; Even as the Nou∣rishments thereof are; As∣well Oyle, which is Homoge∣neous to Flame; As Water, which is Homogeneous to Aire: For the Spirit is not , either of Oyly alone, or of Watry alone, but of both together; And though Aire doth not agree well with Flame, nor Oyle with Water; yet in a mixt Body they agree well enough. Also, the Spirit hath from the Aire, his Easie and Delicate Impressi∣ons, and yeeldings; And from the Flame, his Noble and Potent Motions and Activities. In like manner, the Duration of Spirit, is a Mixed Thing; Being neither so Momentany, as that of Flame; Nor so Fixed, as that of Aire. And so much the ra∣ther
it followeth not the Condition of Flame; For that Flame it selfe is extinguished by Accident; Namely, by Contraries, and Enemies en∣vironing it; But Spirit is not subject to the like Conditi∣ons and Necessities. Now the Spirit is repaired, from the Lively and Floride Bloud of the small Arteries, which are inserted into the Braine; But this Reparation is done by a peculiar Manner, of which we speake not now. FINIS.
