12857.4 99851547 16825
THE New Prophetical King of BARBARY. OR The last newes from thence in a Letter vvritten of late from a Merchant there, to a Gentl. not long since imployed into that coun∣trie from his Maiestie. Containing some strange particulars, of this newe Saintish Kings proceedings: and how hee hath ouerthrowne Mulley Sidan twice in battell, as hath been very credi∣bly related from such as were eye-witnesses. Imprinted at London for Arthur Ionson. 1613.
An Aduertisement to the READER. HAuing receiued this Letter following out of Barbary, from an honest Eng∣lish Merchant, who hath long time so∣iourned there, very religious, wise and discreet, and so knowne among the Merchants: with whom also my selfe conuer∣sed many moneths, during my abode in that coun∣trie; and therafter shewing it as a matter of newes to some friends, I was at length importuned to make it common, in respect of the nouelty: est natura hominis nouitatis auida; and (as the Prouerbe is) Africa semper aliquid apportat noui. There∣by to satisfie, if not all (which) was wont to bee the Poets taske: Populo vt placerent quas fecisset fa∣bulas); yet at least wise those, who haue nought else to doe,Act. 17. 21 (like those Athenians in the Acts) but ei∣ther to tel or heare some newes: Howbeit, I hope, it may serue to some good vse also for vs Christians of these last daies,Forty yeers (saith this new sain∣tish king or Prophet of his) & then Christ must come to iudgement as in the letter. vpon whom the ends of the world are come: to see how busily the Diuell ac∣teth his last part, now in this last age of the world, & playeth his prize, for that he knoweth he hath but a short time, 40. yeers by his own calculation, pronoun∣cing before hand his owne condemnation. For the Lord hath so done his marueilous workes that they ought to be had in remembrance: And so
ought the deuils workes too, though in an other kind, & a Latere (as I may say) for he is the Ape & imitator of God (transforming himselfe into an Angel of light) neither can he doe any thing of himselfe, but by Gods permission as he hath power, commission and authority from him. And therein also many times he plaieth the Mountibank, obtru∣ding for true and effectual workings (as the A∣postle tearmeth them) many false and feigned de∣lusions. And whether true or false, his end is still to deceiue, and vent his lying arts, doctrines of deuils; and therefore in scripture worthily stiled the father of lies: and his miracles, which hee worketh for confirmation thereof, lying wonders. And by these his sleighty conueiances, sometimes winding heere, sometimes there, hath this subtle serpent gon about frō time to time, compassing the earth, to and fro, and walking in it to deceiue the world. And not onely the world (I meane the chil∣dren of disobedience and misbeleefe) but if it were possible euen the very elect.Mat. 24. 24 And such must bee (or rather is) the comming of Antichrist in this last age of the world whereof we haue beene so long since forewarned: (little children it is the last time &c.)Ioh. 2. 18. Whose comming (as the Apostle describeth it) is by the effectuall working of Sa∣than with all power and signes and lying won∣ders &c.1. Thess. 2. 9 And therefore God shall send them strong delusions that they should beleeue lies: that all they might bee damned which beleeue not the truth &c. O the miserable estate of al mis∣beleeuers,
whom the diuel hath thus blinded to their vtter condemnation, which sleepeth not. And such is the state and condition of these miserable Moores giuen ouer, beyond measure, to these idle & superstitious vanities (so Dauid calleth them) I hate all them that hold of superstitious vani∣ties) blind prophesies dreams, naecromancie and such like, wherein these Saints professe themselues, and hold the people in such awe for feare of their curses (which many times fall out accordingly: (the diuell working together) as if they were Popes, such is their soueraignety. As by this example yee may see, one of these fanaticall Saints now become a King. Scilicet his Babylon dextris: euen by these and such like arts, did that spirituall Babylon, at the first that great Whore spoken of in the Reue∣lation, Reue. 17. 1 that man of sinne,2. Thes. 2.  the sonne:of perdi∣tion, now sitting as God in the Temple of God, and shewing himselfe that he is God) vnder the like pretence come to the height of his supremacie, and not onely making himselfe a King, but insulting euen ouer Kings and Emperors: not caring (as the Prouerb is) neither for King nor Keiser, but exal∣ting himselfe against God, and all that is called God: that is to say Kings and Princes. Be wise now therfore ye Kings, whether Christian or Heathen, the vse is generall to all, beware of these Saints for all their hypocriticall shewe of Holinesse. Saints in profession but Diuels in practise. His Holi∣nesse catexochen; euen that holy one of Rome, (for so the word Saint signifieth: a Holy one)
nam si hic mali est quidquam (I say no more) they are capital enemies to the thrones of Kings. In∣stance this Saint who (forsooth) vnder a colour of Holinesse, and simplicity, armed with most strong delusions, euen from the Deuill himselfe; yee see what wonders he hath wrought against Mully Si∣dan, yea and what greater hee promiseth: operae pretium est audire. But when that bridge appeareth in the mouth of the Straights, as he prophesieth, and he with all his troupes ariue in the Popes Dominions (the Pope and he in the Lists together) then we shal see whe∣ther deuil is the stronger. The Lord preserue his peo∣ple from their deuillish delusions. And so after this long Preface (too long I must needs confesse for so short a discourse, but that I could not wel cut it shorter) I referre it to the censure of the wise to make vse of: beeing the chiefe and maine motiue, with the aduise and approbation of some godly Per∣sons, Preachers and others, why I haue published it. Which (if I finde acceptable) I may (perhaps) bee en∣couraged to reuise some papers of my owne, all this while throwne aside, as touching the affaires and state of that country, falling within the compasse of my daily obseruation, during that my imployment: with other accounts of my time not altogether idlie spent there, hauing now but too good a leasure (since the losse of so hopefull a Maister) for such a purpose, God send vs an other comforter. And so once more farewel gentle Reader. I. H.
Laus Deo in Saphia, the 9. of September. 1612. GOod Sir, in most hearty manner I commend mee vnto you, with desire of your good health and all other content to your hearts desire, vvhich the Lord graunt vnto you A∣men. Since my last vnto you, here is great al∣teration in this gouernment, as I account you haue vnderstood before now▪ And be∣cause Master N. and Master F. haue beene here, and heard, and seene what hath pas∣sed, I do referre the discourse to confe∣rence: For I assure my selfe they will visite you. Yet I will make bolde to trouble you,
to aduise of some perticulers as followeth. The tenth day of May was the battaile betwene Mulley Sidan, and our new King Mulley Om Hamet ben Abdela; not farre from Marocus betwixt the mountaines, and the City, both sides very strong: Yet in mans iudgement Mulley Sidan of most force in horse and foote, and three and thirty peeces of good field ordnance. The other no ordnance, and a few peece∣men: his chiefest force Larbies of Sahara, a place distant hence twenty daies iour∣ney. These armed with Launces, demy Laun∣ces and Azagies,Larbies are the country people dwelling in tents. Brebers those that inhabite the moun∣taines Aagies are a kind of darts. and many Larbies that came in to him, by the way as he came, some hee forced, some voluntary. And at the day of battaile his people beganne to bee dismaied, perceiuing Mulley Sidan, was very strong. But hee encouraged them, saying, as they had found that come to passe which formerly hee told them, so now they should see the like, and bid them not feare his ordnance, for onely three peeces should goe off, and doe no harme: the rest should take fire, but not shoote a bullet, and hee would bee formost, and goe in the face of the ord∣nance, and finding his wordes true,
then at his commaund to fall vppon his e∣nemies So hauing satisfied his people with these perswasions sent spies to know where Mul∣ley Sydans ordnance lay, and so came right before it, with all his troopes. And comming within daunger, at Mulley Si∣dans commaund, they gaue fire, hauing both Moores and Christians that knew how to mannage his ordnance. So three peeces went off, and did no hurt. But the bullets hard sing in the ayre a great height, and the rest of the ord∣nance tooke fire, and burnt out the pow∣der, but shot no bullet that remained in, so comming nearer, the Musketiers plaied vpon them, with foure thousand shot, yet hurt no man. So then they came on, and Mulley Si∣dans people gaue way and fled. They pursued them, and slue Mulley Abdela ben Hammet, Alkaide Hammet, Benzebere, and many moe Alkaides, and betweene foure and fiue thousand people. So put his people into Marocus, and lay himselfe in the field. Hee hath not entered into Marocus, neither purposeth till he haue destroied his enemies, and put peace in his country. So
Mulley Sidan fled & came down to Saphia,Hackam is a chiefe officer in a Citty. with his Hackam, Abdela Kather, Abdela Sadocke and the Iew Benwash, and a few o∣thers (besides his mother and women, and luggedge) hee made account to gather a head againe, and to giue a new battaile. But in vaine the Larbies made a faire shew and came in to him, and recei∣ued some mony, cloth, and linnens from him, and so would haue betrayed him. Whereupon he hauing some of his bro∣ther Mulley Shecks children with him, (to make frendship with his brother) sent him his children, and wrote to him very kind∣ly, So betwene them I accountis peace. So staied heere so long as he durst: for that Mulley Om Hammet persued him. Whereby hee was forced to fraight a ship of Marcelleis heere in port, with a French Ambassador, who came to him vpon bus∣sines out of France, and a Fleming that was in the roade: and tooke his Trea∣sure and luggage, some Women and Children, some Alaids and Seruants, and Benwash and his followers, and went for Santa Cruz and there Landed in Sus: and from thence to Tarradante, and there since remained, what force he hath or of his
proceeding wee here know not the certain∣tie. Some fewe dayes after his departure, came our new King into these parts, halfe a dayes iourney from Saphia, and all the Larbies came in to him & submitted them∣selues, and he receiueth all into fauor, par∣doning what passed: For hee sayth, hee comes to make peace, and is sent from God, because of the euill gouernment of Mulley Hammets sonnes the Xeriffes;Kinred of Mahomet which they challenge. and to stablish their Prophets religion, that was decaied, and to fight against the Christi∣ans, and recouer those parts of Christen∣dome the king of Spaine holds from them: as Granada, Andaluzia, &c▪ and tels his people they shall yet see great wonders come to passe, where they shall acknow∣ledge he is sent of God; he promiseth them Spaine, Italy, and France: and hauing put peace in these countries, there must now appeare a Bridge in the mouth of the straights, which hath been in former time, (and so recorded in their writings) and sunk in the sea. Now in his time it must appeare to carrie ouer the Moores: and hauing gayned these countries; he must raigne for∣ty yeeres, and then must com Christ, whom they call Sidie Nicer: and he must surren∣der
all to him; for he must iudge the world and then all must end. But for England, Flanders, or other parts they haue not to doe, they will haue friendship with vs, and desire trade and traffique with vs in loue and friendship, and would haue his myracles and acts made knowne abroade the world: I was in his Almahalla at first fowre dayes,Or Camp. and spake with him, and saw his behauiour, and found him very humble and courteous, with ma∣ny good speeches; and pittying the iniu∣ries all the Christians haue by the ill go∣uernment of his Predecessors, or Vsurpers as he counted them. A man of some thirty six yeers, very ciuill, very plaine in habit, a course tucke vpon his head of died callico,Or turban A long loose gar∣ment muh like an Irish mantle. a holland Shirt, an Alheick of lile gro∣gram, a plain sword by his side, hanged with a plaine leather thong: a man of great wis∣dome and learning, as none like amongst them, and a good Astrologer, a great Po∣lititian. And hath drawne vnto him Alkai∣de Azus, of whom you haue heard; the prin∣cipall Councellor of the land, Shecke Zm∣be, Shecke Glowie, and many other Saints and principall men: and since his com∣ming maried the Widow of Mulley Buffer∣ris. And now diuers libel in Larby verse a∣gainst
Mulley Sidan and his proceedings, and of further misery must come vnto him, till he and his race be consumed. And for his gouernment at Morocus placed his Hackam to see euery one haue peace, and a very honest man for iustic: So Morocus is in peace and quietnes; and amongst the Larbies he demands his due, either corne, horse, cattell, or money; and tels them he coms to put peace amongst them; neither to rob thē, nor yet to lose his right; not to giue them pay, but force them to serue him, as need requireth, if they yeelded not to such conditions, his sword should force them: he came amongst them as a guest, and was to be entertained by them, and not to giue them to gaine their fauour. By which spee∣ches, myracles past, and policy, hee hath made them all tremble; so he puts all to si∣lence: Som cōtent themselues, of the grea∣test in former time, to heare and see, shew o∣bedience and say nothing: others change with the time, and haue great imploiments, and professe loialty to him, and renounce their old Master; what the euent may be I know not: for, we haue learned, the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, he tur∣neth them as riuers of waters which way hee pleaseth.
But hauing beene in his Almahalla, see∣ing the manner of it, his plainnesse and po∣licy, mixt with a shew of mercy and a kind of Saintish gouernment, I feare mee it will come to passe, according to the Fable in Aesop, when th Frogs desired a King, a blocke was throwne downe into the water, which dash at the first made them feare him, but lying still they grew familiar, and sunned themselues vpon him, and grew in dislike; so had the Storke: But it were to be wished they would now content them∣selues, when peace and iustice is offered. If he doe continue it is like to be with trou∣ble and bloud-shed; for already the people begin to disobey, and the Shabenites, Mul∣ley SidansOr Kin∣red. Cast, are got to the Mountaines neare Marocus, and haue procured some of thoseMountai∣ners. Brebers (as wee tearme them) to ioine with them; and one Mulley Om Ham∣met Bolassom, and these haue robbed to the gate of Marocus; wherupon this King sent forces to expell them, but found them so strong that they durst not meddle with them: whereupon was forced to rehale his Almahalla some fifteen dayes since, and is gone towards the Mountaines, where at this present hee is neere frugo: and what hath passed since we know not, only expect
euery howre to heare some good newes that he may preuaile; but here it is greatly feared, because many of his owne people be depar∣ted from him: and those Larbies he caried a∣long with him out of these parts, run away and returned, so if he lose, the other bee the friends of Mulley Sidan, and he is expected a∣gaine: But the beginning and rising of this king and his procedings are very strange. He is a great saint and learned in the lawe, and was sought vnto by many the principallest of the land for his blessings, and fauour, accor∣ding to their superstition; he findes it in an∣cient books writ of him by way of prophecy, that such a man of that place named Messa (whence he is) by name Mulley Om Hamet be Abdela, should bee sent at this time, to put peace in the country, and to reuiue their law, and put out the race of Mulley Sidan, and name of Xeriffes: and so to raigne forty yeers till Christ come to iudgement: his begin∣ning must be, hee must strike vp a drum hee should finde in that Zow  Missa, and then should repaire vnto him people, to make him king. The manner of his proceedings, and what encounters hee should haue, and what he found written, all the Talbies and learned men now do confesse to find the same writ∣ten in their bookes. At his beginning he put forth only one tent and a kitchen: so resorted
to him the Shrokies, a saintish people in their lawe, but otherwise in behauiour very Sauages. These without pay came to him, to the number of 150. or 200. at most; and with their helpe hee brake Alhadge▪ Lemiere, and his forces, seruants of Mulley Sidan, beeing 5000. strong; so more of the sayd Shrokies came to him, to the number of 5000. & with them and such people as ioined with him in the way, he ouerthrew Mulley Sidans forces thrise before the battell. And so came to some strong places in the Mountaines, neuer brought to subiection in the time of Mulley Sidan, nor his father: Those with-stood him, but hee ouercame them and made them pay him what he de∣manded, serue and obey him; so forced the principallest Shecks in the countrie to come to him. After this marched towards Moro∣cus, and by the way was to pass a riuer; and the daie before he warned his people, in pas∣sing such a riuer no man to take vp water in their hands to drinke, if he did he would die. After comming to the riuer weary and hot, many not remembred, or not regarded his words, but tooke vp water in their hands, drunk, and anon after dyed, the rest all esca∣ped, which strooke a feare into them to breake his command, and a perswasion that hee is more then a man: For they say hee
is their Fatamie, that is, a Sauiour. Next in comming to Morocus, diuers great Saints and Sheckes resorted together, and would goe to visite him, that they might see what hee was, and vnderstand whether that which passed was true or not. So com∣ming, after salutations, hee told them they came to enquire and see what newes, and what wonders hee did, and so meant to de∣part. Now therefore, being men of account and Talbies hee would satisfie them, that they might satisfie others. So appointed them a time to come againe, and to bring such bookes, hee nominated, with them; so they did: Then he willed them to turne to such places, and reade what they found written of him; so they did. To wit, both his name, his beginning, and course he was to take, and withall found written sea∣uen speciall markes, or signes, hee must haue vppon his bodie, a wart aboue his right eie, a blacke tooth before, a bunch of hayre growing betweene his shoulders, a signe of a ring in the palme of his right hand, the signe of a spurre vpon the out∣side of his right legge; the rest I remember not. But these and the rest hee shewed them which seeing they did honor him and swore
to him to serue him, and to liue and die with him, or in his cause. Next comming to a place named Dets in the mountains very strong, where much peo∣ple were gathered together against him so that some of his owne people began to faint and be afraied: hee bad them feare nothing for that before to morrow they should see there was more with him then against him: so that night, he cōmanded to take vp his Al∣mahalla & march towards that place Dets: so they did, and all night long to the think∣ing of al his people, there marched another Almahalla greater then theirs, and went be∣fore them: and comming to the place Dets vannished away, and at sight of it his ene∣mies fled, leaft the place and goods, al to the spoile, so comming thither had the spoile of all without fighting. This our country man M. W. affermeth with diuers others vpon solemne oth to haue seene. At his being in these parts, my selfe with others went to wel∣come him: he entertained vs very kindly, & told vs he would shew the English what fa∣uour he could, and permit them free trade, willing vs to take knowledge that he was sent by Gods appointment to releeue the oppres∣sed as wel Moores and strangers, as Christi∣ans, and al sorts, and what we had seene and heard to aduertise, saying wee should see yet
more strange matters come to passe, then what had passed. His meaning as we gather is, the conquering of Spaine, France and Ita∣ly; with which oppinion hee possesseth the foolish and credulous Moores. Now hauing bin tedious to trouble you with such news as the time affoords (not al but part as it comes into my memory) I pray you take it in good part: the censure hereof I leaue to your wis∣dome and confideration. For my owne part I am perswaded, they bee delusions of the diuell done by witch-craft, & permitted by the Lord, to seduce them to further error, God deliuer vs Christians well from among them, and grant vs the vse, and true know∣ledge of his holy word preached in Christi∣an countries which heere wee want, and the vse and comfort of his holy Sacraments to the sealing vp of our faith in Christ Iesus Amen. I am sorry I haue nothing for remem∣brance, to present vnto you, but God willing when the time betters I will not bee forget∣full: in the meane time, I pray you accept of these few lines in good part. So resting euer at your seruice, I commit you to Gods holy tuition who blesse you in this world with health and content, and in the world to come with eternall ioy, Amen. Your louing friend to com∣mand. R. S.
Another letter receiued from another friend, at the same time dated the tenth of September. GOod Sir pardon me in that at my going away, I came not to take my leaue of you▪ the ship went downe two daies sooner than I made account off. But for all your courtesies alwaies towards mee, I heartily thanke you and remaine your debter &c. For the state of this country, and of the wars of this new King, I know Master S. hath en∣larged you more than I can a great deale. But for all this, and the troubles Mulley Sidan hath had, it is thought he will be king again, and that in short time: staying but for a new Moone to giue battaile. This Saint or king told his Shrokies which came with him at first, his comming was to take Mazagant, Sute and Tanger, not to sight against the Moores vnlesse they would resist, and not let him take the Christian townes. Hee said a∣gaine that Mulley Sidan and his followers were Christians, one who robbed all men without reason, killed and slue many men vpon no occasions, but in his angry minde. And withall said hee dranke wine, and eate oppium, therefore said it could not bee but
that hee was an Vnrony, which amongst them they hold to bee an vniust, or vngodly man as they say wee Christians are. His Shrokies two thousand fiue hundreth al∣most all footmen, with no peeces, but halfe Launces: that was their weapons, bare∣headed men. Neuer in their liues they weare shert, or cloth to their backes, but an Alheik. Which Shrokies haue left this king, and are all gonne for their country. This kings for∣ces are of Larbies, which are horsemen: e∣uery day they flee from him more and more. As Alkaid Syde, whom you know Alkaid of this place, is come from him with sixe hun∣dreth horse. So that very shortly Mulley Si∣dan is expected to come heare againe. And thus with my commendations to your good selfe, and all our good friends I commit you to the Almighty. Yours assured to command, G. B.
SInce the writing (and almost printing) of these two letters, there is nevves come (and that for certaine as I am giuen to vn∣derstand) that Mulley Sidan is defeated a∣gaine, and hath lost this last battaile: so the Saint victorious still. What the euent of all these troubles may bee it is hard to gesse. This country hauing beene so long time (e∣uer since the death of olde Mulley Hamet) so vnsetled, and subiect to so manifold altera∣tions: so many yeeres, almost, so many alte∣rations or gouernment: The crowne impe∣riall tossed to and fro, from one to another, as it were a tennis ball rather then a diadem. Non vnquam tulit documenta,Seneca. fors maior quam fragili loco starent super: And that may serue for another vse: a small vse of all, either that hath passed, or may hereafter fall out: whereof if any thing else come to my hands, worthy obseruation, I shall not with∣hold it, to make the rest answerable to the Preface. FINIS.
