13427 S104084 99839824 4279
THREE SERMONS: Aremediè for Securitie. The ruine of Gods Enemies. The Worldlings Downfall. By SAMUEL HIERON. 2. Pet. 1.13. I thinke it meete as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stirre you vp by putting you in remembrance. PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEGGE. Printer to the Vniversitie of Cambridge. 1609. And are to be sold by SAMUEL MACHA in  Churchyard at the signe of the Bulls head.
A Remedie for Securitie. IAMES 4.9. Let your Laughter be turned into mourning, and your Ioy into heauines. The occasion of choosing this Text.IT was a good piece of pollicie which the King of Aram commanded his two and thirtie captaines when they were to goe out to battell against Israel: Fight (saide he) neither with small nor great, saue onely against the King ofL. King. 22.31. Israel. He knew, that the King beeing once slaine, the whole armie would the sooner be discomfited. The like pollicie, I thought very fitting for me to obserue at this time. Many and great are the sinnes of this generation, and (as it was said of Sodom) the crie of them is come vp before theGen. 18.21. Lord: But there is one grand-sinne, vpon which all the rest haue their dependance, which, if we whose office it is to fight the good fight of1. Tim. 6.12. faith, might be so happie as to subdue, doubtlesse we should see Sathan fall downe from heauen like lightningLuk. 10.18., and many come to amendment of life out of his snare, which are (now) taken of him at his will2. Tim. 2.26.. And this is the sinne of Securitie. Against this I haue thought good to bend my whole force at this time, and for that ende, I haue out of this brooke of S. Iames his Epistle, chosen this clause, as a smooth stone, by which I may (if the Lord shall please so to blesse my le∣uelling) smite this Goliath in the forehead, and make it to fall groneling to the earth1. Sam. 17.40.49. which euery where, and in e∣uery
place doth (like that monster of the Philistims) so intolerably blaspheme the liuing God. This is my gene∣rall drift, and this is also (as I may so call it) the Shaft, which I haue chosen out of the Lords quiuer for this purpose. The sion of .The words may be deuided into two parts: The first is, a Restraint from something which is euill; Laughter and Ioy. The second is, a perswasion to a Good contrarie thereunto, Mourning and Heauines. Of both these in course. In handling the first part,The 1. Part. it must first be enquired what Laughter it is, and what Ioy, against which S. Iames setteth himselfe in this place.What Laughtr & Ioy S. Iaes  eth. Laughter, is one of those endowments with which God furnished the Nature of man at his first creation, and therefore cannot be simply euill. Againe it is saide, that AbrahamGe 17.17. laughed when God promised him a sonne, which generally is interpre∣ted to be that Reioycing of his in the Day of Christ, which our Sauiour himselfe reporteth of himIh. 8.56. for which cause Izhak had his name giuen him by Gods appoint∣mentGen. 17.19. as a memoriall thereof, it beeing as much to say in English as Laughter. When the Lord brought againe the captiuitie of Zion (said the thankefull people after the re∣turne frō Babylon) then was our mouth filled with Laugh∣terPsal. 126.1.2.. The same may be also saide of Ioy. For among the Fruits of the Spirit, Ioy is numbredGal. 5.22., and it is a blessing promised, that the voice of Ioy shall be in the Tabernacles of the RighteousPsal. 118.15.. Therefore to auoide all ambiguitie of tearmes, and to know precisely and distinctly, what it is which S. Iames here disswades, we must thus distinguish. There is a twofold Ioy,A twfld Ioy. A Holy Ioy. or Laughter mentioned in Scrip∣ture: The one a Holy Ioy; The other a Hellish Ioy. The Holy ioy hath for the author of it, the Spirit of God; therefore it is called Ioy in the holy GhostRo. 14.17.: the matter of it, is the light of Gods countenancePsal. 4.6.7. the assurance of his grace in Christ, the feeling ones selfe to be clothed with the garments of saluationIsa. 61.10. the measure of it such that it
is vnspeakable1. Pt. 18.; the perpetuitie such, that no man can take it from those that haue inIoh. 16.22.: None can conceiue it but he which feeleth it, the stranger shall not meddle with it, saith SalomonProu. 14.10.. The fruits of it, are, Ioy in the wordIer. 15.16.; Ioy in the house of GodPsal. 122 1.; Ioy in the liberty and free Preaching of the GospelPhil. 1.18.; Delight in the companie of Gods SaintsPsal 16.3., Ioy in AfflictionsRom. 5.3. Ioy in the Conuersion of othersAct. 11.18.: Base account of the worldPhil. 3.8.. This is a Holy Ioy; neither is it the purpose of the Apostle to restraine this Ioy, but to enforce it rather: for indeede the Mour∣ning which he perswades, makes way for this Ioy. Now the other Ioy is a Hellish Ioy,A Hellish Ioy. the other Laughter is de∣uillish. Salomon calleth them all Fooles whose hearts are enueigled with itEccle. 7.6.. Peter tearmeth them bruit beasts lead with sensualitie2. Pet 2.12.. This Ioy is either in wicked things, or els in things (in their owne nature tolerable) after a wicked manner. First, it is in wicked things. It is a pastime to fooles to do wickedlyProu. 14.23.. It is a Ioy to drunkards to be at it earely, and to sit till they be inflamedIs. 5 11. The Twi∣light is welcome to the AdultererIob. 24.15.. The griping Nim∣rods of the world, reioyce in their taking men vpon ad∣uantages, they dance vpon the thresholds of those which are fallen into their hands proudlyZeph. 1.9., & they spoile the poor when they haue drawne him to their netPsal. 10.9.. Ahab is soone out of his sullen humor, when news is come that Naboth is dead1. King. 21.16.. The enuious and malitious person is mooued to Ioy at the destruction of him whom he hatesIob 31.29.. The profane ones make themselues merry with the disgrace of those which runne not with them to the same excesse. Ishmael giereth at IsaacGen 21.9., and the Philistims must haue Samson in to make them pastimeId. 16.25.. Holy Iob was as a tabret to the godlesse onesIob. 17.6., and the Drunkards made songs vpon Dauidsal. 69.12.. Thus this ioy is in euill things. Or els (secondly) it is in allowable things after an vngodly manner. Ho∣nour, Wealth, Prosperitie, Beautie, a Table richly deckt, an ouerflowing cup, a faire house, &c. these things in themselues are not Euill, yet there is a Ioy in these of
which I may say as Paul did of the Corinthians Reioy∣cing, that it it is not good1. Cor. 5.6.: As, namely when men trust in them, and boast of themPsal. 49.6., and set their hearts thereonPsal. 62.10.. Thus that vain-glorious Haman, hauing crept into some grace at Court, when he comes home, must needes send and call for his friends, to tell of the glorie of his Riches, and of all the things wherein the King had promoted himEst. 5 10.11.. Thus Nebuchadnezzar walketh in his Royall palace, and looking about him, saith, Is not this great Babel which I haueDan. 4 27. built? Thus the proud women in the Prophets time, walked with stretched out necksIsa. 3.16., priding them∣selues in their beautie. Thus the Epicures and belly-gods in Amos his daies, ate the lambes of the flocke, and calues out of the stall, and dranke wine in bowlesAmo. 6.4.6.. Thus the Mer∣chants of Tyre, which was the Marte of the people for many YlesEzeck. 27 3., did lift vp their hearts because of their Ri∣chesEzeck. 28.5.. Here is Ioy in things not Euill, but yet after a manner which is not good. Now the fruits and effects of this Ioy are thus registred in Scripture: Deepe securi∣tie; They knew nothing (saith Christ, of the reioycing people in the daies of Noe) till the flood cameMatth. 24.39.: Secret soothing and flattering of the HeartDeut. 29.19.: Confident expe∣ctation of nothing but Quietnes (I shall neuer be moo∣uedPsal. 10.6.:) Carelesnes to inquire after matters of religiō, (The wicked is so proud that he seeketh notVer. 4.: Putting farre off the euill dayAm. 6.3., The vision is for many daies to comeEzec. 12.27.. Into∣lerable Pride ioyned with contempt of others, (Pride is as a chaine vnto themPsal. 73.6.: No respect to the necessities of Gods children, (No man is sorie for the affliction of Io∣sephAm. 6.6.:) A mocking of Gods Messengers2. Chr. 36.16.: A desperate re∣solution to take pleasure while it is to be had, and not to feare the day of vengeance, (Let vs eate and drinke, to morrow we shall die1. Cor. 15.32..) Thus haue I laboured to let you see out of the Scripture, what Laughter and what Ioy it is which Iames intendeth here. In a word, thus: It is a fleshly Ioy, delighting in things simply Euill, or els in the good blessings of God, after a grosse and sensuall sort, by
which the heart is so setted vp, and so lulled sleepe, that it makes men runne on in a kind of secure course, with∣out any awe of Gods maiestie, or constant care to auoide the wrath which is to come. This is the short of it: and, the Necessitie of seeking to suppresse this Ioy, is the Do∣ctrine commended vnto vs in this place. Reasons to shew the equitie of this Doctrine,The substance of the doctrine of the 1. part. & the Reasons to confirme it. and by which to enforce it vpon euery of our soules, may be these. 1. It is directly contrarie to that which the spirit of God perswades all Christians vnto. It is their dutie to hate euillPsal. 97.10., therefore not to delight in it: to weepe for it (as we shall see anon) therefore not to laugh at the com∣mitting it. They are commanded to set their affections vpon the things aboueCol. 3.2., and therfore not to ensnare their hearts with these baser ioyes: They are taught to seeke after Durable richesProu. 8.18., therefore not to dote vpon fading wealth: after a house not made with hands, but eternall in the heauens2. Cor. 5.1. Heb. 13.14., and therefore not to be bewitched with the conueniencie of earthly dwellings: after Sitting at table in the kingdome of GodLuk. 13.2., and therefore not to reioyce in earthly belly-cheare: after the Honour which shall be to the saintsPsal. 149 9., and therefore not to be puffed vp with worldly pompe: to long for the Congregation of the first borne, and the spirits of iust and prfit menHeb. 12.23., and therefore not to place contentment in carnall fellowship. This is then one reason: This Ioy is directly contrarie to the maine streame of Christianitie. It is a reason of Pauls in some things. This becommeth SaintsEphe. 5.3., This becommeth the GospelPhil. 1.27., therefore it must be: The reason is the same in this: This becommeth not Saints: This becommeth not the Gospel, therefore it must not be. 2. This kind of reioycing, is neuer without the mix∣ture of some secret bitternes. Euen in Laughter the heart is sorrowfullProu. 14.13.. And there is a double reason for it. 1. Car∣nall men seldome haue their desire in euery particular, and the want of that which is desired breeds a vexation
greater by degrees then the contentment in the things enioyed. Take Haman for an example: He went from court with a glad heart, and at home vanted of his ho∣nour, yet (saith he) All this doth not auaile me, as long as I see Mordecai the Iewe sitting in the Kings gater.. 1. He was so haunted with a spirit of Emulation against Mor∣decai, that it did distast all that sweetnes which he con∣ceiued in his honour. And still, it is (ordinarily) so in the prouidence of God, that worldly men haue in their pros∣perities something or other comes athwart them, which galleth them as much, as the accomplishment of their desires in other things may seeme to content them. 2. Inward terrours (as furies) do alwaies follow those, who doe willingly cherish in their bosomes, and practise in their liues any knowne corruption. A sound of feare is in their earesIob. 15.21., and it is their iudgement to haue trem∣bling heartsDeut. 28.6.. Well may they set a face vpon the mat∣ter, and feast and drinke away their cares, yet they can haue no true inward quiet. For there is no peace to the wicked, saith GodIsa. 57.21.. So then this is the second reason: It is no solide, but a meerely superficiall Ioy, and therefore it is an idle thing to entertaine it. 3. It is a reioycing of no continuance. The reioycing of the wicked is short, and the ioy of Hypocrites is but a momentIob. 20.5.. Salomon likeneth it to a fire of Thornes vnder a potEccle. 7.8., which crackleth and blazeth awhile, but sudden∣ly dieth. This kind of Ioy is truly called short in two res∣pects. 1. Because the things themselues reioyced in, are so subiect to hazard. Honour a blast: Beautie a perishing flower: Wealth hath wings like an egleProu. 23 5., and is sudenly gone:Non amo illam fortunam ru∣dentibus aptam. Tusc. Qu. and as the heathen said of the wealth of Marchants that it hangeth vpon Ropes, so it may be said of all the contentments of the world, they doe not hang vpon a three-fold cord, which (as the saying is) cannot be easily brokenEccle. 4.12., but vpon a single twine, which is snapt in sun∣der with a twitch: And they which looke highest and beare the greatest port, amp; most study the perpetuating of
their fortunes, are but in the state of Counters, which now stand for pounds, and forthwith go but for a far∣thing. 2. Because life it selfe, in which all these things are enioyed, is but short; Our dies are more swift then a post, they passe with the most swift ships, and as the Egle which flieth to the prayIob.  25 26.: Now carnall men in their reioy∣cing haue but an estate for tearme of life at the vtmost: For, when a wicked man dieth his hope perishethPo. 11.7., and what hope hath an hypocrite if God take away his soule:Ib 27 8. so then, if this Laughter be but momentanie, if this ioy be but for a seasonHeb 11.2. P p act & vi∣de, sed d vid que pla¦cetqe non amen in uen — Oui d Nar∣cso.; surely the counsell of Iames adui∣sing vs to reiect it, is not vaine: For what wise man will set his heart vpon that, which (like a shadowe in the wa∣ter) he may see and affect and catch after, but can neuer lay hold on. 4. The conclusion of this Ioy is fearefull. The end of it is heauinesProu. 14.13., and Woe be to you which now laugh, for you shall waile and weepeLuk. 6.25.. If you aske what Heauines: Heare what Abraham said to the rich man in hell: Thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, now therefore thou art tormentedLuk. 16.25.. Thus in the end, it bites like a ser∣pentProu. 23 3., and leades downe to the chambers of deathProu. 7 27.: Here is Ioabs Kisse attended vpon with a secret stab2. Sam. 20.10., & wher∣as the pleasures of sinne were but for a seasonHeb. 11.25., the woe which followeth will be perpetuall. The worme dieth not, the fire neuer goeth outMak. 9.44.: The breath of the Lord, like a riuer of brimstone doth kindle itn=t" Isa. 30.33.. This is the last reason but not of the least validitie. The wise mans Eies are in his head saith SalomonEccle. 2.14.. He looketh not onely vpon the present face of things, but considereth before what the issue will be. It is no good purchase, to procure an end∣les woe, for a little sliding shadow of contentment. Thus I haue laboured to fortifie S. Iames his counsell with foure effectuall reasons, that so we may haue no colour of reason to reiect it. This carnal ioy, if it be againtst the generall drift of Christianitie, if it haue not that fulnes
of contetment which it promiseth, if it be of no conti∣nuance, if it will certainely set in such a cloud, out of which will arise an eternall tempest neuer to be blowne ouer with any tract of time, how must not the counsell giuen be worthie to be accounted of, which aduiseth vs to ture our Laughter into another tune, and our secure Iy, into some sadder qualitie. I haue expoun∣ded and prooued the doctrine, now let me make vse. This doctrine well agreeth with the Times.The Vs. Nineueh was called a Reioycing CityL 2.15., this may truely be tearmed a Reioycing age; and like the people of Laish, we dwell carelesse, quiet, and sureI. 1 . in our owne opinion. Euery man sings a Requiem to his owne heart. God hath of his goodnesse blessed vs with peace, and peace (through our corruption) hath brought forth intolerable securitie. Re∣ligion is become nothing but a matter of Title, we haue a name (as was said of SardiR. .1.,) but all is little other then a very vizard of godlinesse. Are we not all generally without any feare of euill? Doth not euery man applaud himselfe in his course, and make himselfe beleeue that his fashion and carriage is as it ought to be? Doth not e∣uerie companie, carry the very face of carnall quietnesse, men vpholding and beating vp one another (like the stones in an Arch) in their carelesnesse? Examine our thoughts, consider our speeches, see into our houses, looke abroad vpon the current of the Times, and see whether pleasure and Epicurisme, and that mad mirth (which Salomon speakes ofccle. 2.2.) haue not engrossed the greatest part. I would it had but a weeke (which yet is a very vnreasonable disproportion) for one serious minute about matters of godlinesse. This is made to be the very Ende of all: And as it was a Lawe in Ahashuerosh his court (beeing giuen to pleasure and iollitie,) that no man might enter it, being cloathed with sackclothEst. 4.2., which is a mourners weede, so, nowe a dayes men cannot a∣bide that which may minde them any way to intermit
their carelesnesse: A discourse o conference of religion dasheth all, and seemeth alwaies as vnseasonable, as is the snowe in summerProu. 26.1.. A sermon of repentance is the very Burden of the Lord: either we be like FaelixAct. 24.26., not at lei∣sure to heare it, or we make iests with our mouthsBue 33 ., and as old Lot to his profane sonnes in Law, so we seeme to many as though we did mockeGen. 19.14.: say we what we will, you will say to your selues, we shal haue peaceDe. 2.19., the Euill shall not comeAm ... Thus we stop the Eare like the AdderPsal 58 4., and although the Lord ing many alarmes to awake vs fom the bed of securitie, yet we resolue (like the strum∣pet in Salomon) to take our sillPro 17.18., and determine (as those in Ieremies time) to do whatsoeuer thing goeh out of our owne mouthIer. 4.15.. This is the sickenesse of the times, a dis∣ease which hath spread it selfe ino euery place. I say as Christ did to the accuers of the Adulnesse, Let him that is cleere herein, cast the first stoneIob .. at the applicati∣on of this point. For albeit I knowe, some haue some better care then the multitude, yet I am sure, that the fiue wiser virgins, slumbred and slept while the bridgroome taried long, as well as the fiue foolishMat .2.: and therefore we shall not neede to shift off this doctrine from our selues to others, and to say, This is good for such or such, but we may say euery one to his owne soule, It is euen I to whom this belongeth. Wherefore seeing this is a matter which concernes all, I pray you let it be entertained by all: Let vs rouze vp our selues, let vs not crie with the sluggard, yet a little sleepe, a little slumberProu. 6.10., but let vs make hastPsal. 119.6. with Dauid, and let vs bind our selues by a holy vow to cast away this hardned, brutish, presuming carelesnesse, as it were a menstruous cloth, and to say vn∣to it, Get thee henceIsa. 30 32.: Otherwise vnlesse we doe euen striue against this bewitching euill out of hand, we shall euen cleane be hardened with the deceitfulnesse of sinneHeb.3.13., we shall freeze vpon our dregsZoph .1., and mooue the Lord to giue vs ouer with that fearefull doome, He that is filthie,
let him be filthieRe. 22.11.. And surely if God might please so to blesse my speech, as that you might be mooued by it to thinke seriously with your owne soules, how true it is in this, which Abner said to Ioab when the people fought one against another, namely, that it will be bitternesse in the latter ende., you would then say to me as Dauid did to Abigaile, Blessed be thy Counsell.. And so hoping that this first obseruation shall not vtterly fall to the ground without fruit, I come to the second, touching the contrary good which is perswaded. And this (indeede) is still the remarkeable method of the Scripture, first to perswade a desisting from Euill, and then to stirre vp to the practise of good. Cease to doe E∣uill, learne to doe wellIsa. .16.17.. Abhorre that which is Euill, cleaue to that which is good.Rom. 12.9. To break off an euill course, and so to stoppe, is but the one half of a Christians dutie: To leaue one bad fashion, and then to begin another, is but an exchange of sinne, and no repentance. The 2. part with the do∣ctrine thereof. What mourning & heauinesse i meant.Now the good commended here vnto vs is set downe by two names, Mourning and Heauines. In handling hereof it shall be our first inquirie to know what Mour∣ning and what Heauinesse it is, here ment. As I said of Ioy, so I must of Mourning, it must necessarily be distin∣guished, and that by the Apostles direction. There is a Worldly Mourning, and there is a Godly Mourning2. Cor. 7.10. A ofold mourning. 1. Wrldly mring.. The Worldly Mourning, is a griefe and passion of the heart for worldly things, or else for spirituall things in a world∣ly respect. Both the branches of this worldly sorrow are ordinarie and common. Euery naturall man hath these affections to be grieued for losses of goods, of honours, of friends, &c. with paines and anguishes of bodie: Many are affected with these things extraordinarily. Now al∣though these Touches are not simply euill (for it is a wic∣kednes to be without naturall affection2. . 3.3.,) yet the aime of S. Iames is not vnto them: There is another Branch of this Worldly Sorrow, the matter whereof is spirituall, but
the respects, carnall. Ahab was humbled1. King. 21.27. Esau weptGen. 27.38. Iudas was deepely touchedMatth. 27.3.. Here was Heauines, yea and the causes thereof were spirituall. Ahab for his op∣pression, Iudas for his trechery, Esau for the losse of the blessing: but the respects were not sutable. It was for the danger of Euil, and not for the Euill of Euill. Thus a man may be grieued, and yet neue be saued. This kind of sorrow may be as a needle to p icke and to pierce the heart, and to make way for that true griefe, but it is not properly that which is ment in this place. For this sorrow in it selfe, and in it owne nature, if there be no more in it then I haue said, causeth death2. Cor. 7.10.. Now the other Mour∣ning is a Godly Mourning, that is, a Mourning for sinne because it is sinne, a breach of Gods will,2. Godly mour∣ning. and an offence to his Maiestie. This is that very hing which S. Iames perswades, and it is the Mother of true repentance, euen of that Repentance which (as S. Paul speaketh) is not to be repented of. And of this I will endeauour to speake as ef∣fectually as I can. The ground of it is (as I haue said) the dishonour of God by sinne. Now sinne, that it may wound the more deepely, is to be considered of vs three waies.The matter of the mour ing here perswa∣ded. 1. As it is in our selues. 2. As it is in others. 3. As it discouereth it selfe in the Miseries which it brings vpon the Times. Of these three Respects I will treat seuerally. 1. Our owne sinnes.1. That our owne sinnes must be mourned for, I sup∣pose we will not denie. Repentance is of absolute neces∣sitie to saluation, (for Except ye repent, ye shall perish, saith our SauiourLuk. 13.3.;) and there can be no repentance without griefe: For, (as we haue heard out of Paul) it is Godly sorow which causeth repentance to saluation. Besides, the Scripture hath registred euen a whole catalogue of Mourners in this kind. Looke into i, you shall there see Dauid faintingPsal. 6.6., Hezekiah chattering like a craneIsa 38.14, Iob abhorring himselfe in dust and ashesIob. 32.., Manasseh humbling himselfe greatly2. Chro. 33.12., Ezra vpon his knees in heauinesEzra. 9.5., Dani∣el
sorowfully confessing his sinne, and seeking the Lord by prayer with fastingDa. 9.3 20., Ephraim (the whole bodie of a state) smiting vpon the thighIere. 31.19., Peter weeping bitterlyMath. 26.75., the father of the possessed child bewayling his vnbeleefeMark. 9.24., Marie Magdalene washing Christs feete with tearesLuk. 7.38. Paul crying out, O wretched man that I amRom 7 24.! Who would not wish to be one in this companie. If they mourned, and went to heauen through the vale of Teares, what are we that we should expect a calmer passage? And know we this for a certentie, that the comforts of the Gospel which are treasured vp in Christ, appertaine onely to such: not to them which are at ease in ZionAm. 6.7., but to them which mourn in ZionIsa. 61.3. The spirit of heauines goeth before the garment of gladnes; and there is no Reaping in Ioy, without sow∣ing in tearesPsal. 126.5.. 2. The sinne of others.The next consideration of sinne is, as it is in others: For euen the sinne of others must be a cause of sorrow to a Christian. Samuel mourned for Saul1. Sam. 15.35., Dauids eies gushed out with riuers of waters, because men kept not the lawPsal. 119.136.. Ezra rent his clothes, and plukt off the haire of his head and beard, when he heard of the peoples sinne, in mix∣ing the holy seede with the people of the landEzech. 9.2 3.; The soule of Ieremy wept in secret for the pride of the timesIer. 13.17.; Lot vexed his righteous soule in seeing and hearing the vn∣lawfull deeds of the Sodomites2. Pet. 2.8.: Pauls spirit was stirred to see the City of Athens subiect to IdolatrieAt. 17 16.: Christ mourned for the hardnes of mens heartsMark 3 5., and wept for the securitie of IerusalemLuk. 19.41.: Who can perswade himselfe to cary the like Christian heart, who doth not bring forth the like sorrowing fruite? Two reasons there are why the the sinnes of others should affect our soules. 1. Pietie to God. 2. Pitie to them. First, Pietie to God enforceth it. For what dutifull respect can he carrie to God, who can heare and see God to be dishonoured without any touch? It grieues a friend to heare the disgrace of his friend. The godly are called the Friends of GodIam 2.23. Ioh. 15.15. A poore
friendship it is, if the heart be not effected with a wrong done to his Maiestie. Secondly, Pitie to others requireth it. For whose bowels that hath in him any dramme of goodnes, would not yearne within him, whose heart would not melt, to see whole swarmes, and millions of people which will needes be damned? surely there can be no religion, where there wants this compassion. I haue read of Marcellus a Romane, that when as after a long siege, he entred by composition into that rich city of Sy∣racusa, the teares trickled downe hs cheekes, to see so famous a city & such a multitude of Inhabitants brought into captiuitie. See, what affections haue dwelt euen in the Heathen, begetting sorrow for the miseries euen of their enemies. A shame for a Christian to behold the daily ruine of a world of soules, number-les troupes to be led as captiues by the prince of darknesse, and not to bemone it. 3. The Cala∣mities of the Times.The third consideration of sinne is, as it discouereth it selfe in the miseries, which by the iustice of God it brings vpon the Times: which thing also must be taken to heart. Thus was Dauid mooued, when he saw multi∣tudes swept away with the Pestilence2. Sam. 24 17.. Ieremie wished his head full of water, and his eyes a fountaine of teares, that he might weepe day and night for the slaine of the peopleIer 9 1. and let his book of Lamentations be a testimonie of his griefe for common Miseries. So there was a gene∣rall sorrow, when God tooke away that peere-les king Iosiah; Ieremiah lamented, singing men and singing wo∣men mourned2. Chr. 35 25.. Nehemiah sate and wept and mourned certaine dates, when he heard of the great affliction and reproch of his countrymen, the remainder of the great captiuitieNehe. 1.3 4.. Ester and her maides fasted, because of Ha∣mans conspiracieEst. 4.16.. It argueth a desperate case when men are not humbled by Afflictions: Thou hast smitten them, but they haue not sorowed: thou hast consumed them, but they haue refused to receiue corretion, saide the Pro∣phet
of the forlorne IewesIer. 5 3.. Thence cōmeth that extra∣ordinatie note set vpon Ahaz, not found elswhere: In the time of his tribulation did he yet trespasse more against the Lord: this is king Ahaz2. Chr. 28.23. This is the man who was not brought to any humiliation, no not by Affliction. And al∣though a man haue no cause of deiection, in regard of a∣ny personall grieuance, yet the miseries of others are a sufficient motiue. And therefore it is noted as a sauage and bruitish part, that when the citie of Shushan, was in perplexitie, the King and Haman sate drinking in the palacest. 3.15. and woe is threatened against them which che∣rished themselues, but were not sory for the Affliction of IosephAmo 6.6. For that cause, Nehemiah, though he himselfe were well enough, beeing the Kings butler, and in speci∣all grace with him, yet he professed that he could not but be sad, so long as he heard of the hard estate of his countrymenNehe. 1.11.2.3. and though Moses liued at ease in Pha∣raohs court, yet still his mind was vpon the burdens of the Israelites, and had no rest in himselfe vntill he went to visit his brethrenAct. 7.23.: and Vriah would not afford himselfe the ordinarie comfort of his Bed, so long as the Arke of God was in hazard2. Sam. 11.11. Thus the fruits of sinne, whether they be personall, or such as lie vpon others, or such as (because of the common concernement of a state) we are interessed in with others, must be taken notice of to fur∣ther that Holy Heauinesse, which is commended to vs in this place. Thus I haue opened the doctrine, touching that Mourning and Heauinesse for sinne, into which S. Iames would haue vs to turne all our accustomed securi∣tie. I come now to the vse and application hereof to our selues. In the making of which vse & application I will follow this order.The Vse. 1. I will make it manifest that we haue these causes of Mourning which haue beene handled hitherte. 2. I will lay open the generall defect of this dutie, not∣withstanding the vrgency of these causes. 3. I will labour
the perswading of that, to doe which we haue so great cause, and yet in the doing whereof we haue beene so ex∣ceeding negligent. These be (as it were) the lines, vnto each of which I must endeuour to giue his proper fil∣ling. We haue he three Cses of Heae.First, I must make it good that we haue this treble cause of heauines. 1. Our owne sinnes: 2. The sinnes of the Times. 3. The euidences of Gods displeasure against sinne. Touching our owne sinnes, that in the multitude and grieuousnes of them, we haue much matter of Hea∣uines, no man (I suppose) will denie. First for multitude, he that shall heare Dauids acknowledgement, that his sinnes are moe in number then the haires of his headPsal. 40 1., and Iobs confession, that he cannot answer God one of a thou∣sandIob. 9., how can he thinke his sinnes are few? And if there be any here (as this secure age brings forth many such) who supposeth the tale of his sinnes to be but small, let him doe but this: Let him in the end of some one day, examine his course vpon his bedPsal. 4 4. and proceed with him∣selfe from point to point, from his waking in the mor∣ping to that houre, calling all (as neere as he possibly can) his thoughts, speaches, actions to a eckning: and then, when he hath found by a suruey made, the idle, vnprofi∣table, god-les thoughts, which haue beene as thicke within him, as motes in the aire, the vaine, vitious, blas∣phemous, grace-les speeches which haue fallen from his mouth, the euills which he hath done, the good duties, to God, to himselfe, to others, which he hath left vn∣done, or (at lest) not so done as he should: when (I say) he hath found out all these, and hath (as his dutie is) ad∣ded this withall, that besides, there are many secret faultesPsal. 9.1. which he cannot see; then let him (like the work∣man, who by the sight of Hercules his foote, gathered the proportion of his whole bodie) thinke, put case he hath liued thirtie, fourty, or more yeares, what infinite millions of sinnes, he must needs be guilty of, sith the
particulars of one day doe amount to so great a summe. This would make euen the stoutest to hang downe his head like a bulrush, and to be (as it were) confounded in himselfe if this were duly thought vpon. It is said of Ce∣sar, that when he heard that a certain Knight of Rome, being dead, and whose goods were set to sale, was in debt some thousand of poundes, be wished that the knights bolster might be bought for his vse, thinking, that sure it had some extraordinarie vertue in it, vpon which a man could sleeepe who was so much in debt: And surely, if we had but a glimpse of the particular Debtes re sinnes alled,  .12. in which we stand bound to God, we would no lesse wonder at our selues that we can sleep so secure∣ly as we doe, beeing liable to so great a reckning, especi∣ally hauing so slender an assurance of discharge. And (indeede,) the not looking into the hinder ende of the wallet, is the cause of all our presuming. We are like swaggerers at a tauerne, who (in their humour) call in for as much as the house can afford, but when the shot commeth, then they storme, and are readie to sweare, it cannot be so much: so we run on still vpon the lash, and neuer looke on the score, little doe we thinke it to be so great as indeede it is. He amongst vs, who is accusto∣med to swearing, though it be but now and then, yet if it were possible for him, to see but how many times he had sworne in the compasse of one yeare, (besides his o∣ther sins,) I verely think, that if he were not vtterly giuen ouer, it would make his belly to tremble 2.16., to consider it. Howsoeuer, this let vs be sure of, they are all downe in Gods Registeral. 56.8., and Iob saith, that God sealeth vp ini∣quities as in a bagb. 14.1., as rich men do their mony, laying it vp vntill the Audit. Now for the grieuousnes of our sins (which is another branch) I will note but one circum∣stance of many to set it out; and that is, the Riches of the meanes which we haue long enioyed, for better fruit. Suppose we, that we euen now did heare the Lord cal∣ling
to vs as he did of old to the Iewes, Come let vs rea∣son togitherIsa. 1.14., thinke earnestly what excuse we can make. Hath not the Lord beene patient towards vs? hath he not waited that he might haue mercie vpon vsIsa 0..; hath he not sent vnto vs early and late, Cast away your transgres∣sions, why will ye dieEock. 1. ? Hath not the light of holy directi∣on long stood vpon a candlestick in the midst of vs? haue we not still heard that voice, This is the way walke in itIsa. 30 11. ? Now this is a sure thing: by how much the more we know, or may know, by so much the greater is our sinne. If I had not come and spoken vnto them, they had had no sinne, but now haue they no cloke for their sinneIoh. 15..; Thus the enlargemēt of Gods mercie in blessing vs with the means of holines, is the greatest improuemont of our sinne: And so (I hope) I haue cleered this, that we haue the first cause of Heauines, our own sinnes: touching which it is hard to say, which is the greater, the multitude of them, or their qualitie. The next cause of sorrowe, which must be manifested to be amongst vs, is the sinne of the Times. It was true∣ly said that the Deuill hath great wrah, knowing that he hath but a short timeReu. 12 1.. As his time is abridged, so is his malice enlarged; and thence it is, that this old Age of the world, is so fruitfull in most monstrous impieties. All the euills of the precedent ages, are flowne together into this, as into a common sewer. The filthinesse of the peo∣ple hath filled the land from corner to cornerEz 29.11. Men were wont heretofore, amid their other euills, yet to haue so much honesty, as to seeke to shrowd their sinnes vnder a mantle of secrecy. But now they declare them as SodomIsa. 3.9., Atheisme, Blasphemie, Drunkennesse, Whore∣dome, Oppression, Contempt of religion, men neuer blush to be commonly noted for such kinds of euills. In∣deede nothing (among the multitude) is in more disgrace then this, to be a conscionable and carefull Christian. Me thinkes, considering the full measure of Iniquitie, I
should heare the Lord cry to his Angel, Thrust in thy si∣cle and reape, for the time is come to reape, the Haruest of the Earth is ripeRe. 14.15.. Woe be to vs if we crie not with Da∣vid, It is time for thee Lord to work, for they haue destroy∣ed thy lawPsal 119.126. So much briefly for that, which if my Tongue were as the pen of a swift writerPsa 5.1., I were not able to set downe at full, and which if we might reforme with the sacrifice of our best blood; we might thinke it well be∣stowed. Thus we see the second cause of heauinesse is not wanting. We can scarcely put our heads out at doors, or heare one speake, but we shall haue cause to remem∣ber it. The third thing deseruing sorrowe, to be handled, are the Euidences (in the times) of Gods displeasure against sinne. The prophet Amos saith, that there is no euill (meaning, no euill of punishment) but the Lord hath done itA o 3 6., and Ieremie saith, that euery such Euill is an in∣fliction for sinne; Man suffereth for his sinneIam 3 39.: which to places doe euince thus much, that if there haue been amongst vs any common punishments, surely they haue come from the Lord, and that for sinne. Now what com∣mon Punishments the Lord hath laied vpon our Times, he must needes be blind which seeth not. A raging, and (as I may rearme it) a man-eating pestilence in the chiefe parts of the kingdome (though we hitherto in these West parts, haue beene euen miraculously spared: but let vs not presume, if we haue beene idle lookers on, vpon the visitations of others, the rod will fal the heauier when it comes) vnseasonable seasons, vnheard of inundations, fearefull fires, the foules of heauen, and the fishes of the sea destroyedph. 1.3.. These things we heare, these things we di∣scourse of at our Tables, and in our meetings as newes, and as the occurences of the Times, but we let them die with the report, and neuer put them vpon our hearts. What thinke we of the horrible oppression which raign∣eth, one man labouring to cate and deuoure anotherGal. 5.13.,
the encreasing of Papists, who (like the Cananites to the Israelites) are as a whippe on our sides, or as Thornes in our EyesIos. 23.13., the grosse fatnesse which is growne vpon most hearts, in that (like the Iewes in Christs time) men doe not esteeme nor knowe the things which appertaine vnto their peaceLuk. 19.42. ? What thinke we (I say) of these things? doe they not giue vs cause to say as Moses did to Aaron, when God sent a suddaine pestilence among the people, There is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is be∣gunNum 16.46. yes verely. Nay we may well exspect, the accom∣plishment of that which was said of olde, namely, that if we be not reformed by these things, the Lord will smite vs yet seuen times more for our sianesLeu. 16.24.. Truth is, God hath beene and is, very gracious to our dayes (for so is his manner, oft times to call back his anger, and not to stirre vp all his wrathPsal. 78 38.,) he hath set eace in our bordersPsal. 14.14., vnder the gouernment of a Christian King, he hath not remooued our Candlesticke, as he iustly might, because of the decay of our first loueReu. 2.4 5., yet euen this is also to be counted a iudgement, that the eyes of the most are so holden, that they doe not see Gods mercie, nor knowe how to turne these fauours to a spirituall vse, and full is euery place of such Fooles, (as Salonton speakes of) who haue a price in their hands, but haue none heart to get wis∣domePron. 17.16. And this may serue to let vs ee what Euidences we haue of the Lords displeasure against sinne, and with∣all, to make good the first point, that we haue abundant matter of Heauinesse. We haue ot sorrowed s we should.Now let me shew our neglect, & what slender sorrow these things haue brought forth amongst vs; I will pro∣ceed distinctly and in order: and first what little mour∣ning there is for personall sinnes: The seate of sorrow is the heart, (Rent your hearts, saith IoelIoel. 2.13.), and that only Knoweth the bitternes of the soule.f Prou. 14.10. It is vnpossible that I should be priuie to mens secret bewaylings, neither wil I iudge any, by the smoothnes of his looke, or the drines
of his cheeks; for euery cloud doth not drop down raine, neither is euery mist of sorrow dissolued into teares: Yet there is one thing by which it may be shrewdly suspected that (to speak of the generalitie) men are in very litle hea∣uinesse for their sinnes, and that is, the little reformation which appeares. The mourning heart cannot but be di∣spleased in it selfe, for the Euills which it hath ommit∣tedEzeck. 6.9. This displeasure will turne the delight in sinne, in∣to a hatred of sinne. This hatred will bring forth that which Paul calleth Care2. Cor. 7 11., that is, a pensiue and busie studie how to amend: And it cannot be but God would so blesse these motions, (beeing indeed the workings of his owne spirit) as that sinne, beeing quailed in the roote, shall also wither in the leafe, and the loue of holi∣nes being planted in the heart, shall shoote out some fruite in the life. I know it is possible, for a deare child of God, bitterly to bewaile some speciall corruption, confidently to vow against it, earnestly to beg deliue∣rance from it, to striue to subdue it with the vtmost might, & yet again & again to be ensnared with it: But, that Wickednes should be sweet in a mans mouthIob. 20.12., that he should obey it in the lusts thereofRom. 6.12., that he should take thought for it to fulfill itRom. 13.14., that he should hate to be refor∣medPsal. 50.17., and yet be said, to mourne and be heauy for his sinne, sure I am it is vnpossible. He mourneth not for drunkennes, who riseth early to follow itIsa. 5.11.: He mourneth not for couetousnes, who is plotting and imagining mat∣ters of oppression and vniust getting vpon his bedMicah. 2.1.. He mourneth not for swearing, who saith, With my tongue I will preuaile, what hath any bodie to doe, who is Lord o∣uer mePsal. 12 4. ? and so in other specialties: so that this then is a true conclusion: There is but little amendment of sinne, therefore sure there is but little sorrowe for sinne. Come we now to the next, what sorrow there is for the sinnes of others. Our scantnes in this may well be collected out of the former. For the ground of my sor∣row
for another sinne, is the sting which I feele of mine owne. He therefore which laments not for his owne, can hardly be affected for anothers. But I wil insist vpon a more particular Euidence, which is this; the little care that is had for the reformation of others. He which mournes for anothers sinne, will endeauour as much as in him lieth, to reforme that which is the cause of his mourning. I remember the saying of S. Iames, If a bro∣ther or sister be naked and destitute of daily foode, and one of you say to them, Depart in peace, warme your selues, fill your bellies, notwithstanding yee giue not those things which are needfull, what helpeth itIam 2 15.16. ? So if a man say, Oh I am sorry to see how euill men are, and yet seeke not to pull them out of the fireIude. 23., and to reclaime them from that eternall euill into which they are salling, to what end is that sorrow, or how shall I thinke that it is vnfained? And this dutie of seeking to reforme the sinne of others, lieth vpon all, though vpon some more then vpon o∣thers. The Magistrate by his Authorite, he beareth not the sword for naughtRom. 13.4, and Nehemiah, when matters were amisse, spake not so much to the offenders, as to the RulersNeh. 5.7.13.11.17.. The Minister, by the word: still proouing if God at any time will giue repentance, that men may come to amendment2. Tim. 2.25.26.. Euery priuate man, by discreete admo∣nition (thou shalt plainly rebuke thy neighbourLeu. 19.17.,) or at least by prayer1. Tim. 2.1., that God may oper their eies, to the end they may see their misery. Now if there be a defect in these, the sword of authoritie beeing let to rust in the sheath, and the people not being made to see their trans∣gressionsIsa 38.1., and men stopping their mouthes, so that they neuer giue a word of Admonition to their delinquent neighbours, if (I say) there be such a defect in these things, how do we mourne, where is our pitie ouer mens soules, if we can see men run on to their owne destructi∣on, & not stretch out our hands to pull them (as a brand) out of the fire? Looke you to it that it be not your fault;
it is the common sicknesse of the Times, happie be you, if you be free from the Infection. I will put you ouer to the accusing or excusing of your owne ThoughtsRom. 2.15, and so come to the next point. And that is touching our beeing affected with the to∣kens which we see of Gods wrath against sinne. And surely the very face of things (as they nowe stand) is suf∣ficient to bewray the iron deadnesse of mens hearts in this particular. All things doe euen sauour of an vniuer∣sall securitie. Many blowes are giuen, but the people turne not vnto him that smitethIsa. 9.13.. The wofull occurrences of the Times, haue the same working with men which a great stone hath when it falleth into the Waters. Falling in, it maketh a great noise, and stirreth the Water verie much, and one waue begetteth another for a good pretie space, at last the motion groweth weaker and weaker, and the Water returneth againe vnto his former smoothnes. So in this: We heare of diuers searefull accidents: at the first comming of the newes, we are much mooued, and it runneth from man to man, with much swiftnes; but on a suddaine, when this first addresse is past, the matter di∣eth away, we are as we were, and the thing it selfe leaues no impression; and by this meanes is that veresied, which was complained of old, The Lord calleth vnto weeping & mourning, and behold Ioy and gladnes, slaying oxen & kil∣ling sheepe, eating flesh and drinking wine,Isa 22 12.13. &c. No hu∣miliation followeth vpon Gods iudgements. But where∣as euery Iudgement of God should be as a warning peale to repentance, we be like the smiths dog, who, the har∣der the anuile is beaten on, lyeth by and sleepes the soun∣der, so a deeper kind of drowsinesse hath ouertaken vs. Now then that these two points are cleared, the one touching the causes of Heauinesse which we haue, the other touching our scantnesse in framing our selues to that measure of holy sorrowe which becommeth vs, sure∣ly, if we suppose any waight to be in this which is com∣mended
to vs by S. Iames, I doubt not but I shall easily perswade you in the generall drift of my whole sermon, namely to turne your Laughter into Mourning, and your Ioy into heauinesse. For the better furtherance whereof let me commend vnto your best consideration these parti∣culars. Mones to perswad th Murning ad Heaesse which S. Iae a th 1. Mote.First, the speciall respect which the Lord beareth to those whose spirits are full of heauinesse, either in all or i any one of the regards which I haue mentioned. Thus saith the Lord, The heauen is my Throre, and the Earth is my footestoole, all these things hath my hand made, all these things haue beene saith the Lord, and to him will I looke, euen to him that is poore and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my wordsIsa. 66 1.2. Consider the place. The seate of the Lord is full of glorie, and from thence he beholdeth all the Earth, but his more speciall Eye, is to the trem∣bling and bruised soules; the Mourning spirit is vnto him the most pleasing sacrificePsal. 51.17.. Dauid saith that the Lord hath a bottle in which he doth put the TearesPsal. 6.8. of the humbled, not one of them falleth to the ground without his Notice. Me thinketh this motiue should not be with∣out effect: for who would not do that which wil draw the eye of the Lords respect toward him. God hath a general prouidence ouer all. Thou Lord shalt saue both man and beastPsal. 36.6. but the groning hearts are his chiefest treasure. Secondly, that in the times of common Miseries,2. Moiue. the Lord maketh special prouision for the safety and comfort of those which mourne. Excellent for this purpose is that place in EzekielEz. 9.2.8 . when the sixe Angels (like men) were come forth against Ierusalem, with euerie one a weapon in his hand to destroy it, first there was a course taken to set a marke vpon their foreheads which did mourne and crie for all the abhominations that were done in the midst there∣of. The sword of vengeance was not drawne forth to the slaughter till particular order was taken for their safetie. Lot was in continuall heauines for the sinnes of Sodome,
and we see the destroying Angel could doe nothing vntill he was come to the place appointed for his refugeOen. 19.22.. You haue heard before of Ieremies mourning: note I pray you the fruite of it in this particular. When Ierusalem was taken by Nebuchadnezzar, and (as the manner is in such surprises) many went to wracke, the Lord so wrought, that when as the king himselfe and his sonnes were not spared yet by Nebuchadnezzars owne mouth, speciall charge was giuen for the preseruation of Ieremy, Take him (said he to the chiefe steward) looke well to him, doe him no harme, doe vnto him euen as he shall say vnto theeVer. 11 12.. The poore despised Prophet whose soule had wept in secret in the dayes of their iollitie, was now specially pruided for, when the Body of the people receiued the due reward of their deepe securitie. Thus the meeke are hidden in the day of wrath 3., and if it doe come to passe that they be swept away with common calamities, yet their Death is pretious in Gods sight,Isal .15. and it shall be their happinesse to be taken away from the Euills to come 2 20. Thirdly, that the Lord hath tied himselfe by a promise to afford to all such a gracious plentie of inward refresh∣ing. Blessed are they that mourne, for they shal be comfor∣ted. This is gon out of the lips of the Lord; 4. & he will not alter it 88.4.: The Gospel which we preach is truely said to be Tydings of great Ioy 2.10. and indeed such a ioy it is, which the heart of man in this mortality is too little to receiue; Now the sweetnes thereof belongs onely to these that mourne. The spirit of the Lord (saith Christ) is vpon me: he hath sent me to preach glad tydings: but to whome? To the poore, to bind vp the broken-hearted, to comfort those that mourne, &cIs 1.1. &c. k 18.. Such as these he will fill with good thingsI. 1.53., their Soules shall be satisfied as with marow and fatnesPsal. 63 5.: they shall haue the spirit of consolation, a secret Witnesse in their bosoms, that they are the children of GodRom 8.16.. Woe be to him whom the desire of this blessing
cannot mooue. Fourthly,4. Motiu. that albeit the comfort which such haue is but secret, and such as by reason of the hidden-nes there∣of, maketh many a man to thinke that it is the dullest and most perplexed life in the world to be a good Christian, yet at the day of iudgement it shall be made more appa∣rant. Now the teares vpon their faces, are as a curtaine, before their happinesse, that it cannot be seene, but then, they shall be wiped awayy, that, shall be a Day of full Re∣freshingA .9., and then shall the Lord say, turning him (as it were) to the secure worldlings, which haue liued in plea∣sures on the earth and in wantonnesI 5 .. Behold, my seruants shall eate, and you shall be hungry, behold, my seruants shall drinke, and yet shall be thirstie, behold, my seruants shal re∣ioyce, and yee shall be asshamed: Behold, my seruants shall sing for ioy of heart, and ye shall crie for sorrow of heart, & shall houle for vexation of mindeIsa. 65. 4. The Conc∣ion.. To draw then to a conclusion. You see a dutie com∣mended to vs, by the mouth and ministerie of S. Iames, to turne our Careles Laughter into a holy Mourning, & our presuming Ioy into a godly Heavines. It is not with∣out cause that we are perswaded to this exchange. Looke we into our selues, our own sinns muster together before our eies in no small troupes, inough to wound the dullest heart. Cast we our face to others, we see the world lying in wickednes1. Ioh 5.., and Hell euen enlarging it selfeIsa. 5 12., to receiue it: Examine we the times, many things tell vs plainely, that surely God is not well pleased. Consider we againe our owne course we must needs yeed, that we haue bin two secure, and that these things haue not so affected vs as they should: Thinke we further of the benefite and worth of that which we are perswardd to, we shall find it attended vpon with a traine of blessings. How shall we then denie our obedience to this holy aduise; I pray you then, Let my counsell be acceptable vnto youDan 4.2.. You are here, many Marchants, and much of your trading stands
vpon exchangeA particular application to the place where .. Well is he in his owne opinion who can put away some ill-conditioned ware for a more current cōmodity. Behold here the best exchāge which you euer made, Let your Laughter be turned into Mourning, and your Ioy into Heauines. Sure I am, a commodity it is, for which (which all desire) you shall receiue a very quicke and plentifull returne. Quick it will be, For yet a very little while, and he that shall come will come and he will not taryH 1 3.: and it will be plentifull, for they which now goe weeping, shall returnne with ioy, nay which is more, they shall bring their sheauesI  6.. The Ruine of Gods Enemies: PREACHED Vpon the Commemoration-day of the deliuerance from the Gun-powder Treason. Iudg. 5.31. So let all thine Enemies perish, O Lord. THis is the conclusion of that Diuine song which Deborah and Barak sang after that great deliuerance which God gaue the Israelites from Iabin king of Canaan,The dpen∣a of this verie vpon the rt of the Chaper. and after the ouer∣throw of Sisera the generall of the field. Now when as in the latter part of this hymne, Deborah (who, I suppose was the cōpiler of it) had after a most cloquent manner, set out the fashiō of Sisera his fall, by the hands of Iael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, she shutteth vp all with this prophetical conclu∣sion, So perish all thine enemies, O Lord. This is the order of the place. The generall nature .The clause it selfe is a Prophecie: for, albeit it run in the sorme of an Imprecation, yet it beeing considered,
what Deborah was, euen a ProphetesseChap. 4 , we must needs thinke that the ground of her speach, was the knowledge she had, touching the future estate & condition of Gods Church, for which cause shee maketh the desire of her soule sutable to the purpose and determination of God. As therefore shee well knew that Euill should hunt the enemies of God to destructionPsal. 14.11., and that the prouidence of God should attend vpon those which loue him, for their continuall preseruation, so here she testifieth the fulnes of her desire that it may be so; So let all thine, &c. but they that loue thee, &c. It beeing cleere then (as I take it) that this verse came out of the mouth of Deborah as a Prophetesse,The diuisio of it. it may be diuided into two parts. The first sets downe the ruine of Gods enemies, So let all thine Enemies erish, &c. The se∣cond declareth the prosperitie of Gods friends: But they that loue thee shall be as the sunne, &c. I haue chosen the first part only to handle at this time, the generall doctrine whereof is, That the Enemies of God shall perish so as Sisera did. For the opening whereof, two things must be done: first,The generall doctrine. it must be shewed who be Gods Enemies: secondly, it must be enquired how Sisera perished, and then the ruine of Sisera must be applied to all Gods Enemies. In one word they be generally called Gods Enemies,Who be God; enemies. which are the Enemies of Gods Church. Thus the Lord sware that he would haue warre with Amalek from gene∣ration to generation, because Amalek fought with IsraelExo. 17.8.16., and Ethan in the Psalme, saith, that those which re∣proached the footesteps of Gods annointed, reproached the LordPsal. 89.51., according as Paul was said to persecute ChristAct. 9.4.5., because he persecuted the Church1. Cor. 15.5.: In the same sense, Saneherib, is said to haue rayled against the Holy one of IsraelIsa. 37 23., because he rayled against the Church and people of God in Israel. Now the enemies of Gods Church are of two sorts. Some are directly and professedly enemies
vnto Pietie, and to the truth and religion of God, and seeke by all meanes how to roote it out and to abolish it. Such were the Philistims, the Amorites, the Amalekite, the Midianites, &c. of old, and after that the Babyloni∣ans, and other Monarchs, whom Daniel prophesied of: and such at this day are the Turkes to whom euen the verie name of a Christian is abhominable. Another sort shrowd themselues vnder a name of the Church and of true Religion, but yet indeed and in truth are enemies to the sinceritie of Religion. And these must also be distin∣guished, some doe professe a different kind of Religion, and vse another manner of worshipping God then the true Church vseth, such were the Samaritans in auncient times, who after their rent from the Iewes, retained cir∣cumcision, boasted of their fathers, and expected the MessiasIh. 4.12.25 yet were not Gods peopleHos. 1.9., but were deadly e∣nemies to the IewesIoh. 4.9.. And such nowe are the Papist, who boast that they onely are the Church, but yet vnder this pretense persecute the Church, and are in a continu∣all opposition thereunto: For which cause their Church beeing typed out by the name of The great whore, is said to be drunken with the blood of Saints and MartyrsReu. 17.6.: whereof these latter times haue had and still haue very plentifull experience. These Enemies in their malice a∣gainst Gods Church vse a double course. The one is of o∣pē hostilitie: Therfore the Antichristian Church is said to make warre with the SaintsReu 13.7.: And what warres the Ro∣mish Church with her assistants hath made, and doth still studie to make against the Protestant Churches in these parts of the World, there is no man, who knoweth any thing, can be ignorant. The other course is of secret pra∣ctising, which is also twofold. First by seditions, factions, conspiracies, poisonings, and all to bring confusion vpon Kingdoms, that so (if it were possible) they might quench the light of the Gospel, and establish their owne Idola∣trie. An euident instance whereof we haue had in the
powder-Treason, a deuise, which a man would thinke the deuill himselfe should be ashamed to father, and yet Papists doe not blush that their Religion should be the hatcher of such a hellish enterprise. Secondly, by priuie suggestions of their creeping2. Tim. 36. Iesuits and Seminaries, to corrupt and deceiue the mindsTit. 1.10. of the vnsetled, and to poison them with their popish drugs. They come from the Sea of Rome in amongst vs, like the sammon and fish of that sort into the fresh riuers to doe their kind, and to beget a new spawne and frie of Catholiques. These be the Frogs which come out of the mouth of the DragonReu. 16.15., the little foxes which the Spouse complaineth ofCan. 2.15., which like their predecessors, compasse sea and land to make one of their profession.Matth. 23.1▪. A second ranke of these Enemies shrouded vnder the Name of the Church, are those which professe true Reli∣gion, but yet are aduersaries to the Life and power2. Tim. 3 5. of Re∣ligion. Such our Church is pestered with at this day, and is euen darke with them as Egypt with the grashoppersExod. 10.15.. These are they which cannot endure the yoke of the Go∣spel, which will not abide to be ruled by the Word and discipline of the church, but resolue to breake those bands and to cast those cords from themPsal. 2.3.: Our Sauiour cal∣leth these his Enemies, who will no that he should raigne ouer themLuk. 19.27.. Such are they also who are aduersaries to the Word preached, hindring (as much as in them li∣eth) the passage of it, and seeking (like Elymas) to turne awayAct. 13.8. others from it: All seeming-wise, (for the wisdome of the flesh is enmitie against GodRom. 8.7.:) All couetous worldlings, (for, the amitie of the world is the enmitie of GodIam. 4.4.:) All Epicures and belie-gods, (for, such are Enemies to the Crosse of ChristPhil. 3.18 1:) All continuers in grosse sinnes, (for, God surely will wornd the head of his Enemies, and the hairie pate of him that walketh in his sinnesPsal. 68 2.) These and such like, liue in the Church, and professe to know God, but yet are the Enemies of God,
and come within the compasse of this Prophecie. How Sisera pe∣rished.The second thing to be laboured in, is an enquiry how Sisera perished, that so we may know how the Enemies of God shall perish. The ruine of Sisera is made a pat∣terne for the ruine of Gods Enemies. Touching the con∣spirers against Gods people, the Psalmist prayeth thus, Doe thou to them as to Sisera, & as to Iabin at the riuer of KishonPsal. 83.1.; And, concerning these Kings of the earth, which by the perswasion of the spirits of Deuills (the frogs of Romeb) and themselues against Gods Church, it is pro∣phecied that they shalbe gathered together to a place cal∣led Arma-gedonReu. 16.13.14.16., that is, they shall receiue a famous foile, euen such an one as Sisera receiued at the waters of MegiddoIudg. 5.19.: Wherefore to the end we may vnderstand how Gods Enemies shall perish, it is fit to enquire how Sisera did perish. In Sisera his ouerthrow there be to be noted three things. First, the time; that it was when Sisera was in his greatest height, he was furnished with ine hundred charets of yron, and by him (vnder his master) the children of Israel had bin sore vexed twentie yearesIudg▪ 4 3.. Secondly, the meanes; that he was sold into the hands of a womanVer 9.. Thirdly, the manner, that it was an irrecoue∣rable destruction: All the host of Sisera fell vpon the edge of the sword, there was not a man leftVer. 16., Sisera himselfe sanke downe at Iaels feete, and lay there deadIudg. 5.27.; The chil∣dren of Israel preuailed against Iabin king of Canaan, vn∣till they had destroyed Iabin king of CanaanChap. 4.24.. So then, The Enemies of God, shall perish as Sisera, that is; in their greatest iollity, by meanes (in mans opinion) most vnlike∣ly, and so, as after their fall receiued, they shall be past all recouerie. It will be easie to shew the truth hereof by the Scripture. First they shall perish in their iollity, and in the height of their securitie. I haue seen the wicked strong, and spreading himselfe like a greene bay-tree, yet he passed awayPsal. 37.35.36.. When the workers of Iniquitie doe flourish they shall be destroyed for euerPsal. 92... God will shoote an arrow at them
suddenlyPsal. 64▪ 7. When they shall say, Peace and safety, thn shall come vpon them sodain destruction1. Thess. 5... Secoudly, the meanes but weak in comparison; Whereupon it is a ge∣nerall rule, that God hath chosen weake things to confound the mightie things1. Cor. 1.17.. Euen Wormes shall ate King HerodAct. 12.23., and Grashoppers, and cankers shall be the Lords great hostsoel 2.2. Thirdly, the ouerthrow shall be irrecouerable, like the breaking of a potters pot, in the breaking whereof is not found a sheard, to take fire out of the hearth, or water out of a pitIsa. 30 17.; like smoke that vanishethPsal 68 ., like stubble before the wind:Psal. 8.13. Whereupon the ruine of Anichrists kingdom is compared to the casting of a great milstone into the sea, with such violence (saith the holy Ghost) shall the great citie Babylon be cast and shall be found no moreRou. 18.2.. Our Times haue had two notorious and neuer to be forgot∣ten exampels of the truth hereof. The one in the Spanish fleete in eighty eight. The ouerthrow of it we cannot be ignorant of, and we haue great cause to remember it. It was like the fall of Sisera. First it was in the Iollitie thereof. The Nauy was called Inuincible: They had made themselues sure of vs, they had shared the pleasant things of the land among them in their owne seeming: They which abode at home, said one to another, as Siseres mother did to her Ladyes, Haue they not gotten and di∣uide the spoileIudg. 5.30. ? Secondly, the meanes was but weake in comparison. Our nauie for number and proportion of ships much smaller, our men fewer, our time of prepara∣tion much lesse. We may truly say, it was not by our owne sword, neither did our owne arme sae vsPsal. 44.3. They fought from heauen, euen the starres in their courses fought against themIudg. 5.3. Thirdly, it was an vtter spoile, scarse a ship left to doe any further seruice. The other example is this of the Powder-Treason: touching which you shall see that the Enemies of God and of his Church engaged in it perished also as Sisera: First in their height of confidence. For (now) among Papists both at home
and abroad, there was a very confident exspectation of some great good to be done for the Catholique cause, and the matter beeing brought euen to the push, and tat mousr of theirs beeing come almost to the Birth, they made full account of their golden day, in which they should bath their ands in the blood of all good Cisans, and establish the Idolatrous seruice of their Breaden god. Secondly▪ by meanes vnlikely: It was no bwraid, nor defeated by any wit or policie of man; but in them was verisied that of the Psalme, Their owne tongues fell vpon them., their own pen discouered them, and that which the watchfull ee of gouernment did not espy, their owne priuie buzzing brought to light. I re∣port no new thing: you know the letter, how it was en∣dited, to whom it was sent, & how it was construed. And so was that made good which Salomon said, Curse not the King &c. that which hath wings shall declare the matter; It was a quill, a piece of a wing, that reuealed it. Thirdly it was an vtter fall: their putposes were defeated to their owne confusion: So that we may well take vp that of the Psalmes, They made a pit and digged it, and fell into the pit that they made; their mischiefe is returned vpon their owne head, and their cruelly fallen vpon their owne pate, and Praysed bee the Lord, which hath not giuen vs, as a pray vnto their teeth. Thus by plaine Testimonies of Scripture, and by our owne experience, it i prooued vnto vs, that the Eemies of God and of his Church shall All perish so as Sisera, in the height of their pride, by meanes (in mans conceipt) improbable, by a course & ruine irrecouerable. The first vse of this doctrine, is to stirre vs vp to fill our mouthes with the praises of God, so often as we re∣count the deliuerances which God hath vouchsafed to his Church, especially those which in our owne times we haue had experience of. This vse did Deborah make of the victorie against SiseraIudg. 5.2.: Moses of the ouerthrowe of
Pharaoh, and the deliuerance out of Egyptxod. 11.1.. Many be the Psalmes which were penned vpon such occasion. It is the chiefe thing which God exspecteth of vs, Call vpon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliur thee, and thou shalt glorifie mePsal. 0.1.. The spirit of God noably describeth the ioy of the Church for the ruine of the kingdome of Antichrist, Hallelu-iah, sluation, and glorie, and honour, and power be to the Lord our God, &c.R. 9.▪2. and the seruants of God are incited and incoutaged so to doe. O heauen retoyce of her, and ye holy Apostles and Trophets, for God hath giuen you iudgement on her. And albeit we may haue cause of pity when we thinke vpon their soules, yet so farre forth a the Ruine of the enemies of God, makes for the churche good, we ought to reice in their cue∣throwe. The Righteous (saith Dauid) shall reioyce when he seth the vengeanceP .; and, lsed shall he be (said the people touching Babylon, which had held them in long captiuitie) that taketh and dseth thy children against the stonesPsa. 13.. No nation hath more cause to performe this du∣tie then we: It were long to rehearse cuerie particular: Truely may it be said of the Church of England, as Ia∣cob said of Ioseph in his will, The archers haue grieued her, and shot against her, and hated her, but her bowe hath abode strong, the hands of her armes haue beene strengthe∣ned by the hands of the mightie God of IacobGn 49.23.4, and she may say as the Church of Israel, They haue of tentimes af∣fucted me from my youth vp, but they could not preuaile a∣gainst mePsal. 12▪ .2. . c.. Neither was any deliuerance giuen vs by God, more notorious then was this, from that bloodie Massaker intended agains the whole state by an vnheard of kind of execution, vpon the Kings Maieslie, his dee∣rest Queene, their Princely sonne (ou Hope for hereaf∣ter) the honourable councellours, the noble Lords and Barons, the Reuerend Bishops, the graue Sages and Iud∣ges of the Land, besides many worthe gentlemen and commoners of the Realme; no storie, whether barbarous
or Christian maketh mention of any the like brutish, hellish crueltie. That which (in my opinion) throughout the storie of the Scripture commeth neerest vnto it, is that plot of Haman, for the vtter rooting out of the peo∣ple of the Iewes. For the better quickning of vs vnto thankefullnesse, I will a little insist vpon it, and shew you first, how these two conspiracies, (that of Haman and his adherents, and this of the Papists combined in the Pow∣der-reason) doe agree: and then secondly, wherein, this latter doth in sauage crueltie farre exceede that: and so by consequence how our deliuerance is farre more admi∣rable then was that of the Iewes, though that were also very famous: First touching the agreement betwixt the two plots and the deliuerances from both, marke it thus. The Iewes Enemies, were their Enemies for Gods sake: These ours for Religions sake. These had set downe a cer∣taine day in which (as it were) in an instant to doe their villanie. Ours, bad resolued vpon a day also, yea euen vp∣on a very point of time, in which to accomplish their deuilish enterprise. These had disposed the manner of the Iewes destruction by a Lot, euery conspirator was appointed his particular seruice. Ours had allot∣ted euery one his taske, some to prouide at home, some to negotiate abroad in other countries, some to make tumults in the citie, others to raise rebellion in the countrey: Nay scarse a Papist of any intelligence in the land, (as may easily be gathered by their ge∣nerall confidence at that time) but he was employed at the least thus farre forth, to pray for the good suc∣cesse of the Catholiques, there beeing then some spe∣ciall seruice in hand for their common Benefit. These which sought mischiefe against the Iewes had the war∣rant of a king, for that which they did: Ours, the allow∣ance of him, that taketh vpon him to be aboue kings, the Man of Rome, euen his Holines his vnholy dispensation: Indeede a thing deuised in Hell, might soone passe with
Seene and allowed, at Rome. Well, in fine, these aduersa∣ries were sodenly defeated; ours, in amoment disap∣pointed, euen when their monstrous conception was at the very point of deliuerance. They were slaine the same day in which they thought to haue murthered: these pe∣rished then when they promised to themselues an eter∣nall victorie. Thus farre we haue seene, Enemies alike, daunger alike, a deliuerance in some circumstances not vnlike: Now marke, how in some other things againe, this of ours farre exceedes. These enemies to the Iewes were of another Nation: these Popish conspiratours were our owne countrimen. The Iewes whome they sought to destroy were their vnder-lings, captiues, and such as liued in their land but by courtesie: Those whome these Romish Leaguers sought to murther, were their lawfull gouernours, to whome both by Religion and Nature they did owe obedience. Oh inhumanitie, oh Poperie, be these thy fruits! If this be religion let hell be made heauen, and let the depth of villanie, be the height of pietie. The plotters against the Iewes were heathen men, Pagans, Infidels, Haman himselfe an Amalekite, a sworne enemie to Gods truth. These, in name Christi∣ans and Catholiques of Rome, members of that church, out of which (if we will beleeue them) here is no Holi∣nesse. Well might Nero be a Saint, if this were holines. I may well say of them, as Iaacob did of the fact of Simeon and Leui; Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage for it was cruellGen 49.7.. To proceede yet: These ill∣wishers to the Iewes, albeit they meant nothing but mischiefe, yet they caried not their purpose so closely but that it was knowne, and the poore Iewes had warning, if not to escape death, yet to auoid the miserie which might happen to their soules by a sodaine death: These (whome we speake of) intended such a slaughter, which beeing but a blast might haue brought many to their reckning before god, before they had thought vpon their account.
Neuer my rage so great among men called Christians, but although the blood was shed, yet there was leaue gi∣uen to the soule to prepare it selfe for the Lord. But Po∣perie must be like it selfe, it hath euer beene a butcherie of soules. How true is the saying of Salomon: The mer∣cies of the wicked are cruell 12.10.. This Romish mercie, to say men be Heretiques, and yet to send them away quick without any moment of time to repent them. If this be their mercy, what thinke you may their crueltie be? Hang downe your heads you Papists, and shame, you pretensed Catholikes, neuer seke for figleaues to couer the naked∣nes of your Italian mother: though she be washed with ni∣tre, and much sope, yet this Iniquitie is so marked before God  22., & so hatefull in the sight of all indifferent men, that the reproach thereof can neuer be done away. There is yet one very effectuall circumstance to note out the ex∣ceeding greatnesse of our deliuerance aboue this of the Iewes: God gaue deliuerance to these Iewes in a time when they were humbled by captiuitie, and had also cast downe themselues by fasting and prayer, for the auoi∣ding of that which was comming towards them. I con∣fesse here was mercie, but this of ours farre exceedes. For the Lord wrought this for vs in a time, when we were (as we yet are) puffed vp by the continuance of prosperitie, and euen lulled asleepe in the depth of secu∣ritie, our great sinnes crying loud in his eares for venge∣ance, and euen vrging his Iustice to make vs a by-word and an astonishment to the world, by some extraordi∣narie iudgement. So that in this we haue a greater eui∣dence of Gods mercie, that when so many foule enor∣mities, especially the long contempt of the Gospell, did euen fight against vs, yet he wrought so for vs, as to de∣liuer vs out of the very iawes of destruction. Now all these things beeing duly considered, I may truely say of this fift of Nouember, as was said of the night in which the Israelites went out of Egypt; It is a Day to be kept
holy to the Lord, it is that day of the Lord, which all the children of England must keepe throughout their genera∣tionsExod 12.4.. And although Papists, for th hiding of their owne shame may wish of this day, as Iob in his a∣gonie of his birth-day that it may nor be ioyned to the dayes of the yeare,Iob. 3 6., yet let vs euer make conscience, ac∣cording to the most religious appointment of the Law, to keepe it in his season from yeare to ye weExod. 13.10., as an eter∣nall president of Gods care for his Church, and as a ne∣uer dying testimonie of the hideous cruelty of blood-thirsty Catholiques. And I would I could speake any thing that might be effectuall to quicken the com∣mon and vniuersall dulnesse of our spirits, whome these great and vnspeakable kindnesses of God, to vs, to our State, our gouernours, our wiues and families doe very meanly affect. I remember what Iob said to Dauid, when he shewed so little cheerefulnes, after the victorie against Absalom, I perceiue (said Iab) that if Absalō had liued, and we all had died this day, that then it would haue pleased thee well2 Sam. 19.6.. It may be so thought of many, that if all good people had beene swallowed vp in that gulfe, and none but Atheists and Papists lef aliue, it would haue giuen them more contentment. If we can not shew our selues to reioyce in the goodnesse of God vnto his Church, surely we shall neuer see the Felicitie of his cho∣senPsal. 106 .  2. .. Secondly, this Doctrine is ll of comfort to all true Christians. For here we haue a bllute assurance of the irrecouerable foile which shalbe giuen to all the enemies of Gods Church. They shall perish like isera: They that hate Sion shall be all ashamed and turned backwardPsal. 129.5. God will arise and his enem shalbe scattered, they that hate him shall she before himPsal. 68.1.. The Lord hath said this, and he will performe it. Especially this is to be appled as a com∣fort to all that feare God, in respect of the continuall working and tempering of the Popisher ethey are con∣tinually
plotting and deuising treasons, mutinies, mur∣thers: They brag in their talks, and swords are in their lipsPsal. 59.7., they imagine deceitfull words against the quiet of the landPsal. 33.20., they incourage themselues in a wicked purpose, and commune together to lay snares priuilyPsal 64.5.. But the word of God shall be true: They conceiue mischiefe, but shall bring forth a liePsal. 7.14.. Happely the Lord may here and there exe∣cute some personall vengeance vpon some by them; Happely they may encrease in corners, and draw disciples after themAct. 20.30., it beeing iust with God, so to punish the contempt of the Gospel in this land, and to send them strong delusions to beleeue lies, who will not receiue the loue of the truth that they might be saued2. The. 2.10.11.: but certainly their maine purpose for the confusion of protestant kingdoms which they aime at, and the publike reestablishment of Idolatrie which they gape for, I am fully perswaded that they shall neuer accomplish, but still their pollicies and enterprises shall turne backe vpon them to their owne confusion. For doubtles the time now fast approcheth in which we shall see the verifying of that prophecie, which speaking of the ruine of Antichrists kingdome, as of a thing alreadie done, crieth out, It is fallen, It it fallen, Babylon the great citie &cReu. 14.8. the limmes thereof shall fight with the the Lambe, but the Lambe shall consume themReu. 17.14. The 3. Vse.. Thirdly, here is matter of Aduertisement to vs all to beware of ioyning our seues with these Enemies of God and of his Church either in likenesse of opinion, or pli∣ablenes of affection, or aptnes to pitie them and to think tolerably of them, or in familiaritie of conuersation. We are commanded to Go out of Babylon, that we be not par∣taker of her sinnes, and so receiue of her plaguesReu. 18.4.: We ought rather euery main for his part to helpe forward that iudgement which God hath prepared for them: Ma∣gistrates by punishing, Ministers by confuting their er∣rors, priuate men by discouering them: which is the ef∣fect
of the charge touching Babylon, Reward her as shee hath rewarded you, and giue her double according to her workesReu. 18 6., and, Put your selues in aray against Babel round about, all ye that bend the bow, shoote at her, spare no arrowes, for she hath sinned against the LordIer. 50.14.: Further∣more, this we are also to be admonished, not to think it inough, if in shew and outward profession, we eleaue to Gods Church, vnlesse also we respect and follow these things which may aduance Gods glore and edifie his Church. For this is a sure thing, that albeit the professed enemies of our Church, because of the promise of God, shall not preuaile in regard of an vniuersall ruine to the Church and State, yet if we be (as to to many are) aduer∣saries to the sinceritie of religion, aduersaries to the prea∣ching of the word, contemners of the ordinances of God, worldlings, belly-GodsPhil 3 19., louers of pleasure, more then louers of God2. Tim. 3.4., Walkers after our owne lusts2. Pet. 3.3. denying the power of godlines2. Tim. 3.5. in our liues, the force of this curse touching the Ruine of Gods enemies shall light vpon vs; neither shall it serue our turne in the day of Christ to say, we were no Papists: For albeit we haue Lord, LordMatth. 7.22., and the Temple of the LordIer. 7.4., in our mouthes, yet if we hate to be reformedPsal. 50.17.; and walke stubburnely against GodLuk. 26.25., The Lord will not be mercifull vnto vs, but the wrath of the Lord and his ielousie shall smoke against vs, and he will put out our name from vnder heauenDeut. 29.20..
The Worldlings Downefall. Psal. 49.12. But Man shall not continue in honour: he is like the Beasts that die. The gentrall nature of th place of Scrip∣ture.I Know not wherto better to compare this Text then to the Writing vpon the Wall, in the midst of the king of Babel his roiall feast. When the king was in the height of his banquet, drinking wine (as the story speakes) before a thousandDan. 5.1. &c., suddenly he saw the fingers of a mans hand ouer against the Candlesticke vpon the playster of the Wall. It cooled him presently, his Countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled him, the ioynts of his loynes were loosed, and his knees smote one a∣gainst the other. Of the same nature is this Text, It see∣meth to me to be (as it were) a Counter-buffe or Crosse∣blow, to the plots, and endeuours of carnall and world∣ly-wise men, for the setling of their outward estate here in this life. In the sixt and eleuenth verses of this Psalme, we may see them in their prime, bestirring themselues exceedingly, trusting in their goods, boasting themselues in the multitude of their Riches, and (like the rich man in the Gospel) pulling downe their barnes, and building greater1. . 12.18., imagining that their habitation shall continue euer, and calling their lands by their names, that they may preserue their memorie from Obliuion. But now marke the Writing vpon the Wall: Yet man shall not con∣tinue in honour, he is like the beasts that die. This is as a so∣daine qualme ouer the stomake, as the sentence of death,
as an vnexspected gust amidst a great calme, and it doth vtterly distast all the former supposed felicitie. Thus much (briefely) to giue a generall insight into this place of Scirpture. For order in handling it, take it thus.The diuifies Here is a two fold thwarting or crossing of the purposes of the vngodly worldling. The first is this; He shall not be that which he euer wished to be: He shall not continue in honour: The other is this; He shall be that which he neuer desired to be: He shall be like the beasts that die. He shall misse of that which he sought for, and he shall haue that which he looked not for. Of these two seuerally. The first part is, that Man shall not continue in honour.The  P. In which clause there is no word very an biguous. It may happely be demanded, whether the word (Man) is of so large an extent, as that there by is meant euery particular Man: whereto is answered that the wore must be restrai∣ned only to such a Man, as is in this Psalm described, who trusts in his Gods, and boasts himselfe in the multitude of his Riches, and supposeth his Habitation shall continue euer, &c. The word in the Hebrewe Text is, Adam a name giuen to our first Father, but fiting to vs all, in regard that our making is of EarthGen. 3.9.: yet best agreeing to him, who as he is Earth by creation, so is Earth also in af∣fection, minding onely earthly things, as speaketh PaulPh. 3.1.: And such an one indeede, is here intended. Touching the word (Honour,) it is well knowne what it meaneth. And yet (in the ignorance of some) it may happen to be too much restrained. Therefore by it we must conceiue gene∣rally any eminent estate, or such condition which either for wealth, office, blood, or any outward part, is of regard and esteeme amongst men: It is well translated by some (shining:) so that it signifieth any such condition,Splend . which doth (as it were) glitter in mens eies, which the world approoueth of, for worldly respects. Now the world (Continue) implieth a possibilitie of beeng in Honour.
because no man can be said not to continue in honour but onely he which hath formerly beene in Honour. So that now this first clause occasioneth me to discourse vpon two points: One, that a carnall man, a man that hath no taste of any goodnes, may possibly thriue and prosper and grow great here on Earth. The other; that the Pro∣speritie of such an one hath no perpetuitie. Touching the first of these, 1. Do∣crine. we haue proose inough for Wicked man, yet saith of him, that his wayes alwaies pro∣sperPsal. 10 5., and that (as it is well translated out of the Hebrew) they are fenced in, as though he were ordinarily out of the reach of common miseries. And the same Dauid re∣cords in another PsaimePsal 73., how much it troubled him and what a tēptation it was vnto him to see the flourishing e∣state of the vngodly: I fretted (saith he) at the foolish, when I sawe the prosperitie of the wickedVer. 3.. The very same thing also so perplexed the Prophet Ieremie, that he was bold euen to reason the case with God, how it could stand with his iustice so to suffer it. Wherefore doth the way of the Wicked prosper, and why are they all in wealth that re∣belliously trangresse?Ier. 12.1. The point is excellētly described by Iob, The Wicked liue and waxe old, and growe in wealth: their seede is established in their sight with them, and their generation before their Eies, their houses are peaceable without Feare, and the rod of God is not vpon them, their bullocke gendreth, and fayleth not, their cowe calueth and casteth not her calfe, &c.I.  7 8.9.10. The Scripture also giueth more light to this doctrine by examples, proouing thus much vnto vs, that euen the children of God, such as feare him and make conscience of their waies, come often farre be∣hind the wicked in outward prosperitie: Isaac the sonne of promise is caried to the slaughter, when Ismael the sonne of the Bond woman sitteth quietly at home. Iacob the loued, is put forth to keepe sheepe, and Esan the ha∣ted, goes on hunting. If you looke for Ioseph you shall
finde him in prisonGen. 39.20., for Daniel, you shall see him in the denDan. 6.16., for Ieremie, he is making bookes of Lamentations and wishing his head were full of waters, and his Eies a fountaine of tearesIer. 9.1., to expresse his griefe, when the vn∣godly streich themselues vpon their beds, and eate the Lambs of the flocke, and the calues out of the folde, and sing to the sounds of the viole, and drinke wine in boules, and put farre away the euill dayAm. 6.3.4.5 6.. Now the reason why the Lord taketh, this (as may seeme) a strange course, is this. First that his children, for their sinnes, in this life may not goe altogether vnchastised, and by chastisement may be brought to the greater measure of humilitie: and that the profane, hauing at lest some shew of some good things, may not go altogether vnrewarded, and so may the sooner fill vp the meansure of iniquitie. Secondly, that it may appeare to be but a slander, which the deuill imputed to Iob, and in him, to all that are the Lords, that they serue God for rewardsIob. 1.9.. For when they euen in the midst of the crosse, shall continue n their innocen∣cie, it will then be manifest, that it is conscience and not reward which keeps them in obedience. Thirdly, the Lord taketh this course, as to take away all colour of ex∣cuse from the vngodly, so to assure vs, that he doth not, (as it were) make his books of account cleere in this life, but reserueth the full and finall account, vntill the last day of reckning, in which euery thing shall be recom∣pensed to the full, whether it be good or euill. Thus we see the truth of this point and the reasons of it; namely that a carnall man may haue a full measure of outward prosperitie. The vse of this doctrine is very excellent.The Vs It serueth to shew the vanitie of a conceipt, which is crept into the hearts of a great many, and which so strongly possesseth them, that it maketh them to contemne all religious in∣struction, and neglect all reformation whatsoeuer: And it is this. There is many an one (and let euery man looke
into his own heart to see whether he be not the mā) who beeing in his conscience guiltie of many sinnes which by the ministerie of the word are publikely reprooued, as, of ignorance, contempt of the Word, and Sacraments, scorning of Religion, neglect of the worship of God, Sabaoth-breaking, Swearing, Wantonnes, Oppression, and such like, yet blesseth himselfePsal. 10.3. in his heart, and sets light by the threatnings of Gods vengeance; because for all his hardned course of sinning against God, God see∣meth to blesse him, and to prosper him in all things: And therefore he doth often thus commune with his owne soule: I doe indeede heare the Preacher speake much a∣gainst me, and I confesse my selfe to be euen such an one as he nameth: he telleth often of the wrath and displeasure of God against such courses, and how the Lord is an auenger of all such things. But yet still (God I him thanke) here I liue and haue health and quietnes: my heart is at peace, my field beareth as good a Crop, my cattell bring as great merease, my busines hath as good successe my selfe cary as good credit and opinion with the world, as the holiest of them all. Now if God were so offended with my carriage as the Preacher would enforce, how could it be that he beeing the giuer of these things, would bestow them vpon me? Is it likely that I should thus enioy them, if my conuersation were not pleasing in his sight? Would he thus fauour me, vnlesse he did loue me? Surely no: And therefore here is my resolution, they shall all talke and preach, and reprooue while they will, I will continue one manner of man, seeing I see the blessing of God vpon me so apparantly. These be the very thoughts of carnall men, who strengthen their hands to euill, because of outward prosperitie. Now the doctrine taught is very effectuall to shew the idlenes of this sancie. Dauid here speaking of a meere worldling, denieth not but he may be in Honour. So that a man may outwardly prosper, & yet still be hatefull & abominable before God. Esan was a man hatedRom. 9.13. of God, yet the fat∣nes
of the earthGen. 27.39. was his portion as well as holy Iacobs. And when Abrahā intreated god on the behalf of Ismael, although the Lord wold not yeeld in regard of tying the promiseed seede to his generation; yet for outward things he promised to make him fruitfull and to multiply him ex∣ceedinglyGen. 17.16. The Scripture speaketh of some, which haue their portion in this lifePsal. 17.14., and yet haue no part in hauen: such an one was the rich glutton, of whom the Text saith, that in his life time he receiued pleasureLuk. 16.25., and was therefore tormented afterwards. So that it is but a fonde course for any man to promise peace to his owne soule because of outward things. For, (as Salomon saith) the same condition is to the iust and to the wicked, to him that sweareth, and to him that feareth and oathEccle. 9.2.. Let not then any man, beeing by the powerfull applying of the word conuicted of sinne, hearten himselfe to continue in it be∣cause of Gods forbearance, imagining, because God hol∣deth his peace, that he is such an one as himselfe is; but ra∣ther let him feare, least the Lord doe but fatte him vp a∣gainst the day of slaughter, suffering him to run on, till he haue filled vp the full measure of Iniquitie, that he may then receiue the full measure of destruction. And so much for the first doctrine. The second doctrine of the first clause is,The 2. Do∣ctrine. that the pro∣speritie of the wicked is not perpetuall (But, he shall not continue in honour.) This (But) is that which crosseth the hopes of all Worldings, & nippeth their exspectations in the head. Many the like Buts we finde in holy Scripture. The bread of deceipt is sweete, (saith the wise man,) But the throate is filled with grauellProu. 20.17.. Reioyce, O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheere thee in the dayes of thy youth, and walke in the wayes of thy heart, and in the fight of thine Eyes: But knowe, that for all these things God will bring thee to iudgementEccle. 11.9.. These things hast thou done and I held my Tongue, therefore thou thoughtest, that I was like thee: But I will reprooue thee, and set them in
order before theePsal. 50.21.. It is the speach of God to wicked Hypocrites. So Paul speaking of those which are oppo∣sites to the the ministerie of the Word, giueth them their But also. As Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so doe these resist the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobates con∣cerning the faith: But they shall preuaile no longer2. Tim. 3.8.9.. So the Rich man in the Gospel was met withall: He promi∣sed to his soule great matters, But God said unto him, O foole this night they shall fetch thy soule from theeLuk 12 20.. So that this word (But) prooueth many times to be as gall and worme-wood: It doth so come athwart the purposes of the vngodly. He shall not continue in honour (saith the Text:) the word are properly, He shall not tarie all night in Honour: and thereupon because it is Adam in the Hebrewe, some (& the same learned) haue vsed this place to prooue that Adam fell the same day in which he was created: How euer it be touching that, the holy Ghost his meaning is to note out a very short continuance. We are wont to describe a short aboad, by lodging in an Inne, where a man seldome stayeth in his trauaile a∣boue a night. Now the continuance of the carnall man in his honour and prospetitie, shall be farre lesse, the time shall be (as it were) a degree shorter. The truth hereof is fulfilled by two meanes. For first, either his prosperitie continueth not to him, or els (secondly) he continueth not to his prosperitie. Touching the first, Iob saith, that the wicked man albeit he haue gotten much and raked heaps together, yet many times, his eies see the destructionIob. 21.20.. And to effect this, the Lord hath set euen an host of enemies against all worldly things. The rich in mony is in danger of Theeues, he which abounds in houshold stuffe is in hazard of fire: The rust layeth siege to thy gold, and the moth to thy garment. Thy great heards of cattell may be swept away with rottennes: At sea Pirates may spoile thee: In thy husbandrie, blasting may vndoe thee. All these and many
moe meanes then these, the Lord hath to take prosperi∣tie from the vngodly. Adde, that sometime the Plague lighteth on him, which Dauid prayed for vpon his Ene∣mies: the extortioner (or vsurer) catcheth al that be hathPsal. 109.11. The Lord can make him when he soweh much, to bring in but little, and to put vp his wealth into a broken baggeHag. 1.6.: So that he shall consume like that fat of LambsPsal 37 20., and growe poore and wast in his outward estate, to the vex∣ing of his heart, he knoweth not how: yea and all this many times in lesse space then the wealth was gathered. The tree which was many yeares in growing, is burnt to ashes in a short space: And the famous temple of Ierusa∣lem which was fourtie and sixe yeares a buildingIoh 2.10., was soarse so many houres in burning. The wealth of many yeares getting is many times brought to nothing in an instant. It is like vnto the chaffe, whch though it be a while layd vp together vpon an heape, yet on a sodaine commeth a blast of wind, and scattereth it to and fro, from the face of the earth, so that it is euen a thing vnpos∣sible to bring it backe againe to the former condition: And by this meanes is that verified vpon the Man of Earth, which the Scripture saith: He hath deuoured sub∣stance, and he shall vomit it; for God shall drawe it out of his bellie: The encrease of his house shall goe away, it shall flowe away in the day of Gods wrath, then shall none of his meate be left, therefore shall none hope for his goodsIob. 20.15.21.28.. As the Lord doth often thus deale with the wicked World∣ling in his owne person, so though he suffer happely the owner himselfe to enioy that he hath during his time, yet he curseth it to his posteritie. God laieth vp the sorrowe of the Father for his childrenIob 21.19.. And If his children be in great number, the sword shall destroy them, and his posteri∣ie shall not be satisfied with breadIob 27.14.: He begetteth a sonne (saith Salomon) and in his hand is nothingEccl 5.13.: one that commeth to beggerie notwithstanding the great Wealth of his predecessor. This is an Euill which the preacher,
sawe vnder the sunne, A man, to whom God hath giuen riches, and treasures, and honour, and he wanteth nothing for his soule of all that it desireth, but God giueth him no power to eate thereof,ccle. 6. 2. but a strange man shall eate it vp at It is that which in this Psalme is called, leauing riches for others: and wherwith the Lord twitted the Rich man, whose shall these things be which thou hast prouided?. 2 0. Thus the Lord when he is so pleased can and doth take away prosperitie from the Wicked. Now put case it con∣tinue in full measure with him so long as he continueth, yet at last the Lord taketh him from it. So he tooke the Rich man from his wealth 12 0. Haman from his honour 7 10., Belibazzar from this Empire 5 30 Nabal from his abun∣dance 25 38., Herod from his stateA 12.23 the Glutton from his bel∣ly-cheere 1.2.. Indeede (saith Dauid) I haue seene the wic∣ked strong, and spreading himselfe like a greene Bay-tree, yet he passed away, and loe he was gone, I sought him but he could not be found: And Zophar in Iob; The reioycing of the Wicked is short, and the ioy of the Hypocrites is but a moment. Though his excellency mount vp to the heauens, and his head reach vnto the clouds, yet he shall perish for e∣uer like his dung, so that they which haue seene him shall say, Where is he? He shall flee away as a dreame, and they shall not finde him, and shall passe away as a vision of the night, so that the Eye which had seene him shall doe so no moreIob. 20.5.6.7.8 9.. This is the portion of the Wicked man, and the he∣ritage that he shall haue from God for his workesIob. 20.29. she 1. Vse.. The vse of this doctrine is twofold. The first is taught by Dauid, thus, Be not vaine, if riches encrease, set not your heart thereonPsal 62.10.. It is further vrged by Salomon: Wilt thou cast thine eies vpon that which is nothing? for riches taketh her to her wings as an Egle and flieth into the Hea∣uenPron. 23.5.. The Apostle Paul also, presseth the same point: Charge them that are rich in this world, that they trust not in vncertaine riches1. Tim. 6.17.; It is but folly for a man to trust to that of which there is no assurance. All is but like to
Ionas his Gourd, which came vp in a nght, and ithered in a nightIo .. Rather we should labour for that one needfull thingLuk. 10.42., whereof being once possessed, we can neuer after be depriued. The second vse is taught in this Psalme:Tho . Vse: We not afraid, let it neuer disquiet thee, when one is made rich, and when the glorie of his house is encreased, for he shall take no∣thing away when he diethVer. 1 1: More at large in another Psalme. Fret not thy selfe because of the wicked man, nei∣ther be enuious for the euill doers, for they shall soone be cut downe as the grasse, and shall wither like the greene hearb. And afterwards; Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not appeare and thou shalt locke after his place, and be shall not be found, his day is comming, &cPsal. 37.1 10.11. So that the vse is, to teach vs to possesse our soles with patience notwithstanding the gallantnes and iollitie of the vn∣godly: for he hath but his time, like a great Thistle which starts vp in the Summer, and at the comming of Winter is hidden in the Earth; or, a counter, which now by the Marchant is put for an hundred pounds, and anon is throwne into the bag, and is no better then those which stoode but for an halfe-penie. Thus much for the first Crosse: The earthly man shall not bee that which he wished to be. The 3. Do∣ctrine and that a part of the Text.Now followeth the second: He shall be that he neuer looked to be. He is like the beasts that die. This cause is to be applied, chiefely to the end and eath of the earthly man; in which, he shall be like the beasts that die: or, as it is more properly, He shall be like the beasts dying of the morainePecoribus morticinis. Tremel., and so become cation and are good for no∣thing. Now for the opening her of, weare to vnderstand that the earthly minded man is in hs death like vnto Beasts so dying, in foure things especially. The first is, that he dieth vnwillingly. So it is with the Beast. It is in the nature of euery things to desire the preseruation of it selfe, and to abhorre the coutrarie. Hereupon in the vn∣reasonable
creature there is a kind of strugling & relucta∣tion, and wrastling with death, so that it doth not but by violence yeeld thereunto. Euen so is it with the vn∣godly which mindeth only earthly things. His death (I know) may be peaceable in shew (the naturall strength beeing wasted and abated by some long sicknes) and in speach, he may pretend a willingnes to depart: but it is vnpossible that it should be with fulnes of inward cōsent. For what hope hath the hypocrite, when he hath heaped vp riches, if God take away his soule, saith the ScriptureIob. 7.8.; And, when a wicked man dieth, his hope perisheth, saith SalomonProu. 11.7.. So that because he cannot with any comfort, assure himselfe of entrance into rest, therefore he cannot but be most vnwilling to depart. For who will be willing to part from a present setlednes, for a matter of vncer∣tentie? Who would not rather stay here to enioy that which he is well acquainted with, then to loose his life for the hazard of he knoweth not what? True it is, Gods children long to be dissoluedPhil. 1.23., and I am now readie to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand, saith Paul, in a comfortable and reioycing manner2. Tim. 4 6.. But with the wicked it is not so; death, to them is called The king of feareIob. 18.14., and the slymie valley is a place of terrout to their conceit. Therefore, they will fetch thy soule from thee Luk. 12.20., saith God to the rich man. As who should say, Thou art I know loth to depart, but they shall fetch is away from thee, they shall take it by violence. The second particular wherein this earthly man, is like to the dying beasts, is this. The carke is of the Beast so dying, can not chuse but be noysome and vnsauoury: the smell is offensiue vnto euery one that passeth by, and the sight vnpleasing. So is the dying worldling in Gods sight. Pre∣tious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, saith Dauid. 11.15.. And no meruaile. Their Bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost1. Cor. .19. their soules are holy and vn∣blameable and without fault, (by the blood of Christ) in
Gods sightCol. 1.1. Their death therefore must need be a sacri∣fice of a sweete smelling sauour vnto God. As for the vn∣godly, it is not so with them. Their be dies are cages of vncleanes, their Throtes open sepulchresPsal. 5.9. their members. weapons of vnrighteousnesseRom. 6.13.: In their soules, dwelleth the Prince that ruleth in the ayre, euen the spirit who worketh in the children of disobedience.Ephe.2 2.. How can they be but noysome in the eies of God, yea most lothsome and abominable? Surely he will say vnto them, Depart from me I know you notMath. 7.23. Matth. 25.12.. The third degree of likenes be∣twixt the dying Beast and the dying Worldling is this. The bodie of a beast whom such a disease hath quelled, becommeth a pray to the foules of the aire, and is torne in pieces by other beasts. Where the dead Carkeis is, thi∣ther the Egles resort, saith our SauiourMatth. 24 23. It fareth so with the worldling. For as his goods ill gotten come many times, through the iust iudgement of God, to be a pray to others, and to be the spoile of strangers, so his soule is seased vpon by the damned spirits, and is presently ar∣raigned before the iudgement feate of GodHeb. 9.27., and is dis∣missed thence into it Owne placeAct. 1.25., where it is kept in chains vnder darknes, vnto the iudgemē of the great dayI de. 6.. The fourth and last point of likenesse is this. There is no regard had of the death of a bruit beast, the remembrance is soone gone. The owner happily may ewaile that losse, it beeing some diminution of his substance: but other∣wise, it is a matter which the world paseth by and taketh no notice of. So is the death of the carnall Worldling. There may bee (perhaps) some sorrow among his owne people, who receiued some out: and benefit by his meanes, and with them his memor e may continue. But els there is no misse. The Church of God hath no occasion to lament his losse, in regard that it is depriued of a comfortable member. No man wil open his mouth to say of him, Alas he is now gone, who if he had still liued, such was his zeale, has godly wisedome, and good ca∣riage,
that he might much haue furthered Gods glorie. But men let him goe with some such phrase, What is such as one gone? and there is an end, some other worldling (per∣haps) of the same humour, and of the like fleshly dispo∣sition, who hath beene fellowe with him in the same car∣nall courses, may chance to say as the old Prophet did, o∣uer the Prophet of God when he buried him, Alas my brother1. King 13.3., my old friend, such an one is gone, with whom I haue ioyfully conuersed many a time, whom I haue beene acquainted with so many yeares, &c. Here is all. But Gods Church finds not it selfe maimed in regard of the holy communion of Saints. And thus by degrees his memorie soone dyeth, according to the saying of Salomon. The memoriall of the iust shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rotPro. 10.7.. His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall haue no name in the streets.Iob 18.17. And so much for the opening of this doctrine. Now for the preuenting of all suspitious misconstru∣ing,The Vse., I must (before I mention the vse) say thus muchThe reason why this pre∣uention was v∣sed, was, be∣case this ser∣mon wa prea∣hed at a fune∣rall.. If any man shall spider-like turne the sweet tast of a well-meant speach into poison, & imagine it to be an inuectiue against some particular, he shall therein wrong both me and himselfe. Me, in vncharitable mistaking me: Him∣selfe, because he shall by that meanes be hindred from making that good vse of the doctrine taught, which is required. If your demaund of me therefore, whom I meane by this Man of whom I haue discoursed hitherto: I say vnto thee (whosoeuer thou art which makest the questiō) Thou art the man, if so be thou be such an one as is in this Psalme described, which trustest in thy good, and boastest in the multitude of thy RichesVer. 6.. My sermon hitherto hath beene as a parable: in which though one singular man hath beene named, yet one in speciall hath not beene meant, I will make the moral and meaning to be the same that our Sauiour Christ made to that speach of his, tou∣ching the Rich man. In the ende to shewe his true intent,
he added this saying,L . So is he that gatheroth ri to himselfe and is not rich in God. The same is the Man intended in this doctrine. But as for aiming at a∣ny one in particular, my conscience is free in the sight of God. And therefore let vs all apprehend and en∣tertaine it as a matter which concerties our seluēs, and make this vse of it, to beware how in our liues and conuersations, we be like bruit beasts lead with sensuali∣tie2. Pet. .12., or like horse and mule which vnderstandeth notPsal. 32.9., or as the sow, whose greatest felicitie is to wallow in mire2. Pet. 2.22., or in vnbridled lusts like fed horsesIes. 5.8., or otherwise like the baser creatures groueling, still on the earth and alwaies looking downeward: For this is certaine, if we liue like beasts, we shall perish like the beasts, and our last end shall be like theirs, yea and worse then theirs; because, death which is to them an end of woe, shall be to vs the beginning of sorowes, and as it were a prologue to the most wofull Tragedie, of a neuer ending miserie. Let God alone haue the glorie. FINIS.
