14020 99840063 4534
THE JMAGE of God, or laie mans boke, in which the right knowledge of God is disclosed, and diuerse doubtes besides the principal matter, made by Ro∣ger Hut∣chinson. 1550. ¶Newly imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwelling ouer Aldersgate. Anno do. 1560. Cum gratia & priuilegio Reginae maiestatis per sep∣tennium.
¶The contentes and Chapters. What God is. We must learne what God is of gods word, and not of mans wisdom. Chap. 1 God is of himself. Chap. 2. fol. 6 God is a spirit, and how the scriptures do graunt vnto him a head, eies, hāds fete, and al other parts of mans body he is a bird, a shoter, a husbandman, Christ is his Image and man also. Chap. iii. Fol. 7 God is immutable, and how he is other whiles angry, otherwhiles pleased, somtime a slepe, somtime awake, som¦time forgetfull, standing, sitting, wal∣king. &c. Chap. iiii. Fol. 14 God is vnsearcheable. chap. v. 17 God is inuisible, and how the faithful of the old testament sawe him diuers ti∣mes. chap. vi. 18 God is euery where, and how Christ is in the Sacrament. chap. vii. 19 God is ful of vnderstanding. cha. viii. 31 God is truth, and whether it be lefull to lie for any consideration. chap. ix. 73 God is full of compassion. chap. x. 42 God is full of rightuousnes, and of the prosperitie of euil, and the affliction of good men. chap. xi. 43
God is ful of al goodnes, chap. xii. 46 God only is immortall, and of the im∣mortalitie of soules and aungels. chap. xiii. fol. 47 God is the maker of all thinges, wherof he made them, by whome, and who made the deuill, and of the beginning of syn and euyl, Chap. xiiii. 48 God ruleth the world after his prouidē∣ce, and how he rested the seuenth day, Chapter, xv. Fol. 53 God only knoweth al things, ch. xvi. 73 God only forgeueth synne: our pardo∣ning what it is, of losing and binding, Chapter. xvii. fol. 76 God only is almighty, and whether he can synne, die, or lye, with other pro∣perties. Chap. xviii. fol. 92 God is defined by ye scripture. ch. xix. 99 xx. 100 What a persone is. In what order he wyl write of a person. A person is not a difference of vocatiō and office, and that the fathers of the old testament worshipped a Trinitie, Chapter. xxi. fol. 101 A persone is no outward thing, & why the churche hath vsed thys worde. Chapter. xxii. fol. 107
That there be thre persons. Christ is a substaunce. Chap. xxiii. 109 The holy spirit is not a Godly inspira∣cion, is gouernour of the world, to be prayed vnto, a forgeuer of synne. Chapter. xxiiii. fol. 112 Christ is vnconfounded, why he became man, and why he came so longe after Adams fall. Chap. xxv. fol. 120 The holy comforter is vnconfounded, why he descended in the lykenes of a doue. Chapter. xxvi. fol. 130 Corporal similitudes of God. cha. xxvii. folio. 134 That all thre are but one God. The deitie of Christ and the spirite deny not a vnitie. Chap. xxviii. fol. 142 All the partes of the definition made of God are proued to agre vnto Christ. Chap. xxix. fol. 161 All the partes of the same definition are proued to agree to the almighty com∣forter and spirit. Chap. xxx. fol. 166
Heresies confuted in this boke. AGainst the heresy of trans∣stantiatiō, and corporal or lo∣call presence. cha. vii. fol. 21. Against the Anthropomorphi¦tes, otherwise named humaniformiās which suppose God to be of corporal forme and shape. chap. iii. fol. 7.8.9 Agaist popish and outward priesthod, & the sacrifice of the masse. Chap. viii. folio. 33.34.35. &c. Against the Priscillianistes which think that for some consideration sometime lying is not forbiddē. cha. ix. 13.37.38 Against the Origeniftes, which say that all men & women, and deuels also at length shalbe saued. chap. x. fol. 42 Against the late Epicures, which thinke that God so rested the seuēth day frō all his workes, that now he worketh no more. Chap. xv. fol. 53 Against Astrologers, that thynke all thinges are gouerned by fate & desti∣nie, & by the influence and mouing of the starres. Chap. xv. fol. 61 Against such as thinke that we through loue or forgeuing other, deserue re∣mission of our misdedes, Chap. xvii. Folio. 76.78
Against our late Anabaptistes and Do∣natistes, whiche teache that euill mi∣nisters can not christen, lose and bind. Chap. xvii. Fol. 80.81 Against Peters primacie. cha. xii. 81.82 Against the late Anabaptistes, and No∣uacianes, whiche denie those that fall after Baptisme, to be recouerable. Chapter. xviii. fol. 91.92 Against the Patripassians, and Sabela∣nes, whiche confounde the Father, Christ and the holy spirit, saying that they be thre names and one thyng. Chap. xxi. fol. 101.102 Against our late englysh Saducees, and Libertines, which deny the almyghty comforter to be a substaunce, & holde that he is a godly inspiration. Chap. xxiiii. fol. 112 Against the same Libertines, and Sadu∣ces, whiche make the vnlearned peo∣ple beleue, that good aungels are no∣thing els then good mociōs, and that hel is nothing but a tormenting con∣science, and that a ioyfull, quiet, and mery conscience is heauen, Chap. xxiiii. Fol. 112 Against the damnable opinion, that the
deuill is nothing but a filthy affection coming of the flesh, and that all euyll spirites are carnall mocions, and sen∣sual lustes. Fol. 116.117 Against the assercion of the Arriannes, that Christ toke vpon hym our flesh, but not a soule also. fol. 121 Against the damnable opiniō of the late Anbaptist whiche denied that Christ toke his humanitie of the blessed vir∣gin. Chap, xxv. fol. 121.122.123 Against the Arians that deny the father, Christ, and the holy spirit to be of one substaunce and essence. fol. 142.143 Against the multitude of Gods. 145 Against the Manicheis, whiche make two Gods, calling them two contra∣ry principles. fol. 144.145 Against the heresie of praying to saintes Folio. 145.146 Against vnwritten verities. 104
TO THE MOST REVE∣rend father L. Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Cantorbury, Primat of al England, and Metropolitane, his most humble Roger Hut∣chinson, wisheth peace, welfare, and eternal felicitie. PVblius Scipio (he that was first surnamed African) ryght honorable Father was wont to say that he was neuer les idle, then when he was Idle, mea∣ning therby forsomuch as he was a ma∣gistrate that he most earnestly thought & mused of cōmon wealth matters, when he semed to others least occupied. A wor¦thy saying for so noble a man, and to be embraced of all rulers, namely in these troubelous dayes, in whiche so manye thinges be disordred, and nede reforma∣cion. So albeit I am no Magistrate as noble Scipio was, bu a priuate persone, yet I haue thought it my boundē dutie to see suche houres, in whiche I myght haue ben vnoccupied, which some spend in banketting, rioting, and gamning, be∣stowed neither vnthriftely, ne idelly, but
to the profite of the common wealth, to teache the laye people vnderstanding & science to the vttermost extente of my small power. Vnderstanding is a seede that God soweth in mans soule, and among al his gyftes, knowledge is the chiefest. It or∣dreth the mynde, gouerneth the body, directeth al our workes and affaires, tea¦ching vs what ought to be done, & what is to be left vndone, without whiche ne∣ther a kyng can rule his subiectes, nor the captaine guide his armie, nor a By∣shop enstruct his flocke, ne any man of science or craftes man shewe forth and practise his arte or occupation. Nowe if we recount other thynges to be of great price and value, your wysdome know∣eth that the knowledge of God surmoū∣teth so farre all other sciences, as God hymselfe excelleth all other creatures. And thesame without denay is most pro¦fitable and necessary both vnto kynges, Dukes, Erles, and Lordes, as appereth. Psalm. ii. Deute. xvii. Esay. xlix. where they be named the nourses of Religion, and also vnto gentlemen, marchauntmē yeomen, husbandmen, to al degrees spi∣rituall
and temporal. Vaine are all men,Sap. 1 which haue not the knowledge of God, sayth the wyseman:Rom.  and Paul testifieth that because it semed to them not good to haue the knowledge of god, god gaue them vp into a leude minde to their own heartes lust, and to all vnclennes. For if he be lyght, suche as know not hym,1 Iohn.  do stumble in darkenes: if he be the waye, they that be ignoraunt haue loste theyr waye: if he be the truth,Iohn. 14 al suche as haue no acquaintaunce with hym, be blinded & disceiued: if he only be good,Luk. 1 we must borow & craue all good thinges of hym alone: if al science be the lordes, we must be , Gods scholers, if he only be almighty,Eccle. 24 all our power strength and habilitie cometh frō him: if he be life, the end of such as be ignoraūt,Mark. 10 & wil not seke to know the Lord, shal be eternal death. For our sauiour & mercie stock saieth yt this knowledge is eternal lyfe: This is eternal life, to know thee & Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent,  be ye true God.Iohn. 17 But we must fetch the right knowledge and true description of hym out of holy wryte, whiche as the Apostle telleth is profitable to teache,2 Tim. 3 to controll to a∣mende,
and to instructe in all rightuous∣nes. I haue made this treatise of hym out of the same, and forasmuche as my entent and matter herein is to portray and paint our sauiour Christ, who is the bryghtnes of the euerlastyng lyght,Hebr. 1 Sap. 7 the vndefiled glasse and liuely Image of the diuine maiestie, I doe call it the Image of GOD. Or els because suche thinges be here opened and discouered, which be ne¦cessary to be beleued and knowen of the laye and vnlearned people (I would not haue them vtterly lacke Images) name it if ye wyl, the laye mans boke, for ima∣ges wer wont to be named Libri laicorū, the bokes of the laitie. I am not the fyrst that hath painted Christ, Paul painted hym longe sithe to the Galathians, as he wytnesseth:Gala. 3 I haue paynted Iesus Christ before your eyes, and haue cru¦fied him amongst you: and all the other Apostles, Euangelistes, and Prophetes were painters. My mynd is not to por∣traye any new, raunge, or vnknowen Image, but to renew, and repayre again the olde Image that Paul made, which hath bene so darkened with gloses, and is so bespotted with coloures of mans
witte, so stayned through shamefull co∣uetousnes, libertie, and gredy ambicion, that marueyle it is to se men so vnreue∣rent towardes the maiestie of God their maker. Seneca a wise and sage Phylosopher willeth yt mete giftes be not vnmeetely geuen to vnmete persons, as armour to women, nettes to studentes, wyues to boyes: and Christ the wysdome of God commaundeth: Geue not that which is holy to dogges, neyther caste ye pearles before swyne, meaning therby,Math. 7 that all kynd of giftes ought to be agreable and answerable to their degrees and vocaci∣ons, to whome they are geuen. Nowe what thyng coulde bee deuised more a∣greable to your graciouse estate, then his Image, whose glory & honour you haue alwayes sought to aduaunce, not with∣out great daunger of your goodes and lyfe, for whiche you are bound to render hym moste harty thankes, that he chose your grace for a bless instrumente to sweepe cleane his house and churche, to redresse all abuses, and to restore agayne his fallen and decayed glorye, maugre the head of all ennemies. Therfore I do
presente and dedicate this Image hono∣rable father, vnto your grace, bothe for the worthines of the matter (whiche is incomparable) for the metenes of your person, for a perpetual monument of my good wyll towardes your Lordship, and also for a testimony, token, and declara∣tion of my zeale and beneuolence to my contrey men. If I shal se it to be profita∣ble to them, I shall be encoraged to take mo fruitfull matters in hande, in whiche I desyre continually to occupy my selfe, but the worlde is so euyll, so vnkynde, so vnthankefull to studentes, that pouer∣tie causeth them to remitte, and slacke their studies, and to seke the worlde to maynteine their necessities. Abounda∣unce and wealth dwelleth only with tho¦se, whyche haue Gods houses in pos∣session, whiche eate vp hys people lyke bread, and are not content to lyue vpon theyr owne sweate, but doe lyue vpon other mens goods and laboures, vpon the church goodes, which are the pores. I do meane all suche, as in the papistical tyme were wont to lyue of their landes to kepe good hospitalitie, to mainteine scholes, and houses of almes, and nowe
they be purchessars, and sellers awaye of the same, vsurers, rent raysers, grasi∣ers, and farme mongers, wherby hospi∣talitie, tillage, and many good houses be decayed in Englande, and the Realme is vnpeopled, and disfurnyshed. Besydes some be berebrwers, some fermers of be∣nefices, some persons, some vicares, by∣ers of improparations, some deanes of colledges, some prebendaries, and offi∣cers also in the kynges house. Agayne priestes, which should be preachers, and distributers of the holy sacramentes, be lawiers, commissaries, chauncellors, offi¦cialles, proctors, receiuers, stewards, the office of saluaciō is vnregarded through couetousnes. And lawiers whiche be no priests, be parsons, vicars, prebendaries against the ordinaūce of God, of whiche saynt Paule recordeth: Euen so dyd the Lorde ordeine,1 Cor.  that they whiche preache the gospel, should lyue of the gospel, and no other, neither kynge, Lorde, Gentle∣man, ne lawier. And  this mingle mā¦gle of spirituall, and temporall regiment and offices is suffered, as if ther were ne∣ther god, ne magistrate ordeined of god to redresse suche abuses. What marueile
is it, if mans ordinaunces and statutes be broken, wher the ordinaunce of God is plainly resisted, and not receiued? Other some that pretend they be true preachers of Gods word, and are coun∣ted holy and discrete men, reteined the kynges chapleines, and with other lor∣des both spirituall and temporall, be in deede benefice mongers, prebend mon∣gers, haue many archdeaconships, dean∣ries, and they do not the office of one of their vocatiōs: some once a yere or twise peraduenture, doth preach a sermon be∣fore the kyng, or at ye spittle, or at Pauls crosse, to delude and paynte the worlde, and to vpholde their good names. But in the countrey where is most nede, and where their liuinges lie, they preach not at all, the most part neuer preache. Idle chaplains many yeres possesse, and with¦holde wrongfully preachers liuynges. Is not the ordinaūce of god broken here in? Is not his proclamation disobeyed, whych he procleth by the mouth of saint Paul: Tessa. 3 He who laboreth not, ought not to eate? Had Eleazar, and Abiather, so many liuinges? Did Hely, Achimelech and Sadoc, dispend so much of the costs
of paryshes, and doe nothyng therfore?Abiatha Sodoc. Dyd temporal men amongst the Iewes in the old testament thus lyue of the al∣tare, as they do now of the Gospel? Loke on their examples, behold the Apostles, behold Timothe and Tite, and if we doe alowe the doctrine of the primatiue and apostolicall churche,The Aap¦stles. let vs folow the ex∣ample of thesame. Behold the elder fa∣thers, Origen, Ciprian, Ambrose, Ierom Austen, Chrisostome, and others, which spent all their liues in preaching Gods worde to the people, as appeareth plaine in their workes, which be ether sermons lessons, homelies to the people, or els dis¦putations, and confutations of heresies in theire tymes. Theyre trade was to preache and expounde the scriptures to the people on the holy daies,The elder fathers were prea∣ching pre∣lates. & on some worke daies, & thē thei procured their ex∣posicions and sermons to be written in latin or greke for the erudition of them whiche folowed. Some begin to renewe this trade now in Egland, I besech al∣mighty God to prosper them. I am sure that the best learned of them, is not able to proue that it ought to be otherwyse, or that the scriptures do alow these plu∣ralities
of liuynges, dispensacions, to quots of promocions, non residences, im∣properacions, and this mingle mangle. Paul cōmaundeth euery mā to exercise that vocation wherunto he is called. He aloweth euery man one vocatiō, Cor. 7 one of∣fice and occupacion, not many, for he say¦eth in vocatione, in his vocation, not in his vocations. I hearsay an ecclesiasti∣call law, which I haue long desired, shall come forth shortly, I trust therfore that al spirituall abuses shalbe redressed spe∣dely, without any consideraciō of priuat lucre to any man, high or lowe, spiritual or temporal, & according to the coūsel of which Dauid speaketh, saying: the word of God is my counseller. Truely onles these thinges be reformed, englyshe ser∣uice, homelies, and the right vse of the sacranētes, do not make vs christen mē: We differ from the Turkes, but in out∣ward rites & ceremonies, not in the sub∣staunce of our fayth, whiche is vpryght conuersaciō & go life. But they which should reforme others, some be entāgled with the same vices them selues. Dicing and carding are forbidden, but dycyng and carding houses are vpholden, some
in their own houses, & in the kinges ma∣iesties court (God saue his noble grace, and graunt that vertue and knowledge may mete in his royal hert) geue ensam∣ple to his subiectes to breake his statu∣tes & lawes. Prisons in London, where men lye for dette, be dycing houses, pla∣ces of correction & punishment, be dēnes and scholes of vnthriftines, open drun∣kerdes haue no punsshment, aduoutrie is recoūted but a light matter, chaplains are found of the costes of pore parishes, thorow which disorder many thousands here in england be depriued of the swete milke of Gods word, and lacke teachers to declare thē their duties toward God and their kyng. This is not only my la∣mentation, but the lamenting of all true herted Christians, the voyce of the comi¦naltie, the decay of the comen welth, and a ioyful hearing, glad & plesaunt newes to our enemies, that gape & looke for the ende of these matters, whiche wyl be de∣struction and ruine,  this darnell of co∣uetousnes and lybertie euery man to do what hym lyste, be not weeded out, and Gods wrath pacified by some redresse and amendmēt. For seing the head is so
sycke and disseased, what marueill is it if the body be so froward, so disobedient, & so desperat, If thou wylt heale the body, thou must beginne with the head, for his health cometh thence: I would saye, the next way to make obedient and Godly people, is ye godly enample of magistra∣tes. It is wrytten: Secundum iudicem po∣puli sic. &c.Eccle. 10 As the rulers of the people be such are their subiectes. They are na∣med of God the heads of the people, of others the bellies of the cōmon wealth. As the head is troubled when the hand, the leg, yea the litle finger suffereth an∣guysh, & the belly sendeth sustenaūce to al the partes of ye body: so rulers, in that they are called heades & bellies, ar admo¦nished of their office, to regard the nede and oppression of their subiectes, and to care for the whole body of the common wealth, leste if thei tender one part, & op∣presse another, it brede and gender diui∣sion, strife, rebellion, & parties, as it hath done. And they liwise are admonished to be obediēt, tractable and lowly of ser∣uice. Nothing is more sauegarde to a prince, thē the loue & hert of his cōmons and nothing is more daungerous, more
slippery, then to be feared, for as father Ennius sayd: quē metuunt, oderunt,Ennius. quem quisque odit, perisse expetit. Whō men do fear, him do thei hate wtal. And whom they hate, they wyshe and seke his fall. And Iesus the son of Sirach, saith:Eccle. 1 An vnwise prince spoyleth his people. Loke on the ensample of Roboā, and vpon the good counsel yt his yonge minions gaue their kyng, I thinke he rewarded them for it afterwarde as desirers of diuision and parties.3 Reg. 1 They that wyl be feared of many, must nedes be afrayed of many. The glory of a king, is the welfare of his subiectes. It was a mery world (quod ye papist) before the Bible came forth in en¦glysh, all thinges were good chepe and plentyful. Nay, nay, if these thinges wer reformed, & euery man both spirituall & temporal wer compelled by some lawe & statute to serue but in one vocation, and one office, we shuld haue a golden world England wold become a paradise, God wold blesse vs as he hath promised both heauenly & bodely. The redresse & amen∣demēt of enormities in the cōmon weal, must come frō the magistrates, not by re¦bels,
for they are powers exalted & ordei¦ned of God for thesame entent, who hea¦leth the body by the pollicie of the head, not of the fete. If not, we shal in stede of the comfortable promises of God be de∣stroied and ouerwhelmed with terrible plagues which he threatneth to the brea¦kers of his lawe,Deut. 28 as dearth, warre, discen¦tion, vprores, insurrections, pestilence, straunge disseases. &c. We haue a tast of these curses already, God hath bent his bowe, and let slyp some of his arrowes, (which be his plagues) long sith among vs, we may perceiue by that which hath chaunsed, what touch he wyll kepe with vs hereafter, and what is like to folow. O eternal God spare thy seruauntes, let not the enemies of ye truth haue suche cause to reioyse, suffer not hogs, filthy & couetous men to roote and treade down thy vineyard any lenger, but hold vp the staffe of thyne enheritaunce: Let not the preaching of thy smete son encrease the damnacion of thy people, but doe thou drawe and turne them, worke their amē¦dement who holdest in thy handes the hartes of rulers and al mē. Al these enor∣mities be the fruites of euil hartes, make them O God cleane hearted, that they
may powre forth good fruites by the o∣peration of thy holy spirit, who pre∣serue your grace in good health and make your gouern∣ment prosperous to you, to this Real∣me, and to the churche of God. So be it. At London the .xxvi. of Iune. ¶Maister doctor Byll. Images are made to put vs in mynde Of that which is dead or farre absent, But God is neither as we do fynde. But aye liuing, and eche where present. Images are cursed grauen by mans wyt In place that are set for any religion, But an Image made out of holy wryt, Is not forbidden in myne opinion. An Image is painted here in this boke, Neither with false , nor mās inuētiōs But out of Gods boke set out to all folke, Fruitfull & necessary to al true christiās Hutchinson shope it for good men to regard With thankes his costes, with prayse his paynes rewarde.
AN EXACT TABLE OF AL the principall matters contei∣ned in this boke. A ABsolutiō of the the minister. 90 Abraham lyed not to Abyme∣leck. Fol. 38 Abrahams vision. 103 135 A clene sacrifice. 33 Accidens remaine in in the sacrament. 117 Against fate and de∣stinie, or the influence of the starres. 61 Against Peters pre∣macy. A glasse. 104 A glasse to se God in Fol. 138 Against prayinge to sainctes. 145 An exhortatiō to swe∣rers. 1 Angels are Gods re∣pers. Fol. 13 Against the corporall presence. 21 All lying is forbid∣den. 37 All thinges were ma∣de of nothing. 52 A new sacrifice. 34 An exhortation to kinges. 55 Angels apere in di∣uers shapes. 66 Angels ar ministring spirites. 74 Anabaptistes doc∣trine, euill. 80 Anabaptistes aledge two seedes in Mary. Fol. 123 Anabaptistes would be calde, to geue a re∣coning of their faith. Folio. 173 Arme of God. 9 Armour to fight a∣gainst the deueil. 118 Arius interpretation cōfuted. 155.142.178 Aristotle. 150.145 As there is a God, so is there a deuil▪ 117 A single nature, not mix. 161
B Baptisme commaun∣ded. Fol. 1 Baptisme purifieth vs. fol. 1 Baren ground resem∣bled to men. ▪ Byshop Firmius ans∣wer to the king. 40 Bishops must haue an eye to their vocatiō Folio. 87 By the euerlastinge word, al things wer made. 110 Borne vpon the wa∣ters what it is. 49 C Cause of sicknes. 50 Christ became man, & why? 120 Christ toke both soule and body. 121 Christ brought not his flesh from heauē. 1 Christ toke not the fe∣de of angels. 12 Christs flesh holy. 124 Christes flesh is to be worshiped. 177 Christ borne of a pure virgin. 124 Christ not the holy ghostes sonne. 128 Christ did decke him self with our nature Folio. 126 Christ why he was tē¦ted. 17 Christ suffered for vs. Folio. 106 Christ▪ the begottē son of God. 103 Christ confuted his e∣nemies with scrip∣tures. 4 Christ not in the sacra¦mēt touching his hu¦manitie. 21 Christes body receiued from heauē by faith Folio. 23 Christes fleshe geueth life. 23 Christ is the vyne tou¦ching his flesh. 24 Christs priesthod, hath ended the Leuites. 32 Cist loked vpon Pe∣ter. Christes praier preser∣ued Peter. 87 Christes comming or sending, what it is. Folio. 125
Christ is a substāce 161 Christ is a spirit. 161 Cleāhes .iiii. reasons. Fol. 60 Corrinthiās punished for abusing the sacra¦ment. 29 Creatures are not pu∣nished by desteny. 67 Corporally. 108 D Dauid obtained vn∣derstanding, how? 31 Deuill no fleshly mo∣cion. 119 Deuils confesse Christ to be the sonne of God. 119 Dial, declarth ye dai. 56 Diues & Lazarus. 58 Diagoras. 59 E Eyes of God what they signifie. 8 Earth cursed of God, why? Epiphanius. 95 Euil mē receiueth not Christes body. 28 F Fantasticall heads. 2 Fancies, what cause? 3 Face of God, what it signifieth. 8 Fate, what it is. 67 Father vnbegottē▪ 3 Fete of God, what? 10 Fear god aboue al. 21 First point of our pro¦fession. 1 Finger of God. 92 Figure of Christ. 110 Filleth heuen & earth. Folio. 162 G God a pure substance. Fol. 99 God a pure natur. 14 Gods nature hid from our eies. 12 Gods maiestie shewed Folio. 3 Gods power vphol∣deth ye heauens. 62 Gods remission, goeth before our loue. 78 Gods word the keye of knowledge. 52 gods sho, what it is. 11 Gods remission goeth before our pardo. 74 God is a father. 152 God is life. 158 God only of hīself. 62
God is a spirit. 27 God is full of vnder∣standing. 31 God ia full of truth & mercy. 41 God is full of rightu∣ousnes. 43 God is ful of compas∣sion. 45 God is a floud or stre∣me. 158 God worketh al thīgs to purposes. 56 God honored by swea∣ring, how? 10 God is saide to be an husbandman. 12 God is said to be a sho¦ter, how? 12 God is saide to be an∣gry, how? 15 God is said to slepe. 15 God loketh vpon the earnest repentant. 89 God was seene of the fathers, how? 18 God seeth the wicked euery where. 21 God geueth vnderstan¦ding to his. 31 god is ful of mercy. 41 God loueth whome he scourgeth. 44 God saueth no man a∣gainst his will. 45 God maker of al thīgs Fol. 47 God made not the de∣uyll. 51 Gods iudgement vn∣chercheable. 17 Gods head. 8 Gods repers. 13 God robed of his. 2 Good angels. 115 Gospel is the spiritual sword. 4 Gospel a sermon of gods mercy. 5 Gospell maketh true christians. idem H Hears of god. 8 Hand of god. 9 How god doth laugh. Fol. 15 How god is said to a∣wake, to forget, to re∣member, to sit, to stād to go, to walke. 16 How god is in all pla∣ces. 20 How god dwelleth wt vs. idem How god is vnto all men. idem
How Paule, was a ci∣tezen of Rome. 40 Hell hath thre signifi∣cations. 43 How god is said only to be immortal. 46 How God is said to reste the seuenth day. 71 How God is saide to repent. 73 Howe we doe forgeue one another. 77 How the Pope loseth and bindeth. 83 How ye father is sene in Christ. 105 Holy ghost to be praid vnto. 113 Holy ghost appeared like a doue. 130 How Christ is a flour or a rose. 132 How God is named ye somme of vnderstā∣ding. 135 How God is fyre  lyght. 137 Heathen opinion con∣futed. 144 How the father, Christ and the holy spirite be one God. 152 I Image of God. 1 Image of the father is an Idol. 13 Image of God lost. 14 I am the vine, & this my body are diuers phrases. 24 Iacobs saying to his father, is no lie, but a mistery. 39 In hel no redētion. 42 Immortall properly. Folio. 47 Impossible, for herd. Fol. 94 K Kingdomes, why they are translated. 55 Kingdomes, scourged, why? 58 L Leauen of the Phari∣seis 3 Letter kylleth what it is. 5 Left hand of God. 9 Logyck necessary. 17 Lying, hated of God. Folio. 36
Loue suffereth al thin∣ges. 86 Lybertines errour. 111 Lawe is an axe. 126 M Mouth of God, what? Folio. 9 Man made after the Image of God. 13 Mans soul, what ther is in. 14 Malachie, maketh no∣thinge for ye masse is plainly declared. 32. Fol. 34 Man that was woun∣ded. 35 Ministers haue no sa∣crifice, but common with the laitie. 36 Marchaunt man. 37 Mydwyues of Egipt. Folio. 37 Mans soule, is bothe mortal, and immor∣tall. 47 Man maketh himselfe euill. 51 Mens knowledge vn∣perfect. 73 Mary Magdalen. 76 Ministers, howe they do forgeue & retaine synne. 79 Manichies confuted. Fol. 148 N Nose of God, what it signifieth. 8 No sacrament, is a sa∣crifice. 35 No perfect difinition, can be made of God Folio. 99 O Only God is to be sworne by. 10 Our lyfe, a shadow in this world. 16 Obiections answered. Folio. 29.42.44 Origenistes belefe. 42 Oppression, what mis∣chief cometh therof. 55 Our life a warfar. 134 One God, who ruleth all. 147 One name. 156 grace. 159 Our thoughtes mise∣rable. 179 P Picture none can be made of God. 1.2
Papistes, will haue their gloses. 4 Papistes seke al mea∣nes possible to driue vs from scripture. 4 Phylosophy, the true vse therof. 18 Papistes saye here is Christ and there is Christ. 22 Pyghius calleth gods word a nose of wa. Picklock. 23 Pyghius argument, answered. 32 Peters vision. 33 Papistes, haue made seuen orders. 36 Perfit causes. 67 Peters keye, what it is Folio. 81 Pope cannot shew Pe¦ters last will. 87 Proceading of the ho∣ly ghost. 104 Parsonally. 108 Papistes, stubburn in their doings. 116 Prophetes neuer pray¦ed to no creaturs. 121 Pithagoras. 150 Perminides. idem Preachīg a work▪ 173 Papistes would be cal¦led to geue an auns- to their faith. 174 Peter prayeth to the holy spirit. 175 R Right had of god. 9 Reasons to proue thre persons. 102.103 Resurrection. 115 Rauēs and not doues, who? 131 Reasons against prai∣yng to saynctes. 146 S Symonides aunswer, what god is. 2 Spirit of god, teacheth what god is. 2 Straunge doctrine what it is. 3 Samaritanes. 3.2 Scripture is the po∣wer of god. 4 Scripture ought to be studied. 4 Scripture is the im∣mortal sede. 5 Shoulders of God, what is ment. 9 Synne seperateth vs
from god. 20 Substaunce of bread remayneth. 24 Substaunce, or natu∣ral propertie. 26 Substaunce of bread not chaunged. 27 Sacramentes of the new testament beter then the olde. 27 Sacramētal receiuing necessary. 30 Sacrifice of thākes, of¦fred in all places. 33 Scripture vseth to cal al thinges new. 34 Scriptur ful of tropes and figures. 39 Synne the cause of ba¦rones. 49 Serpentes, flyes, and wormes, why they were made. 51 Syt in the temple of god, what is signi∣fieth. 90 Samosathan an arch-heretike. 109 Spirit is euery wher. Folio. 112 T Touchstone. 3 Tong of god. 9 This is my body, ex∣pounded. 24 Thre similitudes in ye sacrament. idem Thankes ought to be geuen for the death of Christ. 50 Theues, that robbed ye woūded man. 35 Thorder of ministers▪ only. 36 To affirme yt is false, is to lye. 38 The mouth that lieth killeth the soule. 40 Trouble maketh vs to leran to know god. 43 The cause in vs of cō∣dempnation. 45 The holy spirit, is the maker of ye world. 48 To maītein a king. 55 Thre opinions. 66 To wash Christ. 76 To be renewed. 96 the word substāce. 108 Thre bodies. 109 The holy spirit forge∣ueth sinne. 113 Two sortes of resur∣rections. 115
The Godhead is vnde¦fileable. 125 The doe a scholema∣ster vnto vs. 132 The workes of the .iii persons be vnsepera¦ted. 139 Thaes Milesius. 149 Temples are to be de∣dicate to God only. Fol. 176 V Uoice of God must be harkened vnto. 1.2 Unwritten verities. Folio. 104 W What God is. 1 Weapōs of our war∣fare. 3 Worldly wisdom, fo∣lyshnes. 5 What is ment, by the¦se wordes (he y• is) 7 Wombe of God. 9 What stained red clo∣thes be. 11 Winges of God what they signifie. 12 We shall see God face to face. 16 Wickednes coueteth ye darke. 2 We cānot escape gods hand. 21 We must receiue the sacrament, why? 31 Wounded man, what is signified? 35 Wicked shal haue end∣les paine. 42 Why god doth punish the Godly, aferd. 43 World, is the worke∣manship of the whole trinitie. 47 Why Christ is named a worde 48 World, the workman∣ship of ye trinitie. 49 Workes of God in beastes, be not vnpro¦fitable. 51 Worlde gouerned by Gods prouidence 54 Why good men are af¦flicted. 58 Why starres appeared at the birth of Christ Folio. 64 Who is forgeuen and when. 80 Who is the rock. 83 Why Peter was na∣med Sephas. 84
Why Christ byddeth Peter thrise fede my shepe. 85 What is most necessa∣ry in a preacher. 86 Whether God can sin or lye, or not. 92 Word, person. 108 Why christ was born of a woman. 120 Who are the brethren of Christ. 124 Why christ was born of a virgin, espoused and maried. 125 Why all men ar borne babes, not able men. Folio. 126 We are the sonnes of God by adoption. Fol. 126 Why Christ came in thende of the world. Fol. 125 Why Christ was bap∣tised. 127 Why Christ suffered death. 128 Why he died on the Crosse. 128 Why Christ toke our nature. 128 Why the holy ghoste apered. 130 Why the spirit is na∣med oyle. 167 FINIS.
AN OTHER TABLE TO finde harde textes, and suche as haue bene abused for euill purposes, plainly and truly expounded. GEne. 1. In ye begynninge God created heauen and earth. 48 Gene. 1. The spirit of the Lorde was borne vpon the waters. 49 Gene. 1. God saide let ther be light. God said let there be a firmamēt Folio. 49 Gene. 1. Let vs make man to our similitude, and after our likenes. fol. 13. cha. 27. fol. 138 Gene. 1. God behelde all that he had made, & o, they were exceading good. 49.50 Gen. 2. God rested the seuenth daye from all his workes. 71.72 Gene. 3. Adam, where art thou? 73 Gene. 3. Cursed be the earth in thy worke, in sorowe shalt thou ate therof. 50 Gen. 3. The sede of the woman shal grinde the serpentes head. 123 Gene. 4. Where is A∣bel thy brother. 73 Gene. 6. I repent me yt I made man. 73 Gene. 12. Abrahā said to Sara his wyfe: say I pray thee that thou art my sister. 38.39 Gene. 18. And the lord appeared vnto Abrahā, and he lift vp his eies and loked, and lo three men stoode not far frō him. 103.104 Gen. 18. And ther came two angels to Sodom at euen. 104 Gene. 24. You shall bring my hoare heares wt sorow vnto hel. 43 Gen. 26. Isaac dwelled in Gerat, & the men of
the place asked him of his wife, & he said that she was his sister. 38 Gene. 27. Isaac sayde vnto Iacob, art thou my son Esau? and he said, I am Esau thy el¦dest son. 38 Exod. 1. And the myd∣wyues answered Pha¦rao: ye Hebrues womē are sturdy women, & de¦liuered before we come at them. God therfore dealt wel with the mid¦wiues. 37.38 Exod. 3. God said vn∣to Moises, I am that I am. 6 Exo. 15. Thi right hād Lord is glorious in po¦wer, thy right hande hath all to dashed the enemy. 169 Exo. 15. With the spi∣rit of thine anger the water gathered toge∣ther as a rock. 169 Exo. 33. you shal se my hīderparts, but my fa∣ce you can not se. 8.9 Ex. 33. The lord spake vnto Moises face to face, as man speaketh vnto his frend. 18 Deut. 3. The Lord thy God is a consumyng fyre. 137 Deut. 4. Unto thee it was shewed that thou mightest know that ye Lord is God. &c. 156 Deut. 6. The lord our God is one God. 156 Deu. 33. They yt draw nigh his seat, shal taste of his doctrine. 10 1 Reg. 2. Our lord brin¦geth folke downe into hel, & bringeth them a∣gaine. 24 1 Reg. 16. It for thin∣keth me yt I haue made Saul king. 73.74 3 Re. 22. Micheas said vnto Achab. I saw the Lord sit on his seate, & al the cōpany of heauē stāding about him. 18 Reg. 2. Behold there came a charet of fire, & horses of fire, & did put them a sunder. &c. 66 Iob. 7. The life of mā is a warfar vpō ye erth
Iob. 8 Mans life is a shadow. 16 Iob. 18. The hand of the Lord hath touched me. 9 Iob. 34. For the wyc∣kednes and synne of ye people, he maketh an Hipocrite to reigne o∣uer them. 55 Psalm. 2. This day I begotte thee. 137 Psalm. 2. Kysse the son lest the Lord be angry. Folio. 15 Psalm. 2. He that dwel¦leth in heuē shal laugh them to scorne, and the Lord shall mocke them Folio. 15 Psalm. 7. God hath bent his bow & made it ready, he hath prepared weapons of death, and ordeined arrowes to destroy. 12 Psalm. 8. I wil behd the heauens the work∣manship of thy fingers the mone, and the star∣res, whiche thou haste made. 169 Psalm. 10. His eielid∣des beholde the childrē of men. 8 Psalm. 16. Defend me vnder the shadowe of thy wynges. 11.12 Psalm 21. The gene∣ration which is to co∣me shalbe tolde vnto ye Lord, they shall tel his rightuousnes. 74 Psalm. 33. The eyes of the Lorde are ouer the rightuous. 8 Psal. 44. God which is thy god hath anoin¦ted thee with the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felowes. Psal. 59. Ouer Edom will I stretche out my shoe. 11 Psal. 62. All they that sweare by hym shalbe commended. 10 Psalm. 70. Shewe vs the light of thy counte¦naunce, and we shalbe holy. 8 Psalm. 98. Worshyp the fotestole of my fete Folio. 177
Psalm. 101. The hea∣uens ar the workes of thy handes. 169 Psal. 109. Sit on my right hand. 9 Psalm. 109. Of my wombe before the mor¦ning starre I begat the Folio. 103 Psalm. 116. The right hand of the Lord hath don maruels, the right hand of the Lord hath gotten the victory. 9 Psalm. 118. All things serue thee. 166 Prouerb. Because I haue called, & ye haue refused, I wyll stretche out my hand, and ther was none that coulde helpe you, and I wyll laugh at your destruc∣tion, and wyll skorne you, when that whiche you feared shall come. &c. fol. 15 Cant. 2. I am the flour of the field, the Lilie of the valleis, and the ro∣se among thornes. 132 Esay. 6. Beholde this hath touched thy mou¦the, and thyne vnrigh∣tuousnes is taken a∣way, and thy synne for¦geuen. 171 Esay. 11. There shall come a rod forth of the roote of Iesse, & a blos∣some or floure shall a∣rise out of the roote. Folio. 122.123 Esay. 40. Who mea∣sureth the heauēs with his span? who held the waters in his fist? who cōprehēdeth the whole earth in thre fingers? weyghed the hilles and mountaines in a ba∣launce. 6 Esay. 45. The occupi∣ers of Egipt, the mar∣chauntes of the Mo∣rians, and Sabees shal come vnto thee with tribute, they shall bee ne, they shall folowe thee, and go with chei∣nes on their fete. The shall fall down before thee, and make suppli∣cation vnto thee, for
God is in thee, & there is none other God be∣side thee. 135 Esay. 63. Who is this that cōmeth frō Edom with stained clothes of Bosra. 11 Esay. 66. I will flowe vpon you like a water floud of peace, and like a flowing streame. 158 Ier. 10. Behold ye hou¦se of Israel ye are in my hand, euen as the clay in ye potters hād. 9 Ie. 23. Is not my word like fyre saith the lord and like a hāmer that breketh ye hard ston? 99 Ierem. 32. Thou haste brought thy people of Israel out of the land of Egipt with an al∣mighty hande with a stretched out arme. 9 Thre. 1. We haue pro∣uoked his mouth vto wrath. 9 Threno. 4. The spirit before vs Christ the Lord 161 Danie. 2. Thou sawest the stone cut out of the hill withouten handes breake into pouder, the Iron, bras, earth, siluer and gold. 124 Dan. 3. He hath deliue¦red vs out of hel. 43 Dan. 7. His clothyng was as white as snow the heare of his head lyke pure wolle. 8 Sopho. 1. I wil stretch out my hand ouer Iu∣da and Ierusalem, and I wil rote out the rem¦naunt of Baals. &c. 9 Mal. 1. I haue no plea¦sure in you, and as for an offering I will not accept it at your hand, for from the rising of ye sunne vnto the goinge doune therof, my name is great among the gen¦tils, yea in euery place shall there sacrifice be done, and a cleane offe∣ring offered vp in my name. 32.33 Ionas. 3. Who can tell whether God wil turn and repent and pacifie
his wrath & preserue vs. 15 Sap. 5. The sunne of rightuousnes and vn∣derstanding arose not vpon vs. 135 Sap. 12. God made the worlde of a confused heape. 52 Eccl. 18. he that liueth euermore, made al thin¦ges together. 52 Baruch. 3. He is our God, and there is none other able to be compa¦red vnto him. 154 Mat. 1. Behold a maid shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son. Folio. 125 Math. 1. Espoused to Ioseph. 125 Math. 1. His mother Mary. 120 Math. 1. That whiche is conceiued of her, is of ye holy gost. 124.125 Math. 2. They founde the childe with Mary. Folio. 124 Ma. 2. we haue sene his star in the east. 46.47 Math. 2. They kneled doune and worshipped him, and opened their treasures, and offered giftes, gold frākēsence and myrre. 65 Math. 3. And Ihō saw the spirite of God dis∣cende lyke a doue, and light vpō him. 130.131 Mat. 3. The axe is put to the rote of the trees. Folio. 126 Math. 3. Then came Iesus from Galile to Iordan, to be baptised of Ihon. 127.128 Math. 4. Then came to him the tempter and and sayd. 127 Math. 5. Blessed be the cleane herted, for they shall se God. 131 Math. 6. If ye shal for¦geue other their trespa∣ces, your heauenly fa∣ther shal also. &c. 77 Math. 10. Be ye inno∣cent as doues and wise &c. Fol. 132 Mat. 16. Thou art Pe¦ter, & vpō this rock wl
Iohn. 10. I and my fa∣ther are one. 106 Ioh. 14. If a man loue me, he wyll keepe my worde, and my father also wyl loue hym, and we wil come vnto him and dwell with him. Folio. 20 Iohn. 14. Whosoeuer seeth me, seeth my fa∣ther. 105 Ioh. 15. I am the vine, and ye are the braun∣ches. 23 Iohn. 15. My father is an husbandman. 23 Ioh. 16. He shal iudge the world of sin. 167 Iohn. 17. This is life euerlastinge that they might knowe thee the only true God, & whō thou haste sent Iesus Christ. 154 Ioh. 17. I pray not for them alone, but for thē also which shall beleue on me thorowe their preaching, that they al may be one, as thou fa¦therr art in me. &c. 143 Iohn. 20. Whosoeuer synnes ye remit, they are remitted vnto thē, and whosoeuer sinnes ye retaine, they are re∣teyned. 79 Iohn. 20. Receiue the holy spirite. 171 Iohn. 20. And many o∣ther thinges did Ies{us} which are not written these are written that ye might beleue. &c. and haue lyfe eternall. 104 Iohn. 21. Simō Ioan∣na, louest thou me more then these? and he saide yea lord, thou knowest I loue thee. He sayde vnto him: feade my lā∣bes. He said to hym a∣gain, louest thou me? Peter aunswered: yea Lord thou knowest I loue thee. He said vnto him: feade my sheape. And he asked hym the third tyme. 85.86 Actes. 10. And there came a voyce to hym, aryse Peter, kyll and eate, but Peter sayde:
God forbyd Lorde, for I haue neuer eaten a∣thyng that is vncleane or comen. 175 Act. 10. Whyle Peter thought on his vision, the spirite sayde vnto him: beholde men seke thee, aryse therfore get the down, and go with them, for I haue sent them. 176 Actes. 19. Paul passed thorow the vpper coa∣stes, and came to Ephe¦sus and found certeyne disciples and sayd vn∣to them: haue ye recey∣ued the holy ghost? and they sayde no. And he sayde: wherwith were ye then baptised? And they sayd, with Iohns baptisme. And it folo∣weth when they heard that, they were bapti∣sed in the name of the Lord Iesu agayn, and Paul layd his handes on them, and▪ thei spake with tongues and pro∣phecied. 91 Act. 22. Then the cap∣tain came vnto Paul and sayd to him. Tell me, art yu a Romaine? he saide yea. And the Captaine aunswered: with a great summe ob¦teined I this fredom. And Paul sayd: I was free borne. 40 Rom. 3. By the dedes of the law no flesh shall be iustified. 121 Rom. 5. The lawe en∣tred that syn should en¦crease. 126 Rom. 8. We know not what to desire, but the spirit maketh interces∣sion myghtely for vs, with gronyng, whiche can not bee expressed with tonge. 131 Rom. 8. God sent hys sonne in the likenes of sinful flesh. 125 Ro. 8. Euery creatur is subdued to vanite. 166 Ro. 9. Who can resist his wyl. 44 1 Cori. 2. The eie hath not seene, and the eare hath not heard, neither
haue entred in to the heart of men the thin∣ges whiche God hath prepared for them that loue hym. 170 1 Corin. 2. The spirite searcheth all thynges, yea the bottom of gods secretes. For what mā knoweth the things of a man, saue the spirite of mā which is in him Euen so the thinges of god none knoweth but the spirit of God. 170 1 Cor. 6. Ye are washed ye are sanctified, ye are iustifieth by the name of the Lord Iesu, and the spirite at our God. Fol. 171 1 Cor. 6. Your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost which is in you, whom ye haue of God, & ye are not your own, for you are dear∣ly bought. Therfore glorifie God in your bodies. 176 1 Corint. 8. Althomgh there be that are called gods in heauen & earth as ther be many gods, and Lordes many, yet vnto vs is there but one God, which is the father of all thinges, & we in him, and one lord Iesus Christ, by whō are all thinges and we by him. 154 1 Corin. 10. One loafe, one body, we that bee many. 52 1 Cor. 14. The secrets of his hart are opened and he falleth down on his face, and worshyp∣peth God saiyng: that God is in you in dede. Fol. 177 1 Cor. 15. By a man ca∣me death, and by a mā cometh the resurrectiō of the dead, for as by Adā al die, so by christ al be made aliue. 120 2 Cor. 3. The letter kil¦leth, the spirit geueth lyfe. 4 2 Cor. 10. The weapōs of our war are not car∣nall thynges, but the
power of God to cast down strung holdes. 3 Galat. 3. There is no Iew, nether Gentil, ne¦ther bonde ne free, ne man ne woman. 107 Gala. 4. In the fulnes of tyme God sent his sonne. 125 Galath. 4. God sent Christ. 125 Gal. 4 Borne of a wo∣man. idem Philip. 2. Beware of dogges, beware of euil workers, beware of dis¦cention, for we are cir∣cumcision seruing the the spirite, whiche is God. 35 Philip. 2. He became o¦bedient to the death of the Crosse. 128 Colo. 2. Beware lest a∣ny man come, & spoile you through Philoso∣phie, and deceitful va∣nitie. 17 Col. 2. In Christ dwel∣leth all the fulnes of ye godhead corporally or bodely. 108 2 Tessa. 2. He shall syt in the temple of God, and shew him selfe as God. 88 1 Timo. 1. Unto God king euerlasting, im∣mortall, inuisible, and wise only by praise. 155 1 Timo. 2. God would haue all men saued, & come to the knowledge of the truth. 45 1 Timo. 6. He that is blessed and mighty on∣ly, which only hath im¦mortalitie. 155.156 Hebr. 1. Which being the bryghtnes of his glory, & expresse image of his substaunce. 106 Hebr. 6. It is impossi∣ble, that they whiche were once lightned, & haue tasted of the hea∣uenly gifte, and were become partakers of ye holy ghost. &c. if they fall, should ryse again by repentaunce, cruci∣fiyng vnto themselues again the son of God, and making a mock of
hym. 91.92 Hebr. 13. Be not caried about with diuerse & straunge learning. 3 Iaco. 1. Cometh doun frō the father of light. Fol. 45 1 Iohn. 1. God is light and in hym is no dar∣kenes. 137 1 Iohn. The seede of God remaineth in him Fol. 123 1 Iohn. 5. There are thre which bear record on earth, the spirit, wa∣ter, and bloud, and the∣se thre are one. 104 1 Iohn. 5. There are. ii which beare recorde in heauen, the father, the worde, & the holy gost, and these thre are one. Folio. 142 Apoc. 19. He had a na∣me written, that none knew but he him selfe. Folio. 78 FINIS.
The first Chapter. ¶ We must learne what God is of Gods word, and not of mans wisdome THe first point and chief profession of a true christen man, is most sted¦fastly to beleue, that ther be thre persones and one God, as we are taught in Baptisme, whiche is commaunded to be ministred in the name of the father, of the sonne,Math. 28 & of the holy spirit. For in ye bath of holy baptisme, we are regenerate, washed, pu¦rified, and made the children of God, by the workmanship of the thre persons, which formed also heauē and earth, and al the glorious fairnes of them, they brought the children of Israel out of the house of bondage, they preserued them from the tyranny and oppression of the Heathen, they gaue also vnto the Hea∣then prosperitie and aduersitie, peace & war, pouertie and riches▪ they gouerne the vniuersal church, whose workes be vnseparable. Wherfore I thinke it neces¦sary to declare what God is, and what a persone signifieth in the deitie, for as much as the commen sort of peple are
ignorāt of their maker and gouernour, and the signification of a persone is ap∣plied to diuerse things. And because the∣se two pointes be darke and hidden mi∣steries, and no lesse necessary to be kno∣wen of al men, then hard to teach, I wil shape my speach after such a perceiuable fashiō, that I may by Gods help make an Image of God for the capacitie of ye simple and vnlearned. God spake to the Israelites out of the fire in the mount Oreb, & it is writtē yt they heard a voice, but they sawe no Image,Deut. 4 because they should make none after it. For it is a dis¦honor to God, a derogation and defa∣ming of the diuine nature, to make any similitude therof, ether of gold, siluer, stone, wood, or in thought and minde. We must hear his voyce, we must learn what God is out of Gods boke, not of mans wisdome. For if al thinges which be vnder the sunne, be to hard for man, as the wyse mā telleth,Eccle. 1 how much more be the secret of Gods nature hid from his eies, of the whiche Esay wryteth: Truly Lorde thou art hidden from vs,Esaie. 45 counting himselfe one of the ignoraunt.Simonides Simonides a famous clarke among the
Heathē teacheth vs how feble mās wyt is, in declaring this misterie, who when he was enquired of king Hiero what a thing God was, he asked a day respite, and the next day when he was enquired again, he asked two daies more, & when they were expired, he asked more, not ceassing to double his daies, vntil Hiero required of him why he did so? For be∣cause said Simonides, the more I consider it, the darker it is vnto me: And no mar∣uel, for as no man knoweth what is in man but ye spirit of mā, so al men be igno¦rant what God is, except thei be taught of ye spirit of God. For seing Paul saith: the eie hath not sene,1 Cor. 2 nor the eare hath not heard, ne yet haue entred into the hert of mā, the things which God hath prepared for them that loue him: howe much more doeth he himself surmount our capacities? But it foloweth: God hath opened them vnto vs by his spirit,Iohn.  for the spirit searcheth al things, yea the botom of gods secretes. And this spirit speaketh & breatheth on vs in the scrip∣tures, as it is written: My wordes are spirit and life. Experience doth teache vs, and the
Apostle warneth vs, how sātastical our heads be in searching Gods misteries. For some imagine God to be a corpo∣ral thing, & of mās shape and forme, be∣cause the scripture doth graūt in diuerse places vnto God hands, fete, eares, eies mouth & tong, called comenly Anthropo morphites. Read the .x. boke of the tripar∣tite historie .vii. chap. and there you shal finde a great contention cōcerning this matter,Li. x. hist. ripr. ca. 7 betwene the monkes of Egipt, and Theophilus bishop of Alexādria, al¦beit the sect of the Epicurus held this as¦sercion long before as it appereth in the first bok of Tullie De natura deorū, wher this opinion is eloquently confuted by Cotta a Senatour of Rome. Roma. 1Other rob God of his glory & geue it vnto his creatures, worshipping ye Sun the Mone, the fier, yea and mortal men for the immortal God, and vnreasona∣ble beastes, for the authour of al reason, wisdome, and vnderstanding. And some dishonor him by honoring of dead sain∣tes, and worshipping of bread and wine, without any cōmaundment of the scrip∣ture, any exāple in the old or new testa∣ment, any authoritie of the doctors. I
wyll not stand in rehersing the sundry phantasies of men as touching God. What is the cause of al these phansies & diuersities, but that for which Esay con∣troleth vs, saieng:Esaie. 1 The oxe knoweth his Lord, and the asse his masters stall, but we know not god. Come therfore good christen people, & harken to the wordes of the Lorde, & I wil shew you in them ye maiestie of God himself, his face & coun∣tenāce, his magnificēce & highnes, which cannot abide the felowship of any crea∣tures.Hebr. 1 Paul vnto the Hebrues warneth vs that we be not caried away with di∣uerse and straung doctrine,Strauge doctrin what it is. which  much to say as if he shuld cōmaunde vs to flie mans doctrine. For mn be the straūgers, whose doctrine he biddeth vs flie, as Peter witnesseth: early belo∣ued I besech you as straungers & Pil∣gims. &c. Paul also expoūdeth hmelf,1 Petr. 2 saying that Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, confessed themselues to e straungers and Pilgrimes vpō the  dwelling in tents. And Christ saith that his shpe hear not the voice of straungers,Iohn. 1 Math. 8. that is the doctrine of men, the whiche in the viii. of Mare is called the leauen of the
Pharisies and of Herod.The leauē of the Pha¦risies. Wherfore if we be shepe of his pasture, and people of his handes, let vs folow his counsel, for he is our shepeheard, our head, and the truth, and of his Apostles, for they are his labourers and workemen, remem∣bring that Dauid saith, vnderstanding is good to them that doe after it.psal. 110. a Luke. 12. a For he that knoweth his maisters wil and will not folow it, he shal be more greuovsly punished. Christ saith vnto a woman of Samaria at Iacobs wel besides Sichar,Iohn. 4 Samari∣tans, Ie∣wes. yt she & her people worshipped they knew not what, for they leaned to custume & fathers, rather then to the text of Gods word, saiyng: our fathers worshipped in this mountain. But the Iewe leauing vnto Gods word, and worshipping in the temple, knew what they worship∣ped, the whiche was written for our en∣struction, that we shuld repare vnto the scriptures in all doutes, and controuer∣sies, the which is the only touch stone to examin and trie al doctrine, the forged, pretensed and false, from the sincere, ger∣mane & true. The weapons of our warre saith Paul:2 Cor. 10. are not carnal thinges, but the power of God to cast down strong
holdes, to ouerthrow inuentions, that is to vanquish heresie, to destroy all il doc∣trine. Verely the Gospel is that power of God (for so Paul tearmeth it) vnto saluation to all them that beleue.Scriptu is the po∣wer of god Roma. 1. A swearde. The Gospel is the spiritual swerd that shall preuaile against Sathan, much more a∣gainst heretikes and his members, this swerd shal ouercome Antechrist, whom god shal sley wt the breath of his mouth: With this swerd Christ confounded the deuil, mainteined his disciples,Ephe. 1. 2 Thes. 2 Math. 4 Math. 12▪ sclaun∣dred of the Phariseis as Sabboth brea∣kers, proued the resurrectiō against the Saduces, taught a certain yong man ye way to heauen, contented the Phariseis touching mariage,Math. 22 with this swerd the Apostels in diuerse assembles confuted the Iewes after Christes ascension, as in their actes is regestred. The papistes replie that the scripturs are not sufficiēt and able to confoūd heretikes, but their interpretations and gloses vpon them, because they be not plaine and euident, but dark and hard, and may be wrested to many purposes. How did Christ con∣fute the deuil? With scripture or expoū∣ding the scriptures? Again, Gods word
is a lanterne, a light, it turneth the soule, it geueth wisdome euē vnto babes,A lanterne Psa. 118. it re∣ioyseth ye hart, it lightneth the eyes, it is a candle shining in a darke place, & ther∣fore not hard nor darke,2. Peter. 1. but easy & plain, and to be studied of all men hygh & low, pore and rich,To be stu∣died of all mn. Iob. 7. spirituall and lay. For the holy & paciēt man Iob saith, that the lyfe of man is nothing els, then a very war∣fare vpon the earth, ful of misery & trou∣ble, set about with a great multitude of mortal enemies, the deuil, the world, and the flesh. Wherfore the sweard of Gods word is very necessary vnto al that be in this warfare.gods word  a sword. Luke. 22. For who goeth to battell without a sweard? Doth not he yt taketh away thy sweard, betray the vnto thyne aduersaries? Christe saith, he yt hath no sweard, let him sel his coat & by him one, and the papistes seke al meanes possible to spoyle ye people of their sweard which is Gods word, saieng it wil make them heretiks:2. Cor. 2 for Litera occidit, spiritus est qui viuificat. The letter killeth, and the spirit quikneth, is Gods word the letter? Thē we must not reade it▪ least it kill vs, least it make vs heretykes.Ihon. 17 1. Peter. 1. But harken what master Doctour of all veritye saith.
Sermo tuus veritas est. Thy word is truth. And Peter calleth the selfe same immor∣tall seed, by which we are borne a newe,Immortal seed. Ihon. 15. Roma. 10. and which lasteth and lyueth for euer. Doth immortal seed kyl vs? Doth truth make vs heretikes? Christ declareth the operatiō of this seed saieng, now you ar cleane by my word, & Paule saith: Fides exauditu, that faith commeth therof, not heresy. These frutes this seed engēdreth where it is sowen: truth, cleannes of life, regeneration, and faith. He that talketh with wyse men, becometh wiser by ther cōmunication. And shall not he that tal∣keth with God ye authour of al wysdom in his scriptures, be edified therby:2. Cor. 3. The  letter wha it is. Thē what is Littera occidens, the murthering letter? Truly the lawe which causeth an∣ger, by which cometh knowledge of sin,Roma. 4. Roma. 3. Galath. 3. which is a scolemaster vnto Christ. The lawe first killeth, that Christ may make alyue, it condempneth, that Christ may iustify, it sheweth sinne, he healeth sinne. The gospel is a sermon of Gods mercy, that he hathe blotted out oure sinnes by fayth onelye in Chrystes bloude, it ma∣keth no heretykes, xii. men by preach∣ynge of it,Math. 5. made the vnfaythefull and
heretikes, faithful and true Christians: this candel was not light to be put vn∣der a bushel,Math. 5 but to be set in the candel∣stick, to geue light to them that be in Gods house.Luke. 11 For Christe crieth, wo worth them, that take away the key of knowledge, nether entring them selues, ne yet suffring other to enter. The key of knowledge is Gods holy testament and word,gods word the key, the touch stone that whiche before we called the touchston to discerne good doctrine frō euil. When thei had taken the touch¦stone from vs, they made vs beleue that Peuter was siluer, and they sold vs cop¦per for gold, making ye scriptures a nose of wax and a tenis baule, wresting them vnto euery purpose. Thus we sée from whēce we must fetch the knowledge of God, verely out of Gods word whiche is the truth, and not out of the questio∣nistes or schole mē or other like. For he saith by his Apostle:Esay. 33. I wil destroy the wisdome of the wyse, and I will cast a∣way the vnderstanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? wher is the searcher of this world?. Cor. 1. Hath not God made ye wisdom of this world folishnes? As God is knowen only of
himself, so we must only learne of hym what he is. As for man he knoweth no more what God is, then the vnreasona¦ble beastes know what man is, yea and so much lesse, as there is more difference betwene God and man, then betwene man and the beastes. Wherfore all leauen, al straunge doc∣trine and mans wisdom set apart, I will see what the scriptures teach vs concer∣ning God, nor I wil not disdain to aske where I shall see cause, nor be ashamed to learne where I am ignorant, desiring him that readeth this treatise, where the scripture is plain to beleue (for except we beleue, we shal not vnderstand) where it is doubtfull to search with me, where he seeth himself out of the way, to reuoke his opinion, where he seeth me in an er∣rour, to enforme me, and I will be glad to learne, and so we shall folow the rule of charitie, searching both after God, whome it is written:psal. 104. Seke the Lorde and hys strength, seke his face euermore. The second Chapter. ¶God only is of him self.
WHen Moses desired ye Lord to shew him his name, the Lord saide vnto him:Exod. 3 I am that I am. That is to wit, I am of my self I am only. Nothing is of it selfe without creation, without corruption, saue only I, which am that I am. Whiche vnderstanding God himself doth declare speaking fur∣ther vnto Moses, this shalt thou saye vnto the childrē of Israel. He that is, did send me vnto you, for nothīg is saue on∣ly God, forasmuch as they stand not by their proper strength, but by the power and goodnes of him. The heauens, the waters, the earth, the hills would fall, onles he measured the heauen with hys span,Esay. 40 held the waters in his fist, compre∣hended the whole earth in thre fingers, weyed the mountaines and hilles in a balaunce: by which phrases is ment that he gouerneth, ordreth, and disposeth thē as he listeth. Nether the Sunne could geue light, ne yet the fire heat, al thinges would decay and perishe, onles he did rule them, as the soull doth mans body, vnto whom only that belongeth and ap¦perteineth▪ which the Grekes cal on, the
Latinistes, est, as witnesseth the Apostle. Non est in illo, est & non, sed est in illo est.2 Cor. Of all other thinges (non) may be said for once they were not, but not of God, because he was alwaies, he is, and he is to come, all thinges haue their being of him, and he of him self. Except we vnder¦stand this saying (he that is, sent me vn∣to you) after this sort, it maketh no diffe∣rence betwene God and his creatures. For all be it they haue not their begin∣ning of themselues, but of him, yet it is truly said of them that they are. Moreo∣uer what could ye Isralites haue thought Moses to haue ment by these wordes, (he that is) then a certain man sent hym vnto them? If they had taken Moises so, they would not haue left Egipt and folowed hym into the wyldernes, but they toke these wordes (he that is) for God himself, and therfore folowed him▪ the which throughout the Bible be ne∣uer spoken of any creature, but only of him that made all creatures. The name of God also declareth thys sence to be true, which is Ihuh, of foure letters in all tongues, in Greke Theos, in Latin Deus, in English & Dutch, God, in the Frēch
Dieu, in spanishe Dios, in the Almaines tong Gott, and therfore called Tetragram maton, and in Latin Quadrilitterum, deri∣ued of Essendo, or rather that word that signifieth Esse in the Ebrue, is deriued of it. The Iewes read for that worde, Adonai, not that it can not be expressed in their tongue, but for a reuerence to Gods name, the which as they thought was not once to be named. The .iii. Chapter. ¶God is a spirit, and how the scriptures do graunt vnto him a head, eies, handes, feet, and all other partes of mans body. God is a bird, a shoter, a husbandman, Christ is his Image and man also. WE reade also in ye scriptures that God is a spirit, and no corporall thing.Iohn. 4. God is a spirit and thei that worship him, must worship him in spirit, and truth the Lorde no doubt is a spirit. But you will say, if God be a spi∣rit,2 Cor. 3 how is it tht the Prophet affirmeth him to measure heauen with his span, to hold the waters with his fist,Esay. 40 & the earth in thre fingers? Dauid also saieth: The eies of the Lord are ouer the rightuouse,psalm. 33
and his eares are opē vnto their praiers, and the hand of the Lord hath driuē out the Heathē. Hath a spirit, fingers, hāds,psalm. 4 eies, and eares? Whersoeuer scripture doth attribute vnto God a head, eares, eies, eieliddes, nose, mouth, lips, tonge, heart, wombe, handes, right or left, fin∣gers or a finger, an arm, hinder partes, fete, it is not to be vnderstand litterally, but a spirituall sence is to be gathered of such wordes. Bycause our vnderstan∣dinges be weak & not able to perceiue God, if he should vse such words as be∣come his maiestie, he boroweth cōmon & plain words to declare a difficult mat∣ter vnto vs: and euen as mothers before they can teach their yōg babes to speak, are faine as it were to lispe stammar & stut with them, so God to teach our ca∣pacities, vseth these familiar maner of speches. When thou readest that God hath a head,what god head is. thou must vnderstand his deuine nature, which was bere all thinges, & vnto it al thinges be obediēt.His hear. His heares signifie his Angels and the whole mul∣titude of the chosen. Dan. 7. his clothing was as whit as snow, ye hear of his head
lyke pure woll, where the head of God is his deitie and Godhead, his clothing and his heares be his Angels and elect, which be like whit snow and pure woll. God is said to haue eies,Eies. bicause he seeth al thinges, and nothing is hid from him in whose sight as the Apostle telleth no creature is vnuisible, for all thinges be nakd and open vnto his eies. His eies also sometimes be taken for his fauour. The eies of the Lord are ouer the righ∣tuous.Psal. 33 His eie liddes be taken for his se∣cret iudgements.Psalm. 10 Eieliddes. His eie liddes beholde the children of men. He is sayd to haue eares, bicause he heareth al things. The eare of the gelouse heareth all thinges & the noise of the grudgings shall not be hid.Eares. Sap. 1 His nose doth signifie his inspirati∣ons in the herts of the faithful.Nose.  Reg. 22. Smoke went out of his nosetrelles. The face of God is the knowledge of his deuine nature,His face. Psal. 79 of the whiche is wrytten, shewe vs the lyght of thy coūtenaunce and we shall be hole, that is graunt vs to know thee. Otherwyse Gods face signifieth ye vnuisible nature of Christes deuinitie, as Exo. doh declare, you shal se my hin¦der partes but my face you can not see,Exod. 34
that is thou shalt se Christes humanitie, but his diuinitie can not be seen.Mouth. Threno. Gods mouth is takē for the sonne of God the father. We haue prouoked his mouth vnto wrath, or his commaundement.Esay. 59. Tongue. Psal. 44. Arme. Iere. 32 The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Gods tongue is the holy Ghost. My tongue is the pen of a redy wryter. His arme signifieth Christ, of whom Iere∣my writeth. Thou hast brought thy peo¦ple of Israel out of the land of Egipt, wt an almightie hand, with a stretched out arme. Wher also Christ is called ye hand of God. For he is both his arme,Hand. Christ. & his hand. Moreouer Gods hand is taken some tyme for his power. Beholde ye house of Israel, ye are in my hand,Power. Iere. 18 euen as the clay in the potters hand. Some time for his scourge saith he: I wil stret∣che forth my hand ouer Iuda and Hieru¦salem,Scourge. Soph. 1 and I wil rote out the remnaunt of Baal, of the which scourge Iob saith, the hand of the Lord hath touched me.Iob. 19 Right hād Christes glory. Psa. 116 Furthermore Christe i called Gods right hand. The right hand of the Lord hath done maruelles, the right hand of the Lord hath gotten the victory. It is vsed also for the glory of the father con∣cerning
which he saith to his sonne, syt on my right hād. And in some places for euerlasting ioy and life. And he shal set ye shepe on his right hand,Math. 25 and the Goats on the left hand, wher as his right hand is taken for uerlasting ioye,Left hand. so his lefte hand signifieth the tormentes of the wic¦ked. Gods finger is the holy ghost. If I cast out deuils in ye finger of God.Luke. 11 &c. For where Luke saieth in the finger of God,Math. 12 His finger it is in Mathew: If I cast out de∣uils in the spirit of God. Gods finger therfore is his holy comforter. For as the hand, finger, and arme, are thre, and yet but of one body: so ye father, ye sonne, and the holy ghost, are thre persons, and one substaunce, one God. The hert of God.The heart of God ye father signifieth the secret of his wisdom, of which he be∣gate his word, that is his sonne with∣out beginning, without any passion, my heart is enditing a good matter. His wombe is vsed in thesame signification.Psal. 44. Wombe. psal. 109 Of my womb before the morning star I begat thee. God is said also to haue shul¦ders,Shulders. psalm. 90 Hinder par¦tes. because he beareth vp all thinges as it were vpō his shulders, for al things stand by him. The hinder parts of God
is Christs humanitie, the which he toke vpon him in the end of the world, that we might liue without end, which is cal¦led also Gods fete.Fete. For as his head sig∣nifieth his deuinitie, so his fete signifie Christes humanitie, the which is subiect vnto Gods deitie, as our fete are vnto our heads. Thou hast put all thinges in subiection vnder his fete.psal. 8 In some pla∣ces preachers of Gods worde be ment by his fete. They that drawe nigh hys fete, shal tast of his doctrine.Deu. 33 An exhorta¦tiō to swe∣rers. You swea∣rers & blasphemers which vse to swear by Gods heart, armes, nailes, guttes, legges, and handes, learne what these thinges signifie, and leaue your abhomi¦nable othes: For when thou swearest by Gods heart, thou swearest by Gods wisdom: when thou swearest by Gods armes, thou swearest by Christ: when yu swearest hands, legs, thou swearest by his humanitie: whē thou swearest by his tong, and finger, thou swerest by the ho∣ly ghost, and swearing by his head, thou swerest by his diuine and blessed nature, and swearing by his heares, thou abu∣sest his creatures, by which thou art for∣biddē to swear. Whē an oth is necessary
we are bounde to swear by God only, vnto whom al honor is due, for we ho∣nor that thing wherby we swear. It is naught to swear by the Masse, a propha¦nacion of Christes supper, and a patched creature of the Byshop of Rome,God is ho∣nored by swearing. which was longer in patching, then Salomōs great tēple in building. Nether is it law∣full to swear by any sainctes, as Iudges and Stewardes make the simple people do at cessions and courtes,God only is to be sworne by. Psal. 62 Heb. 6 for if they be to be sworne by, they are to be praied vn¦to, and to be honored. Dauid saieth all they that swear by him, shalbe commē∣ded. And Paul vnto the Hebrues spea∣keth thus: that God because he had no greater thing to swear by, swore by him self, wherby we must gather, yt we must swear by God only. Thei that swear by his creatures, or by the Masse, be Ido∣laters. But some wil say, if we honor y• thing wherby we swear, let vs swear by God, that we may honor him. Brother be not deceiued. God is honored by swe¦ring, but how? Truly when thou swea∣rest by him in a waighty matter of life & death, before an officer, or in any other matters of importaunce, thou dost hym
honor and homage: but if in euery trifle thou call him to witnes, thou dishono∣norest him, and breakest his commaun∣dement, which saith: Non assumes nomen domini. &c. Thou shalt not take ye name of thy Lord God in vaine: Swear ther∣fore by God, as God hath commaūded thee, & thou honorest him. I trust nowe it is euident that God not withstāding all these forsaid partes and members, is a spirit, and no bodely, no corporall, no sensible thing. If ther be any that think otherwyse, I would fain learn how thei set the scripturs together, which can not be contrary one to another, for scripture is truth,Iohn. 17 and truth can by no meanes be contrary to the truth. If they wil proue of the places before that God is like man, I will proue also because the scripture saith: who is this yt cometh frō Edom with stained red clo∣thes of Bosra, whiche is so costly,Esay. 63 that God goeth in a red coat, whiche if it be true, he must nedes haue a tailer, or els make it himself, for those wordes ar spo∣ken of God, as the place sheweth. But if we weigh the place diligently,What stai¦ned red clo∣thes be E∣dom. we shall find that Edom is the earth, & the stai∣ned
red clothes, are Christes bloude, whiche he did shed vppon earth for our sinnes. And they whiche demaund who he is, be his creatures, which shall mar∣uel at the wisdom of God in deliuering mankind from the bondage of the spiri∣tual Pharao by bloud, by death, by the crosse. I wil proue also, yt he hath shoes: for he saith by Dauid, ouer Edom wil I strech out my shoe. And then he must ne¦des haue a shomaker,Psal. 59 what gods shoe s. or els make shoes him selfe. But Edom is the earth, the A∣postels fete be his shoes, for it is written how bewtiful are the fete of them which bryng glad tidinges of peace.Iohn. 10 He stret∣ched his shoe ouer the earth, when he sent them to preach to al creatures. For their sounde went into all landes, their words to the ends of the world.Psal. 18 I may proue also with lyke argumentes vnto these, bycause Gods worde doth attri∣bute wynges vnto God,Psal. 16 that he is a byrd, and so if he be lyke a man and a byrd,Psalm. 7 both, he is a mōster: and bicause it doth attribute vnto him bow, shaftes, & quyuer, that he vseth shoting, bicause it graunteth to him a fan, a flore, wheat & chaffe,Math. 3 that he occupieth husbandry. Da¦uid
saith: defend me vnder the shadowe of thy wynges, likening God to a bird, forasmuche as he is no lesse carefull for his chosen then the Hen is for her chic∣kens, as Christ declareth very well cry∣ing: Ierusalem, Ierusalem, howe often wold I haue gathered thy children toge¦ther,Math. 3. as the hen gathered hir chickēs vn∣der hir winges, and ye would not. And it graunteth God bow and shaftes and a quiuer,How God is said to be a shoter. to signifie him to be a punisher of the vngodly, and a rewarder of the Godly, for as muche as men minister helpe or vengeaunce one to another of∣tentimes through bowes and shaftes, and one Prince aideth an other with ar¦chers. He hath bent his bow saith Da∣uid, and made it ready,Psalm. 7 he hath prepared weapons of death, and ordeined arowes to destroy, that is, he wil auēge euil mē, he wil reward them for their oppression▪ he wil punish them for their vngracious deuises, except they amende, he hathe whet his swerde. And ell may God be compared to a shoter. For as the sho∣ter the lesse or more he draweth his shaft his stroke is therafter, and if he draw it far and vp to the Iron, then it payeth
likenes of God? Yea truly, but in soule, in mind, in y• inward man, not touching his body. Wherfore Augustin a man most expert in Gods word, crieth out a¦gainst the Image of the trinitie, calling it Sacrilegium. A staining of Gods ho∣nour,The image of ye father is an Idol. and an Idoll, because the glory of the immortall God is chaunged into ye similitude and Image of mortall man, forbidding such an Image, not only in the church, but also in thought & mind. I suppose that the Antropomorphites e∣rected this Image. When Philip desi∣red Christ to shew him the father,Iohn. 14. Hebr. 1 he re∣buked him, and aunswered: he that seeth me, seeth the Father, for he is the only Image of the Father, as Paul writeth, not a domme Image,How man was made after the I¦mage of God. for he is his word not a dead Image, for he is life and re∣surrection, not coūterfet, for he is truth. God is a spirit, not fleshe, a soull, not a body. The soull of man is sayde to be made, Ad imaginem & similitudinem dei, after the Image of God,Gene. 1 because it is a spirituall creature, vnuisible, vncorrup∣tible, not of the substaunce of God, as the Maniches,Priscillia∣nistes. and the Priscillianistes do falsly defend, but made of nothing.
For then it should know all thinges, as God knoweth, and be ignoraunt of no∣thing: it should be voyd of al affections, mutabilitie, and vnconstancie. There is in mans soull, reason, discerning good from euil, truth from falshead. There is memory, by the whiche he remembreth thinges past, there is will, by the whiche he choseth what hym lyketh. Besides this, our first parentes were made with out spot, voyd of sinne, clean, righteous, holy, replenished with al floures of ver∣tues and knowledge. In these thinges, man was formed after the lykenes of God: In these we be like ye Angels,Gene. 2 our bodies we haue comen with the brute beastes, it was made of the mould of the earth (as Moses telleth) before ther was any similitude, likenes, or image of god in mā. S. Paul also declareth this to be true, saying:Ephe. 4. be ye renued in the spirit of your mindes, & put on ye new mā, which after the image of God is shapē in righ∣teousnes, & true holines. And in another place:Collossi. 3. lie not one to another after that ye haue put of the old man with his works & put on ye new, which is renued in know¦ledge after ye image of him yt made him.
place: as for the scorneful, he shall laugh them to scorne.How God doth laugh Prou. 2. God is not of such affec∣tion as a man is, to be moued with moc∣age and laughter, for he reioyceth not in the hurt of man, but at his amendment: and it is writtē: Abhominatio domini om∣nis illusor, God abhorreth scornefull per∣sons: but as ye man which laugheth at o∣ther mē, is furthest from a mind to help them, and to remedy their griefes: so is God to such as dispise his commaunde¦ments, set light by his threatnings, & are not moued wyth his promises: this is Gods laughter & scorning. He is said to slepe, when Christ lay dead in his graue whose death is called a swete slepe of Hi∣eremye,How he is said to slepe. or els when he is slowe to helpe his elect out of trouble, as in the. Psa 43. Arise,Psal. 44 wherfore doest thou slepe O Lord. And contrariwyse, he is said to awake, when he doth straight way without any tarying socour them,To awake help them, and de∣liuer them. He is said to forget vs, when he taketh his mercy from vs,Forget. for forget∣ting his statutes, ordinaūces, & cōmaun∣dements, & to remēbre vs when we cha∣unge,Remēbre. not he. Iesus Christe that is God yesterday, & to day continueth the same
for euer. He sitteth not after humane ma¦ner, but after another sorte.Sitte. To raigne & to sit, be one thing in God, & of one signi¦fication & meaning. God raigneth ouer the heathen,Psal. 46 God sitteth in his holy seat he sitteth ouer Cherubin, which is by in∣terpretation, fulnes of knowledge, by which word angels be ment, & the myn∣des of good men, for in them god sitteth and raigneth, as Salomon testifieth: The soule of the righteous is the seat of wys∣dome.Sapien. 7 To stande. And scripture also attributeth stā∣ding vnto God for long suffraūce, wher with he calleth vs to repentaūce, who is said also to go, & to walke,Gooe. Walke. not by chaun∣ging of place, for he filleth all places, but by ocupying ye mynds of the faithful, as in the Prophet: I wil dwel amng them, and walke amonge them,Esay 55. 2. Cor. 6 and be their God, where dwellinge, walking, and to be their God meane one. When these thinges be spoken of God, the chaunge is to be vnderstanded in vs, and not in him, as if you and I shoulde drinke both of one drinke, and I shoulde lyke it, and you mislyke it, the diuersitie is not in the drink but in vs: euen so God, after dy∣uers cōditiōs of mē, is said to be pleased
with one and discōtented with another, to remēbre some, and forget other, not that the very passions of anger, of mer∣cy, of remēbraūce, of forgetfulnes, take place in him, in whome is no affection, no passion, but the scripture vsethe these speaches for our weak vnderstandings feeding vs wyth mylke, because we are not able to disgest stronger meate. As long as we be in this lyfe, we must lear∣ne of God such termes, for our lyfe is a shadowe, our knowledge is vnperfecte, we se in a glasse, in a darke speaking, wt a corrupt eye. Nothing can be properly spoken of God,1 Cor. 3 for then he shoulde not be vnspeakeable. Who cannot se better in the clear lyght then in a shadow, with out a glasse then in it? we see in this lyfe as it were with a payre of spctacles, but when the spectacles shalbe taken away, we shal se clearly God face to face, who was neuer sene yet, with bodilye eyes. Then shadowes, glasses, dark speaches, spectacles, mylke, and the corrupte eye, shalbe taken away according to the voi∣ce of the trumpetour: when that which is perfect cometh, yt which is vnperfect shalbe done awaye,
The .v. Chapter. ¶God is vnsearcheable. THe scripturs teach him also to be ineffable in all tonges, vnsercheable in thought, no¦thing can attain vnto hym, in so much that Paul crieth out:Rom. 11 O the deapnes of the rightuousnes and wisdom and knowledge of God. How vnsearcheable ar his iudgements, and his waies vntraceable? If his iudge¦mentes surmount our capacities, much more he himselfe, and if Paules, muche more ours. Logike the science of reason, discussing all doubtes and cōtrouersies, confuting all mens wisdome, beholding the beames and brightnes of Gods glo¦rious visage, faileth in searching what he is, and becometh folishnes. I speake not this iudging Logike to be vnprofi∣table to the reader of Gods word, no, I thinke rather such as iangel against it, to be void of all reason, for as muche as they speake against the act of reason. Logike is an excellent gift of God not to be dispised or discōmended least we be vnthankefull vnto God,Lodgike. but to be dili∣gently learned and commended. Many
clatter and prate that Peter and Paull neuer learned Logike, Philosophie and such dregges, whiche I deny: for Christ said, he would send them the conforter, who should teach them al things. If the holy ghost taught them all thinges, he taught thē also Logike. There you haue that the Apostles learned Logike. But you wil reply that the holy ghost taught them al things necessary for a preacher. Paul also declareth that Logike is neces¦sary for a preacher when he saieth that a bishop must be Didacticos. That is apt to teach. Christ & his Apostels in their ser∣mons,1 Tim. 3 disputatiō & letters, vse al formes of arguments, al sorts of reasonings, all waies and meanes of inuentions, as I would proue if I thought it nedefull to stand in this matter. That whiche Paul writeth to the Collossians, Videte ne quis &c.Colloss. 2 Bewar least any man come & spoile you through Philosophie & deceitful va¦nitie maketh for philosophie not against it. For Paul there biddeth thē take hede of such men that with their Philosophie went about to hinder the gospel, to stop the prosperous successe of Gods word, abusing Gods gift to the destruction of
them self and other, rebuking the il cōdi∣cions of men, and not dispraising the art for he himself was a great Philosopher, Now if Philosophy did set forth a false & vntrue matter, that it confonded ye faith of many, how much more is it able to set forth the truth. The .vi. Chapter. ¶God is vnuisible, and how not withstan∣ding, the faithful of the old testamēt saw him diuerse times. BVt to retourne vnto our matter, as he is vnsearch∣able, so he is vnuisible, as Paul recordeth vnto Ti∣mothe:1 Thm.  To the vnuisible God and wise only be ho¦nor and praise for euer and euer. Ther be some thinges vnuisible, which not with∣standing be subiect to mutabilitie, as mans thought, memory, wyll, and all spirituall creatures: and whatsoeuer also is visible, is also mutable. God is said on¦ly to be inuisible, bicause he is void of all mutabilitie. He saieth vn Moyses, no man shall see me and lyue: By Iohn Baptist,Exo. 30 Iohn. 1 no man hath sene God at any time. If no man hath seen GOD, howe did the faithfull of the olde Testament
se him? The scripture saith that the Lord spake vnto Moises face to face as a mā speaketh vnto his frend:Exod. 33 And Micheas affirmeth vnto king Achab the wicked, I saw the Lord sit on his seat,3 Reg. 33 and all the company of heauē standing about him. Steauen also ye first martir that we read of in the new Testament, loking vp sted¦fastly with his eies vnto heauen,Act. 7 sawe ye glory of God, & Iesus standing on his right hand.How Moi¦ses, Miche¦as, & Ste∣uen, sawe God, who is inuisi∣ble. To these I answer, Moises saw not God with his bodely eies, who is a spirit, nor thou cannot gather any such thing of the text, which saieth that God spake vnto hym face to face as a man vnto his frend, that is God talked familiarly with hym, not that he sawe him in that place, albeit we read oftenti∣mes that God appeared vnto him and to all the Israelites,Exod. 33 but not in his owne nature and substaunce, but in his crea∣tures and visible formes: For Moises desireth God afterward, if I haue foūd fauour in thy ight, shew me thy self ma∣nifestly, wherfore he did not se him ma∣nifestly before, but only talked with him And as for Micheas and Steauen,1 Cor. 12 they sawe God as Paul did when he was ca∣ried
vp vnto the third heauen with the eies of their belefe, of their minde, not of their body. As long as we continue in this life, we shall neuer se the deuine and blessed nature, because our hartes be vn¦clean:Math. 5 Blessed be the pure in hart saieth Christ, for they shal se God. This lyfe is a warfare and a purifying of our hartes by faith from sinne. As long as the war∣fare endureth, there is no perfect victory of sinne, for victory maketh an ende of warre: the victory of sinne is the perfect vision of Gods glory, whiche is gotten by faith as Iohn the beloued disciple te∣stified:1 Ioh. 5 This is the victory that ouercom¦meth the world euen our faith. Who is he that ouercommeth the worlde, but he that beleueth that Iesus is the sonne of God. Of these it appereth that God is a pure nature, vnchaungeable vnsear∣cheable inuisible.. The .vii. Chapter. ¶God is euery where, and howe Christ is in the Sacrament. HE is also euery where by nature, not by grace ac∣cording to which he saith by Ieremy:Hiere. 23 heauen and
earth do I fill. For the heauens be hys seat and the earth is his fotestole. Thys thing belongeth only vnto God, and to no creature, nether spirituall, ne corpo∣rall. A certain Christen man being de∣maunded of a Phllosopher where God was, enquired of him wher he was not. Wherfore the sonne and the holy ghost be no creatures, for of the sonne it sayd: wisdom reacheth from one end vnto an other mightely,Sapi. 8 and ordereth al thinges louingly, and of the holy comforter ly∣kewyse: The spirit of the Lord filleth the round compasse of the worlde,Sap. 1 and vp∣holdeth all thinges. There is a great dif∣ference betwene mans soull and his bo∣dy, but exceading more difference be∣twene God & his creatures, who made both the soull and the body. He is not sayde to fulfyll the world as the water, the ayre, the Sunne light, which by de∣uisiō be in many places: he is in al places without diuision wholy, and conteined in no place. But as a sound or noyse is hard more of some, & lesse of other some, being of equal distaunce from it, as they be of quick or dull hearyng, so all be it God be present with all thinges, yet he
is in some more plentifully, in some lesse not with parcialitie, but according to the diuersities of their capacities. If God be in all places,Sap. 1 how is it true that wysdom doth not enter into a frowarde soule, ne dwell in a body subdued vnto synne? Surely synne doeth seperate vs from God,2 Cor. 7 for what cōpany hath lyght with darkenes? What concord hath Christ with Beliall? What felowship hath truth with falshod? I answer God is said to dwel, to enter, where he fauou∣reth, where he loueth, after whiche sort he is not in the wicked, but after ano∣ther sort he is in them: For where he is not by hys fauour and grace, he is by his righteousnes, where he is not a be∣nefactour, he is a punysher, where he is not a dweller, he is an auenger.Iohn. 1. But Christ saieth if a man loue hym, that his father and he wyll come to hym, if they wyll come to hym, they were not with hym before, and so God is not in al pla∣ces. This text sheweth howe all suche thinges are to be vnderstanded in God. The words expoūd one another, which be these: If a man loue me, he wyl kepe my word, and my father also wyll loue
him, and we wil come vnto him & dwell with him. Where the comming of God the father, and dwelling is the same that goeth immediatly before, my father also wyl loue hym. These wordes be a good comentary to the other wordes before: we wyl come to hym, we wil dwel with him. Wherof it is manifest that all such phrases darke speaches and ridels make nothing against the presence of God in al places,Psal. 137 but rather fortifie and establish it: we can go no whither from his spirit, we can flie no where from his face: if we climme vp vnto heauē, he is there: if we go down vnto hell he is also there. We must not imagin him to be cōtei¦ned in place, and yet he is al thing in al. He is to all men as he findeth them: he is good in them that he findeth good, & yll to them that be yll: he is a helper in them that be good, and a punisher in thē that be euill. If thou lokest for any suc∣cour, help, or ayd at Gods hand, forsake that is euill, ad folowe that is good. When thou stealest,wickednes coueteth ye darke. or goest about ad∣uoutry, thou tariest for the darke, thou louest the night, because thy workes be of darkenes, lest thou shouldest be seen
and shamed, lest thou shouldest be taken and hanged. Thou goest vnto the kings high way, and takest a standing, thou goest to thy neighbours house, and rob∣best hym, thou ridest vp to London to sue thy neighbour, to robbe him of his right:God seeth the wicked eury wher. Cal to remembraunce that God is with thee euery where: he is with thee goyng, he is with thee by the way, he is with thee when thou art doing thy de∣uelish purpose: he stādeth by and loketh on, wryting thy fact as it were in a paire of tables, and at the last day he wil make it knowen vnto al men to thy vtter con∣fusion, shame, and condemnation. If thou be afrayed of men,Fear God aboue al. that destroy the bodi, fear him that hath power to throw both thy body and soull headlong into hell into the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, whiche is the seconde death. Thou mayest escape the punishe∣ment of man, but thou canst not escape Gods hand, who punisheth more gre∣uously then man. Whther wilt thou flie? from God?We cānot escap gods hand. surely thou canst not flie from him, but by flying vnto hym: thou canst not escape his wrath, whiche is his righteousnes, but by appealyng
vnto his mercie. Dauid compared God to a man that draweth a bowe, the far∣ther he draweth his shaft whiche is his punishment, the greater is the stroke therof. There is a great altercation nowe a daies,Against the corporall presence. Christ is not in the sacrament touching his huma∣nitie. Mar. 13 Math. 24 whether God be in the sacramēt or not: he must nedes be ther, for he is in al places. But whether is he ther by his diuinitie or humanitie? Christ warneth vs that in the latter age there shall aryse many false Prophetes, and Pseudochristi that is false anointed (which be the By∣shop of Romes gresed butchers and sa∣crificers) which shal say, lo here is Christ and there is Christ. These Pseudochristes, be not they of whom they speake after∣ward in thesame chapters: many shall come in my name saying I am Christ, but another sort, for these shall not cha∣lenge this to them selues, but direct mā to other: and of these false anointed that shal point vs to other, he saith: Nolite cre¦dere, beleue thē not: and therfore I dare not say that he is there after his humani¦tie, least I be a false Prophet, for this is spoken of his humanitie, not of his diui∣nitie. Touching his diuinitie, I say vnto
you good people, lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, for it is here, there, in the towne, in the citie, in the chappel, in the church, and wildernes, and euery wher, as I haue declared. The papistes say yt this place maketh not against ye presence of Christes body vpō earth,An obiectiō but against false Prophetes, which should preach in the last age, false doctrine: True it is, Christ speaketh here against suche. But what false doctrine shal they teach?The auns∣wer. Shal ther come two at one time in one age, of which false prophets shal say, he is christ and an other shal say no this is Christ, pointing to some other? There were ne∣uer yet two in one age, which both were said to be Christes, of any false prophets nor the scriptures do not mencion or re∣gester any such thing to come, for the ve¦ritie saith yt many such shal come. Now we neuer read that many haue reported and said, here is Christ, and there, onles we take it to be spoken of the papistes, whiche shewe Christ vto vs in many places at once, in euery chapell, and on euery Aultar. Many shall say of them selues that they are Christ, but these be other doctours, compare their wordes
together, and thou shalt fynd that I say true, the one text doth not expounde the other, but they be two dyuerse propheci∣es of two diuerse things. This false doc∣tryne then is nothynge els, but to teach Christes body after his ascentiō to be v∣pon the earth, visibly, or inuisibly. Pi∣ghius,Pighius interpreta∣cion. who calleth Gods worde a nose of ware, wresteth this text to another pur∣pose, taking Christe here for his church. Lo here is Christe, and there is Christe, (saith Pighius) that is, heretikes shal say: here is the church, and there is ye church. O wyse exposition: shall heretikes saye that Christ is here & there, touchyng his members and church? No verely, this is no heresy: for Christes church is in ma∣ny places,Marke. 13 Math. 34 in deserts and other. If Christ must be taken for his church in this text, then we are compelled also to vnderstād the church by him, in the text which im∣mediatly foloweth, where he saith, bele∣ue them not: Christe that is the church shall come as lightnynge, we must take Christ for the same thorow out the chap∣ter. Read diligently, examen the circum∣staunce, whych is chieflye to be regar∣ded in the exposition of doubtful places,
open the scripture with the key,The keye. The pyck∣lock. not with the pykelocke, that is: expound it by tt selfe, not by priuate interpretation, and yu shalt fynd that Christe there is taken for Christ, not for ye church, as Pighius wold straine the place, making of ye scriptures a nose of wax. You wil ask me then whe¦ther we receiue Christes body? yea truly from heauen, from the right hand of the father, not out of ye bread, nor in ye bread. For onles we eat his flesh and drink his bloud, we shal not dwell in him,We recei∣ue Christs body from heauen. we shall not arise at the last day, we shal not haue eternall life. Christes humanitie is the mean, wherby we must obtein al things the way, by which we must clyme vp to heauē, the ladder that Iacob sawe going vnto Mesopotamia, reaching vp to hea¦uen, with aungels ascending and descen∣ding vpon it. Christ teacheth this vsing, not only his word and commaundemēt in raising the dead, as God, but also his flesh as a help and meane to the same.Math.  In raysing the doughter of one of the chief of the synagoge, he toke hir by the hand and raysed her.Math.  When he cured one full of the leprosy, he stretched out his hand and touched hym. When he entred into
the citie of Naim, meetinge a dead man caried out,Luke. 7. the only sonne of a wydowe, hauyng compassion on her, he touched the bere, and raised him from dead. Ther be infinit places of scripture, which teach vs that Christes flesh geueth lyfe, deliuereth from death, expelleth vice, but this is notable, forasmuch as this wy∣dowe signifieth the church, and her dead sonne representeth mankynd, dead tho∣rowe the sinne of Adam. Christ is a vyne and we ar the braūches, as he witnesseth himselfe:Ihon. 15. Ego sum vitis vera. &c. I am the true vyne, and my father is a husbād man, & vos estis palmites. The braūches cannot lyue, onles they take norishment of the substaunce of the vyne and of his iuice: Euen so the soul of a christen man must nedes be fed with the swete fleshe, and comfortable bloud of Iesus Christe. If we be braunches, we be nouryshed of the vyne: I wold learn whether he be the vyne after his humanitie, or by his diuinitie. He is not the vyne touching his diuine nature, for the vyne is not e∣quall with the husband man, but at his commaundement. Christ touchinge his diuinitie, is the husbandman, and equall
with his father. Marke,Christ is ye vyne, tow∣chynge his flesh. he is the vyne therfore cōcerning that nature, in which he is inferior to his father, which is his humanitie. If then Christe be the vyne not by his diuinitie, but by his humani∣tie, and we the braūches: then we must be refreshed of the vyne, that is of his humanitie. This metaphore hath ben a∣bused to many euill purposes, as to pro∣ue Chryste not to be God, because he is the vyne, it hath ben racked also to pro∣ue that these words, hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, is a lyke phrase, a like speach, as when Christ saith, ego sum vi∣tis, I am the vyne.I am the vine & this my bodye, are diuers phrases. They be no like phra∣ses, but far different and diuerse: for the vyne, is no sacrament, neither the dore, nor the way, be no sacramentes. The bread of the which Christ said, this is my body, is a sacrament,This is my body expounded not a bare and na∣ked metaphore, the rocke was a sacra∣ment, the brasē serpent was a sacramēt, not metaphores only.Luke. 22. Math. 26 Mark. 24. When Christe sayd this is my body, he ordeyned a sa∣cramēt, yt is, he gaue ye name of the thing to the signe, so yt notwythstanding, the matter, nature, & substaunce of the signe
remaineth: onlesse this substaunce re∣maine,The sub∣staunce of bread re∣maineth. the bread is no Sacrament. For sacramentes (saith S. Augustine) are so called of the similitude of those thinges, to which they be sacramentes. Take a∣way the matter, the substaunce, and na∣ture of bread and wyne, and there remai¦neth no more similitude. Now all the fa∣thers that were before Gregory do con∣fesse, that the scriptures do wytnes, that there must be thre similitudes in this sa∣crament:Thre simi¦litudes in the Sacra¦ment. a similitude of norishing, a si∣militude of vnitie, and a similitude of cō∣uersion. The similitude of norishing is this:Of nori∣shing. that as bread and wyne doe norish our body and comfort our outward mā, so the body and bloud of Christ, be the meat and fode of our soules, and do cō∣fort our inward man.Of vnitie. And the similitude of vnitie is this: that as the lo of which we eate was made of many cornes of wheat by the liquor of water knoden in to dough, and yet is but one loaf, and as the wyne wa made of the iuyce of di∣uerse grapes, and yet is but one cup of wyne, so al they that eat Christes body, and drinke his bloud, being many, are made one body, & one flesh by the liquor
of charitie and loue, the mistical body of our sauiour Christ which is his church, not his natural body: for the bread is a sacrament not only of Christes naturall body, but also of the congregation and mistical body: and therfore Paul saith, that albeit we be many,1 Cor. 10 yet notwithstan¦ding we ar, Vnus panis, vnum corpus, one loaf, and one body. What a loaf are we? Verely euen Triticeus panis, a wheaten loaf by the similitude of vnitie, which I haue declared.Of conuesion. The similitude of conuer∣sion is this, that as the bread and wyne is turned in to ye substaūce of our bodies, so by the receiuing of Christes body and bloud, we are turned into the nature of them, we are chaunged and made bones of his bones, and flesh of his flesh. He that eateth my flesh saith Chrst, & drin∣keth my bloud, he abideth in me and I in him: that is to saye, we be made one flesh and one bloud, and thesame nature that my flesh and my bloud hath, thesa∣me getteth he that eateth me. These simi¦litudes must be in the bread and wine or els they be no sacramentes. Now take a∣way the substaunce, matter and nature of them, and what similitude remaineth
ether of norishing, or of vnitie, or of con∣uersion. These similitudes be in the very substaunce and inward nature of bread and wyne, not in the outward shewe of accidentes, whiche doe nether noryshe, nether are they chaunged, neither haue any similitude of any vnitie. Here percase gentle reader thou wilt demaund of me: seing I teache the sub∣staunce of bread and wyne to remayne after the consecration, what I doe aun∣swer to the doctours and fathers which oftentymes doe say that the nature and substaunce of bread and wine is altered, is turned into the body & bloud of our sauiour Christ, as Ciprian in his treatise which he writeth De cena domini, of the Lordes supper saith:Ciprian de cena domi∣ni. Panis non effigie, sed natura mutatus, this bread is chaunge not in the outward shew, but in the na∣ture and substaunce: and Ignatius saith the same, and Cirill, and Ambrose, and Hierom, and Augustin, and Chrisostom whose doctrins we doe folowe, and we do alowe, and imbrace them. How the doctors do say that the substaunce of bread is chaunged.Be not deceiued good people, they ar nothing against this doctrine, but the pillers and mainteiners therof, if their
wrytinges be truly vnderstand: Marke the phrases, compare their sayinges to∣gether one with an other, and you shall find, that many do fasly slaunder them, and that they, which boast & prate most of the doctours and old fathers, vnder∣stand not the old fathers. So they say that Eliseus chaunged and altered the nature of Iron,4 Reg. 6 whē he made it to swym aboue the water, so they say that Elias chaunged the nature of fyre, when tho∣rowe his praier it fell from heauen,3 Reg. 18 Ambrose de sacram¦tis. Exod. 3 and consumed his sacrifice of wood, stones, and dust. The nature of fire was chaun∣ged, no man can deny it, at what tyme God appeared vnto Moyses out of a bush in a flame, for the bush was not cō∣sumed. He cōmaunded ye fier not to hurt his faithful seruaunts, Sidrach, Misak, and Abednago,Dan. 3 & preserued them harm∣les, from the hot burning ouen. There a∣gain nature was altered. Elias & Elise∣us did not turne, alter, or chaūge the ve∣ry substaunce & inward essence or mat∣ter, ether of Iron, or of the fier into any other substaunce, or nature, but the na∣turall propertie of thē making the Iron which is heuy to houe aboue ye waters,Substance for natural propertie. &
causing the fier which is light to descend dounward. Euen so the doctours and old fathers which we alowe and folow, say that the substaunce of bread & wyne is chaunged, that is the natural proper∣tie of them, so that where as before they were only the meat of the body, now af∣ter the wordes rehearsed, they are the fode of the soul also, for so much as they deliuer vnto vs Christes swete flesh, and comfortable bloud: before it was comen bread and wine, now it is holy and sanc∣tified, before it was no sacrament, now it is a sacrament of the blessed body and honorable bloud of our sauiour Iesus Christ. But for a more manifest profe, yt the old fathers beleued the substaūce of bread to remaine after the consecration, I wyll aledge some of thē. Ireneus saith, that euery sacrament is made of two na∣tures,Ireneus of a heauenly nature, and of a ter∣renal or earthly nature. Now take away the substaunce of bread, and what earth∣ly nature or substaūce remaineth in this holy sacrament? The papistes say, that the earthly nature is Christes body,An obiec∣tion. which he toke of the earth when he was borne of the blessed virgin Mary: For
she was earth, and all men be earth. To this I aunswer,The auns∣wer. that Christes body is earth in very dede, yet it is not the earth∣ly and terrenall nature of this sacramēt, which must haue thre similitudes, of vni¦tie, of nutricion, and of conuersion, as is declared before, whiche similitudes can not be in Christes body. Moreouer hear what Origen saith:Origen. Panis sanctificatus va∣dit in ventrem: The sacramentall bread entreth into the belly. Wherfore entreth it thither? but to norish our bodies, to fe∣de them, to be ye meat of the flesh. Wher∣fore the substaunce therof is not turned, not chaunged, not altered, but remay∣neth and continueth: for accidentes doe nether fede, nor norish. S. Augustin also subscribeth vnto them, saying:Augustin. Accedat verbum elemento, & fit sacramentum, he saith not succedat, but accedat, whiche is this much to say: Let the word be added to the element, and then it is made a sa∣crament. Thus it is euident that ye bread and wyne which is the element remay∣neth, and is not trāsubstanciat, both by autentical scriptures, whiche do alowe thre similitudes, and also by the consent of al the doctors, and elder fathers: For
out of doubt, Athanasius, Basil, Nazian∣zene, Hierome, Chrisostome, and other, both Latinistes and Grekes, do not disa¦gre with these. Moreouer the rock was a sacrament of Christes bloud, & yet not transubstanciat: They & we drinke one spiritual drinke, as Paul recordeth. Like¦wise Manna was a sacrament of his bo¦dy without any such mutacion.1 Cor. 10 You wil aske me then whether our sacramentes be better then the sacraments of the old testamēt?How our sacramēts are better then the sa¦cramentes of the olde testament. Yea truly, but not of their own nature, but thorow ye grace of God, tho∣row the fulnes of time: bicause in this te∣stament the face of Christ is more clear∣ly discouered and knowen, and not tho∣row any transubstanciation. These be ye daies which the Patriarkes & Prophets desired to come, the daies of saluation, & the acceptable time. I haue opened the true meaning of Christes words: this is my body, and declared the necessitie, the vse, the fruit, the mary, and swetenes of the holy communion, which fruit is in∣comparable. For if all they whiche did but touch the hem of Christes garment,Math. 9 receiued their perfect health: How much more shall we be made strong and con∣forted,
if we haue Christ in vs. This ho∣ly communion geueth lyfe, destroyeth death, quickeneth our bodies, lighte∣neth our soules, banysheth synne, and encreaseth vertue. For as a litle wax, powred vpon other wax, is made al one with it, euen so they that receiue this sa∣crament worthely, abyde in Christ, and Christ in them. A little leauen sowreth a whole batch, but the seldome receiuing of this sacrament, if (I say) it be receiued worthely, bryngeth remission of sinnes, purgeth our soules, maketh cleane our herts, amendeth our vnderstandinges: but the oftener the better. All you that approch vnto this table, and desyre to be braunches of the vyne, and to be sea∣led into the felowship of the congrega∣tion, forsake your sinfull lyuing, entend to leade a newe conuersacion from the bottom of your hearts, pourge out the olde leauen, and become newe dough,Euill men do not re∣ceiue Chri¦stes body. burie al affections and liue vnto vertue: otherwyse ye nether eat Christes flesh, nor drink his bloud. He that eateth Chri¦stes flesh, hath eternall life:Iohn. 6 The first reason. Yea mary saith the Papistes, if he eat it digne, wor∣thely, adding vnto the text, or els ma∣king
it false, but he may receiue it vnwor¦thely as Iudas did. Examen this expo∣sition with the touchstone, opē the scrip∣ture with the key, not with the pick lock and thou shalt finde that Christes flesh is not receiued vnworthely. In all the scriptures this word, indigne, vnworthe∣ly,The secōd reason. is but once read concerning this sa∣crament, and there (marke) the bread & the wyne is said to be receiued vnwor∣thely, not Christes most cōfortable flesh and bloud. Quicunque manducauerit panē hunc. &c. He that eateth of this bread, & drinketh of this cup (saith Paul) vnwor∣thely, he shal be gilthy of the body and bloud of Christ.1 Cor. 11 Lo he saith, he that ea∣teth of this bread vnworthely, and drin∣keth of this cup, not of the body & bloud of Christ, which alwaies be receiued vn¦to health. Chose nowe gentell reader whether thou wilt beleue ye papistes, which teach that Christes flesh is receiued of euil mē vnworthely, r Paul which saith he that eateth of this bread, that is not commen bread, not dayly bread, but sacramental bread, that is ment by the word (this.) If they can shew in any place of scripture
where this word (vnworthely) is ioined with the body of Christ, as I haue she∣wed where it is coupled with bread, I will be of their opinion. Christes flesh is meat according to his own saying,The third reason. Iohn. 6 Caro mea vere est cibus. &c. My flesh is very meat and my bloud is very drink. Now meat doth hurt, where it findeth a bely corrupt with naughtie humores. Euen so this spiritual fode, if it find a man de∣filed with sinne, encreaseth his dampna∣tion, bryngeth hym vnto destruction, not of the nature of it, but thorowe the default of hym that receceiueth it. Yea if we be defiled with corrupt humors, we be no partakers of these deinties. But peraduenture the Papistes wil re∣ply, if it be meat then is it receiued both of good and euil men, for nether of both sortes can lyue without meat.an obiectiō aunswered To this I aūswere, it is the meat of the soul not of the bodie, the fode of the spirit not of the flesh, and therfore it is not receiued of e∣uill persones, because the meat is good and they be euill, so that this is a strong argument: Christes flesh and bloud is meat, ergo it is not receiued of euil men.The .iiii. reason. Moreouer Christes flesh and bloud is
the vine, as I haue proued before, and we be the braunches. Only the brauches be fed of the vine. Euil men be not braunches of the vine.A Silogis∣me. Ergo euil mē be not partakers of ye vine Which is Christes flesh and bloud. Therfor let no Iudas, no Simō Ma¦gus, no man with a cloked mind thinke that he is fed with these deinties. If it were not lawful for the vncircumsised in flesh to eate the figuratiue paschal lambe how much more is it vnlawful for ye vn∣circumcised & vnclean in heart, to tast of these deinties? If he that despised Moi∣ses law was condempned without any mercy vnto death vnder two or thre wit¦nesses, how more greuously shall he be punished which treadeth vnder fote the sonne of God, & coūteth the bloud of the new testamēt as an vnholy thing, wher¦with he is sanctified. Purge out ye old le∣uen, or els thou maist not, nor thou canst not eat this swete bread. Paul testifieth that many among the Corinthiās, for ye abusing of this sacramēt, were punished with weakenes, with sicknes, yea & ma∣ny stroken with death, the whiche he wrot for our enstruction. Against the cō¦ming
of our frend we make cleane our houses, and loke diligētly that al things be trym: And are we negligent in pury∣fying of our mindes against the cōming of the great king, who hath promised to dwell with vs after the receiuing of this holy meat?Thankes ought to be geuen for ye death of Christ. I wold wysh that men wold geue thankes more customably imme∣diatly after the receyuing therof vnto God, for the redemption of mankinde and for all his benefites, syngyng the C. Psalme. O be ioyfull in the Lorde all ye landes, serue the Lord in gladnes and come before his presence with a song. And the Psalme that beginneth: O com let vs sing vnto the Lorde,Psal. 94 let vs hartely reioyce in the strength of our saluacion, let vs come before his presence with thā∣kes geuing. With the .C.iii. Psalme: Praise the Lord O my soull. For who cōmeth to the table of any man, & depar∣teth without any thākesgeuing: it is cal∣led also a sacrament of thankesgeuing. I wold men wold as diligently dispose them selues to receiue this sacrament, as they do eftsones delight to talke of it: if they would prepare them selues to re∣ceiue it more oft, the holy Ghost would
enstruct them and becom their scolema∣ster, for wysdom entreth not vnto a soul subdued into sin. But I heare some say: I wil not come to receiue the sacrament for I can, and do receiue the bodye and bloud of Christ at home, in the field, and in the church, yea euery where withoute the sacramēt,The sacra¦mentall re∣ceiuyng is necessary. beleuing vpon his passion. Truly if thou be godly mynded and do call his death to remembraūce, trusting to haue pardon of thy sinnes by the effu∣sion of his bloud, thou dost eat his body and drinke his bloude. But thou art not godly mynded, but carnall, the seruaunt of sinne, if thou dispise the ordinaunce of God, and his cōmaundement, who bid∣deth the, take, and eat: and carnall and vngodly men do not receiue the body of Christ, but the spirituall and godly. Thou maist say likewyse, I wil not com at the minister for remission of my sines, and for absolution,The abso∣lution of the minist. for God is not boūd to his sacramentes, he pardoneth with∣out the ceremony of ministration, as he did ye thief, Mary magdalen, and other. Sure it is, God forgeueth thy sinnes be∣fore thou come to the priest, if thou haue earnest repentaunce, and true entent of
amendement: for he sayth, In quacunque hora. &c. In what hour soeuer ye vnrigh∣teous man doth repēt. &c. and yet neuer∣theles he himself cōmaūdeth ye to come to them, for he hath geuen them autho∣ritie to louse & to bynd, and to blesse and curse▪ Now what their lousing, blessing, and absolution is, shalbe declared heraf∣ter, in the .xvii. Chapter. So albeit Chri∣stes body be receiued in fayth, withoute the sacrament: yet thou must come vn∣to the sacrament because thou arte com∣maunded, or els thou art an euill man. It is not inough to receiue it spiritually we must receiue it also sacramētally: yea he that will not receiue it sacramentally, neither doth he, neither can he, receiue it in faith spiritually: for I haue proued be¦fore, ye euill mē do not eat these dainties. The .viij. Chapter. ¶God is full of vnderstanding. GOD is also full of vnder∣stāding, If any man lack wysdom,Iacob. 1. Iames biddeth him aske it of god, which geueth to al men indiffe∣rentlye, and castethe no manne in the teth, and it shall be geuen
him, if he aske it without wauering, wi∣thout mistrust. Dauid asking with a sure fayth obteyned his request,Psal. 118 in so much that he had more vnderstanding then all his teachers, & was wyser then the aged, but what foloweth? for because I kepe thy commaundements. Thou askest not in fayth, without keping of Gods com∣maundements, ostende mihi fidem tuā ex operibus, shew me thy faith saith Iames, of thy workes.Psal. 98 Psal. 18. 3. Regū. 3 Kepe them & he wil geue the vnderstanding. His testimonies are a lanterne, and geue light euen vnto the babes. He gaue Salomon an vnderstand∣ing heart to iudge his people, and to dis∣cerne betwen good and bad, so that ther was none lyke hym, neyther before nor after. He gaue him also honour, and ry∣ches, and long lyfe, which be his gyftes. He opened the myndes of his discyples,Luke. 24. that they might vnderstand the scriptu∣res.2. Cor. 12 He toke Paul vp into ye third heauē, and taught him things which cannot be vttered. He lled Besaliell and Ahaliab with the spirite of God,Exod. 31. with wysdome, vnderstanding and knowledg, to fynde out curiouse workes, to worke in golde, and syluer, & brasse, to karue in wood, to
graue in stone, to make ye tabernacle of witnes, the Arke, ye mercy seat, the table the pure candlestickes, the alter of incen∣se, vestiments to minister in, and the ho∣ly garments for Aaron the priest. Wherfore he himself, must nedes be full of all wysedome and all vnderstanding. But these thinges, as they were cōmaū∣ded to them of the ould law, so we of the new lawe are not boūd to them, because we haue no commaundement. For as Paule writeth vnto his nation,Hebre. 13▪ we haue an aulter wherof thei mai not eat, which serue in the tabernacle. The priesthod of the leuites, ther sacrifices and ther lawes be disanulled. Christes euerlasting priest¦hod, hath made an end of all the Leuites priesthod, yea and of all other priesthod saue onlye that, whych belongeth to all Christen men. The oblation of his body once for all, vpon the aulter of the crosse: which was a slayne sacrifice for our sin∣nes abolisheth all other, and the lawe of his Gospel hath blotted ot the lawe of the carnall commaundement. But oure Romanes allege the prophet Malachy,Malachy maketh no¦thyng for the sacrifi∣ce of the masse or po¦pish priest∣hode. for the defence of the sacrifice of their masse, and for their Popish priesthod, by
whom God saith: I haue no pleasure in you, and as for an offring I will not ac∣cept it at your hands. For from the ry∣sing of the Sunne vnto the going down of the same, my name is great amongest the gentils, yea in euery place shal there sacrifice be done, and a clean offring offe∣red vp in my name. Albertus Pighius, one of ye byshop of Romes chief knygh∣tes,Pighius argument laboureth to proue that this text is ment of the oblacion of the masse, whose reasons be these. First that it cannot be taken for the oblation of Christes body on ye crosse, for God promised here such a sacrifice that should be offred in al pla∣ces, and of the Heathen. That was offred in one place, in Iewry only, and of the Iewes. Moreouer it can not be such a sa¦crifice as Dauid cōmended,Psalm. 50 that a trou∣bled spirit, a broken and a contrit heart is a sacrifice vnto God: for the Prophet speaketh here of a cleane sacrifice vnto God, all that we offer vnto God, is spot¦ted, vnclean, and defiled, as the clothes stayned with the flours of a woman. The Prophet also speaketh of a new sa∣crifice that was not before,Esaie. 63 but should be vsed among the Heathen, and offred on∣ly
of the priestes. But we haue the sacri∣fice that Dauid praiseth commen with them of the old law, and it is to be offe∣red of all christen men and womē: wher∣fore it must nedes be spokē of the masse. This is Pighius reason,The aun∣swer. yea the principal argument of al the papistes, vnto which I besech you hear paciently my answer. I entend to wryte a comentary to Ma∣lachie, but I wil take it out of gods word and I wil open scripture with the key. I defend that Malachie meaneth none o∣ther sacrifice, then an oblacion of a pure and contrite heart: and I proue it thus. First Malachie speaketh of such a sacri∣fice as shall be offered in all places vnto God, as vndoubtedly this hath bene, & shal be to the worlds end. He speaketh also of a cleane sacrifice:The sacri∣fice of thā∣kes is offe¦red in all places. Is not ye oblaciō of a contrite heart a cleane sacrifice? Yea truly, or els it were not to be offered vp vnto God, to whom no vncleane thyng is to be presented. Paul speaking of this sacrifice, calleth it a holy,A clean sa∣crifice. Roma. 11 and an accepta∣ble sacrifice, saying: I besech you ther∣fore brethren by the mercies of God, yt you make your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy, and acceptable vnto God. &c.
He meaneth not that we should kyl ou bodies, slea our selues, but kil al our car∣nal lustes, vnlawful desires, euil affecti∣ons in the body, which is a sacrifice of a contrite and humble hart. And wher as Pighius affirmeth against this, that our harts be vnclean, I deny it not: but ne∣uerthelesse God accepteth them as clean and calleth thē so in his word, as by Da∣uid saying: Make me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me:Psal. 50 And by Christ: blessed be ye pure in heart or clean hearted,Math. 5 for they shal se God. We read in the actes, when Peter was a hongred at Cornelius house, that the heauens o∣pened, & certen vessels came doun to him as it had bene a great shete knit at four corners, wherin were all maner of four oted beastes, and that he was bidden to arise and kill, but he would not, saying: he did neuer eat no vncleane thinges: but he was aunswed and commaunded not to esteme any thing vnclean,Act. 1 which God hath cnsed. Euen so I say vnto Pighius yt seing Paul, Dauid & Christ cal it a clean sacrifice, and that GOD hath puritiied our hearts, it becometh not hym to name it otherwyse: For a
good man, a good tree, out of the good treasure of his heart, bryngeth out good fruit. But the papistes say that this is no new sacrifice. I affirme that it is,Math.  A new sa∣crifice. 2 Cor. ▪ for as much as God saith, behold I make al thinges new. If all thinges be new, then this is a new sacrifice, albeit we ha∣ue it commē with the fathers of the old testament: The scripture vseth to call thinges new, when they be commaun∣ded a new, as Christ commaunding his disciples to loue one another before his passion, saith:Iohn. 1 1 Iohn.  I geue you a new cōmaū∣dement that ye loue one another. And Iohn likewise again: a new commaun∣dement I wryte to you, not that these cōmaundements were not mēcioned be¦fore, but that they were so necessary that it pleased God to renue them againe: in which signification the oblation of a cō∣trite heart, may also be called a new sacri¦fice, and that after the phrase of the holy scripture, although Pighius spurne a∣gainst it, who not knowing or not remē¦bring this acception of neenes, doth falsly affirme that the sacrifice that Ma∣lachie entreateth, only apperteineth vn∣to priests. I trust I haue sufficiently de∣clared
bi the testimonies of Gods word that a contrite heart is that cleane and new sacrifice offred in al places, of which Malachie speaketh. That ye Lordes sup∣per, which men cal the masse, is not a sa∣crifice for sinne, S. Paul declareth plain∣ly, saying: sine sanguinis effusione. &c. that without sheding of bloud no sacrifice cā blot out sinne.The first reason. If Christ be sacrificed or offred in his supper for the expiacion of sinne, his precious and moste cōfortable bloud is shed again, is poured forth a∣gain:Hebr. 9 for without bloudshed is no remis∣sion, it must be a bloudy sacrifice, not a drie sacrifice, for which synne is pardo∣ned. Christ (saieth Paull) by his owne bloud entred once for all into the holy place, and found eternal redemption, so that all sinne both that is past and that which is to come in the chosen, is & shal be pardoned by hys eternall sacrifice, which was offred once for al on ye crosse. And sinne being forgeuē as the Apostle telleth by the vertue of it,The secōd reason. Heb. 10 there remay∣neth no more sacrifice for sinne, but only a cōmemoracion & a memorial. For the loue of God, & of our own soules, let vs kepe & vse this sacrament and other in
the church, as Christ the author of all sa∣cramentes cōmaundeth. He mencioneth no such vse, or rather abuse and propha∣nacion. That is a sacrament, in whiche God certifieth vs by some outward and sensible signe,The third reason. yt he geueth vnto vs sum∣what: as for an exāple, in baptisme there is water; which preacheth vnto vs remis¦sion of sinnes by Christs bloud. Now a sacrifice is an other thing,No sacra∣ment is a sacrifice. for in a sacrifi∣ce we geue, dedicate, and presente some thing vnto him. Wherfore the supper of the Lord is no sacrifice for sin, for asmuch as it is a sacrament. Marke this differē∣ce brethren, and be no longer disceiued. The parable of the theues teacheth vs yt Christes coming hath disanulled al such priesthod as is called sacerdotiū,The .iiii. reason. Luk. 10 The woun¦ded man. but pres∣biterum remaineth. The priestes and Le∣uites passe by, & leaue the wounded mā, which was robbed going frō Hierusalē to Iericho, vnholpē, vnprouided for. Is not he socoured only of the Samaritā? The wounded man, sigifieth all man∣kind, who descended from Hierusalem to Iericho,Ierusalē. when he was expulsed out of paradise into this miserable world. For Hierusalem is as much to say, as visio
pacis, or visio perfecta, a peaceable visiō of God which mā had in paradise. The the∣ues yt robbed and woūded him,Theues. were the Deuils, that entised him to eat of the tree of concupiscence, & robbed him of his vn¦derstāding, of fre wil, of dominiō & lord∣ship ouer al creaturs, of ye image of God after which he was made, & made hym after the image of the deuil himself. The priests, the Leuits, were not able to help him, but only the Samaritan, that is Christ healeth him, and restored him to the image of God again. Read ouer the four,The .v. rea¦son. fiue, seuen, nyne, and ten, to the He¦brues, and thou shalt find that the mark yt S. Paule shoteth at in thse Chapters is only to fortifie, that al suche outward priesthod is taken away. Moreouer marke what I say vnto thee:the .vi. rea∣son. Read ouer al the new Testament, and thou shalt not find once this word Sacerdos, Priest, applied or spoken of any one sort of mi∣nisters, as the commen sort do vse it: but whē it is refeed to the Phariseis, & to such as do apperteine without al doubt to the old testamēt, it is referred always to all christen people, which all be Sacer∣dotes thorow Christ: and ministers haue
no maner of sacrifice, but commen with the laitie, both men and women: that is to say, the sacrifice of thankes geuyng, & the quicke and lyuely oblacion of their own bodies,Ministers haue no sa¦crifice, but cōmē with the laitie. the new Testament requi∣reth no other sacrifice. I doe not meane, that euery man or woman may christen marie, purify women, may leuse & binde consciences, may distribute the holy sa∣crament: but I mean, that popish & out∣ward priesthod is crept into the churche of God, against the word of God, and I do beleue and confesse no mo orders of ministers but thre, that is Deacons,The order of Mini. only. and Presbiters, & Bishops. These thre the scriptures aloweth, and shewed the ma∣ner of their creation, and declareth their offices and duties. Ther be mo ministra∣tions, I wil not denay, but they may be reduced all to these thre. The Papistes make .vii. orders, ostiaries or porters,Seuen or∣ders. re∣ders, acolits, exorcistes, subdeacons, dea¦cons, and priestes, but nether of the na∣mes of .v. of them, nor yt which is meant bi the names, nor their creaiō, nor their offices be expressed in the scripturs. And if I wold recite the offices that they thē sees assigne, and their forme of creaciō,
I think mo would laugh at them, then alow them. Some of the doctours write that ther were some so called in ye church at their daies, but that their offices were such, as they decribe, they can not shewe out of any doctour. They haue kept the names, and chaunged the duties and of∣fices, and haue appointed thē other du∣ties, as it is plain, namely in the office of a deacon, and so they do not only rack ye scriptures, but also depraue and corrupt the doctors, to maintein their dreames, and phantasies, and by the name of an∣tiquitie and fathers, they leade vs from our father in heauen. The .ix. Chapter. ¶God is truth: and whether it be lawfull or honest to lie for any consideration. GOD is also full of truth and mercy, of whom Da∣uid witnesseth that al his waies or pathes ar mercy and truth.Psal. 24 Psal. 5 Iohn. 24 Prou. 6 He destroieth al those that forge lies, & deliteth in such as be true, for he is truth it self. Salomō amōg .vii. things which God hateth rekeneth lying twise, as yt which God most abhorreth, affirming
also in another place, that a false witnes & lying lips shal not escape punishment. Ther be that thinke it lawful to lie, as ye marchaunt man to sell his wares with more aduaūtage, & the Priscillianistes,Prou. 1▪ Marchan man. who held this opinion yt for a greater ad¦uaūtage lying is not forbidden to couer their couetousnes: & to excuse their daily lying, they make thre sortes of lies, Ioco sum, perniciosum, officiosum, gesing lies, pernicious, & officious, of the which thei say two kindes to be lawful honest & cō∣mendable, bringing these examples. Na¦sica when he came to Ennius the Poets house to speak with him,Nasica. Ennius. Ennius hauing earnest busines, cōmaunded his maide to mete him at the dore, and to say that he was not within, who knowing that her maister had bidden her to say so be∣cause of his busines, departed. Sone af∣ter it fortuned yt Ennius came to his hou∣se, and knocking at ye dore, enquired for him. Nasica hearing one knock and per∣ceiuing out of a window that it was En¦nius, answered with a loud voice that he was not at home. But Ennius knew his voyce and came in. Then nasica came vnto hym and sayd: you are impudent,
for I beleued your maid that you were not at home, and wil not you beleue me my self? In this exāple be two lyes, one of Ennius mayd at her maisters cōmaū¦dement, the other of Nasica, in the way of iest and mirth, whiche both be defen∣ded to be honest. But I tel you, al lying is forbidden.Sara. Gen. 18 Abraham. Gen. 12 Iacob. Gen. 20 Gen. 27 Sara also is alleged, who when she had laughed, denied it to thre men which came vnto Abraham: and he likewyse is brought in for calling hys wyfe, his sister. And Iacob the patriark through the sutteltie of lying, stoieaway his fathers blessing, and the title of enhe¦ritaunce, from his elder brother Esau, at the coūsel of his mother Rebecca. The scripture recordeth also,The mid∣wiues. Exod. 1 that God delt wel with the midwifes of Egipt, & made them houses, because with a lie thei hin∣dred the deuillish entent of cruell kyng Pharao, and preserued the babes of the Hebrues from death. How is it true thē that he destroieth all liyng lyps?Raab. Act. 5 Iosu. 2 Iosu. 6 Hebr. 11 Anani∣as and Saphia his wife are slaine for ly¦ing, but Raab the harlot is rewarded, & numbred of S. Paul among the faith∣full, because she by lying saued the mes∣sengers or spies of the Israelites, from
the pursuers of the kyng of Iericho. Iehu the kyng of Israel saying he had a great sacrifice to do vnto Baal,King Iehu Iosu. 2 Iosu. 6 4 Reg. 10 gathe∣ring his priests from al the coasts of Is∣rael into one temple, murdered them all thorow his lye, & is not reproued for the same: wherfore all lying is not forbiddē. We read of Christ himself how he fay∣ned that he wold go further then ye town of Emaus,Luk. 24 and the elect vessell S. Paul is not abashed to say he was a citizen of Rome and borne fre.Act. 2 Act. 23 With these eāples lying is mainteined, disceit and falshod alowed and named policie and prudēce. But I saye vnto you, ye abuse Gods word, ye rack it, ye make it a nose of wax ye open it not with the ryght key, but with a picklock: name not subtiltie pol∣licie, nor lying ieste or dutie: all craftie schoffing, all profitable lying is damp∣nable. You bring for the defence of your leasinges. Nasica, Sara, Abraham, Ia∣cob, the midwifes of Egipt, Raab, Iehu, Paul and Christ. As for Nasica his say∣ing was a ieste,The auns¦wer. a mery conceit and no lye. Iestes & mery conceites be no lies, for as much as they be vttered not to harme, noy, or hynder any man, but for
myrth sake. A man may affirme yt which is false,Abraham lyed not Genes. 12 and yet make no lye, for to ly, is to affirme an vntruth wt a mynd to hurt, ēdamage, and deceiue som man therby. Abrahā said not to Abimilech, she is not my wyfe: but she is my sister which was true, for she was his sister by his father, but not by his mother, the daughter of Aran his brother and consequētly of his father, for asmoch as, filij siliorum dicun∣tur etiam filii auorum, the sonne sonnes or daughters are called also the sonnes and daughters of the grandfathers. And so she was Abrahās sister, because she was his fathers daughter: and she was his fathers daughter, because she was his brothers daughter. Wherfore he spake nothynge that was false, but he kepte yt close which was true: saiyng she was his sister, and not cōfessing her his wyfe: the which thing also his sonne Isaac did afterward.Genes. 26 But this was no liyng to hyde the truth, but to affirme that which is false. And otherwise Sara lied in dede, and her example is in that poynt to be eschued, for many thinges are wrytten, which are not to be folowed. The story of Iacob is no lye but a mistery, and the
mistery proued true afterward.The sayi of Iacob i no ly, but  misterye Gene. 27. Luke. 13 When his father asked him: who art thou son? He answered, I am Esau thy eldest sōne wherby nothing els is meant and signe∣fied then that which Chrest saith: ye shal se Abraham, and Isaach, and Icob, and all the Prophetes in the kyngdome of God, and your selues thrust out, & they shall come from the east, and weste, and north, and south, and sit in the kingdom of God: and behold, they be last, which shalbe fyrst, and they be fyrst, which shal be last. This thing nowe is com to passe, for we are his people,Rom. 9▪ which wer not his people, and his beloued, which were not beloued. S. Paule nameth this a miste∣ry:Roma. 1 I would not this mistery shoulde be hidden from you brethren, lest ye should be wyse in youre owne conceites, for as∣much as blindnes is partly happened in Israell, tyl the fulnes of the Gentyles be come in. Of these places it appeareth, that Iacobs saying, I am Esau thi eldest sonne, is as much to say, as the last shall be fyrst, and the first last, which is a true saying and no ly, because it is a mistery. For if we count misteries to be lyes, we must coūt likewise al parables and meta∣phores,
all tropes and fygures, to be no lesse,Apoca. 5 1. Cor. 10 Ihon. 11 Math. 13 Ihon. 15 Luke. 22 Hiere. 23 Psal. 143 Psal. 38. in which ye meaning is to be cōside∣red, and not the proper signification of ye worde. Christ is called a Lion, a rocke, a dore, a Lambe: the children of the king∣dome are called good seed, and the wyc∣ked tares. The father of heauē is named a husbandman, & Gods word a sweard, a hamer, a key. Mannes lyfe is called a span, a shadowe &c. These maner of spea∣ches be no lyes, but playne demonstrati∣ons of hard matters, in easy & common termes. We be taught by ye lion, rocke, and dore, which we know, what Christ is, whom we know not: and by the hus∣bandman, we learne what God ye father is. By the sword, the hammer, the strēg∣th of Gods work: by the key, howe it is to be expounded: by the spanne, the sha∣dowe, the shortnes of mans lyfe, which be frutefull matters. In sēblable maner, in this story we learn of Esau, the blind∣nes of ye Iewes, and of Iacob ye yonger, the fulnes of ye Gentiles. Now to speake of ye midwyues of Egipt, and of Rahab, God dyd not reward them for their lye, but for their mercye, because they dealte kyndly wyth his people, for whych also
he forgaue them their ly, wherein theye sinned vndoutedly, greuously.Exodus. 1. For the mouth which lyeth kylleth the soule. If those midwyues had ben perfect womē, they wold haue refused that office wher∣unto Pharao apointed them, for it was to murder the infantes of the Israelites: and Rahab had don better, if she had not lyed, but answered: I know where they be, but because I feare God,Iosu. 2. I wil neuer shewe it. They could haue lost nothing by this aunswer, although thei had suff∣red death therfore. For blessed be ye dead that dy in the Lord. By the other way, they gat them houses vpō the earth, but this way they might haue purchast that house, of whych it is wrytten: blessed be they, which dwell in thy house, they shal prayse the euermore. Stories make mentiō of one Firmius bishop of Tagasta who makyng this answer in such a case,Bishop Firmius. lost naught therby. Whē the Emperour sent his officers to search after a certeine man whome he had hidden, he beyng enquyred for him, said he would not de∣ny but that he had hidden him, because of lying, but that he would neuer betray him: for which aunswere he was gre∣uously
pained, but no pain could cause him to disclose where the man was. The Emperour marueling at his stedfastnes deliuered him. Iehu in his lying is no more to be folowed, then in the sinne of Ieroboā the sonne of Nabat, which ma∣de Israel sinne with the golden calfes in Bethel & Dan.4 Reg. 10 For it is written of him, that he forced not him self to walke in ye law of the Lord God of Israell with all his heart. S. Paul made no lie, for he was in dead a citezin of Rome,how Paul was a cite¦zen of Ro. because his father was fre: as at London the chil¦dren of fre men be citezēs and fre. Nowe as concerning our sauiour Iesus Christ God forbid that we should say he lyed, in whose mouth no gyle could be found who speaketh of him self,Luke. 24 I am the way, the truth. His pretending to go further was no lying but a true meaning, for he went further afterward, when he ascen∣ded vp into the heauē in the sight of his Apostles, which thing only was mēt by his petending to go further, for it is a mistery. No man therfore can affirme y• Christ lyed, but he that denieth him to haue ascended: many false thinges are fained to signifie and teach true thinges
which be no lies, for they be not spoken as thinges true, as thinges done, but to teach vs what we should do, as the nar∣ration of Lazarus and the rich man,Luk. 16 Luk. 15 the parable of him which had two sonnes, of the whiche one abode at home wyth his father, the other went into far coun∣tries, the parable of trees in the booke of Iudges which spake one to another,Iudi. 9 Math. 2 Math. 25 Luk. 15 Luk. 18 Math. 13 Luke. 1 the parable of the vineyard, of the virgins, of ten grotes, of the shepe, of the vnrigh∣tuous iudge, of mustardsede, and of the Pharisie and the Publicane. If all these be lies, Christ is a great and notable her, who spake alwaies in parables to ye peo¦ple, the Prophetes are lyers, yea all the scripture is ful of lies, not only the scrip∣ture but all heathen wryters vse this ma¦ner of teaching,Horatius▪ Esopus. as Horatius making the litle mouse to speake, and Esopus ge∣uing language to foules, fishes and four foted beastes, and yet no any wyse man slaundred them at any time of lying. Thus it is euidēt that they which main∣teine lying, rack the scripturs, and open them not with Peters key, but with a pielock, and that the examples brought for lying, ether be no lies, but iestes, as
Nasica, or misteries as Iacobs, Christes or true sayings as Abrahams, Isaac, & Paul: or els if they be lies as Ennius mayd, Sara, the midwiues, Raab, Iehu, they are earnestly to be eschued,1. Ihon. 2 for no lie is of the truth, and whatsoeuer is not of ye truth is naught, seing God is truth. The .x. Chapter. ¶God is ful of compassion. HE is also ful of mercy, let¦ting the sunne shine vpō good and euil, & sending rain to both sortes. Thou most gracious Lord brin¦gest forth grasse & herbes for cattel,Psa. 103 and fode out of the earth: thou geuest vs wine to make our harts glad, and oyl to chere our coūtenaūce, & bread to strengthē ye hert, thou satisfiest al mēs desires wt good things, & specially of tho¦se that be mercifull, as ye only begotten sonne maketh proclamacion in ye moun∣tain: blessed are ye merciful, for they shall receiue mercy.Math. 5 The erth is ful of thi mer¦cies, & it (O lord) reacheth vnto ye heauē, no place is empty of thy mercies.Psal. 32 The Origenistes defend that Gods mercie perceth into hel, & that al men, the deuils
also shal at lēgth be saued, alledging this scripture: His mercy be vpon al his wor¦kes,Psal. 105 Psal. 144 Eccle. 18 and the mercy of God is vpon all flesh. They bring also Gods righteous∣nes in iudgemēt, which thei deny to pu∣nish sinne euerlastingly, for then the pu∣nishment should be greater then ye fault which is tēporal, and hath an end. This is a merciful heresie, but God sheweth no mercie against his truth. His truth saith: depart frō me ye cursed into euer∣lasting fier,Math. 25. which is prepared for the de∣uil & his aungels. No mā can here iustly say that euerlasting fier is taken for a long fier, albeit the latin word eternum, bee some tyme taken so, Produturno, for the Greke is,Thanswe  which word is neuer taken but for euer more world without end. As for their ar¦gument that the punishment must be no greater then the fault, I answer that our least fault deserueth euerlasting fier, be∣cause it is committed against GOD, who is euerlasting, all be  the fault be begonne and ended in tyme, so that he is more to be considered against whose diuine wil it is done, then what is done. For the scriptur denieth him ye kingdom
of heauen,Math. 5 that breaketh one of the least cōmaūdements. Doth it not cry that in hel there is no redemptiō?Psalm. 6 And in death, who remēbreth thee? And who wil geue thee thankes in hell? And where the tree falleth there it shall lie. The continuance of hel fier is described notablie of Christ where he cōmaundeth vs to cut of our hand,Marke. 9 our fote, and to pluck out our eie, that is to prefer heauenly thinges to our fathers and mothers, & familiar frindes, saying: if thy hand offend thee, cut hym of. It is better for the to enter into lyfe maimed, then hauing two handes to go into hel, into fier vnquencheable, where their worm dieth not and the fier neuer goth out. What cā be more plainli, more vehemently spokē of the endles pain of the wycked, then these wordes, into fier vnquencheable, where their worm dieth not, and the fier neuer goeth out, whiche termes in ye same place be repeated twise more afterward. If there be no redemp∣tion in hell,An obiectiō how is it written in the boke of the kynges, our Lord bryngeth folke doune into hel and bryngeth thē again? we read also that Anania,1 Reg. 2 Dan. 3 Psal. 15 Azaria, and Misaell blessed the Lorde for delyue∣ring
them out of hel, and sauing from ye power of death.Hel hath thre sign∣cations. This worde hel in the first place doth not signifie that which is commenly ment therby, but a graue or pit that is digged, for the Hebrue worde is sheol. If any euill chaunce vnto my sonne Ben Iamin in the land whether you go,Gen. 2▪ you shal bring down myne hore heares with sorow, vnto hel, that is into my graue. In Daniel it signifieth aduer∣sitie, trouble and misery, as in many o∣ther places. The .xi. Chapter. ¶God is ful of rightuousnes, and of the pro¦speritie of euill men, and the affliction of good men. This endles punishment of the wicked is no derogaciō to Gods great mercy, but rather a mirrour of his righ¦tuousnes, for as he is merci∣ful so is he rightuouse, as the mercy en∣dureth for euer toward th good, so his rightuousnes endureth no lesse time to∣ward the euil. Dauid testifieth him to be iust in al his waies,Psal. 144▪ & holy in al his wor∣kes. By his rightuousnes, he hated Ca∣in, Esau, & the thief on the left hand: & by
his mercy he loued Abel, Iacob, & hym that hong on ye right hand: thorow these two happened the blindnes of ye Iewes, and the fulnes of the Gentils. If he be vnrightuous, how shal he iudge ye world His sainctes iudgements be rightuous:Roma. 3 he shutteth the vnrightuous out of hea∣uen, he rewardeth right dealers, wher∣fore he himself must nedes be a rightu∣ous God. Thou wilt say: why thē doth he suffer the wicked to prosper, geuyng them riches honour and children? And why doth he punish the godly with po∣uertie, sicknes, and al kind of misery? Why doth he suffer wicked Manasses to murder cruelly Esai? Why doth he let Ieremy be slaine of Apires, Zacharie of the hie priestes, Iohn Baptist of He∣rode, Christ of Pilate? Why doth he suf¦fer the Deuil to plage ye pacient mā Iob with al kind of aduersitie? Why wyll he al good mē to bear a crosse in this world S. Paul telleth vs,1 Cor. 11 when we ar iudged, we are chastened of the Lord, lest we be damned with the world. And it is good for me (said Dauid) that I haue bene in trouble,Psal. 118 that I may learn thy statutes. Here two causes be rehearsed why God
layeth affliction, trouble, and the crosse, vpon the shulders of his elect, that they may auoid dampnation, and learne to kepe his cōmaundemēts: for trouble ge∣ueth vnderstanding. Lord (saith Esay) in trouble they cry vnto thee,Esay. 28 the aduersi∣tie which they suffer is a lesson vnto thē. When the outward man perisheth,Esay. 26. the inward is renued day by day. Moreo∣uer God hath set at the entring of the garden of pleasure,2. Cor. 4 Genesis. Cherubin with a fy∣rie sweard, mouing in and out to kepe ye way to the tree of life, to which there is no accesse, but by affliction, which is por¦ter, as it is written: we must enter tho∣row much trouble into the kingdom of heauen. Wherfore God loueth them whom he troubleth,Prouerb.  Hebre. 12 and he scourgeth e∣uery sonne yt he receiueth: they that are vnder no correctiō ar called bastards no sonnes. Cato when Pompey was ouer∣throwen of valeaunt Iulius Ceasar, be∣gan to be angry wt God, thinking hym percial, but we christen mn may not do so, knowing aduersitie to be a token of Gods fauour, an occasion of vnderstan∣dīg, a cause of amēdmēt. These scripturs teach vs yt God punisheth his elect, for
their erudicion and cōmoditie, nor for a∣ny vnrightuousnes, albeit ye holiest man that euer was, deserueth a crosse in this life. His rigtuousnes enpouerisheth vs, plageth vs, and condempneth vs, & hys mercy enricheth vs, healeth vs, & crou∣neth vs.An obiectiō Rom. 9 But it is written of Iacob & E∣sau, that or they were borne, or they had done good or euil, God loued the one & hated the other, which was contrary to al true iudgement. S. Paul in the same place compareth God to a potter, and men to clay.The auns∣wer. The potter hath power o∣uer the clay, to make euen of one & the same lompe one vessel vnto honour, and another vnto dishonour. And hath not God power ouer vs, which be but clay, that is naught, the children of wrath, to condempne or to saue? The Latin worde here declareth more plainly what we be which is, Ex eodem luto. We be al becom durt by the faul of the first Adam. If he croune durt it is his mercy, thorowe the second Adam. If he cōdempne it, he ge∣ueth right iudgement. Thou wilt say then,Rom. 9 why blameth he vs? For who can resist his wyl. He made thee not clay, that is the child of death, but after the
Image of God & without sin: Thou art durt and clay thorow the sinne of Adam not because of thy creation: For God wold haue al mē saued.The caus in vs not in God. And why be thei not? the cause is not in hym, but in vs, not that we be able to withstand his wil but bycause he will saue none against their wil: he wil saue al, that is al that wil take it when it is offred them, al that re∣fuse not the saluation of their own souls, as the Israelites did.Math. 23 For Christ saieth vnto them, that he wold haue gathered them together as the hen gathereth hyr chickens vnder hir wynges, and they would not, suche be not saued, for God saueth no mā against his wil. Ther is thē no parcialitie, no vnrightuousnes with God, whose iudgemēts be vnsearchable but neuer against iustice: aboue our capa¦citie, but neuer against equitie. Who is able to discusse, why some die old, some yong, some in midle age? why some be poore, some rych, some gentlemen, some Lordes, some kinges, some of a base ston and other infinite diuersities. If these thinges were necessary to be knowen, God wold haue opened thē in his scrip¦tures, but in that he speaketh not of thē,
iudgeth thē vnprofitable for vs to know Let vs beleue that God worketh al these thinges and that therfore they must ne∣des be right & iust bicause he is ye work∣mā, not searching things aboue our vn¦derstandings, but say with S. Paul: O the depenes of the riches, and wisdom, & knowledge of God? how vnsearcheable are his iudgements, and his waies vn∣traceable? for who hath knowen ye mind of the Lord, or who was his counceller? The .xii. Chapter. ¶God is ful of compassion HE is full of all goodnes, S. Iames witnessing of him yt euery good gifte is from a∣boue,Iacob. 1. & cometh down from the father of light, that is fa∣ther of good mē, for thei are called light, Vos estis lux mundi, you are the light of ye world.1. Cor. 3 What haue we that we haue not receiued? He is liberal, pacient, merciful, wise,Iacob. 1. strong, constant, equall, faithfull, magnifical, aable, liberal, geuing to all mē indifferently, & casting no man in the teeth. Pacient, calling vs thorowe his long suffring vnto repentaunce.Roma. 2 Merci∣ful, not dealing with vs after our sinnes,Psal. 102
nor rewardyng vs according to our wic¦kednes. Wyse,Psal. 14 for of his wysdome Da∣uid saith: there is no number. Strong, for he is our buckeler, our shield, our strength and defence, the rock of our might, and castel of our health: Constāt,Psalm. 63. with whom no man can proue any va∣riablenes. Equall, for there is no parcia∣litie with God, there is no Iewe,Iames. 1 Roma.  nether gentile, nether bound nor free, nether man ne woman, but all be one in Christ Iesu. Faithfull, for he is a strong God and a faithfull, stable in all his wordes.Galath. 3 Deute. 7 Psal. 144 Psal. 101 Psal. 8. Magnificall, for the work of the Lord is great and worthy to be praysed, the hea∣uens, the Sunne and the Starres, the waters and great fyshes therin, are the worck of thy fyngers. Affable exhorting vs continually to aske,Math. 7 knock and pray vnto hym, and talkyng with vs moste familiarly, first by holy Fathers, hys Prophets, and Patriarkes, afterwarde by his only begottē sonne Iesus Christ, walking hear vppon earth,Hebre. 1. to whome belongeth all power, maiestie, rule, and honor. We read of a certen ruler which called Christ good maister,Luke. 18 askynge him, what he should do to obtain euer∣lasting
lyfe, whome Christ rebuked say∣ing, why callest thou me good? none is good saue God only. If God only be good, then all goodnes is in him. The xiii Chapeer. ¶God only is immortall, and yet neuerthe∣les, the myndes of menne and Aungels be im∣mortall. HE is without beginning, without ending. How cā he haue any beginnyng, of whome al things take their originall? Howe can he haue anye end, who is of himselfe & by no other thing? Heauen and earth perisheth, and all yt is in them shall fade awaye as grasse, and as the floure of the field, but oure God lyueth eternallye, who speaketh of himselfe: I am Alpha & Omega,Apcalip. 1 the beginning and ye ending, which is, which was, and which is to come. Paul affirmeth the same vn∣to his discipl Timothe, geuing al honor and rule vnto God,1. Timo. 6. who only hath im∣mortalitie. If only God haue immorta∣litie,How God in ly is said to be im∣mortall. why doth Christ forbyd vs to feare men, which slea the body, and cānot slea the soule? howe is man formed after the
Image & similtude of God? Howe can the immortalitie of the mynd be defēded and of Angels?Aungels. truly mans soule is im∣mortall, and yet only God is immortal, for this word (onely) doth not deny this priuilege to other things, as to mannes soul, to the Angels, but God is said only to be immortall, as he is said onely to be good, & only to forgeue sin.Mans soul is both mor¦tal and im∣mortal. Mans soule is immortal, but clean after an other sort then God, who only hath immoralitie. For the scripture testifieth of mans soul that it dieth, saying: suffer ye dead to bu∣ay their dead, that is to say: let the dead in soule, bury ye dead in body.Math.  It is trou∣bled with affections, with passions, and subiect to mutabilitie. But it so dieth thorow vice, that it ceaseth not to liue in his owne nature: It is so mortal, that it is also immortall. Wherfor God is only euerlasting, immortal euermore, who is only immutable. And if this interpreta∣tion do not content the, heare an other, That is immortall properl which is wt∣out beginning, without ending.Immortal properly. Al crea∣tures haue a begynnynge, of the which some neuerthelsse are called immortall, because they haue no endynge, as the
angels, mans soul, but only God is pro∣perly immortall, who speaketh of him∣selfe,Apoca. 1 I am, which is, which was, which is to come. This belōgeth only to God and to none of his creatures, to none of the works of his fingers: of which som may truly say, that thei be & ar to come, but not that thei were, because once they were not. The .xiiij. Chapter. ¶God is the maker of all things, wherof he made them, by whome, and who made the Deuil, and of the begynning of sin & euil. IN the beginnig GOD made al things, wherfore he hath no beginning: & that which neuer had be∣ginning, can not haue en∣ding. When I say, God made all things,The world is ye worke∣manship of the whole Trinitie. Ihon. 1 Psalm. 32. I mean that the father, the son, and the holy spirite formed hea∣uen & earth, angels & men, and all other creatures of nothing. For of the son it is writtē, al things were made by him, and of the holy comforter: by ye word of the Lord, were the heauens made, and al the hostes of them by ye breath of his mouth, wher the latin is, Spiritus. Yea in the be∣ginnyng
of the boke it is writtē of them both, that they be no creatures:Christ ma∣ker therof. Genesis. 1 In the be∣gynning. Ihon. 8 of ye son in ye beginning, God created heauē and earth, that is in Christ. For he answereth ye Iewes askyng what he was, I am the beginnyng which speake vnto you, and in whose behalf Dauid speaketh:Psalm. 38. In the beginning of the boke it is writtē of me. Paule to the Hebrues repeteth the latter text and expoundeth it of Christ.Hebre. 1 And Dixit Deus fiat lux. &c. God said, be ther light, be there a firmamēt: God said, the waters be gathered together, God said,Genesis. 1. God saide. be there lights in the firmament. This phrase and maner of speaking, is ioyned with the creation of euery thing. What did God say? what language did he spe∣ake? Did he speake grek, latin, Italian, frēch, spanish, english, or hebrue? Mark, this was no audible voyce, no sounding or transitory noyse, commyng from the lightes, but God said be there light, fyr∣mament. &c. that is to saye, God made these thinges by his saying▪ by his word by his voice, which is christ, as it is writ∣tē: In ye beginnīg was ye word,Ihon. 1. that is in ye father was christ, & al thīgs were made
by it, and nothing was made without i as Moises teacheth very wel, repeting these wordes Deus dixit, God sayd: in ye creatiō of euery thīg.why Christ is named a word. And why is Christ called his fathers word? Truly bicause he is his image, and no man cometh to the knowledge of the father but by the sonne. And as we do open manifest, and declare our mindes one to another by our words and communication,Hebr. 1 so God is disclosed, opened, and discouered by Christ.Iohn. 1 No man hath sene God at any time, thonly begotten sonne, which is in the bosome of the father, he hath decla∣red him, in his sermons he is sincerely published, and plainly painted and por∣traied. For this cause he is surnamed ye saying of God, and an audible and a trā¦sitory word, not properly, but by a meta∣phore, and borowed spech. And this trā∣sitory word, made al thinges, vpholdeth al thinges, gouerneth al things. Nowe touching the holy spirit, we read in the first Chapter of generation, & spiritus domini ferebatur,The holy spirit is maker of ye world. Gen. 1 the spirit of ye Lord was born vpō the waters. Many do expoūd by the spirit in this text, the wynd, but it can not be taken so for many causes.
First the wynd is the exhalatiō or spirit of the waters, this was ye spirit of God, as the text doth say. Moreouer ye wind then was vncreat, vnmade. For I think no man wil defend that the wind was made before the first day, which is made after these wordes.Born vpon the waters what it is. And others do read for ferebatur super aquas, fouebat, vel exclu debat aquas, the spirit did bring forth or hatch the waters, & so in dede the word signifieth in the Sirian tonge, wherfore was borne vpon the waters, is no blast of wind, but a metaphore of the hen, and a borowed speach. The hen is borne of her egs and sittteth vpon them, and so hatcheth her yong: and so the holy ghost was borne vpō the waters, sat vpon thē, brought forth and hatched all creatures which there are called waters. For as it is wrytten,Psal. 103 when thou lettest thy spirit go forth, they are made. Basil who for his great learning was surnamed mag∣nus, expoundeth this text thus, & sayth:Basil. that his predecessors toke it so, and S. Austen is of the same mind,Austen. Melanch. and Philip Melancthō aloweth their interpretatiō. Thus it is euident yt the vniuersal world is the workmāship of the whole trinitie,
whose workes be inseperable: as they be inseperable, and one almighty, euerla∣sting, inuisible, vnsercheable god, of one substaunce and nature, power and ma∣iestie, who gathered the waters together as it werin a bottel, who maketh ye clou∣des his chariot, and goeth vpō the win∣ges of the wind, and who spreadeth out heauen like vnto a curteyn. After that he had finished al his workes, he beheld thē and o they were exceading good. Now there be many thinges not good, vnpro∣fitable, vnfrutful, perilouse: for thornes and thistels prick vs, the gout greueth vs, the pocks, the canker consumeth vs, the sciatica payneth vs, spasmes, palsies, feuers noy vs, serpentes doe poysen vs, flies do bite vs, cats do scrat vs, flees do eat vs, moūtaines weary vs, snow doth let vs, thonders do fear vs, the cocodrils do kil our bodies, & the deuyl our souls. God made not these thinges, for al that he made was good: and if he made not these, he made not al thinges. The earth bringeth forth thornes and thistels,Sinne the cause of ba¦renne. and other venemous herbes, not by nature, but thorow the synne of man, vnto whō God speaketh: Because thou hast obey∣ed
the voyce of thy wyfe, and hast eaten of the tree of which I commaunded the not to eat: Cursed be the earth in thy worke.Genes. 3 In sorow shalt thou eat therof al the daies of thy lyfe, and it shall beare thornes and thistels vnto thee, and thou shalt eat the herbes of the field, in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.Genesis. 1 Before sinne, we read not that the earth brought forth thistels, bushes, vnfruit∣ful trees, but grene gras, fruitful trees, & herbes bearing holsome sedes. The fal of Adam also caused al maner of griefs, panges, sicknes, disease,The cause of sickenes which then began to torment man, when God had said: In sorow shalt thou eat therof all the daies of thy life. By this word so¦row, al such thinges be ment and signi∣fied. If you aske me why God suffred the earth to bring forth thornes and vn∣fruitful trees, my answer is,Why God curseth the earth. not to pain the earth with thē, which feleth no pain, but to admonish vs, of our synne, to put vs in remēbraunce of our fault, to be a warning vnto vs, as often as we se thē, to take hede that we synne no more. For if he punish the earth for our sinnes how much more will he punishe vs?
Wherfore this memory shall continue vntyll the sting of death, which is sinne, be taken away, & vntil that be brought to passe that is written, death is consu∣med into victory,1 Cor. 15 death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory? by vn∣fruitful trees he warneth vs, yt we be not vnfruitful. For as husbandmen forsake their trees not dōging not watring thē, when they be baren, but to burn them, euen so God ceaseth to poure his bles∣singes vpon the vnfruitfull, for he is a husbandman: herken what his only son saith, whom we are cōmaunded to hear: I am the true vine, and my father is the husbandmā.Iohn. 15 He that abideth not in me, is cast forth as a braunch, and is widde∣red, and men gather it and cast it into the fier, and it burneth: This fruit we may gather and learn of the vnfruitfull tree. By siknes partly he scurgeth vs for our sinne, partly he trieth vs, and lerneth vs his will as it is wrytten, the ouen pro∣ueth the potters vessell,Eccl. 27 who made the serpēts flies, and o¦ther like. so doth tempta∣tion of trouble, try rightuous mē. Now we are come to those, whiche demaund who made serpentes, Cocodriles, flies, wormes. &c. Of which much harm and
no profite cōmeth. Verely he who made al thinges: Although they be hurtful vn∣to vs for our disobedience, yet be they ex¦ceading good in their own nature, and profite vnto the furnishing of the whole world no lesse, then the other, which we recount more profitable and preciouse. If an ignoraunt man chaunce to go into a conning mans shop, and happen to see many oles there that he knoweth not, he thinketh them either to be vnprofita∣ble, or not necessary: Euen so we in al∣mightie Gods shop, which is the world, do iudge many thinges to be naught, be¦cause we are ignoraunt. The Cocodrill, the litle flie, the small flee, haue their cō∣moditie, albeit we know it not: Our ig∣noraunce doth not argue Gods worcks to be vnprofitable, yea Gods glory and wonderful power is more maruelous in making the litle flie to hear, to tast, and to fele, with a mouth, with legges, with wynges, a body, the stomak, the othe inward partes, then in an Elephant: and more maruelous in a frog, then in a great Whale, and in a mouse then in a mightie horse. If thou come into a riche mans house and seest much stuffe, thou
thinkest al to be to some purpose, and da¦rest thou iudge yt God in his house hath made any thing to no purpose? Al Gods creatures, ether be profitable, or hurtful, or not necessary: thanck him for the pro∣fitable, take hede of the hurtful, and que∣stion not, reason not of thinges not ne∣cessary. For although thy capacitie can not perceiue it, yet God hath made all thinges in measure and number,Sapien. 11 who made he Deuill. and weight: he made not ye deuil, for he made him an aungel, and he made himself a de¦uil by sinning, when he fell from heauen as lightening. For the deuill is as much to say as an accuser,Luke. 10 and a seducer, of the Greke word Diaballi, whiche signifieth to accuse, to infame, to disceiue: God made man, but he made not man euil, so he made him an angel but not a deuil: he made many angels, but they made them selues euill, for no euil commeth of him, as it is written: he beheld many thinges yea al that he had made, and o they wer exceading good.Genes. 1 But why did he make him an angel, knowing he wold become a deuil? why did he make other aungels innumerable? why many thousands of men, women, and children, which he for¦seeth
shalbe dampned? Verely that he might declare himself to be rightuous in punishing the vngodly, as he is merci∣ful in rewarding the godly: no man can blame him therfore, but rather magnifie his rightuousnes. He compelleth them not to sinne, for which thei ar dampned. Should God (because he forsawe they would be euill) absteine from creatinge them, which is good? Is it not lauful for him to do what him listeth with his own are their eies euyll bycause he is good?Math. 20 should he not do well in making them, because they would doe ill in offendyng him? Of this thing seke a further aun∣swer, in the .xii. of the boke of wysdom:Sapien. 12 but let vs returne from whence we are straied, al beit these questions are annex∣ed vnto our purpose. The smyth is not able to make any thing without Iron, nor the Carpenter without wood, nor the Tayler without cloth, nor the Sho∣maker without leather, nor the Potter without clay, but God who is almigh∣tie, made al thyngs of nothyng.All things were made of nothing together in six dayes. Before any thyng was, what could there be to make them of, except he would haue made them of hymself? Iesus the sonne
of Sirach saith, Qui viuit in eternum crea¦uit omnia simul. He that liueth for euer more made al thinges,Eccle. 18 simul, together, that is, God made first a confused heap, called in Greke Chaos, of nothing, and of that heap he formed all thinges, as it is written:Sap. 12 Qui fecisti mundum ex materia informi, who hast formed the world of a confused heape. He made this heap alto∣gether, where he saith: in the beginning God treated all thynges,Gen. 1 heauen and earth, for the heap is called there heauē, and earth, as afterward also it is called the water: the spirit of ye Lord was born vpon the waters. So far no time, no or∣der of daies is mencioned: afterward, God of this heap in six daies, shapeth al thinges, so that both be true that God made the world in syx daies, and that he made all thinges together. This article of creation is necessary to be knowen, for as muche as some deny God to be the maker of the world, and geueth the glory therof to aungels, as the Menandrians, Satur∣nians, Cerinthians, & al so the Nicolitanes, & it is ye first article of our Crede.
The .xv. Chapter. ¶God ruleth the world after his prouidēce and how he rested the .vii. day. OTher graunt God to be maker of al thinges, but they suppose, that as the shypwright whē he hath made the ship, leaueth it to ye mariners & medleth no more therwith, & as the carpenter lea¦ueth the house that he hath made: euen so God after he had formed all thinges, left al his creatures to their own gouer∣naūce, or to the gouernaūce of ye starres, not ruling the world after his prouidēce but liuīg in ease & quietnes as ye Stoiks, Epicures, & diuers astrologers, because it is writtē yt on the .vii. day God rested from al his workes. To these I aunswer with the prophet Dauid:Psal. 14 God couereth the heauen with cloudes, prepareth rain for the earth, maketh the grasse to grow vpon the moūtains, geueth foder vnto the cattel, maketh fast ye bars of ye gates of Sion, blesseth ye children within, ma∣keth peace in our borders, filleth vs with the flour of wheat, geueth vs snow lyke wol, seatreth the hore frt like ashes,Psal. 144▪ ca∣steth
forth his ise like morsels, helpeth them to right that sustein wrong, loseth men out of pryson, geueth sight to the blind, raiseth vp them that are fallen, ca∣reth for straungers, defendeth the father¦les, socoureth the widowe: wherfore he is not an idle God. For as the body ly∣ueth thorow the lyfe of the soul, euen so the world continueth by Gods gouer∣naunce, who ruleth it as ye maister doth his seruaunt, without whom it persheth in the twinkling of an eie. All thynges wayte vpon him to receiue fode in due season,Psal. 103 when he geueth it them, they ga∣ther it, when he openeth his hand, they are filled with good things, when he hi∣deth his face, thei are sorowful, if he take away his breath, they die and are turned again to dust. The common wealth of ye Israelites, teacheth vs how wōderfully God prouideth for thē,Gene. 33 Gene. 45 that he hath cho∣sen. He preserued Iacob frō his brother Esau, he sēt Ioseph into Egipt, to make prouision against the .vii. dear yeares,Psal. 104 Exod. 10 Exod. 7 Psal. 78 Exod. 8 he sent darknes amongs the Egiptians, he turned their waters into bloud, and slue their fishe, their landes brought forth frogges, flies, lyse, grashoppers, caterpil¦lers,
yea euen in their kinges chambers, he brought them forth of the house of bondage and slauery with siluer & gold, he rebuked the sea and dried ti vp,Exod. 1 Exod. 14 Exod. 13 Psal. 11 Exod. 1 & he led them thorow the depe, as in the wil∣dernes, he spred out a cloud to be a coue¦ring, and fire to geue light in the nyght season, at their desires came quailes, and he filled them with the bread of heauen, he opened the rock of stone, and the wa∣ters flowed out, so that riuers came into the wildernes, he dried vp the waters of Iordan, that ye people might passe ouer, he ouerthrew the walles of Iericho,Iosu. 3 Iosu. 6. and made the sunne to stand stil, and the day was lengthened, he sew mightie kings, Sehon king of the Amorites,Iosua. 1 and Og king of asan, and gaue away their lād for an heritage. Of which scriptures it doth consequently folow that he gouer∣neth the world by his prouidence,Psal. 134▪ Nume. 21 Deuter. 3 Iosua. 12 & not by the whale of fortune, or by force of de¦stinie, For if he gouerne thē, he gouer∣neth vs, seing the earth is the Lordes & al that is therin, the cōpasse of ye world,Psal. 23 & al that dwel therin. But some do say that he gouerned the Israelites,1. Peter. 2 the sede of Abraham the cho∣sen
generatiō, but not the refydne of the earth, which he gaue vp to their own go¦uernaunce. Verely God ruled all, as he is Lord of al.Actes. 14. Actes. 17 For Paule preacheth to the Athenians, that we liue, moue, and be in him. He gaue them also rain, light, corn, grasse, as he hymself teacheth Iob out of a storme, saying: Who deuideth the a∣boūdaūce of waters into riuers?Iob. 38 or who maketh a way for yt stormy wether? that it watereth and moystureth the dry and barren grounde, to make grasse grow wher no body dwelleth? Who is the fa∣ther of rayne? Or who hath begottē the drops of our dewe, out of whose wombe came the yse? Who hath gendred ye cold∣nes of the ayer, yt the waters are as hard as stones, and ly cōgeled aboue the depe? Did he not styr vp Pharao among ye E∣giptians?3. Reg. 20 Benhadad among ye Sirians, Salmanasar amōg the Assirians, Nabu∣chodonozer among y• Babilonians, Da∣rius among the Medes, Artaxarces a∣mong the Parthians, Alexander among the Macedonians, and Vaspasian amōg the Romaines? In the boke of ye Kinges Elias is cōmaunded to anoynt Hasaell king of Siria,3. Reg. 19 Iehu of Israell, & Eliseus
to be Prophete in his roume. Wherby he teacheth vs, yt he maketh Prophetes and Kings, and taketh away their king∣domes, as it is written. Propter iniustiti∣as, & iniurias, & diuersos dolos. &c.Eccle. 10 Be∣cause of vnrighteouse dealing, wrong, & dyuers deceipts, kingdomes shalbe trā∣slated from one to another, for ye power of the earth, is in the hand of God.An exhor∣tation to Kynges. If kings wold earnestly beleue this which is Gods owne voice, & behold how ma∣ny kings he deposed in ye boke of kings, and for what causes, they wold be as ear¦nest to set forth Gods glory, that is, to cause the gospell to be preached thorowe their dominiōs, and to relieue their pore brethren, which be members of the same body that they be, children of the same father, and heires of the same kingdome and that which is done to them, is done to Christ, as thei haue ben diligent, poli∣tike, yea rather deceitfull, in encreasinge their reuenues, in filling their hutches wt gold & siluer, thei wolde first seke for the kingdome of God, & then God wold be ther castle, & cast al other things vpō thē,Math. 6 or els he is vntrue of his promes. One being demaūded how a king might rule
safely and assuredly, answered: if he d∣uyse good lawes, and se them diligently practised. This is a necessary lesson for al princes, that wil lyue in quietnes, or that wil enioy their crounes with long conti∣nuance, And a king aught to be a father to his subiects, not onli to the gentlemē, but rather to his pore cōmons, for they haue more nede. He is the head of them, as wel as of the other. What causeth vp∣rores, & insurretiōs, soner then oppressiō of the pore? Or what prouoketh ye wrath of God more against them? If I were demaunded how a king might not only pas his time safeli, but also al his posteri¦tie & ofspyrng cōtinue in possessiō of the kingdome, I wold answer: if he seke the glory of God vnfaynedly, For if kyng∣domes be translated for vnrightousnes, they ar preserued by rightousnes. If pro¦motion come neyther from the east, nor from the west, but from the king of hea∣uen, the wai to attein it, and to maintein and continue i▪ is to please the king of heauē, The pacient man Iob saith: that almightye God oftentimes for the wic∣kednes and sinne of the people, suffereth an hipocrite to reigne ouer them. Nowe
I thinke that ther was neuer more god∣ly pretence, more outward shew of holy∣nes, more dissimulation in Rulers, then now is, and this is Ipocrisy, and all the people be lyke the rulers I warant you. I wold wish that all kings wold diligēt∣ly reade ouer, and earnestly beleue ye cro∣nicle of the kings, there thei should fynd that which is written:Prou.  by me kyngs do raigne. Cirus kyng of Persie, caused a proclamatiō to be made throughout his empyre,1. Esdr.  that the Lord God of heauē had geuen him al the kingdomes of ye earth. Is God of lesse abillitie now to do these things thē he was? Or is he of les know¦lege and vnderstāding? But to the mat∣ter againe. If he do not gouerne y• world by his prouidence, it is either because he cannot and he is not able, or that he will not, or that he is ignoraunt what is done here. But there is no ignoraunce with him to whome all thinges be naked and manifest, and he lacketh no cunning, for he is almighty, and nothing is impossi∣ble to him, and he lacketh no will, for he is full of goodnes, mercy, & compassion, and promiseth plenty of all good things to the godly, and scarcitie to the euill.
wherfore he ruleth al by his prouidence, he causeth thūder, lightning, haile, frost, snow, darknes, life & death, barennes & fruitfulnes, raine, & faire wether, wind, hunger, battel, peace, and pestilence, as it is written, prosperitie and aduersitie, lyfe and death, pouertie & riches, come of the Lord. God sendeth al these things partly to admonish vs of our frailnes, partly to punish the il, and partly to try the good, as I haue intreated before. I put case thou knewest not wherfore he ordeined many thinges, as thou art ig∣noraunt why he formed thee a man and not a woman, an English man, and no Italian, were that a iust cause denie hys prouidence? Were it not a like thing, as if thou shouldest deny that I would be at London at the beginning of Michael¦mas tearme, because thou knowest not my sute? We must think almighty God to forme al thinges to good purposes,God wor∣keth all thinges to purposes. The dial al be it his workes surmount our capaci∣ties. When yu okest vpon a dial, which declareth how the daie passeth away, thou art moued to thinke that it is made by art, and not by chaunce. If one wold carie a globe into Ireland,The globe whose dayly
turnings would work thesame thing in sunne, the Mone, and the fiue mouable sterres, whiche is done in heauen euery day and euery night, which of thē wold thinke in yt wild countrie the globe to be made without singuler conning? And do we think that God gouerneth the world the which comprehendeth both the dial and the globe and the makers of both, bi luck and fortune? Are the partes gouer∣ned by reason framed by art, finished by conning, and not the whole? Or did Ar∣chimides by art coūterfet the mouinges of heauen, and God not rule the same bi his prouidence? If God doe not rule it, there is some thing more mightier then he, which doth it. But he is almightie & none is able to cōpare wt him. Townes cities, kingdoms, Empiers, be gouer∣ned by counsell, much more the whole. The world is called of wisemen the citie of al creatures. Wherfore as Athens,Tounes. Cities. Realmes La¦cedemon, Venise, Rome, Paris, London and Yorke, haue Mayres, Aldermen, Bailifes and Constables, to gouerne them after counsel: Euen so hath it, but who is able to be Maire or Constable therof but ye hiest? therfor it is only ruled
of him.An obiecti∣on answe∣red. Telamon. Regulus. Cinna. Marius. Dionisius Diogines. But you wil say, that citie is not wel gouerned, where vice is mainteined and vertue punished, as Telamon who de¦nieth Gods prouidence, bicause good men be pained & euil fauoured: why was Regulus tormented of the Carthaginians? why did cruel Cinna kill so many noble men? Why did C. Marius sley the good quene Catulus? Why did Dionisius, Pisi∣stratus & Phalaris, put so many to death? Diogenes Cinicus, was wont to say, that Harpalus a strong thefe vpon y• seas bare witnes against God, that he was not mindful of vs bicause he cōtinued so lōg. Albeit this obiection be partly resolued before, yet I will touch it againe, that it may be plentifully confuted, taking an example of S. Paul who vnto ye Philip∣piās writeth, It greueth me not to write one thing oftentimes, for to you it is a sure thing. If Paul Gods chosen vessel, to whō he gaue no singular grace thou∣ght it nedeful to write one thing oftenti∣mes, how muche more must we thinke the same of our small vnderstandinges and eble braines, whiche be lesse able to paint Gods secrets at one time? When thou seest one exceading riche & vnwor∣thy
of riches, thinke not him happie, cō∣demne not Gods prouidence, iudge not al things to go by luck and fortune. Re∣member Lazarus and the rich glutten,Lazarus. ye one was cruel, proud, vnmerciful, vnpi∣tiful, and yet stored with al thinges: The other humble, meake, ful of pacience, ful of goodnes, and yet of notable pouertie and siknes, he did not accuse God, deny his prouidence, complaining with any such words as these: I haue not greatly sinned against God and yet I am hun∣ger pined, pained with cold, & punished with sicknesse, but this euil man liueth in wealth, pleasur, ease and health: How can it be, that God is mindfull of vs? How it is true yt he gouerneth ye world? No truly, he toke it pacienly, he thought himself worthy of Gods rod.Luke. 10. Wherfore he was caried by Aungels into Abra∣hams bosome, the riche man was con∣dempned to hell torments. The prospe∣ritie of the euil in this life encreseth their dampnation in the other,Why good men are a∣flicted. and the good haue aduersitie in this world that thei be not dampned in the worlde to come. There is a comen saying: the end trieth ye dede. Many theues in this life liue wel∣thily,
many aduoutrers, many extortio∣ners, many Idolaters, many tenderlin, ges. &c. Is this a sufficient cause to deny Gods prouidce? No truly. If at the lat∣ter day he condemne the good, & croune the euil, then say that he was vnmindful of vs: if not, say he is a righteous God, mindful of both good and il, for the end teacheth ye no lesse. If therfore thou haue affliction in this lyfe, deny not Goddes prouidence, but cnumfort thy selfe with thexāple of Lazarus, of Paul, of Christ. Think that he punisheth sin in this lyfe, that thou be not dāned for it in thother. But nowe I will speake of euill rulers. God suffereth euill men to reygne ouer the people, because of their sinne and ab∣hominable liuing, as the cōmon saying is,. Qualis populus, talis princeps. That is, lyke people, lyke prince. He scourgeth them wt tyraunts, because they be a fro∣ward,Iudic. 3 Iudic. 4 and ouerthwart generatiō, going a stray from him, and starting aside like a broken bow. The boke of the Iudges registreth, that God lefte to scourge Is∣raell, fyue Lords of the Philistines, and all the Sidonites, & Heuites, that dwell in mounte Lybanon, he styrred against
them when they synned, Chusan, Rasa∣thaim king of Mesopotamia, & Eglon,Iudic. 19 Kyng of the Moabies, Iabin, Kyng of Canaan, & he suffred Abimelech, a cruell tyraunt to raigne ouer them. Wherfore was Israell so oft sold into the hands of the Egiptians, Chaldees, Assirians, but for ther wickednes? If God spared not his chosē generatiō, natural braunches, and his owne house, wil he forbeare the wyld oliues? Cinna and Marius, Dio∣nisius and Phalaris, Pisistratus & Har∣palus, wer rods and scourges, wherwt he scourged the heathen for their Idola∣try, shameful lusts and vnthākefulnesse as Chusan, Eglon, and the Philistines, were vnto the Israelytes. If they wolde haue forsaken their vicious liuing, and returned vnto nd whome they knew of his workes, but were vnthankefull, not glorifiīg him as God, he wold haue deliuered them from those tirauntes, by good rulers and magistrates, as he de∣liuered the Israelites from Chusan, Ra∣sathaim kyng of Mesopotamia, by O∣thoniell ye son of Kenes,Iudic. 3 Iudic. 4. Iudic. 5 from Eglon by Ahud, & from Iabin king of Canaan, by Barak & Debora. Wherfore these exam∣ples
do not deny Gods prouidence, but proue vs to be sinners and declare his rightful iudgements both vpon y• Iewe and gentil, yea rather they do establish & fortifie his gouernaunce, teaching hym to be mindful of al natiōs, in geuing thē good kinges for their vertue, or cruel ti∣rauntes for their vice. Diagoras he that thought God to be vnmindful of men,Diagoras atheos. comming to Samothratia, a frend of his shewed him a table, wherin many were painted which through vowes had esca∣ped shipwrack, and were come into the hauen, to whom he said: but they are not painted which vowed, and neuertheles wer drouned, ascribing their deliueraūce vnto the blindnes of fortune, and not vn¦to the goodnes of God. Doth Ionas so? Doth Paul so in the Actes,Actes. 27 when he and al that were with him were in ieoperdie of shipwrack? No truly he biddeth them be of good comfort, he taketh bread and geueth thankes vnto God who had pro¦mised him by an angel that an hear shuld not fall from the head of any of them. It chaunsed an other time Diagoras sayling vpon the sea, that a great slawe of wynd arose, the mariners thought that God
had sent them a tempest bicause thei had taken him into the shyp, and agreed a∣mong them selues to cast hym into the seas, thinking that then they would be quiet. But Diagoras desired thē to loke a¦bout and shewing them other ships in no lesse daunger, he asked them whether Diagoras was in those other shippes also meaning that tēpestes come not of gods prouidence, but by fortune & luck. How much wiser and more likely is the opini¦on of the noble clerk and most excellent Philosopher Cleanthes, who fortifieth Gods prouidence with four reasons.Cleanthes 4. reasons One is bicause he forseeth al thīgs. The second for as much as he geueth plentie, and scarsitie, cold and heat, corn, encrease of catel, and infinite other. The third, by∣cause he feareth vs with thunderboltes, poureth down shoures, haile, snow, cau∣seth plages, earthquakes, and blasing starres. The fourth and greatest, is the constant turnings of heauen, the marue∣lous iourneis of the sune, the mone, & the starres, ye glorious fairenes of them, the cōli order of al things. Who entring into a schole wher he seeth all thinges be done in order, wil not thinke it to be go∣uerned
by some wise scole master? if the scole cannot kepe a good order without a wyse scole master, much les the world which comprehendeth al scoles and sco∣le masters. But who is able to be scole∣master ouer al creatures but God only? Wherfore he ruleth them by his proui∣dence,An induc∣tion. A house. as the scolemaster doeth his sco∣lers. Is not that house best gouerned, best stoored with all thynges necessary, which is ruled by counsaile?An armye is not ye ar∣my in better case, which hath a wise and polyke Captaine, then that which hath a rash and folish? The ship likewise, that hath a singuler cūning master,A Ship. goeth sa∣fely and assuredlye. But nothing is bet∣ter ruled then ye world, in which ye house, the army and ship, be contayned, which of the comely order & great beauty that is in it, is called of grekes , and of the latinistes Mundus. If we will search the holy scriptures, which beare witnes of God, we shall find that he gouerneth the whole word, not as kyngs do their realmes, myndfull of weighty matters, and vnmindful of smal, but yt he is mind¦full both of great and small. The Rauen, the Storke, the Oule, the Pellicane, the
Kyte, the Sparow, and the litle Wren, the Quayle, the Doue, the Swalow, all .iiii. foted beastes, are preserued by his prouidēce. Did not al maner of creaturs enter into the Arke by couples at his cō∣maundemēt,Genes. 7. and were saued from drou∣ning? Doeth not he puruey meat for the Rauē, when his yong flicker about him: Did not thei at his cōmaundemēt bring bread and flesh to Elias beside the broke Karith?Iob. 38 Exod. 16 3. Reg. 17 Luke. 12 Fyue Sparowes are sold for a farthing, & yet none of them be forgottē of him. He fed his heritage with Quay∣les. He geueth Pellicanes, Storks, Ky∣tes, possession in the court of this world. He fedeth ye lions whelps in their dēnes and lurking in their couches.Iob. 38 He shut their mouthes, that thei should not hurt his seruaunt Daniell. Yea,Daniel. 7 he numbreth the heares of our head, and clotheth the lilies of the field. I cannot here,Mah. 10 Agaīst fate destinie, or the inflēce of ye stars. but som what rebuke such as curiously marketh their birth day, and birth star, as if their lyfe, and doings wer gouerned of nece∣ssitie by ye influēce, and mouing of ye star∣res. They teach that there is such a pith and efficacy in the signifier cyrcle, called of the Grekes, Zodiacos, that euery part
therof hath a seueral, and vehement ope¦ration, the which vertue is sōdry and di∣uers, through the seuen mouable stars. By it they wil al things to be ruled, and specially man: whose head (as the say) is gouerned by Aries, the neck by Taurus, the shulders by Gemini, and his fete by Pisces, which be signes in heauen, so na∣med of the similitude of those thinges yt they signifie in earth, supposing almigh∣ty God as one tired wt six daies labour, the seuent day to worke no more. And if one be borne vnder Aries, they promyse him that he shalbe rich and wealthy, bi∣cause wethers be profitable beastes, ren∣dring to their masters euery year a good fleshe. If thou were born vnder Taurus, they say thou shalt be a seruaunt, a slaue, a drudge, and an vnderling al thi life, for so much as this beast is yoked inplowes and cartes, and set to al drudgery. And if thou weee borne vnder Scorpius, thei tel thee thou shalt be a murtherer, a thief, a blasphemer▪ because ye Scorpion is ful of dedly poisō, deducing ye causes of gouer¦naūce in heauē, of ye properties of beasts in earth. This opiniō hath caused much idolaty, and geuing the glory belonging
only to God, to ye works of his fingers. For when men perswaded their selues that al thinges were gouerned by stars, the worshipped the sunne, the mone, and the other mouable, & vnmouable stars: & thinking that riches come from them, they haue not praied vnto God, of whō only al good gifts are to be desired. The first of Genesis,Gene. 1 witnesseth wherfore they are formed and created, not to rule mans life violently, not to gouerne vs, as the ryraunt doth his commons, but Vt sint in signa, & tempora, & dies, & an∣os. &c. to be for signes & seasons, daies and yeares, to shine vpon the earth, and to deuide light from darknes. Many wold excuse their viciouse liuing by the influences, & vertue of ye stars, saying yt they constraine them vnto sinne, as the seruaunt of Zeno the Philosopher bla∣med his maister for striking him bicause as he said, ye stars cōpelled him to sinne. If our birth star cause vs to sinne, & to do that is honest, wherfore shuld we be bla∣med when we do il, or praised whē we do wel, seing it is our nature & fatal destinie to do both, & not in our power to doe o∣therwise? who blameth ye sun, bicause he
burneth the grasse of the feild, making it vnholsome for cattell, who prayseth the water for quēching of mens thyrst? Or the Sunne for warming them? Because thei cannot do otherwise, thei ar neither praysed, ne blamed: and shall we be bla∣med or praysed, for yt which is not in our power? If Christ the liuely image of the father,Luke. 10 Ihon. 1 Marke. 8 Ihon. 18 praysed Mary Magdalen iustly for chusing the better part, for pouring a box of preciouse ointment vpon him be∣fore his burial, if he iustly reproued Pe∣ter for coūselyng him not to come at Ie∣rusalem, and for vsing the tēporal sword against the seruaunt of the high priestes, this is an vntrue doctrine, which taketh away both prayse dispraise. We reade in ye scripture,Marke. 9 that God hath prepared vn∣speakeable tormentes for such as breake his commaundements. Wherfore doth he so, if destiny compell them to sinne? If thou be accused before an officer of murder, and laiest for thy selfe that thou hast done it against thy wyll, if thou can proue it, thou art discharged. If ye hang∣man of Calice put a man to death at the commaundement of an officer, he is not blamed therfore. Yea, mine ennemye
wil forgiue me, if I hurt him against my wyll. And wil almighty God punish vs so greuously, for breaking his cōmaun∣dementes through fate and destiny? You Iustices, Shryues, Bayliffes, and Cunstables, why presume ye to punysh euill doers? if a thiefe come before you, he is not to be blamed, but his destiny: if an adultrer, an Idolatrer, an extortio∣ner, you can laye nothynge to his char∣ge, but to the starres which cause him to be naught, will he, nill he. No man esca∣peth punishmēt, by laying of destiny for him, no officer will accept this aunswer of an euill doer, no master wil alowe his seruaunt laying this for him, nor the mi∣stres her maide, nor the scolemaster, his dysciple, nor the marchantman his pren∣tice: wherof it is euident, that all men condempne this dampnable opinion by naturall reason in their dedes, albeit the words of some, soūd to the contrary. If we think al thing to be gouerned by de∣stini, we must nedes agre to ye libertines, which make no differēce betwene good and bad, betwen right & wrong, betwen light and darkenes,Libertines but defēd all things to be lawful & honest, calling notable vi∣ces,
vocations cōmaunded of God. If they spy a theife thei blame him not, but exhort him to continue in his vocation. Thei bid the band, the strong whore, ap∣ply their vocations,. Cor. 6. for S. Paule saith: all thynges be lawfull vnto him, if vnto him, to vs. Thei ground this doctrine of the regeneration, the which they say is a full recoueraunce by Christe, of yt which we loste by Adam. He, before his faule, knewe no difference betwene good and yll, but fel by knowldge of good and yll. Now they say that Chryst hath taken a∣waye euill,Gene. 3 and therfore all that we do is good:. Ihon. 2 for he that is born of him, sinneth not because his seed remaineth in him, & and he can not sin. Whosoeuer sinneth hath not sene him,Luke. 18 neither hath knowen him. Wherfore they that wil be the son∣nes and childrē of God, must be like vn∣to children, which neither know, nor do neither good nor yll. For the kingdome of God belongeth vnto such. Doth not fate and destinie teach ye same?Math. 19 Nothing is good ne bad, except it be volūtary, no∣thing is to be praisd or dispraisd, nothing is to be punished, or recōpēsed. It taketh awaye all lawes, statutes, actes, procla∣matiōs,
for all mē be borne to obey them or to breake them. If to obey them, they nede not, if to breake thē, thei profit not. But yu wilt answere it is profitable, that actes be put forth, that such as be disobe∣dient, escape not vnpunished. O cruell destinie, which both causeth vs to do euil & punisheth vs therfore: Is it not a lyke thing, as if a man shold throw the down hedlong from the top of Poules steple, and after finding ye aliue, wold al to beat the therfore? I wold faine learn whether all men & women, in the time of the holy man Noe, and the host of Pharao which pursued the Israelites,Gene. 7. Exod. 14▪ had one fate and destinie. They were destroyed with one kynde of punyshment. I would knowe whether all the Sodomits and Gomor∣rians wer born vnder one planet,Gene. 1 which all at one time, and after one fashion wer consumed with fier falling from heauen. The Idolatrers which worshipped the golden calfe, were slayne therfore.Exod. 32 The earth opened her mouth, and swalowed Chorce, Dathan,Num. 1 and Abiram & all their adherents, for their rebellion and insur∣rection againste Moyses their head and ruler. If all thinges were gouerned
by ye starres, these men should haue had diuers punishments, because their dest∣inies were vnlyke. Who knoweth not that there haue bene dyuers excellent in many faculties and sciēces, & that many were borne at the same time with them, for at al times an infinit nūber are born, & yet we haue none like Homer in poe∣try, like Samson in strength, like Aristo¦tle in Philosophie, lyke Salomon in wisdome, like Appelles in painting, like Euclide in Geometrie, like Tully in e∣loquence. Were none borne vnder the same instillation, that our sauiour Christ was? It is likely, that both some of those babes,Math. 2 whiche Herode murdered were borne at thesame time, and also diuerse in other regions. Stories make relatiō, that Anaxagoras a noble Philosopher was trussed in a foteball,Anaxago¦ras and spurned to death, at the commaundement of a cruel kyng, if it had bene his distenie, it would haue chaunsed as wel to other born vn∣der the same starre. But you wil say, if the starres do not gouerne vs,Why stars apeared at the birth of Christe. why did such a notable star appere when Christ was borne? A star gouerned his natiuitie, for the wysemen
say: vidimus enim stellā eius in Oriēte. &c. We haue sene his star in ye East. Truly that star was none o the mouable or vnmouable starres, but a new star, in a new and maruei∣lous case, neuer sene before ne afterward. As we reade in the Cronicles, of many wonders which happened commenly before great bat- and conquestes, as in the time of P. Crassus, and L. Sceuola, mylke rayned from heauen. In the time of L. Domicius, and C. Lelius, a mayde was borne with two heads, foure handes, and foure feete: And in the tyme of M. Anthonius, and P. Dolobella, there was seene a great blasyng starre, and thre Sun∣nes: Euen so at Christes birth, whiche was wonderfull, appered this starre, who as tou∣ching his diuinitie, had no mother, and con∣cerning his humanitie, was borne without a father. The wyse men whiche moued by this starre, came to seke after Christ, signifie the wysdome of man, whiche in matters of Religion is folishnes. Wherfore God of his infinite mercie opened the incarnatiō of his sonne by this starre, and therwith stirred the wyse to offer vnto hym, Aurum, thus, & mirram, Gold, frankinsence, and mirre. By Gold is signified that he is a kyng,Math. 2 by Fran∣kinsence that he is God, and by Myrre that he is man. If God had not opened it vnto them, they could neuer haue knowen his in∣carnation, the whiche S. Paull calleth
Misterium absconditum a seculis, a mistery hid since the world begon, and since the begin¦ning of generations:Colloss. 1 but now it is opened to his saintes, to whom God would make kno∣wen the glorious riches of his godnes. For this cause the starre appeared,Psal. 8 and not to go∣uerne all the doinges of our sauiour Christ violently: All thinges be cast vnder his feete, and he made the starres: therfore he is not subiect to the starres. But bicause heauenly matters surmount our capacities, his com∣ming into this world was declared vnto the Iewes by the Patriarkes, Prophetes, shep∣herdes, and the holy word of God, and vnto the Gentils by this starre, and his Apostles: which sar went before the wyse and prudēt men, till it came & stode ouer the place where Christ was. What wyse man wyl impute al that Christ did afterward to this star, which after it had brought the wysemen vnto him, appered no more? Do our birth starres cease to appere after a certain space? Do they stand ouer the place where we be borne? Or do the leaue their accustomed circuite? Wherfore it is euident that this starre was ordeined to preache Christ▪ and not for fate and destinie, to serue hym, and not to force hym, who can not be forced, for he worketh what he wyll in heauen and earth, and all the worlde is his workemanshyp. Many doubt whether thys starre were a true star, or an aungell, or the holy ghost. I leue euery man in this matter
to his owne iudgement,Thre opi∣nions tou∣ching thys Starre. so that his verdite disagree not with the scripture, but edifie & instruct the hearer, neuertheles I wyll talke my simple phantasie therin. If it were a very star, why did he leaue his accustomed progres? Or how could he be a guide vnto the wyse men betwene Bethle∣em and Hierusalem, being placed with the other starres in the firmament of heauen? We read that the sunne stode vnder Iosue, and went backward vnder Esechias,Iosua. 10 4 Reg. 20. Angels ap∣peare in d¦uers shap but ne∣uer of no star that left his ordeined circuite, and wandred, as one that loseth his way. Peraduenture an aungell appered vnto the wyse men in the lykenes of a star, for they ap¦pere in diuers likenesses and shapes. At moūt Oreb an aungell spake vnto Moises out of a bush in the lykenes of fyre,Exod. 3 Iosua. 5 and at Galgall to Iosue the sonne of Nun, like a man of ar∣mes. Helias is caried vp to heauen in a cha∣ret of fyre, and with horses of fyre.4 Reg. 2 The cha∣ret and the horse be the aungels of God, whiche be ministring spirits accomplishing all his commaundementes. The aungels ap∣pere vnto Abraham and Lot,Gene. 1 like thre wayfa∣ring men. Manne & his wyfe sawe an angel talking with them, as he had ben a Prophet.Iud. 13 So it may wel be that an aungel in the simi∣litude of a star, was a guide to the wise men. For aungeles are called starres in the scrip∣tures, as in the reuelation of Iohn: Stelle sep tem ecclesiarum angeli.Apoc.  The seuen starres
are the aungels of the seuen congregations. Other thinke that this star was nether aun∣gell, nor a materiall star, but the holy spirite, whiche opened the incarnatiō of Christ, both vnto the Iewes and to the Gentils: but vn∣to the Iewes in the likenes of a Doue, & to the Gentils in the shape and similitude of a star, of whiche Balaam an Astronomer, pro∣phecied long before, Orietur stella ex Iacob, there shall come a starre of Iacob,Num. 24. that is a shining light of the holy ghost, the which shal leade the Heathē to the knowledge of Christ in the likenes of a star, as he fell vpon the A∣postles in the shape of fyre.Act.  Thus muche I haue spoken of the starre, that appered at the natiuitie of Christ, bicause many by it, wold proue fate and destinie. But what (say they) is fate and destinie? A stedfast and immuta∣ble order of causes,What fate is. wherby all thynges are done of necessitie, called in Greke  True it is, nothing is done wtout a cause, but yet many thīgs may seme to be done without any necessary cause: for some causes be perfit, & some in our iudgement again may seme to be vnperfit.Perfit cau¦ses. Unperfit. Fire causeth heat perfectly, and water cold, but surfiting causeth sicknes, a wound causeth death, study causeth learning vnperfectly: for a man may surfet, be woun∣ded, and applie his study, and yet nether be sick, nedy, ne learned. If all causes were ne∣cessary, but presuppose they were, yet I wold deny all things to be ruled by their necessitie,
of fate and destinie: for almighty God wor∣keth what he will in them of his good plea∣sure.Exod. 2▪ He appered vnto Moises out of a bushe in a flame of fire, and yet the bush consumed not.Dan. 3 Gene. 17 Gene. 18 Luc. 1 Num. 17 Iosua. 10 Math. 1 Math. 8.9 He cōmaunded the fire not to hurt Ana∣nias, Azarias, and Misael, and saued them harmeles from the hote burning ouen. Did necessitie of fate and destinie make Sara & Elizabeth, which were barren and past chyl∣dren, fruitfull? Did destinie make Aarons rod bud, the sunne to go bakward, a maid to conceiue, the blynd to see, the deaf to heare, the dead to aryse? If almighty God then did al those thinges he leaueth not his creatures to be gouerned of causes which depēd one on another, but ruleth them at his pleasure. Salomon witnesseth of GOD, that he doeth lengthen the lyfe of hys, and shorten the life of the wicked, saying.Prou. 10 The fear of the Lorde maketh a long life, but the yeares of ye vngodly shalbe shortened. There be many ex∣amples of this in the Bible. The Prophet Esay commaundeth kyng Esechias to put his houshold in an order,4 Reg. 20. because he shoulde die out of hand and not liue, and yet at his earnest request, God lengthned his life .xv. yeares. Thus we denie that the creatures are gouerned by stoicall destinie ether in their byrth, death or any of their actions, but only by the prouidence of God, as the examples of the Scriptures concerning the birth of Ia∣cob and Esau, Phares and zara, do witnes.Iacob. Esau. Gene. 29 for the notable birth of Iacob & Esau doth
confute destinie, and destroy the influence of the starres, for they were borne both at one tyme, in one place, of one woman, by one mā, and yet they were as vnlyke as fier and wa∣ter, as lyght and darkenes, as blacke & white. So were Phares and zara, two twinnes also the chyldren of Iudas by his daugter Tha∣mar.Gene. 38 These examples declare destinie & in∣fluence of the starres, to be but a fable, yea they fortifie Gods prouidence, teachyng him to be a gyuer of dyuers graces, vnlyke for∣tunes, and seuerall blessynges. I graunt that an Astronomer may tell, by the obseruation of the starres, to what occupation, to what estate of lyfe euery man is most feat, most ap by nature: but that he can tell mans fortune by any of his arte or cunning, I deny vtter∣ly: For our lyfe is not ruled by the mouynge of the starres, but by Gods prouidence, who worketh all thynges in heauen and earth. How then is that true, whiche is wrytten in the boke of generation:Gene. 2. How God is sayde to haue rested the .7. day. Gene. 3. Compleuit Deus die septimo opus suum, & requieuit ab vni uerso opere. &c. He finished and he rested the seuenth day from all hys workes. God rested the seuenth day from the workes of creation, from formyng of newe creatures, but not from gouerning of them. The Carpenter after he hath finyshed the the house, medleth no more therwith, if God should doe so, all creatures would peryshe. If
mans body can lyue without quickenyng of the soule, the world may continue without his prouidence. For he is to the worlde, that the soule is to the body, and more necessary to ye gouernaūce of it, then ye soul to ye gouer∣naunce of the body, forasmuch as he is ye ma¦ker both of soul & body: Thou must not ima∣gin that God was wery with syxe dayes la∣bour, because he is sayd to haue rested the se∣uenth day, who made all thynges, and go∣uerneth them without labour, and rested without werynes. For resting signifieth en∣dyng. In the seuenth day God rested from al his workes, that is, he ended, he finished the creation of the world. Why then doeth not the scripture say, he ended all his workes, but that he rested from them? Truly not without an vrgent cause, for God is sayd to haue rested from all his workes, whiche he made exceadyng good, for because he wyll geue vs rest and quietnes from our trauayl, if we wyll doe all good workes, as he made all thynges exceading good. This phrase of speakyng is vsed muche in the scripture, as of the Apostle, we knowe not what to desyre as we ought. Spiritus intercedit pro nobis gemitibus inenarrabilihus, bu he spirit ma¦keth intercession mightely for vs with gro∣ninges,Rom. 8. whiche can not be expressed wyth ong. The holy ghost doth not grone, but ma¦keth vs to grone and lamente our synnes,
nor make intercession, but sturreth vs vnto prayer. Moyses vseth the same maner of spe∣kyng vnto the Israelites, saying. The Lord your God tempteth you,Deut. 13 to knowe whether you loue hym. God doeth not tempt his to knowe any thynge therby, who knoweth all thynges, but to make them to knowe howe much they loue hym. He crieth vnto Abrahā, now I know that thou fearest God,Gene. 22 in that thou hast not spared thine only sonne for my sake, that is, I haue made thee to know. So he is said to haue rested, because he wil make vs to rest with hym in glory. If we endeuour our selues to folowe hym in goodnes, who made nothyng, but it was good. Wherfore this resting of God doth rather establish his prouidence then make against it, declaryng hym to be myndful of good men, and to haue prepared them a restinge place, where they shall beholde his glorious countenaunce euer more, for he is called in latin Deus, in Greke  (which worde signifieth to run) because he hasteth vnto euery place, to gouerne and order all creatures. The .xvi. Chapter. ¶God only knoweth all thynges. AS we sufficiently taught, that God is the worker of al things,ap. 19. so if we searche the Scriptures, we shal finde that he only know∣eth
al thinges, and is ignoraunt of no∣thing, as Iesus the sonne of Sirach wit∣nesseth: The Lorde knoweth al science.Eccle. 4 The knowledge of men is vnperfit, and encreaseth by diligence, for the mortal & corruptible body is heuy vnto the soul, & our earthly mancion kepeth down vn∣derstāding,Sapi. 9 so that we can not perfectly iudge of earthly things, much les of he∣uenly matters. Aungels haue a more plentiful knowledge then we, & yet they be ignoraunt of many thinges,Marke. 13 as of the last day and hour, which the father kno∣weth only, but God knoweth al things perfitly, who is the Lord of knowledge, whose wysdom can tel thinges that are past, and discerne thinges to come.1. Reg. 2. Sapi. 8 Eccle. 42 The workes of al flesh are before him, & there is nothing hid from his eies, his wisdom knoweth the subteltie of words, and can expound darck sentences. He seketh out the ground of the heart, and vnderstan∣deth al imagination. No thought may e∣scape him, nether may any word be hyd frō him. He called vnto Adam & said vn∣to him: Adam vbi es, wher art thou? not bicause he was ignoraunt,Gene.  but to teach him what he had lost, & to moue him vn∣to
earnest repentaunce for his syn. After like sort he asked Cain,Gene. 6 wher is Abel thy brother? not for to lerne yt, he knew not, but for to punish and dismay him. The scriptur telleth that Penituit deum quod hominem fecisset in terra:How God is said to repent. Psal. 21  Reg. 16 God repented yt he had made man vpō the earth, & soro∣wed in his heart, who repenteth also of making Saul king of the Israelites. He is said to repent, not that he is ignorant of thinges to come, who forsawe that Saul, & al mankind wold become abho∣minable, but whē we chaūge & go astray from him, or returne to him, & are ether punished for our synne, or rewarded of his mercy. After the first sort he repented of making mankind, of making disobe∣dient Saul king, & of the chusing of the Iewes, who once wer ye people of God, and now the mēbers of Antichrist. After the other sort, the Heathen are become ye worshippers of God through the fauou¦rable regard of Iesus Christ, which once were the sonnes of wrath, and the shepe going astray: Through it the traytor Iu¦das lost his Apostleship & is iustly damp¦ned in hel, and the thief after great rob∣berie is deliuered from the crosse & mer∣cifully
crouned in paradise. This chaūge from good to il, or frō il to good, which is done by the secret and most rightfull iudgementes of almighty God, in the scripture is called his repentaunce, and the chaunge is in vs, and not in hym. Dauid a man according to Gods hertes desire, witnesseth of him saying:Psal. 21 The ge∣neration which is to come shalbe told to the Lord, they shal tel his rightuousnes. He doth not say the Lord shalbe told to the generation, but the generation to the Lord: of whiche wordes we can not ga∣ther, that any thing is told God, wher∣of he is ignoraunt, that he may know it, but that he is told that which he know∣eth already, as the aungels tel vnto him our praiers and almes deades, and as we shewe God our griefs and what we desire in our praiers. Raphael one of the seuen aungels, that stand before God sayth vnto Toby: I haue offered thy prayer before the Lord,Toby. 1 wherby is ment that they be ministring spirits, for their sakes, which shall be heyres of saluaciō, not that God lerneth our nede by them,Hebr. 1 who knoweth what is necessary for vs, before we aske it of hym,Math.  neuertheles
he willeth vs to aske that we may recei∣ue,Math. 7 Luke. 11 as it is written: aske and it shalbe ge∣uen you. Euery one yt asketh receiueth, and he that seketh findeth, and to hym that knocketh, it shalbe opened. After this sort S. Paul is to be taken, saying: Petitiones vestre innotescant apud deum, let your requests be knowen vnto God.Phlip. 4 Colloss. 4 Why dost thou maruel that God is shewed that he knoweth, seing ye men oftentimes are told of other, that which they knew before. If thou mislike this exposition, hear another. These wordes, the generation to come shalbe told the Lord, be as much to say as the Lord shall be praised in it, for to tel vnto the Lord, is to praise knowledge and magnifie hym, as to liue vnto the Lord, to eat vnto the Lord.Roma. 14 S. Paul expoundeth eating to the Lord, to be geuing of thankes, and pray∣sing him when thou eatest: saying, he yt eateth doth it to the Lord, for he geueth God thākes. If doing to the Lord be ge∣ueng of thankes, as S. Paul declareth, saying, he doth it to ye Lord, for he giueth thankes, then of necessitie telling to the Lord, is thāking of him, forasmuch as al elling is doing. We read of the sonne of
God in the reuelation of Iohn,Apoca. 19. that he hath eies like the flame of fier, & on his head many crownes, & a name written, yt none knew but he himself. If non knew it but he him self, the father knoweth it not: wherof followeth that God know∣eth not al thinges. To this I answer, bi∣cause the father and Christ be one, that ye father knoweth it, for as much as Christ knoweth it,Ihon. 10 nor ye text doth not exclude the father from the knowledge therof, saying none knoweth it, but he himself, for the lantin is, Nemo scit, that is no mā knoweth. Moreouer this saying, no mā knoweth it, but he himself, teacheth vs, that only his diuinitie knoweth it, not his humanitie, for yt is excluded by these words, no man knoweth it. But Christs deuinitie is ye fathers deuinitie, who both are al one by nature, not by persō: wher∣fore, that which Christ knoweth, the fa∣ther knoweth also. This text doth not diminish the fathers knowledge, but ra∣ther establisheth, only God to know all things, saying that only he himself kno∣weth this name: wherby these wordes (he himself) we are compelled to vnder∣stand the deuinitie, the nature & maiestie of
God, to know it only, and Christes hu∣manitie to be ignoraunt of it, which also doth not know the last day. The .xvii. Chapter. ¶God only forgiueth sinne: Our pardo∣ning, what it is: the losing and binding of ministers. HE is sayd also only to for∣giue sinne, who driueth a∣way our offences lyke the cloudes, and misdedes, as ye mistes. The Lord saith: I am euen he only,Esay. 44 Esay. 43 yt for mine own selues sake, do away thyne offences, and forget thy sins. The vnfaithful Iewes acknow¦ledge this, laying blasphemy to our sa∣uiour Christes charge, because he said to to one sick of the palsy:Marke. 2 Sonne, thy sins are forgeuen thee. Likewise, when he for¦giueth many sinnes to Mary Magda∣lene,Luke. 7 in the house of Simon, bicause she loued much, they aske who he is which forgeueth sinnes also. The stifnecked Ie¦wes found fault wt Christ, in forgeuing of sinnes, bicause they beleued not hym to be God, to whom that only belōgeth and to no creature. For who can forgiue sinnes, but God only? Thei shuld rather
haue gathered him to be very God, then a blasphemer, forasmuch as he proueth this to belong vnto him vpon the earth, restoring strength & health vnto the sick man, to cary his bed home, whence he was brought of four mē. When he saith of Mary Magdalen washing his fete with teares,Mary mag¦dalene. & wiping them wt her hears Remittuntur ei peccata multa, quoniam di∣lexit multum: Many sinnes are forgiuen her, bicause she loued much, we may not thinke that loue causeth remissiō of sins, but that remissiō of sinnes causeth loue. For that our loue foloweth, and goeth not before,Goddes re¦mission go¦eth before our loue Christ declareth in thesame place, saying: He that hath much forgi∣uen, loueth more, and to whom lesse is forgiuē, he loueth lesse. Doth not Christ here manifestly teach, that Gods forge∣uing, engēdreth is vs much loue or litle? if we examin the circūstaūce of the place, and ponder it diligētly, we shal find it to be no otherwise. Simō, who bad Christ vnto his house, is offended that Mary Magdalen touched Christ, and maruei∣leth that he wil suffre a mysse woman to be so homely with hym, as to washe his fete, & anoynt them. Christ therfore said
vnto him: Many sinnes are forgeuē her bicause she loueth much: to whom lesse is forgeuen, he loueth les, as if he should say: Symon, thou art offended that I let a sinful woman touch me: be no more of¦fended, she is no longer a sinful woman▪ for I haue forgeuen her many sinnes, & bicause many sinnes are forgiuē her, she loueth much. For he, to whom much is forgeuen, loueth more: wherfore maruel not that I let an honest woman, which hath her sinnes forgeuen her, & therfore loueth me gretly, touch me: maruel not that I let a penitēt womā wash my fete, wipe them wt her hears & anoint ye same. I would the clergie and laitie would wash Christ. What is that? truly to be penitent for their il liuing,To wash Christ. to mourne, to wepe, to lament their couetousnes and gredy ambicion, their pluralites of per∣sonages, non residences, ferming of bene∣fices, totquots, necligence in their voca∣tions, and absence from their cures. Ve mihi, quia tacu▪ Wo be vnto me for hol∣ding my peace. Al men and women, yea kinges, quenes, lordes, & ladies, folowe good Mary Magdalene in this point, & cry not, cal not vnto her, prai for vs, prai
for vs. But the deuil is crafty, he maketh vs omit to folow the saintes, for whiche their liues were writtē, and perswadeth vs by his ministers, which be heretikes, to pray vnto saintes, which can not help vs. This is the true meaning of these wordes, not that her loue went before to deserue, or to be a cause of remission of sinnes, but that she might honestly wash Christ, whō she loued much, for her sins pardoned. The parable of two detters, declareth this to be true, by which christ proueth vnto Simō, the great loue that she bare vnto him. For if ye detter to whō the crediter forgeueth .ccccc. ducates, lo∣ueth him, better then he to whom he for¦geueth but fifty, thē Mary loued Christ hartely, who blotted out al her sinnes. Do not the detters loue the crediter, bi∣cause of his liberalite: euē so Mary was not forgeuen through the merite of her loue, but she loued bicause she was forgi∣uen. Christ witnesseth yt the crediter for∣gaue his detters, whē they had nothing to pay. What is this, but that almighty God pardoneth our sinnes, not for any crum of loue in vs, but of his tender and gracious fauour? For we are ye detters,
and he is ye liberal crediter: but how shall we answer the phrase of scripture, which saith that many sinnes were forgeuē her because she loued much? Do we not vse to say, somer is nigh, bicause ye trees blos¦som? and yet the blossoming of the trees doth not cause somer, but somer causeth them. So winter causeth cold, & not cold wynter, & yet we complain of wynter, bi¦cause it is so cold, so we say the tree is good, bicause ye fruit is good. But Christ teachīg his disciples to pray, willeth thē to aske pardon of God, as thei pardō o∣ther:Math. 6 How we do forgeue one ano∣ther. for if we forgeue other mē their tres¦passes, our heauenly father wil also for∣geue vs. Wherfore, it is not a thing belō¦ging only to god. Mā is said to forgeue his neighbour, not by pardoning ye euer¦lasting punishmēt, which is the reward of al sinne,Roma. 6 and is pardoned nether of thi neighbour ne yet of priest but of God alone, but by refraining his anger, by pa¦cifying himself, by asswaging his fury. S. Paul sheeth what our forgeuing is saying:Ephesi. 5 let not the sunne go down vpon your wrath.Eccle. 28 He that seketh vengeaunce sayth the preacher, shal finde vengeaūce of the Lord. To seke vengeaūce is not to
forgeue thy neighbour, but this venge∣aunce is nothing but a displeasure in this lyfe, wherfore to forgeue, is to seke no vē¦geaunce in this life, we haue nothing a do with the other lyfe. After this sort Christ commaundeth the Iewes when they offer any gyft at the Altar,Math. 5. if they be out with their brethrē,Math. 1 first to labour are cōciliation, & then to offer. After this sort S. Peter is charged to forgeue his bro∣ther sinning againg him, not only seuen tymes, but seuenty tymes seuen times. This commaundement belongeth also vnto vs, for S. Peter asketh Christ in the name of the congregation. God only forgeueth the punishment which is prepared for the deuill and his aungels, & for ill liuing men, as he only crouneth such as he forgeueth. Of whō is it spoken but of God only:1. Reg.  The Lord killeth and maketh aliue, bringeth doun to hel, and fetcheth vp again.Goddes re¦missiō goe∣th before our pardo∣ning. Some also reason of this place in the Lordes praier, that we must forgeue first, thā aske for∣geuenes of God, peruerting ye true mea¦ning therof. Christ teaching vs to pray for pardon of our trespasses, as we for∣geue them yt trespas against vs, meaneth
not that by forgeuing, we merit or deser¦ue remission of our misdedes (for we be all detters vnto God, some of .vC. pēce, and some of .l. and haue nothing to pay) no rather he certifieth our weake fayth by these wordes, & biddeth vs to be well assured, that God forgeueth vs, as we be sure that we forgeue other, makyng our perdoning a signe, a token yt God perdo∣neth vs, and not a cause therof. For ex∣cepte God forgeue vs first, and pour the dewe of his blessing vpon vs, our nature will not forgeue, but reuenge & punish. Thexample of the seruant whych ought his master .xM. talentes, who was first forgeuen the whole det, and after impri∣soned because he forgaue not his felowe, maketh nothing against this interpreta∣tion. For he was first released and par∣doned, but afterward when he wold not pardon his felowe, he became a dettour vnto God againe, and was throune into prison. For when thou saist forgeue me, as I forgeue hem that trespasse against me, thou makest a promes to God, if he be mercifull to the, to be mercifull vnto thi brother: the which thing if yu do, aser∣tein thy selfe, yt God hath melted thy sin∣nes,
as the fier doth the wax, and let thy doing be a token vnto thi consciēce, that thou art in his fauour. This is the cause why Christ taught his to pray thus, not that our remission deserueth any thinge at Gods hand, who geueth vs al things thorow Christ, in whose name whatsoe∣uer we aske, we shall haue it. He that as∣keth forgeuenes of God, and cannot en∣force his heart to forgeue his brother, let him thinke yt he hath asked, but not rece∣iued, because he asked amisse, & that he rather kindleth Gods wrath and indig∣nation against him, then pacifie it. For he deserueth forgeuenes, as he for∣geueth. If he cannot find in his heart to forgeue his felow, but laith hand on him and taketh him by the throte, & casteth  him into pryson, let hym thynke that God will deliuer him likewyse vnto the iayler for breaking his promise, till pay∣ment be made: for sinne is called det in scripture, because a punishēt is due for it. For this cause we are commaūded to aske forgeuenesse as we forgeue, that it may be a seale vnto vs, a token & a certi∣ficate of Gods mercy and fauoure, or of his displeasure and anger.
This I haue spoken partly constrayned by my matter, and partly because Ste∣phē Winchester straineth this place for the iustificatiō of workes. As euery pri∣uate man forgeueth his brother, so much more, the ministers of Gods word haue power to do ye same, for to them belong∣eth forgeuing & retayning,How mine¦sters do for¦geue and re¦teine sin▪ Math. 16 bynding and losing of ye whole congregation, to them Christ gaue the keyes of ye kingdome of heauen. Howe then doth God only for∣geue sin? Truly they are only ministers of the forgeuenes, and preachers of his mercy or of his wrath. Their forgeuyng and losing, is to declare ye swete and com∣fortable promises, that ar made through Iesus Christ in Gods boke to such as be penitent, and their binding & reteining, is to preach ye lawe, which causeth anger, to such as be vnpenitent. Or their losing is to declare before ye congregation,Roma. 4 that God forgeueth the beleuing, & their bin∣deng is to shewe, that God will not par∣don the vnbeleuyng, because they are without purpose to amend and reforme their liuynges. The common sort suppose y• God forgeueth them, as sone as the minister layth his handes vppon
theyr heades, although they returne to their old liuing. Be not deceiued, except thou repent,Who is for¦geuen and when. he hath no aucthoritie to for¦geue ye, for he is a minister of forgeuenes only to such as repent & will amend, his commissiō stretcheth no further. If thou from the bottome of thy heart, be sory for thy trespasse, if thou be without al de∣sire to sinne, if thou earnestly mynd to a∣mend, God forgeueth the before yu come at the minister, who first clensed the man from leprosy, and after cōmaunded him to shew him to the priest,Math. 8 for a witnes to the congregation. So he raised Lazarus first,Luke. 5 and afterward bad his disciples lose his graue bondes. As the priest of ye olde law made the leperies clean or vnclean:Ihon. 11 so byndeth and vnbyndeth, forgeueth & reteineth, curseth and blesseth, the mini∣sters of the new lawe. They put the name of God vpon the pe∣ople, but he only doth blesse them,Nume.  they minister the sacramēt of forgeuenes, but he only doth forgeue: as S▪ Paule forti∣fieth vnto the Corinthians, saiyng: nei∣ther is he that planteth any thing, ney∣ther he that watereth, but god which ge∣ueth the increase.1. Cor. 3 As an enbssaadour ma∣keth
peace with a straunge king, to whō he is sent with a message, but thei which bear witnes of the peace make it not, no more do they forgeue sin, but be witnes∣ses therof, that God pardoneth them through the ambassage of Iesus Christ,Actes. 1 Actes. 2. who is our high Ambassadour. Wher∣fore Paul calleth the preaching of ye glad tidinges of the gospel, ministration of ye spirit, and rightuousnes, and he nameth the preaching of the law, ministration of death and dampnatiō:. Cor. 3 by which two he meaneth nothing els but losing & byn∣ding,1. Cor. 5. as he teacheth vs, binding and lo∣sing him that held his fathers wife. The Anabaptists and Donatistes teach,Against ye Anabapt. that euil ministers can not lose, bicause God saith that he heareth no sinners. I graūt that God heareth not their praiers,Ihon. 9 yet the sinne of ye minister doth not disanull the swete promises whiche are made to such as repent and beleue Christ. Be he good or bad, God performeth ye wordes spoken of him, not presuming beyond his commission. Doth Gods mercy de∣pend of the goodnes of the minister? thē our faith can not be stedfast and sure, but wauering and vncertain, forasmuch as
no man can deserne who is a good mi∣nister: for he that semeth good, may be an hipocrite. The Scribes and Phari∣seis were euil ministers,Math. 23 & yet wer we cō¦maunded to beleue theim, whatsoeuer they say, sitting in Moises seat: that is, as long as they teache Moises, and not their own inuentions. Sacramentes be seales. Doth not ye seale make like print, whether it be of gold, siluer, or iron? If it seale deper or shalower, that which is sea¦led, is cause therof, not the stuffe: So the difference is in them, which come to the minister, and not in the ministration of good or euil, which both make one print for ministration is a seale. Why doeth Paul rebuke ye Corinthians because one said he held of Paul, another said,1 Corin. ▪ he was of Apollo: but because they thought the vertue of the sacramentes to hang of the worthines of the minister. If their mor∣thines or vnworthines make the sacra∣ments effectual, or not, thē of two good the more worthy, maketh thē more effec¦tual, and it wer better to be christened of Iohn, than of Thomas of Inde, better to be sent of Cephas than of Timothe, better to receaue the cōmuniō at Pauls
hand than of Apollo: but their ministra∣tion differeth not, & we are forbidden to reioyce in men: for nether he that plan∣teth is any thing, nether he that watreth wherfore al hāgeth of God, who giueth the increase, who only forgeueth sinne, & not of the worthines or vnworthines of the minister. The key which Christ pro∣mised vnto Peter,What the keye is. Math. 16 saying: Tibi dabo cla∣ues regni caelorum: To the I will giue the keyes of the kingdome of heauen (who answered in that behalf of al as all were asked) is Gods holy word, wherwith ye minister bindeth and vnbindeth vs, as the keye doth shut & open the dore.Againste Peters pri¦macie. The Papistes expound the keies to signifie a general authoritie & supremitie graūted vnto Peter, aboue the other Apostles, & al kinges, the whiche nowe they giue t their great sire of ome as to ye only suc∣cesser of Peter. To these I aunswer that Christ gaue non of his Apostles further authoritie then he had himself: for when he sendeth them he saith:Ihon. 20 Math. 20 As my father sent me, so I send you. Wherfore was he sent? Not to be ministred vnto, but to mi¦nister vnto other. The people wold haue made him their king & head,Luke. 22 but he refu∣sed
it,Ihon. 6 Math. 17 Roma. 1 he paid tribute to Cesar at Caper∣naum, he was a minister of circumcision many yeares, he saith vnto him, whiche desired part of his brothers inheritaūce: Who made me a iudge or deuider euer you?Luke. 12. Wherfore ye keies be no tēporal au∣thoritie. Hath ye disciple a further autho∣ritie then his maister? Or is the seruaunt aboue his Lord? Christ cōmaundeth Pe∣ter to pay tribute vnto Cesar,Math. 10 Math. 17▪ Actes. 8 to put vp his swerd, who in the actes sendeth not other, but he himself is sent of the Apost∣les to lay hands vpon them in Samaria which beleued through the preaching of Philip, & he is asked a count afterward, why he went and eat with the vncircum¦cised,Actes. 11 Actes. 1 he appointeth no mā in the roume of Iudas, but al the Apostles chose two indifferently, and cast lottes, beseching God to temper them, that the lot might fal on ye most ablest. Wherfor he was not head of Apostles, kings & Emperours, but a felowe minister, as he witnesseth of himself, saying: I exhort ye ministers among you,1. Peter.  which am their felow mini∣ster. Albertus Pighius the Byshop of Romes chief Knyght in his controuer∣sy of the Congregation, peruerteth
the scripturs, to proue that Christ, at his departing, made him head of the church and general shepherd of his flock. First, touching the keyes, he saith, that the ci∣uil lawyers, with ye keyes, giue possessiō of house, burrow, town, and citie: As for an example, Kyng Henry the eight, of most famous memory, was made Lord of Bulloin, when they deliuered the ke∣yes therof to his maiestie. Moreouer Christ commenly calleth hys churche Regnum, a kingdom or Monarchie. If it be a kingdom, saith Pigghius, one must be head therof,Math. 3.4.10. Luke. 10 not many: for that is a kingdom, where one gouerneth. If one must be head, who is that but he and his successours, that had ye keies of the king∣dom geuē him. These be reasons of de∣ceitful vanitie, and after the ordinaunces of the world, & not after Christ, of which S. Paul warneth the Collossiās, to take hede.Collos. 2 Among lawyers, possessiō and do∣minions is euē by the key, but we must learne what the key is, of him that gaue it, and not of Lawyers, who telleth vs what the key is, saying: Wo be to you lawyers: For ye haue taken away that key of knowledge. Where no man can
denie but that by the key of knowledge Gods word is ment & signified,Luke. 1 whiche is the only key geuen to the Apostles. This is the key, wherwith the ministers are commaunded to lose and to bynd, to forgeue and to retaine, to blesse and to curse. The byshop of Rome, losing and iustifying men thorow traditiōs and ce∣remonies, and not with the key of gods word, hath not Peters key but a pick∣lock, of whiche he bosteth himself to be head of the churche. This key is the .ii. Testaments which Christ commaunded his Apostels to preach to al naciōs, and because there be two testaments he cal∣leth them keyes. For euery Scribe of this kingdom bringeth forth of his trea∣sure, thinges both newe and olde, newe thinges that is the swete tidinges of the gospel, to vnbynd vs,Math. 13 and olde thinges that is the olde Testament and Moises lawe to bind vs: and euery minister hath this key as wel as Peter. If Peter be head of the church bicause it is a kyng∣dom, and scriptures ar to be expounded after the law and ordinaūces of ye world, then Peters sonne shuld haue bene head after his father: or if he had no sonne, the
next of his kinred, not the Pope: For in al kingdomes, the sonne or the next of ye kinred is heire to the crown. But nether Peter, nor the pope be heads therof, nor no other vpon the earth: but the euerla∣sting Iesus Christ, who nedeth no heir, who hath promysed to be present with his congregation vnto the worldes end, who nameth his congregation a king∣dom,Math. 28 not that he made Peter Lord auer vs, or the Pope, but because he is Lorde, and we haue promised obedience vnto him. Peter calleth hym our chief shep∣heard, and forbiddeth priestes to be lor∣des ouer the parishes. The Pope sayth that Peter is the rock,1. Peter. 5 vpon which the congregacion is founded, and than he wil be Peters heire, because Peter was once at Rome.Math. 16 But the scriptures, which are the true touchstone to examine al in∣terpretations by,Who is the rocke. teach vs that Christ is the rock, & not Peter, when he saith vn∣to Christ, thou art the sonne of the liuing God, and is unswered: Thou art Pe∣ter, and vpon this rock I will build my congregation: These wordes, vpon this rock, are not to be vnderstand of Peter, who was so vnconstaunt, that he denied
his maister thrise, but of Christ who is ye sonne of the liuing God: as S. Paul tea¦cheth vs saying, Petra autē erat Christus: That is, Christ was the rock, whom in another place he calleth our foundacion,1. Cor 1 and saith: No man can lay another foun∣dation. If no man can lay another foun∣dation, then Peter is not the foundatiō. The scriptures vse to liken Christ and ye congregation, to a bridgrome and hys wyfe: for he is called the bridgrome,1. Cor. 3 and the church is called his spouse. Wherfor S. Paul maketh matrimony a high mi∣stery. The husband appointeth no other to be head ouer his wyfe, but he only is her head: for els she should be vnder two heades: no more doth Christ ouer the cō∣gregation to which he is only husband, & a gelouse husband. If Peter be general head,Ephe. 5. Ihon. 11 Ihon. 15 Ihon. 14▪ & the Pope after him ye congrega∣tion is maried to many husbands, & hath many heads, cōtrary to the order of ho∣norable wedlock. Christ only is ye dore, the way, the truth, & the li, ye true vine: so he only is the rock & foundaion, in whom euery building coupled together groweth vp to an holy temple in ye Lord:Ephe.  as S. Peter wytnesseth, callyng hym a
liuing and head corner stone, Pet. 2 disalowed of mē, but chosen of God, refused of the bylders, & vpholding the buylding, that it fall not flat vpon the ground. In the same place, Peter calleth Christ the rock and not himself. If you loke for the self same word. But the papistes reply, that we all as liuing stones, are made a spiri∣tual house by Christ. Why then say thei, may not Peter be the stone, Pet. 2 whō Christ named Cephas, which is by interpreta∣tion, a stone? This text graunteth other to be the stone as wel as Peter: for it is generally spoken of al christen men. If yu be not a stone, thou hast no felowship wt Christ. He named Peter Cephas, that is a stone, because when he beleued him to be Messias,Iohn. 1 he became a stone of ye con∣gregation: As he gaue Bonargus to name which is ye sonnes of thūder,Why Pe∣ter was na¦med Ce∣phas, a ston to Iames & Ihon: not that they were to be thūdred & preached, but yt thei shuld be ernest prea∣chers of Gods word. Andrew bringeth him to christ, in whō he beleued through his preaching. Christ welcomed hym wt most swete words, saying: thou art Sy∣mō the sonne of Ionas, thou shalt be cal¦led Cephas, which is by interpretaciō a
stone. What meaneth Christ by these words but this: Simō, before yu wast the son of Ionas that is, the son of death, as thi fathers was, thou shalt no more be so but a ston of my congregatiō, for which I am come to suffer, because yu beleuest in me. This is Christes meaning, not yt Peter is the stone, wheron we be buyl∣ded, but a stone of the building, a shepe which is lost & recouered again, a mēber of his congregatiō, Christ only is ye ston wheron the building is founded. We ar smal stones of ye bilding foūded on him. he only is ye rok which saueth his church from rain, flouds & the windes, from hel gates, frō syn & death, as he teacheth vs saying. He that heareth my word & doth therafter, is like a man that builded on a rock. Some may vnderstand this text otherwise,Math. 7 yt Christ called Peter a stone not that he only is that, but in the behalf of the whole cōgregation. If Peter wer not head of the church why doth Christ aske him thrise: Petre amas me? whether he loued him,why Christ biddeth Pe¦ter thrise: Fede my shepe. & cōmaund him only thrise to fede his shepe? Lo, sayth the Roma∣nistes, here is he made head of ye church. Here Christ going to his father, cōmit∣teth
the congregation to his gouernaū∣ce. This place doth not establish Peters supremicie, but rather deny it, for as much as Christ giueth him no cōmaun∣dement, no aucthoritie, but such as belō∣geth to al ye Apostels, bidding him shew his loue in feding his flock, & preaching him. For no mā wil preach him whō he loueth not.Ihon. 21 Doth not he geue like com∣maundement to al the Apostles, saying: Go and preach throughout al the world and to al creatures.Marke. 16 Then why doth he aske Peter only thrise, and commaunde him thrise, and not the other? He asked him thrise, because he denied him thrise, that his thre nayes might be recompen∣sed with thre confessions S. Augustin saith vpon this place:Austen. Thre confessions are required for thre naies: That the tōg might do as much for loue, as it had don for fear.Cyrilli. And Cyrillus sayth the same. They expound it thus, not for Peters primacie. But I will speake this more plainly: Christ did aske and commaund Peter thrise, for two causes: the one was that by his confessiō, the rest of the Apo∣stles shuld know, that he was restored in¦to fauour again, from whiche he had fal∣len:
The other is, yt al men might learne by Peter,What is most neces¦ary in a Preacher▪ 1. Cor. 4▪ what thing is most nessary in a preacher, which is, that he loue him en¦tirely and hertely, whom he preacheth. Paul speaking of ministers saith: it is re¦quired of them that they be found faith∣ful. But who is faithful to hym, whome he loueth not? Moreouer, diligence is re¦quired in a preacher: as S. Paul tea∣cheth his beloued sonne Timot. Preach thou the word: be feruent,2. Timo.  be it in ceason or out of ceason: improue, control, exhort with al long suffring, & doctrine. What thyng causeth diligēce so much as loue? thorow loue shed abrode in our heartes, by the holy ghost, all thynges are made easy and swete vnto vs, whiche before were both hard & vnplesaunt. For loue suffereth al thinges, beleueth al thinges,1. Cor. 13 hopeth al thinges, endureth al thinges. There is a commen saying, that nothing is hard to him, whiche loueth. Loue ma∣keth labour, trauail & pain, light & sweet to the hunter, yea, in snow and foule we∣ther, in cold and frost, at al seasons. But they which loue not the pastime, nether wil, ne can abide such pains, as to runne thorow thick and thin, to leape hedges,
and ditches.Rom. 5 &c. Through loue, Christ was sent of his father and humbled him∣selfe to our nature, and was whipt, scor∣ned, woūded and slaine for our sinnes, as it is written: God setteth forth his loue towardes vs, forasmuche as whyle we wer yet sīners,Act. 5. Christ died for vs. These things were swete & plesaūt vnto Christ. Through loue, the Apostles reioice that they are beaten, in the Actes. Through loue, S. Paule was beaten wt rods, was often in hunger, Cor. 11 in watching, in thirst, in labour, in coulde, in nakidnesse, often in perils of robberi, in perils of wildernes, in perils of ye sea, in perils of false brethrē. Through loue,Heb. 11 mani holy men haue ben burnt for ye truth, racked, stoned, hewen in sonder, slayne with swerdes, hunger-pyned, and drowned. Fier and water is not more necessary for the preseruatiō of this terrenal life, then loue in a preacher, which is the mother of faithfulnesse, of diligence, of patience, and of all vertue We read in Mathue,Math. 16 how Christ before he sent his disciples to preach, examined them what they thought of him, saying, whome say ye yt I am? not that he was ignoraunt therof, from whome nothing
is hidden,1 Tim.  but to geue an example to our bishops, to lay handes sodenly vpon no man, & to trie their doctryne, to examine their learnings, for lerning also is a qua∣litie most necessary in a preacher. So in this place he examineth Peter whether he loue him, because loue is so necessary. I wold wish yt our magistrates, and the ouerseers of Israel would set this exāple of our sauiour Christ before their eies, & diligently folow it. The captain going to battel mustreth, gathering many to¦gether, and choseth out the most ablest to serue his Prince. What marchaunt mā wil take any to be his prentise, onles he haue certen qualities, necessary for his occupatiō. Colligeners in their electiōs pose their scholers, assaie their wits, trie their learnings, aske their conditions, be¦fore they chose them.Bishops. If bishops applied their vocations as diligētly as other do their occupations, the heritage of ye Lord should be in much better case, his vine∣yarde should not be roted vp, & destroied with beastes of the field, The hil of Sion wold wax grene and beutiful.Demosnes. The No∣ble Orator Demostenes was wōt to say that he was greatly ashamed of his smal
study, when he considered the great pai∣nes, which artificers toke at Athens to get mony, and yt he was moued to more earnest studie therby. Haue not ye ouer∣seers of the house of Israell much more cause to be abashed for their great necli∣gēce? They folow not the Noble captay∣ne, which mustereth before he goeth to war, and chuseth out taul and able men, but they send al yt come, and refuse none, they esteme preaching often & diligently to be against their honour and dignitie, thei allure learned men from their cures and make them stewares of their lands. They geue them benefice vpon benefice, but they will not suffer them to come at their parishes to preach, to exhort to in∣struct. And this practise is custumable, not only in them, but in the most part of great men and women. For commonly thei take benefised men to be ther Chap∣laynes, and cause them to lye from their benefices, the which whē thei haue done a good whyll in theyr seruice, then they geue them another benefice for ther pay∣nes, and then cause them to ly from two benefices, and after from thre, and then from foure, and to put holy water swin∣gers
in ther roumes and cures. I speake not this against al Lordes and Bishops, but against vnpreaching prelates, & coui∣touse Lords, which find their chaplaines at the costes of pore parishes, and not of their owne lands. Well, the bloud of all soules yt perish for lacke of instructiō (my lords) shall fall on your heads, beware & amend betimes. Geue your chaplaynes sufficient wages, and pil not pore parish∣es. I accuse no man, euery mans cōciēce at the last day, befor the bar of ye terrible iudge, shall eyther deliuer & quit, or con∣dempne & cast him. But Pigghius repli∣eth further for Peters supremitie, becau∣se Christ sheweth him that Sathan desy∣red to sifte al the Apostles,Luke. 22 & biddeth him strengthen them, saying: Simon Simon, behold Sathan hath desyred to sifte you as it were wheat, but I haue prayed for the, that thy faith faile not, when thou art conuerted, strengthen thy brethren. Before trouble, Christ vseth to geue his Disciples warnyng, that they be not dis∣maied, mated, or discoraged, but armed with patience, as in telling them that he must go to Ierusalem,Math. 1 and be slayne of the high priests and lawyers, in shewing
them the destruction of Salomons tem¦ple and tokens of the latter daies.Math. 24. And wherfore he shewed them, he teacheth saying, but se that ye be not troubled & take hede, I haue told you before. In the mount Oliuet, he shewed them that all they shalbe offended by him the night fo¦lowing, as it was written: I wil smite ye shepeherd, and the shepe of the flock shal be scattred abrode. That which was said to them all in mount Oliuet,Math. 26 cha. 13 is spoken now seuerally vnto Peter, because he had more nede of warning then the rest, because he offended more, because he tru¦sted much in himself. Therfore Christ sayth, Simon, Simon, behold Sathan hath desired to sift you, but I haue praid for thee. The meaning of which wordes is: the deuil shal busely tempt you all at the time of my passion, and specially the Peter more then the rest, he shal not pre∣uail, for I haue praied for thee, trust not in thine own strength but in my praier, onles I had praied, thou shouldest haue bene the sonne of dampnation, and not haue repented. For it is writtē, the Lord tourned back and loked vpon Peter, & then he went out and wept bitterly.Luke. 22 He
denied hym once and wept not, for the Lord had not loked vpō him. He denied him again and wept not: for Christ dyd not yet loke vpon him. When he denied him the third time,How christ loked vpon Peter, cor∣porally or spiritually Christes loke moued him to lament his offence with abundāt teares. But there riseth a question, whe∣ther Christ loked vpon him with corpo∣ral eies, and admonished him visibly or not? If we read the Gospell diligently, we shal find, that Christ was in a cham∣ber within, and many about hym which spat in his face, & buffeted him with their fistes, and that the Apostle Peter was without in the haull, some time sitting, sometime standing at the fire with the seruauntes, as al the Euangelistes agre. Wherfore, Christ did not loke on hym with corporall eies: but as he loked vpō the lowe degre of his hand maid, that is to say: He did helpe him with his mercy, secretly: He touched his heart:Luke. . he visited him with his inward grace which cau∣sed him to poure forth outward teares. He biddeth him strengthē his brethren, when he is conuerted, not as head of thē but as a labourer in his vineyard: For these wordes, strengthē thy brethren, be
as much to say, as fede my shepe, preach ye glad tidings of ye gospel, which strēgth¦neth the sick soule as it is written: Man shal not liue by bread only,Math. 4 but by euery word that cometh out of the mouth of God. Dauid witnesseth, & experiēce tea∣cheth vs, that bread cōforteth, & strēgth∣neth the heart of man,Psal. 103 and yet the lyfe is more worth then bread, & the body more of value then any meat.Math. 6 Wherfore these wordes giue no authoritie to him aboue the rest of the Apostles, but rather be a narration of his fal, thorow presumpciō, and of his rising again only by Christ. If Peter were head of the church, yet yt doth not stablish the Popes supremite, vnlesse he can shew Peters last wil, and lawful testament, wherin this is geuen him. I haue spoken this of the primay, partly bicause the Papistes, with subtil and crafty reasoning, and wrong leaue∣ning of the scriptures, allure the consciē∣ces of many into this damnable opiniō, partly also being occasioned of my mat∣ter, for he hath presumed many years to forgyue the synnes of such as wold giue hym money, to lose and to blesse them, & to curse and hold the synnes of them,
which were against his mind, according to S. Paules prophecying, he shal sit in the temple of God, and shew himself as God:2. Thess.  What is to sit in the tēple of God and boast him self as God: but to reigne in the consciences of men, and to take vpon him that which belongeth only to God? Now to make a brief rehearsal of this matter, there be four thinges neces∣sary to be knowen concerning remissd of sinnes. Who forgyueth the synne, wherfore or for whō, by whom, to whō. The scripture answereth these four que∣stions. We learne who forgiueth synne of it, saiyng: Who can forgiue synne, but God only.Marke. 2 And for whom we are pardo¦ned our misdedes, S. Paul teacheth vs, writing to his countreymen of Christ: For this cause is he mediatour of the new Testament, that through death, which chaunsed for redempcion of those transgressions that were in the first Te∣stament, they which were called,Hebre.  myght receaue the promise of eternall inheri∣taunce. And to the Romains: He which spared not his own sonne, but gaue him for vs al:Roma. 8 how will he not wt him giue vs al things also. If God giue vs al things
for Christes sake, we haue remission of our sinnes, also by him. By whō god for geueth, Christ telleth vs, saying: whose sinnes ye forgeue shalbe forgeuen, and whose ye holde shalbe holden,Ihon. 20 whiche words be spokē to ministers. Somtime he doth forgeue without the certificat of the minister, for he is not bound to his sa¦cramentes, but worketh what he will & how he will.Actes. 9. Paul after he had heard Christ speak, was sent to a minister, yet he was lightened frō aboue before Ana∣nias,Luke. 23 who layd handes on hym, knewe therof. The thief which hung on ye right hand, was straight caried into Paradise without any ceremony of ministration, which God hath ordeined for our infir∣mities, not that it is a necessary mean vnto him. Now he promiseth forgeue∣nes to all those which repent and intend to lead a new conuersation, and to make their bodies a liuely, holy, and accepta∣ble sacrifice nto him, as the cōming of Iohn the christener before our sauiour Christ teacheth vs, who began his prea∣ching at repentaunce,Luke. 3. saiyng: repent, for the kingdom of heauen is at hand. He baptised many in Bethabara beyōd Ior¦dan,
but they confessed their sinnes first. He reuiled the Phariseis and Saduces, and bad them do fruites worthy repen∣taunce. Christ also whē it was told hym that Herod had laid hands on Iohn, co∣ming to the coasts of Zabulon,Marke.  & Nep∣thalem begāne with thesame, & not only that, but he commaundeth his Apostles to begin with it, when he doth auctorise them to preach. He sendeth by and by af∣ter them other seuēty to preach thesame.Marke. 6 Math. 1 Luke. 9 Luke. 10 I would our magistrates were as dili∣gent in sending forth preachers: but they haue no leasure to muse of the common wealth, they ar so gredy of priuat welth. In the acts many being pricked in their hearts through Peters preaching,Actes. 2 aske him and the other Apostles, what they should do to achiue and get remission of their sinnes, and Peter aunswereth thē, saying: Repēt and be baptised euery one of you in the name of Iesus Christ, for remission of synnes. Of whiche textes & examples it is euident that God doeth not forgiue our synnes, pardon our tres∣passes, and wype out our misdedes and offences, vnlesse we haue an earnest pur∣pose & feruent mynd to crucifie our old
man, and to become new dowe & sweet bread, albeit the minister lay handes on vs an C. times. for he regardeth the hert, not the ceremony of ministration, sear∣ching the botome and ground of it, and trying the reines, rewarding euery man according to the fruit of his counsels. The .xviij. Chapter. ¶God only is almighty, & whether he can syn, die or lie, with other mo properties. THe next propertie belon∣ging to the maiestie of the Godhead, is that he is al¦mighty, and can do what him list in heauen & earth as the booke of wisdome telleth vs: Vnto thy almighty hand, that made the world of nought, or as other translate of a confused heape, it was not vnpossible to send among them a heape of beares or wood lions, or cruel beastes of a straunge kynd,Sapi. 11 such as ar vnknow∣en, spouting fire, or casting out of a smo∣king breath, and shoting horrible spar∣kes out of their eyes, whiche might not only destroy them with hurting, but all so kyl them with their horrible lokyng. Lyke as the smal thing, that the balaūce wayeth, so is the world before him, ye
as a drop of the morning dewe, that fal∣leth down vpon the earth, for he hath po¦wer of al thinges. The glorious and fa∣mous deliueraunce of Israel shewe hys hand to be almighty,Exod. 9 Roma. 9 Sapi. 16 Exod. 7. Exod. 8.9 Exo. 10.14 Exod. 16 Sapi. 16 his arm to be strōg and infinite, who raised vp Pharao for this only purpose, to shew his might on him, & that his name which his power & rightousnes might be declared through out al the world. He punished the vngod¦ly, that woulde not knowe hym, with straūge waters, hailes, raines, frogges, lice, flies, moren sores, grashoppers, thik darkenes. He drouned Pharao in the reed sea, and led his people through the middel therof, he fed them with aungels fode, and sent them bread from heauen. He toke away the heritage of kinges & gaue it them.Luke.  We read that the aungell answered the holy virgin Mary asking how she could conceiue, sithen she knew no mā, that ye powre of the highest shuld ouershadowe her, and that by the same power her cosin Elizabeth should haue a sonne in her age, for with God can no∣thing be vnpossible. Christ sayth it is ea∣sier for a great Came to go through the eie of a nedel▪Marke. 1 then for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heauen, notwithstā¦ding many riche mē haue entred thither as Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, king Da∣uid, the pacient man Iob, in the old Te∣stamēt: and Mathue, Zacheus and Io¦seph of Aramathie in the new. We may gather them, that God can easely cause a mighty camel to go thorow the eye of a fine nedle, wherfore al thinges be pos∣sible to him, as Iesus teacheth his disci∣ples, that with men to be impossible, but not with God, for with him all thinges are possible. Some deny him to be al∣mighty,Whether God can sin, or lye, or not. for he can not sinne, he can not lie, he can not be disceiued, he can not die. Ye rather he is almighty, because these thinges haue no stroke in him, which be infirmities not powers, & include a cer∣tain wekenes & feblenes, and no omnipo¦tencie. If he could ether sinne or die, or be deluded and lie, he wer not almighty, for he that sinneth, becommeth the ser∣uaunt of sinne. Remembre ye not sayth Paul that to whomsoeuer ye commit your selues as seruauntes to obey,Roma. 6 his seruauntes ye ar to whom ye obey, whe¦ther it be of sinne vnto death, or of obe∣dience vnto rightuousnes? Christ also
answereth the Iewes denying that they were bond: but Abrahams sede:Ihon.  verely I say vnto you, whosoeuer cōmitteth syn, is the seruaunt of sinne. S. Augustin a noble member of the christian congrega¦tion saith:Austen. Magna dei potentia est non posse mētiri, It is a great power of God, yt he can not lie. The same may be sayd of de∣ceauing, of al sinne, of dying, the which can not be in God, because he is almigh¦ty. Other reply that we can doe many thinges, whiche the deitie can not: As walke, speake, eate, and drinke, to which I aunswer, that albeit God by himself, do not these thinges, yet he worketh thē al in his creatures: For he maketh them to walke, speake, eate, and drinke. If he should do these thinges in his owne na∣ture, he should be lyke vnto man, and so not almighty. Christ telleth a mā, whose sonne was vexed with a domme spirit, yt al thinges are possible to hym that bele∣ueth: much more al thinges are possible vnto God. But thou wilt say: If I be∣leue, nothing is impossible vnto me, thē only God is not almighty.Marke.  Nothing is impossible vnto beleuers, notwithstan∣ding they be not almighty, because they
can do nothing of themselues, which  an infirmitie, and no almightines, but liue, moue, and be in him S. Paul in his letter vnto the Philip.Philip. 4 saieth that he can both cast doun himself, & excede, be hun∣gry, & suffre nede, yea, yt he cā do al thing but thorow ye help of Christ, which strē∣theneth him without whō we can do no¦thing. Wherfore, Christ is almighty, & therfore God by nature, not by nūcupa¦tion only,Ihon. 15 We read in Paul to the Heb. Impossibile est eos qui semel. &c.Hebr. 6 That it is impossible, yt thei which wer once light∣ned, & haue tasted of ye heuēly gift, & were become partakers of ye holy ghost. &c. If they fal, shuld be renued again vnto repē¦tance, crucifiyng vnto thēselues again ye son of God,Against ye Anabapt. & making a mock of him. If this be impossible, wher is gods almigh¦ty hand & omnipotēt arme? Impossible, in this text is not to be taken for yt which can not be or come to pas, but for that which seldome and very hardly is done: for Paul speaketh the very same thing again straight way in a similitude, that the earth, whch drinketh in ye raine that cometh oft vpon it, and bryngeth forth earbs conuenient for them that dresse
it, receiueth blessing of God, but that the ground which beareth thornes and bry∣ers, is reproued, and nigh vnto cursing. The barren ground here whiche resem∣bleth man, with thornes and thistles, re∣sembling sinne, is not all ready accur∣sed, but rebuked, and nigh vnto cursing▪ so the man which falleth after he is ligh∣tened, is not without al possibilitie of a∣mendement, but in great perill of dam∣nation. For as the barren groūd bering thornes & thistles may become fruitful, so such one may be renued & rise againe. Me thīke Paul by this similitude which immediatly doth folow, sheweth what he meaneth by this worde impossible. Wey the similitude & the purpose why it is brought, & I thinke you wil not re∣fuse this interpretatiō. The disciples vse the same word in effect vnto Christ, as∣kyng him who can be saued? which is as much to say, as it is impossible for any to be saued. But he aunswereth thē, that with men it is impossible, but not with God: teaching vs ye rich mn haue hard accesse vnto heauen: & for these words,Marke. 1 wt men it is impossible, before he saith:Luke. 18 chil∣dren how hard is it for them that trust in
rychesse, to enter into the kingdome of God?Inpossible for harde. Wherfore it is not against the phrase of the scripture to cal ye impossible which is hard, and seldom. The Noua∣tians, Anabaptistes and Catharoi, abuse this place, to proue that all such as do fal after baptisme, can not rise again, but ar dampned, and not recouerable. I trust my exposition do more accord to ye truth then this dampnable assertion, against which, I think it necessary somwhat to speake: for I haue heard say that ther be many of this opinion in Englande, and partly I doe beleue it. After the trium∣phaunt deliueraūce of the Israelites out of Egipt, God ordeined two maner of offringes among them, one for synnes done of ignoraunce, an other for trespas¦ses done willingly, promising forgeui∣nes vnto both. If some Anabaptistes say that these were not done after baptisme,euit. 5.6 for the Israelites lacked baptisme, Paul answered him, saying: Brethren, I wold not ye should be ignoraunt of this, how our fathers were all vnder a cloud,. Cor. 10 and all passed through the sea, and were all baptised vnder Moises in the cloud, and in the sea. &c. Wherfore, after baptisme
God forgeueth sinne, done both of igno∣raunce, and also willingly. If he say that vnder the law suche might be restored, but not vnder grace, I would know of hym, whether the mercy of God be aug¦mented or diminished through the com∣ming of our sauiour Christ. Epiphanius, an auncient writer and of famouse me∣mory telleth that one Meletius an arch∣eretike,Epiph∣nius. spread this opinion ouer a great part of Egipt and Siria, and preuailed against Peter byshop of Alexādria, who was slaine afterward of the cruel tiraūt Maximine. But thankes be to God, there be innumerable examples, whiche notably confute & vanish it, and among all none more worthy, then one in the history of S. Ihon the beloued Apostle. Eusebius in his third booke and .xxiii. Chap. writeth of him,Hist. Ecc. L. 3 ca. 2 that he turned maruelously a certain yong man from stealing vnto Christ, whiche had fallen from Christ to stealing.Gene. 37 Gene. 35 Gene. 38 Nume. 27 2. Reg. 2 4. Reg. 2 Luke. 22▪ In the old Te∣stament the Patriarkes conspire the death of Ioseph and rise again. Ruben defileth his fathers bed, Iudas commit∣teth fornicatiō, Moises displeaseth God at the waters of strife, Dauid falleth into
aduoutrie,Actes. 8 2. cor. 2 Math. 28 Luke. 15 Manasses into Idolatrie, in the new, Peter denieth his master thrise, the Galathians folow another Gospell, and ar recouered by Paul, Peter exhor∣teth Simon Magus vnto amendment, Paule desireth the Corrinthiās to recei∣ue him againe whom he had excomuni∣cate, Christ byddeth vs forgeue our bre∣thren seuenty times seuen times, the an∣gels in heauen reioyce at the conuersion of a sinner. These examples and authori∣ties be very plaine against ye blasphemy of the Nouatians & Anabaptistes, which wold bring men vnto desperation & infi∣delitie. If they cleauing to this word im∣possible, refuse to take it for that which is hard, as it doth signifie often in the scrip¦tures, yet this place maketh nothing for their desperate opiniō, but rather destro∣yeth & vanquisheth it,Another in¦terpretatiō as ye circumstaunce of it declareth. For Paule denieth that he which is baptised, can be rechristened, so that these wordes, it is impossible that they should be renued again, be the same in effect, which he hath in an other place:Ephe. 4 One Lord, one faith, one baptime. And that it is so, and no otherwise, I wil proue with .iii. manifest reasons. One is
because as the words immediatly before do teach, he speaketh there,The first reason. of doctryne pertayning to ye beginning of a Christen man, as the foundation of repentaunce from dead workes, and of fayth toward God, and of the doctrine of baptisme, of laying on of handes, of resurrection and iudgement, and mounteth afterward vn¦to perfection, that is, toucheth Christes euerlasting priesthod, his death, and the disanulling of the law. By which words he teacheth vs, that he speaketh not of re¦pentaunce alone, but of the whole foun∣datiō of a christen man, which is baptim, and those thinges whych he doeth anex vnto baptim. For in ye primatiue church as this place & ther sheweth, men fyrst were moued vnto repentaunce▪ then vn∣to faith in Christ, then sealed with the sa∣crament of baptisme, then confirmed wt laying on of hands, and last of all certfi∣ed of the resurrectiō and generall iudge∣ment, and yt al, at the time of their christe∣ning. Nowe after yt he hath declared this maner of christnīg, & begīning of a christ∣en man, this form & fashiō of ye primatiue church, he saith incontinēt, that it is im∣possyble for such as fae after this ligh∣tening,
to be renued again vnto repen∣taunce. Who doth not se, considering what goeth before, and whi these words be brought in, that he speaketh of the whole order and forme of Baptisme, & denieth that this forme and fashion can be Iterate?The secōd Reason. My next reason is that he must nedes mean so, because ye text doth not say that it is impossible for such to re¦pent, but Rursus renouari, to be renued vnto repentaunce, requiring a renuyng with the repentaunce. What is to be re∣nued, then to be borne again, the whiche is done only by baptisme? We may re∣pent without baptisme before and after, but renued vnto repentaūce, we can not be without this noble sacrament. Wher¦fore S. Paul in this place forbidth al ite¦ration of baptisme, not of repentaunce. Thirdly it appereth to be so also of these wordes:The third. Rursum crucifigentes sibimet ipsis filium dei: Crucifying vnto them selues againg the sonne of God, and making a mock of him. For al such as wil be chri∣stened more than once,Roma.  crucifie Christ a∣gain in a figure, and scorne his death, as insufficient to take away their synnes. For baptisme is a figure of it, as s. Paul
witnesseth, saying: Remēber ye not that al we which be baptised in the name of Iesus Christ, are baptised to die with Christ. Wherfor, as Christ died but once making ful satisfactiō for sins: so baptis∣me is but once to be ministred, but they denie this also. If any man wold know the vse of the primatiue churche, in this poynt, Eusebius regestreth, that Alexan¦der byshop of Alexandria,Hist. Eccl. li. 10. ca. 14▪ calling a coū∣sel of learned men, enacted that all those which Athanasius christened in the way of pastime, being chosen byshop,Athanas. by a cō¦pany of laddes, and being but a boy him self, ought not to be rechristened. The A∣nabaptistes alledge the .ix. of the Actes, where it is written, that Paul findyng certen disciples at Ephesus, whiche had not receiued the holy ghost, baptised thē again in the name of the Lord Iesu. Pau¦les baptising in this place is nothīg but geuing the holy ghost by laying on of hands, as the text expoūdeth it self.Actes. 1 For first Paul is said to baptise them in the name of Christ, and then these wordes according to the vse of scriptures be ex∣pounded with them whiche folow, that is: Paul laid handes vpon them and the
holy ghost came on them. If thou think that Baptisme can not be taken for ge∣uing of the holy Ghost, harken what Iohn the Baptist sayth of our Sauiour Christ,Math  and him self: I baptise you in wa∣ter in token of repentaunce, but he that commeth after me shal baptise you with the holy ghost and with fyre.Ihon. 4 Christ ne∣vr baptised any with water, and yet the scripture sayeth he baptised, because he gaue the holy ghost. In this significatiō Paul baptised them again in the name of Iesus Christ without all iteration of the sacrament. Melanthon taketh this place vnto the Hebr. which the late No∣uatians would wrest to maintein theyr opinion, to be of the synne against the holy ghost, out of which no man can rise for it is neuer forgeuen. Thou hast now gentle reader two interpretations of the terrible saying of S. Paul, folowe that which thou iudgest to be most true. But to retourne to our matter, may deny Gods omipotencie, because he can not reuoke that which is past. The Greek Poet saith. .
The power of God doth faile in nought, saue this: To make vndone that thing that once done is. Yes truly, God can do this if he wil, albeit we iudge contrary of his infinite might & power: but it shal neuer come so to passe, because it is to be supposed, that God neuer wyl that thing, to be vndon, which he hath once done. For he wor∣keth al thinges, and that without repen∣taunce. If he would that thing to be vn∣done, which is gone & past, or that word to be vnspoken, which is spoken, repen∣taunce shuld take place in him. Yet can he do it, albeit it be impossible vnto our vnderstanding. The infirmitie is in vs, which can not comprehēd such a power, such a maiestie, not in him. Through like infirmitie, the Heathen supposed there were many gods, because it semed to thē impossible for one to rule & gouerne all things. Therfore they deuided the gouer¦naunce of ye world betwene hre, geuing heauen & earth to Iupiter, ye seas to Nep∣tune, the low places & hel to Pluto. The craued plenty of corn of Ceres, riches of Plutus, wine of Bacch{us}, Luck in hūting
of Diana, good fortune in woing of Ve∣nus and Cupido, learning and vtteraūce of Mercury, and victory in battaile, of Minerua and Mars. Through like in∣firmitie, the Papistes brought in pilgri∣mages, dedicatiōs, praiyngs to saintes, thinking God ether not so able, or ls not so wylling and merciful to hear our requestes and accomplishe them. Some because they will rather deny his omni∣potencie, then confesse their own infir∣mitie, say that he is called omnipotent, because he can do whatsoeuer he wyll, & not all thinges. I had rather acknow∣ledge my infirmitie, then diminishe his omnipotencie. The .xix. Chapter. ¶God is defined out of his scriptures. THere be many other things also belonging only vnto ye deitie mēcioned in the scrip∣ture,Hebre. 6 as I am the Lorde thy God, whiche brought thee out of the land of Egipt, the house of bō∣dage and slauery,Deute. 5 & the name of the Lord is a strong castell, the rightuous flieth vnto it, and shalbe saued, and it is God that iustifieth. God worketh in vs both
he wyll and the dede,Prou. 18 Roma. 8 Philip. 2 Hebre. 13 1. Ihon. 1 1. Ihon. 4 Deut. 6.10 Math. 4 God is a consu∣ming fier. God is light, God is charitie, thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, & him only shalt thou serue, when I cal v∣pon the Lord, he heareth me: for nothing is to be honoured, called vpon, nothing heareth our praiers, nothing is charitie, light, consuming fier, nothing iustifieth and saueth ye rightuous, saue God only. The scriptur doth attribute these proper∣ties to no maner of creature. Hitherto le¦uing all superfluous questions, whiche haue rather curiosite, then profit, I haue applied my kynd of wryting to the ca∣pacities of the congregacion, of which ye most part be lay, & declared what God is, out of his most sacred and holy word, which is the only way leading vs to the knowledge of him, the only light illumi¦ning our darknesse, the only fier and hā∣mer that breaketh the hard stone,A hammer that is vanquisheth il doctrine, and confoūdeth al heresies. They which seke him with∣out it,Ierem. 23 not cōtent with ye holsome words of our Lord Iesus Christ, nor with the doctrine of Godlinesse,1. Tim. 6 go out of theyr way, walke in darknes, ouerwhelm thē selues with reasons of mans wisdome▪
learn always, & neuer can get the know∣ledge of hym, wast their braynes about vnprofitable questions & strife of words wheof spring enuy,2. Tim. 3 railinges, euill sur∣misings, vaine disputaciōs of men with corrupt myndes, & destitute of the truth. Wherfore,The Child as the child before he is born into the worlde, abideth in his mothers wombe, and taketh all nourishment of her, so we must learn what God is with in the boundes of his worde, not at ro∣uers, vntil he mercifully deliuer vs from this bondage, and out of the dungion of the body, and graunt vs to behold hym face to face. Now gathering a summe of my sayinges, I wyll define what God is, not that any perfect definition can be made of him (for he is vnsercheable) but for the capacities of the laytie, for whose sakes I write this, that they may behold him in a glas, and a shadow, who cā not be sene in this life perfectly. God is a spi¦rituall and pure substaunce or nature, immutable, inuisible, vnsearcheable, fyl∣lyng heauen and earth, ful of vnderstan¦ding, of truthe, and rightuousnesse, of mercy, of wysdom, of al maner of good∣nes, without beginning, without en∣ding,
not create, not made, and maker of al thinges, subiect to nothing, and go∣uerning al thinges, knowing al things, yea, euen the inward thoughtes, enten∣tes and heartes of men, forgeuing sinne, only to be honoured, called vpon, only hearing, iustifying and sauing vs, of an almighty arme and maiestie, the father vnbegotten, the sonne bgotten, the ho∣ly spirit proceading from them both. I haue declared before, all these thinges to be attributed vnto God in hys holy worde, and the scripture doeth not only not deny but eftsones graunt the same al, and euery one vnto Iesus Christ our sauiour, and to the holy ghost our com∣forter: as it shall appeare more euident∣ly hereafter. Whervpon it must nedes folow that both Christ is God, and the almighty conforter also by nature, & not by name only as thei of whō it is writtē Ego dixi, dii estis: I haue spoken you are Gods. The .xx. Chapter. ¶In what order he wil write of a persone. NOw seyng that I haue shew∣ed what God is, accordynge to the talent of my know∣ledge,
I thinke it conuenient vnto my matter, to declare what this word persō signifieth in this place, forasmuch as the signification therof is referred to diuerse things. And because many heretikes do mistake and wrongly expoūd this word in the glorious & blessed trinitie, as they know which haue read auncient chroni∣cles of times past. I wil first shew what a person is not, the which is easier, and with thesame that there be thre persons in ye supergloriouse deitie. For we must learne weightie & hard matters by fore∣knowledge of easy thinges. This done I wil shew what the word persone doth signifie in the godhed, then I wil applie the definitiō therof to Christ, and then I wyl referre the same to the holy comfor∣ter, I wil proue Christ to be a substaūce, and I wil fortifie the holy spirit to be a substaunce, and Christ to be vnconfoun∣ded, and the holy spirit to be vnconfoun∣ded. Finally I will portray & paint the thre persons, hat is the trinitie by corpo¦ral similitudes, whose nature in it self is ineffable and vnsearcheable. And albeit these thinges be profound and high mi∣steries, and as hard as they be necessary
and vnknowen and neuer yet disclosed in our mothers tonge, yet I wil so shape and order my oration and speache after such a homely & perceiuable fashion, as shalbe most mete & agreing to the capa∣citie of those that be simple. The .xxi. Chapter. ¶A persone is not a difference of vocation and office, and that the fathers of the old testament worshipped a Trinitie. THe Patripassiās & Sabel¦liās,Against ye Patripassi¦ans. & after them Phoi∣nus, & of late Seruetus, define a person to be a cer¦tain cōdition & differēce of office, as whē we say, Ros∣ius somtime susteined the persone of A∣chilles, & somtime of Blisses, or yt a king & a prophet be diuers persons. For as one man may represent ye person of Achil¦les & Vlisses, & nothing letteth, but one mā may be a king & a prophet, as Dauid was: so thei say that ye father is the son, & ye holy spirit also, & that they be not thre seueral persons. The story of Christes christening banisheth this opiniō,Math. 3 wher we se a notable difference of the thre per∣sons. The father soundeth these wordes:
this is my beloued son. The son is sene stāding in Iordan, ye holy ghost lighteth vpō him in ye likenes of a doue. If the fa∣ther, the son & the holy ghost, be thre na∣mes, & one thing: as of this heretical de∣finition of a person, it must nedes folow, then the father both soūdeth the forsayd words, was baptised of Ihō in ye famous riuer of Iordan, & appeared also in ye like¦nes of a doue. But this doctrine is con∣trary to the truth of the gospel. Wherfor a persone is not a differēce of office. Fur¦thermore, the Apostles are cōmaunded to christen, in the name of the father, the son,Math. 28 & the holy ghost. If the father be all thre, he is named thrife, & so it is Tautolo∣gia ociosa,Roma. 1 a folish and vain repeticiō. And this of S. Paul likewise: Grace be with you,2. Cor. 1 & peace from God our father, & frō the Lorde Iesus Christ, who vseth this maner of salutatiō in al his Epistles,Philip. 1 the which is vain & superfluous, if we credit this dampnable opinion. Hearken what he saith in an other place:Colloss. 1 Vnto vs there is but one God, whiche is the father, of whom are al things, and we in him, and one Lord Iesus Christ.1. Cor. 8. By whom are al thinges, & we by him. Doth not he teach
vs here, that there be two persons,Of whome By whom. one of the father, the other of the son, not con∣foūded together, and that these two per∣sons be but one God? Christ saith:Ihon. 7▪ My doctrine is not myne, but my fathers which sent me. Wherfore, he and his fa∣ther be seueral persons, & not one thing. Isaac was a figure of Christ:Gene. 22 Isaac.  Christ. For as A∣braham, at the cōmaundement of God, led him vnto his death: So Christ was sent of God, to be slayn for our sinnes. And Sampson likewise, & many others: but Abraham, Isaac, Manoad,Sampson Samp∣son, were seueral persones: wherfore, the father and Christ be not all one thing. But I wil speake of al the thre persons, of the glorious Trinitie. And forsomuch as many hold opinion, that they of the old Testament nether worshipped, ne knew any Trinitie, but honoured only an vnitie, and sought no further. I will fyrst begyn with the testimo∣nies of the olde Testament▪ that it may appeare that this doctrine was prea∣ched from the creation of the worlde. The begynning of the boke of genera∣tion teacheth vs,Genes.  that there be three se∣ueral persons, saying: In the begyn∣ninge
God created Heauen and earth: Where euidētlye by ye name of God the father, and by the beginning his sonne, by whome he made all thinges, are to be vnderstand.Ihon. 8 For who is the beginning, but Christ? who answereth the Iewes? asking what he was: I am ye beginning, which spake vnto you, and in whose be∣halfe Dauid speaketh in ye beginning of ye boke,Psal. 35 it is writē of me. After these words of the father & the sonne it foloweth im∣mediatly:Hebr. 10. The spirit of God was borne vpon the waters, the which is the thirde persō in ye gloriouse trinitie. Some take the spirite here, for the wynd blowing v∣pon the waters. If they examine the text diligently, they shall fynd ye wynd was yet vnmade, and that ye waters there do not signifie, that which we call water cō∣monly, but the confused heape, of which God formed all thinges. If God were not a trinitie, he wold not haue saide let vs make man to our similitude, & after our likenes▪ For these words (let vs, our similitude, our likenes) cannot be spoken of one person. Neither they which are spoken after the miserable captiuitie and faule of Adam: The Lord God saide lo,
Adam is become as one of vs, in know∣ledge of good and euill. But here thou wilt say,An obie∣tiō answe∣red. these Phrases proue not many personnes, for doth not the king say, we wil that this or that be done, and yet he is but one? Kinges and Emperours vse to say so, because they haue coūselloures commonly, whose prudent aduises they folowe: but of God, it is wrytten: Quis cognouit mentem Domini, aut quis illi fuit a consiliis? Who hath knowen the mind of the Lord? or who is his counselloure? And therfore he doth not say so, for lyke cōsideratiō,Pithag. but because yt as Pithagoras saith: He is Ternarius numerus, The third numbre, which cōnteineth al other num∣bres, both vnitie, euens, & oddes. Esayas teacheth vs the same,Esay.  where he saith that he saw the seraphins flacker from aboue and cry each one to other: Holy, Holy, Holy, is ye Lord of Hostes. By this word holy, thrise repeted, we are taught that there be thre persons and y the wordes folowing, the Lord of hostes not iterate, that there is but one Lord. I will proue the same, by the propertyes of the thre personnes. The Congregation con∣fesseth the father to be vnbegotten,Unbegotē. and
no heretyke can deny it, and the scriptu∣re telleth vs, that the son is begotten, to whome ye father saith: Thou art my son, this day I begat the:Begottē. Psal. 2 not that the father is elder then Christ: for as he was alwa∣yes a father, so he was neuer without a son, but begat him without time: also of my wombe before the mornyng star be∣gat I the.Psa. 109 God ye father hath no wombe or corporal form: but by his wombe, we must vnderstand his substaūce: as if he said, of my substaūce, of my owne nature I begat thee. If God the father begat Christ of his owne substaunce, which is immutable, howe could of the same sub∣staūce his mutable flesh be made, as our late Anabapt. defend? God begat God, and light begat light, as a man getteth a man, and a dog gettech a dog, for a man cannot get a dog. The holy ghost is ney∣ther called vnbegotten nor gotten. For if we cal him vnbegotten, we bring in .ii. fathers. If we name him begotten, we make .ii. Christs. He is said to prosede e∣qually from the father & from the son,Proceding as he is equally God, & equally almightye, to be honored equally and euery wheare equally. Peraduēture some wil requyre
profe out of the scripture of ye proseeding of the holy cōforter,Scriptur prouing ye proceding of the holy spirite. because we say that nothing is to be beleued vpon payne of dampdatiō, which is not in ye scriptures. For many do allege this processiō of the holy spirite for vnwritten verities, ther∣fore I say I wil proue it by certaine test∣imonies, albeit I will not deny, but that many thinges be true verities, which be not in the scriptures, as it is true that I wrote this boke, & not written, it is true that king Edw. the .vi. God saue his no∣ble grace, is King of Englād, & vnwrittē But marke good christen people, when we disalow vnwrittē verities, we except such, and do speake only of such thinges, as be nedefull & necessary for the sauing of our soules. All such things we say, be written in Gods boke.Unwrittē verities. For Ihon sayth these are written yt ye myght beleue, and haue eternal life, if we obserue these thīgs we shal haue eternal life, & what cā we de¦sire more. Al such necessari points be wri∣tē. Away therfore wt vnwrittē verities. But how proue ye ye processiō of ye holy spirite bi scripture? That he procedeth frō ye father, christ techeth his disciples saing whē ye cōforter is come whom I wil send
vnto you from the father,Ihon. 15 he shall beare witnes of me. That he procedeth also of Christ, these. S. Paules wordes be a suf¦ficient record. If there be any man that hath not the spirite of Christ,Roma. 8 the same is none of his. For he can not be Christes spirit not proceding of him. He is ye ver∣tue,Luke. 6 which went out of him, and healed ye people of Ierusalem, of Tyre, and of Si∣don. Further our Sauiour Christ after his victorious and gloriouse resurrectiō, to teach vs that the holy ghost procea∣deth from him equally, as he doth from the father, breathed on his disciples and said,Ihon. 20 Luke. 24 receiue the holy ghost, and lo I send the promis of my father vpon you. If therfore the father be vnbegotten, ye son begotten not made, the holy comforter proceding, there be thre persons not cō∣founded together. The father is a spirit, and the sonne likewyse, and the father is holy, and the sonne likewise, but nother of both is the holy spirit, the holy ghost. He is an vnspeakeable communiō of the father and sonne also: therfore these two wordes be truly verified seuerally of thē both, but not together. If the holy ghost be the father, he sendeth him self that is he pro∣ceadeth
from himself. If he be the sonne, he is the son of the father, and of Christ also, for euery son is the son of twaine of the father & of the mother. But God for¦bid that we shuld imagin any such kind of thing in the father and Christ. If he be nether of both, he is a seueral person. No earthly man is able to discusse this natiuitie of Christ and procession of the holy ghost, after what maner both be done, for both be vnspeakeable as it is writtē: Who can declare his generatiō? Of the holy cōforter it may be said also,Esaie. 55 who can declare his proceding? wherfor we must eschue curious talking of these misteries, & stedfastly beleue because of ye scriptures. Christ saith: the father is grea¦ter then I. If he be greater,Ihon. 14 ether they be two seueral persons, or els the father is greater thē himself. Dauid witnesseth yt the father setteth Christ on his right hād The Lord sayd vnto my Lorde,Psal. 109 syt thou on my ryght hand, vntyll I make thyne ennemies thy fotestole. And that he syt∣teth there, we learne of saint Paul, who exhorteth vs to seeke those thynges,Colloss. 3 whiche are aboue where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Then ether
they be two persons or els the Father speaketh to hym selfe and sytteth on his owne ryght hand. The father heareth, and Christ prayeth,Iohn. xi. he blesseth & Christ geueth thankes, he commaundeth, and Christ obeyed,Iohn. xii. Iohn. xvii. Iohn xiiii. Iohn. vii. he teacheth and Christ learneth. For Christ recordeth thys of hymself, as my father taught me, so I speake. These properties learne vs that they be two persones vnconfounded, for so much as we can not apply or refer thē to one person. Abrahams vision. A Glasse.The visiō which appered to Abraham in the oke groue of Mambre, declareth vnto vs a manifest distintion of the god∣head, & yet not a Trinitie of Gods. For he sawe thre men, and yet he called them Lord, not Lordes. If that vision be pon∣dred depely,Gene. 18 it is a glasse wherin we may behold the face of the glorious trinitie. The maiestie & nature of God himselfe, for as those thre men were thre seuerall persons, and yet were named but one Lord, so the father, the son, and the holy ghost, be thre persons & one God. Som wil replie that Abraham spake to one of the thre, when he sayd Lord, whom he ac¦knowledged to be the chief, taking the
other for his ministers and seruauntes. This is proued to be false of that which foloweth: and the Lord went his way, as sone as he had left talkyng with Abra∣ham, and Abrahā returned to his place, and there went two aungels to Sodom at euen, and Lot sat at ye gate of the city. Lot calleth these two men after they had brought him without the citie, cōmaun∣ding him not to loke backward, Lorde not Lordes. Wherfore he whiche depar∣ted was not chief, & their Lord. If he had bene chief,Gene. 19 the scripture wold not name the twain, remaining Lord which in cal∣ling the twain Lord also, signifieth vnto vs, that there was no superiorite, no pre∣heminence, no prerogatiue among thē, but equalitie, as in the trinitie, whiche is figured by these thre men. Some wyll say, that Lot speaketh not to both, but to one of them. Why then doth the scrip∣ture say, Loth sayde vnto them, oh nay my Lord, behold for as much as thy ser∣uaunt hath found grace in thy syght. &c. These two men signifie Christ and the holy Ghost, not the father, for so much as they saye that the Lorde sent them to destroy that place. For Christ and the
holy comforter are sent, but the father is neuer sent, but sendeth: Notwithstāding he whiche departed before they came to Sodome, sending them twaine thyther, representeth the father of heauē, of whō Christ and the holy ghost both be sent. Now let vs se good christen people how this vision doth portrey or paint the Tri∣nitie. As thre men appeared, so there be three persones: As these three persones are named one Lorde, so the Trinitie is one Lorde, one GOD: As the Father is vnsent, so one of these is not sent, and as the father sēdeth Christ and the holy ghost into this world, so here twayne be sent of one vnto Sodome and Gomor: as the twain which were sent are called one Lorde, so Christ and the holy ghost are but one god. Protogenes neuer pain¦ted Ialisus at Rodes so excellently, nor Appelles, Venus, nor Policletus, ye ima∣ge of Doriphorus, as this vision doth li∣uely declare ye properties of the glorious Trinitie,Roma. 11 of which, thorow whiche, & for which, al thinges are. But let vs serche how the scripture vseth to speake of the Trinitie.1. Ihon. 5 Iohn saith: Ther ar thre, which beare recorde on earth, the spirite, water and bloud, and these thre are one. The tri¦nitie
is signified by these thre.Spirite▪ The spirit is ye father, for Christ calleth him so spea∣king of the true worshipping: God is a spirit. And by ye name of bloud, we may vnderstand Christ,Bloud. who for our sakes is become flesh, and bloud. By the name of water the holy ghost is ment,Water. whome our sauiour Christ calleth water, saying: If any man thirst, let him come vnto me  drink.Ihon. 4▪ He yt beleueth on me (saith ye scrip¦ture) out of his belly shal flow streames of water of life. This spake he,Iho. 7 Ihon. 1 1. Cor. 1 Christ. Dore. Rocke. Uyne. Bread. Brydegro∣me. Kyng. Phisition. Ihon. 6 Luke. 11 Ihon. 3 Spirite. Fier. Fing¦er. Math. 3 Exod. 8 Luke. 11 Hebre▪  saith Ihō the Euāgelist, of ye spirit, which they that beleued on him, should receiue. Wher∣fore as a spirit is not bloud, ne water, no more is the father, the sonne, or the holy ghost; but a distinct person. Christ is na∣med also a dore, a rocke, a vine, bread, a bridegrome, a kyng, a Phisicion, and his father a husbandman. If the father be Christ he is the dore, the rock, the vy∣ne, yea rather as a husbandman and a vine be diuerse thinges, so Christ is not the father. The holy comforter is called fyer which all be diuers thynges from those often times, and the finger of God and the oyle of gladnes, and anoynting, that figuratly be spoken of the father.
But my thinke I hear some suttell sear∣ching and craftie witted man replie, that as Christ and the vine, the dore, the rock be diuers names of one thynge,1. Ihon. 2 and the holy ghost, and oyl▪ and fier, and annoin¦ting,An obiect. answered. that so ye father, the son, and the ho∣ly ghost, be thre names and one thyng, and that the father is called by these na∣mes, as he is called afore by the name of a husbandman. This were somwhat, if we had euident Scripture that the Fa∣ther is Christ, or the holy Ghost, as we haue that he is a husbandman: And so we haue say they. For Christ sayeth: I and my father are one,Ihon. 10 Ihon. 14 and whosoeuer seeth me, seeth my father. These textes plucke vp thys opinion by the rootes: For in that he sayth (we are) he teacheth vs,We are that he and his father be not one per¦sone. For as muche as (are) can not be spoken of one persone. And in that he sayth (one) he declareth that he is of the selfsame substaūce.One. O the depenesse and exceading power of Gods word, which with two sillables (are and one) confoū∣deth two heretikes,Howe the father is seen in Christ. the Arrian, and Pa∣tripassion. The other text declaring the father to be sene in Christ, doth not pro∣ue
theim one persone, but rather twayn, teaching vs that whiche S. Paul wry∣teth to his countreimen: that he is the brightnesse of the fathers glory, and ex∣presse image of his substaunce.A glasse. Hebre. 1. When men loke in a glasse, & behold their own faces, they vse to say, that they see them selues, and they and that which they see, be not al one. When they se the picture of Christ in a painted cloth, they say thei se Christ. If we se Christ in his picture, if we se our selues in a glasse, much more the father is sene in Christ who is no coū¦terfet, but the bryghtnes of the euerla∣sting lyght, the vndefiled mirrour of Gods maiestie, the liuely image of the fathers substaūce. And for asmuch as he is the image of the father,Sapien. 7 he is not one personne with hym, no more then the Image of your personne is your selfe, or the image of my father William Hut¦chynson is my father, or the Image of our noble kyng Edward the .vi. is the kyng. God graunt that vertue & know∣ledge may mete in his roial heart, to the cōfusion of euil doers, & heretikes. They be .ii. persons, not .ii. gods. For ye kinges Image is called the kyng, and yet they
be not two kings S. Iohn speaketh af∣ter the same maner of all thre together: there are thre which bear record in hea∣uen,1. Ihon. 5 the father, the worde, and the holy ghost, & these thre are one. Doth he not teache vs plainly that God is a trinitie? Thus to conclude this chapter, if the fa∣ther be both the sonne & the holy ghost, he toke our nature vpon hym, he was tempted of the deuil, he suffred hunger & thirst, he was buffeted and scourged of the Iewes, and put to death cruelly, and he also came downe in the lykenes of a doue, and in the similitude of fyrie ton∣gues, he begat himself, he sent himself, he graunted himself a seate of the right hād of himself, he is an Image, he is greater then himself, he is God to himself. If he can not be these thinges, we may easely perceiue, that he and his sonne, and the spirit be distinct and vnconfounded per∣sons, and that this worde persone in the glorious trinitie doth not signifie a diffe∣rence of vocation. The .xxij. Chapter. ¶A persone is no outward thing, & what a persone is in the Godhed, & why the churche hath vsed this word, concerning God.
THis word also is vsed for all suche thynges, as doe cause fauour, parcialitie, regard, and frendship, or anger, hatred, displeasur, enmitie, both in the old & new Testamēt, as for riches, authoritie, office, countrey, beautie and pouertie, bondage, scarcitie, deformitie. After this signification and acception, king Iosa∣phat a worthy prince, an earnest promo∣ter of godlines and learning, witnesseth that with God ther is no vnrightuous∣nes, no regarding of persones.2. Para. 1 S. Paul also telleth the Gallathians, that he loketh on no mans persone,Galath. 3 and that wt out parcialitie he regardeth both Iewe and gentil, bond and fre, man & woman.Roma. 3 And Iames biddeth vs to auoid such cō∣sideration and regard.Iacob. 2 But in the glori∣ouse trinitie a persone is nether any out∣ward thing, nether any condition or dif∣ference of vocation, but as we may ga∣ther of the scriptures, & as mē learned in thē teach, a persone in the Trinitie is an vnconfounded substaūce,Parsone. or as other de∣fine with many wordes: A persone is a singuler substaunce, indiuisible, not con∣foūded,
declaring vnto vs a distinctiō of the godhead,Why this word is v∣sed in the Godhead. & not a trinitie of Gods. I suppose it necessary for ye vnderstanding of this definitiō to declare for what cōsi∣deration & skil the faithful congregation hath euermore vsed this word. For as much as ye scripture teacheth vs & our be¦lief telleth vs, yt god is thre, thei thought it necessary to declare what thre God is, who is not thre fathers, for nether Christ is the father, nor ye holy cōforter, nor thre sonnes, for ye father is not the son, nor the holy ghoste, nor thre holy comforters. Then what thre is God? Hear an exam∣ple, whē we sai Sydrack is not Mysak, nor Misack Abdenago, we graunt they be .iii. but if we wil know what .iii. they be, we must find out a more general word, that is .iii. men. Likewise Mary, our sauiour Christs mother, & Mary Magdalene, & Mary of Iames be .iii. & if we be further demaūded what thre they be, we answer with general word, that they be .iii. wo∣men. Euen so ye congregatiō answereth this questiō, what thre is God? with this general word person, to declare yt ther is a destinctiō betwene Christ & his father,  the holy spirit. For a person is a gene∣ral
word belōging also vnto men, for as much as one man is a substaūce vncon∣founded with another: as Abraham is not Isaac, & he is not Iacob, ne Iacob is Abrahā. But here we must ote, that as Abrahā, Isaac, & Iacob ar one sustaunce touching mans nature, yt so God albeit he be .iii. persōs, yet he is not .iii. substaū∣ces, but only one substaūce. If ther be .iii substaūces, ther be thre Gods. Som clat¦er & prate yt no such wordes as substaūce & persone, be found in gods boke, & ther∣fore that thei be not to be vsed cōcerning God. What if I shew & find thē in gods boke, in the Bible boke, wilt thou then vse thē? I wil shew this first, after I wyl proue that the meaning of these wordes may be gatherd of infinit textes of scrip∣ture. Thirdly & finally concerning this treatise, of a persone I wil paint the Tri∣nitie by corporall similitude, whose na∣ture it self is ineffable and vncomprehen¦sible. We fynd the word substaunce spo∣ken of God in Pauls letter to the Israe¦lites:The word substaunce where he recordeth that our Saui∣our Christ is a liuely image of ye fathers substaunce.Hebre. 1 Also in his letters to the Co∣rinthiās he witnesseth that to God only
that belongeth,2. Cor. 1 which the Grecians call , the Latinistes est, saying: Non est in illo est & non, sed est in illo est. We may fynd in the same Apostle the word persō,The word person. in the foresaid cception and signification: for in his letter to the Collossiās, he wri∣teth of Christ:Colloss. 2 , in him, in Christ dwelleth all the fulnesse of ye god∣hed corporally, or bodily, that is, Christe is a diuine person.Corporaly Personaly For corporally in this place is asmuch to say, as that we call in the gloriouse Trinitie, personally, as the Greke word  doth manifestly proue. We fynd also ye word , spokē of the godhead in the boke of the second lawe,Deute. 4 otherwise named Deuteronomie. Moyses exhorting the people vnto obe∣dience, and fulfilling the lawe, saith: The Lord spake vnto you out of fier, and you heard his voice, but you saw no Image. Where the latin texte of these words, ye sawe no Image, is Corpus non vidistis. For the Grecians, in whose language S. Paule did wryte this letter, at yt time vsed this worde , for that which we call nowe a persone, and as we say there be thre personnes, so they acknowleged
, thre bodies.3. Bodies. Therfore as  signifieth a person, so  must nedes signifie personally. But because many heretiks racked this word to pro∣ue ye thre persons to be of corporall form and shape, the successors of the Apostles, were constrayned to vse another worde for the same meaninge, and so they vsed for it , which word continued in vse many yeares. But nowe also this word is not vsed, for asmuch as some he∣ritiks wold proue by it, that God is thre substaunces. For which considerations the Grecians of more latter time vse for it, the word persone, saying, there be  in the same meaning and vnder¦standing, in which thei of more auncient time confessed:  or : This is ye doctrine of the Apstles, ye cōfessiō of Martirs, ye catholike churh, and generall faith of the congregation. The .xxiii. Chapter. ¶That Christ is a substaunce. NOwe I wil proue, that the scripture graunteth vnto Christ, & to the holy ghoste ye meaning of these words substaunce, & persone, that
is that Christ is an vncōfoūded substāce, and the holy ghost likewyse: and fyrste I will proue that Christ is a substaunce, and afterward that they be vnconfoun∣ded, and so it shalbe sufficiently declared that God is thre. For a persones an vn∣cōfoūded substaūce: ye worde or thought of man is no substaūce, but a transitory thing.Ihon. 1 But Ihon recordeth that Christe is the word of the father, howe then can he be a substaūce?Samosat. Tharch heretike Sa∣mosaten made this argument, who also denieth the thre persons saying, that the father is Christ, and the holi ghost both. To him I make this answere: S. Ihon in the same place telleth vs, that Christe who is the word, is God, and that God is a substaunce. I haue proued before in my treatise, what God is: wherfor we must nedes graunt that Christ is a sub∣staunce, or els deny him to be God. Tell me Samosaten what thou beleuest of the Father? Is the Father a substaū∣ce or not? Both Photine, and Seruete, thy adherēts graūt this. Thou sayst also that Christ is the father. Doest thou not confesse him to be a substaunce, in yt thou saiest he is the father? Againe, in denieng
him to be a substaūce, doest thou not de∣ny him to be the father, for the father is a substaunce? Thy owne sayinges proue Christ to be a substaunce, and not to be ye father. If he be the father as thou graun¦test, then is he a substaunce. I graunt the somuch, but I deny that, of which thi as∣sertion proueth him a substaūce. For no man is his word, no mā is his owne tho∣ught: but Christ is the word & thought of the father,Gene. 4 wherfore he is not ye father nomore then the words of Ioseph to his brethren are Ioseph himselfe. S. Ihon witnesseth, that ye word which is Christ, is not a transitory word, a soūding word comming from the lightes, but by a me∣taphor. But an euerlasting word,Iohn. 1▪ by which all things were creat, things that are in heauen, and thinges yt are in earth, thinges visible & inuisible, whether they be maiestie or lordship, either rule or po∣wer, saying, all were made by it,Colloss. 1 and no∣thing without it. He sayth also that this word is God. It vpholdeth things, dis∣poseth all things, gouerneth all: wher∣fore it is a substaūce, for these things can not be aplied to ani thīg which is no sub∣staū: & if so be it be substāce, thē christ is a substaūce, for christ is ye word. Christ is figured
in the scripture by diuers thinges.Fygure of Christ. Abra∣ham and Isaac were figures of him, and the wether which was slaine for Isaac, ye stone which Iacob anointed,Gene. 22 the ladder, Ioseph sold into Egipt, Moises rod, Io¦sue,Gene. 28 Sampson, the brasen serpēt, a cluster of grapes, be figures of him, which al be substaūces, & is he himself no substaūce? We read not in holy writ that substaū∣ces,Gene. 37 and no substaunces be likened and compared together. The scripture bea∣reth record of him,Exod. 7 Nume. 21 Nume. 13 yt he is no dead image of the father, for he is life and resurreciō: nether a dum image, for he is the fathers word: Nor insensible, for he is wisdome: nor counterfait,Ihon. 12 for he is truth, but a ly∣uely and expresse image, & therfore a sub¦staunce,Ihon. 1 forsomuch as all liuing thinges be substaūces. He answereth the Iewes reuiling him,Ihon. 14 that he said Abraham had sene his daies: Verely verely I say vnto you,Ihon. 8 er Abraham was borne, I am, by which wordes we learne not only that he is a substaūce, but also that he is both God and man. God, because nothing is saue only God, and man, forasmuch as in mans flesh he spake. Moises saith of him, he that is did send me vnto you: for
the son sent him.Exod. 3 The son did shewe him self in the likenes of fier, the son went be∣fore the Israelites, by day in a pyller of a cloude, and by nyght in a pyller of fyre. He caried them to the land of pro∣mis, he appeared vnto them in many li∣kenesses and similitudes, his workman∣ship gouerned the world from the begin¦ning, as his answer teacheth vs vnto the Iewes accusing hym for healing a cer∣tain man on the sabboth day:Ihon. 5 my father worketh hitherto and I worke. As if he should say: why blame you me for wor∣king on ye saboth day, who neuer ceased to worke? If ye blame me, blame also mi father, who worketh hitherto. If ye can not iustly accuse hym, ye can not iustly blame me, for I and my father are one. Whatsoeuer he doth, that doth the son also,Ihon. 10 he ruleth al thinges from the begin¦ning and so do I. He worketh hitherto & I worke hitherto. Our sauiour Christ teacheth vs here, that he is licensed to worke on the sabboth day by the exam∣ple of his father, who worketh continu∣ally, and that the commaundementes of the sabbatticall rest belonge nothing vn∣to him working inseperably with his fa∣ther:
And also that he gouerneth all thinges with the father, and is not idle, condempning and cōtroulling the dam∣nable opinion of the Arrians and Paul∣lians. It is nedeles to speake any further of this thyng. The .xxiiij. Chapter. ¶That the holy spirite is a substaunce not a Godly inspiration, he is euery where, gouernour of the world, to be praied vnto a forgiuer of synne. BVt touching the holy con¦forter many doubt whe∣ther he be a substaunce or not. The Saduces and Li¦bertines say,Against ye libertines. that all the spirites and aungels are no substaunces, but inspirations, affec∣tions, and qualities: That good angels, are good affections, Godly motions, which God worketh in vs, and that dy∣uels and euil aungels are beastly affec∣tions, euil thoughts coming of the flesh. Therfore I thynke it agreable vnto my matter, to proue ye holy spirit to be a sub∣staunce, for vnlesse he be so, he can not be the third person in the ouerglorious Tri¦nitie.Sapien. 1 The boke of wisdom witnesseth, yt
the spirit of the Lord filleth the round cō¦pas of the world.The spirit is euery where. We can go no whither frō this spirit, we can not auoyd his pre∣sence, we can not flie from him, but by flying vnto him, we can not escape his rightuousnes,Psal. 138 but by appealing to his mercy, for ther as he is not by his fauor and grace, he is by his wrath & displesur where he is not a bene factor he is a pu∣nisher, wher he is not a dweller, he is an auenger. Who can deny him to be a sub∣staūce, who filleth ye world, & not ye world only but Christ also the only sauiour of ye world, of whō it was written:Luke. 4 Iesus full of the holy ghost returned from Iordā. If he fil the world, he is God, for this be∣longeth only God as I haue proued be∣fore. If he be God, thē is he a substaunce not an inspiraciō cōming from God as our english Saduces, & outlandish Liber¦tins do teach.Esay. 63 The Prophet Esay recor∣deth yt he gouerned the cōgregatiō of the Israelits, yt he was their deliuerer out of Egipt, their guid in ye wildernes, ye wor∣ker of wonders saying: where is he,Gouerner of ye world. who brought thē frō ye water of ye sea as a shep¦herd doth his flock? where is he which ed Moises by the right hand wt his glo∣rious
arme? Where is he that led them in the depe as an horse is led in the plain and he answereth: The spirit of the Lord led thē as a tame beast goeth in the field. He gouerneth also the present congrega¦tion,Ihon. 14 for Christ promiseth, that he would pray the father to send vs another com∣forter to abide wt vs for euer. And Paul testifieth that the spirit geueth to one vt∣teraunce of wisdome,1. Cor. 12 to an other fayth, to an other giftes of healyng, to another power to doe miracles, to another pro∣phecy, to another iudgement of spirites, to another diuerse tōgues, to another in¦terpretacion, which be necessary offices in the congregation, so that the holy spi∣rit may say also: The father worketh hy∣therto & so do I, for he workth insepera∣bly with the father and the son. Wher∣of it must neades folow, that he is a sub∣staunce, and that he is God, for the go∣uernaunce of the world belongeth to the maiestie of the Godhead, as I haue pro¦ued before. If he were nothing but a Godly motion, a good affection, and in∣spiration,Math. 3 he would not ne coulde haue shewed himselfe in the likenes of a doue, and in the similitude of fyrie tongues.Actes. 2
He is the fynger of God, he is fyre, oyle, anoynting, water, an aduocate, a cole,Exod. 8 Luke. 11 Hebre.  1. Ihon.  for all these the scripture geueth hym. Wherfore he is a substaunce, forasmuch as al these be substaunces, not inspira∣tions. For the scripture doth not lyken substaunces, to thinges that be no sub∣staunces. He is also to be prayed vnto, to be called vpon, for what is baptisme:To be pra∣yed vnto. Ihon. 8 but an inuocation of the father, the sonne, & the holy spirit, and therfore a substaūce. No man prayeth vnto an inspiration, no man crieth to an affection. Our praying vnto hym proueth hym to heare vs,Esay. 6 to be almighty God, to be euery where to know the thoughtes of all men, but no∣thing heareth, nothing searcheth thou∣ghtes, but a substaunce, then he can not be a thought, a motion comming from God, yea, rather these properties proue hym to be the third persone in the ouer gloriouse deite. That comforter sayeth Christ the holy ghost whom my father wyl send in my name,Ihon. 14 he shall teach you all. If he be a teacher, he must nedes be a substaunce. If he be an inspiration, he is the doctrine, which is taught, not the tea¦cher therof.Luke. 9 He gaue Symon an auns∣wer
that he shuld not se death, before he had sene the lord Christ. He through the mouth of Dauid spake before of Iudas.Actes. 1 He at Antioche cōmaundeth to seperate Barnabas & Paul to the worck,Actes. 13 wherun¦to he had called them. He forbiddeth thē to preach Gods word in Asia.Actes. 16 S. Luke of the actes telleth that he monished Philip to ioyne himself to the chariot of the gel∣ded man.Actes. 8 Do not these textes, proue him to gouerne the congregation? Doe they not witnes him to be mindfull of both, good and euil? Doe they not deny hym to be an inspiration coming from God? Do they not fortifie him to be a substāce to be ye third persone, to be God? S. Pe∣ter when he saith: holy mē of God spake by the inspiration of the holy ghost, put∣teth a plain difference betwene him & an inspiration, for he is not the inspiration, but the worker therof, the sender of it. Wherfore as the worckman is not hys worck, as Protogenes is not Ialysus, Appelles is not Venus,2. Peter. 1 the carpenter is not the house, no more is the holy spirite an inspiration.The spirit forgeueth sinne. He also forgeueth synne, maketh vs the sonnes of God, for we ar christened in his name, & that we should
beleue that ye holy spirit worketh in bap∣tisme, it pleased the almighty Trinitie yt he shuld notably appere at Christes bap¦tising.Math. 3 For this cōsideration the holy cō¦forter at that time shewed himself in the likenes of a doue. Doth any aungel for∣geue sinne, or Archaungel? No truly this belongeth to the father only, the sonne only, the holy ghost only. But me thin∣keth one replieth. Seraphin speketh vn∣to the Prophet Esay: Behold,Esay. 6 this hath touched thy mouth, and thine vnrightu∣ousnes is taken away, & thy sinne forgi∣uen. He saith not, I haue taken it away, but this, speaking of a hote cole taken from the alter with the tōgues, not chr∣coale, not seacoale, but the cole of the ho∣ly ghost, who may be wel called a coale, for he is fire.Iob. 26 The pacient man Iob tel∣leth vs, that almighty God garnished ye heauens with his spirit, & with his hand wounded the rebellious serpent, wt whō Dauid agreeth saying: By the word of the Lord were the heauens made,Psal. 31 and all the hostes of them, by the spirite of his mouth. Wherfore in ye worke of creatiō, Moises maketh relation of him,Gene. 1 telling vs that the spirit of God was born vpō
the waters. Basyl who for his great lear¦ning was surnamed Magnus, expoun∣deth this place of the holy ghost, & saith, that his predecessours toke it so: for the word spirit can not signifie wynd there, which was then not made. Was borne vpon the waters is no blowyng, but as much to say as he sat on the waters, for as the Hen sytting on her egs, hatcheth her yōg ones, so the holy ghost hatched al creatures, whiche there are called wa∣ters, as it is wrytten, when thou lettest thy spirit go fourth they are made, so yu renuest the face of the earth. Is the gar∣nisher of the heauens, maker of ye world, forgeuer of synnes, myndfull of the con∣gregation, no substaunce but a phanta∣sie, an imagination? And here I suppose it be agreable vnto my matter, to speake somwhat of al good aungels in general, and euyl spirites: for if I can proue them to be no motiōs, but substaunces, much more the holy comforter is a substaūce. But if it be beside our purpose, yet it shal be a profitable & necessary digression, for there be many late Libertines and late English Saduces, which wold teach out of scripture, that there is nether place of
rest, ne paine after this life, that hel is no¦thing els, but a tormenting and desperat conscience, and that a ioyful, quiet & me∣ry conscience is heauen, and that deuils ar euil thoughtes, & good aungels good thoughtes. First if this doctrine be true, we beleue in vaine the resurrectiō of our bodies, which is groūded of scripture,Resurrec∣tion. & nothing els: so yt if you beleue scripture, this is a false, pretensed, & damnable doc∣trine. If our bodies shal not ryse, then is Christ not risen, saith Paul,1. Cor. 15 & al preachīg is vanitie: but our bodies be dead throu∣gh ye syn of Adā, & shalbe raised through the rightuousnes of Christ Iesus. By a man came death of soul & body, and by a man cometh resurrection of soul & body. Were not many christen men baptysed ouer dead mens graues in the primatiue church, in token that the dead should rise againe? S. Paul in his .xv. Chapter to the Corinthians, the first letter, doth no∣thing els but confute this damnable opi¦nion of the Saduces denying the resur∣rection, which now the Libertines begin to renew. But our Saduces graūt the re¦surrection, they say we must rise frō syn, if we wil come to heaue, which is a mery
and ioyful conscience.2. sorts of resurrectiō from sinne from death There be two sor∣tes of resurrections expressed in Gods word, of which it is written: Lykewise as Christ was raised vp frō death by ye glo∣ry of the father: Euen so we also should walke in a new life. This new life is re∣surrection from sinne:Roma. 6 Christes raising is the other resurrection that is of the bo¦dy,Roma. 8 which began in Christ, the first fruits of the dead. For Paul saith: He that ray∣sed vp Christ from death,1. Cor. 15 shal quickē our mortal bodies: & in another place: it shall rise a spiritual body. Our Saduces, be∣cause they ether wil not, or can not per∣ceaue the difference betwene these two sortes of resurrection, which both are in scripture, graūt in words, & deny in dede both heauen & hel, both good aungels & il, defending al resurrection to be from sinne to vertue, frō vice to godlines, frō vnclennes to sanctifitation. Resurrection from sinne is but a figure of the other re∣surreccion. For Paul saith: Christ being once raised from death (not from synne,Roma. 6 who neuer sinned) dieth no more. Like∣wyse imagen ye also, that ye are dead cō¦cerning sinne, but are aliue to God. Thē it disanulleth not resurrection of bodies,
but fortifieth the same, forasmuche as if there be a shadow, there must nedes be a body. Now let vs search what the scri∣pture teacheth vs of good aungels & be∣leue them.Angels. For a scripture geuē by inspi∣ration of God, is profitable to teache, to control, to amend: and it is truth.2. Tim. 3 No mā can deny aungels to be creaturs, and al∣mighty Gods workmanship,Ihon. 17▪ as Paul witnesseth: He maketh his aungels spi∣rites, and his ministers flames of fyre.Hebre. 1 How then are they inspirations? Luke regestreth that at Christes birth a multi¦tude of heauenly souldiours (which wer angels) song glory to God on high,Luke. 2 Luke. 1 and peace in earth, and reioysing to men. Therfore they be no inspirations. Did an inspiration appeare to priest Zacha∣rie burning incēse in the temple? Did an inspiration shew him that Elizabeth his wife shuld beare him a sonne? Did an in∣spiration make him specheles? No truly, for the aungel telleth what he is saying: I am Gabriel that standeth in the syght of God, and am sent to speak vnto thee. In yt he saith I stand & I am sent, he decla¦reth that he is a substaūce. And if Gabri∣el be a substance, ye rest be also substāces.
They reioyse ouer euery sinner y• repen∣teth,Luke. 15 Math. 18 Psal. 91 Luke. 16 Math. 4 they behold the face of the father in heauen, they assist & beare vs vp in their hands, thei cari Lazarus into Abrahams bosome, they minister vnto Christ after his temptation, they deliuered ye law vn∣to the Israelites,Actes. 7 Math. 25 thei shal come to the ge¦nerall Iudgement with Christ, and after the resurrectiō, they shalbe made like vn∣to them.Math. 22 If they be inspirations, tell me how, speaking, singing, stāding, sēding, ioye, seing, punishing, handes, helpe, and infinite other things, which the scripture geueth to Angels, can be in an inspiratiō and without a substaunce. Me thinke this assercion hath affinitie with the doating opinion of transubstā∣tiation. For our Romanistes, although they more stubburnely, then truely, and more obstinately, then deuoutly defend, that no bread remaineth after the conse∣cration, yet they cannot deny, but that many accidents remaine, as the culloure of bread, the tast of bread, bredth, length, and other, the which cannot be in ye com∣fortable and swete flesh of Christ, wher∣fore either the substaūce of bread remay∣neth, or els we must sai with the papists,
that these things be without a substaūce, the which is as if we should say, there is sickenes, and there is helth, there is cold and heat, moisture & drith, but ther is no such thing as a body. An angel of ye Lord comforteth Agar ye Egiptian,Gene. 24 besyde the well of Seer, and commaūdeth her to re∣turne to her mistris. Abraham promiseth his seruaunt, that an Angel shall ayd and further him in his iourney. Iacob when he blesseth Ephraim & Manasses,Gene. 24 Gene. 4 pray∣eth yt the Angel of ye Lord, which had ben his succour at all times, might blesse and multiplie them. We read that an Angell gouerneth ye hostes of the Israelites, an Angel of the Lord killeth thousāds of the Assyrianes, Angelles certifie women of Christes resurrectiō,4. Reg. 19 Luke. 24 Actes. 1 Hebre.  and the disciples of his glorious returne. Wheafore they be no inspiratiōs, no mociōs cūming from God, but spiritual substaūces, and mini∣string spirites, sent to minister for their sakes, which shalbe heyrs of saluation. Now as I haue spoken of good Angels, so I thinke it no lesse nedefull somwhat to speake of euil Angels. For ther be ma∣ny late borne Saduces, which haue per∣swaded theyr owne wauering myndes,
and allure the consciences of others to y• to the foresaid opinion, that the deuill is nothing but Nolitum, or a filthy affecton of the flesh, and swaruing from honesty, vertue and godlines. I thinke such haue either already said in their harts: ther is no God, or yt they may as easely be bro∣ught thervnto, as Cherea was vnto Pam¦phila. Cherea durst not ieopard in his ow¦ne apparell, but fained himself to be ano∣teer. Euen so our late Saduces & Liber∣tines, will not reason these thinges stifly for disturbing ye cōmonwelth, or rather for losing their lyues. But it is to be fea∣red, that vnder the coloure of christians, they say they reason in the way of dispu∣tation, when they speake from ye bottom of their hearts. If any man winch at my wryting, he declareth yt he is a Saducie. If there be a God, as we most stedfastly must beleue, verely ther is a deuill also, & if ther be a deuill, there is no surer argu∣ment, no stronger profe, no playner eui∣dence, that ther is a God. Be not al euill angels spirits? Then ar they not sensual motiōs, but spiritual substaūces. But I will leaue argumēts, & call truth to wyt∣nesse, let vs aske the scripture what the
deuill is, let vs enquire of Peter & Paul, let the Prophets & the Euangelists testi¦fie. S. Peter saith,1. Peter.  that our aduersari the deuil walketh about like a roaring lion, seking whome he mak deuour. He com∣pareth him to a Lion, he walketh, he see∣keth. And the chosen vessell Paule,Eyhes. 6 war∣neth vs to put on ye armour of God, that we may stand stedfast against the crafty assaults of ye deuil, forasmuch as we wres∣tle noe against flesh & bloud, but against rule, against power, against worldly ru∣lere of the darkenesse of this world, aga∣inst spirituall wickednesse for heauenlye things. He maketh a difference betwene the deuill & his assaults, which be beastly affectiōs, saieng: against ye crafty assalts of the deuill, and he calleth them rulers, powers, wherfore thei be no fleshly mo∣tions. But you will say he calleth them spirituall wickednesses,Ihon. 1 a wickednesse is no substaūce. So Terence calleth Dauus, Scelus: Tully calleth Cateline Pestis, so the scripture caleth God loue, truth, and light, & il men darknes.Iob▪ 1 We read in ye sto∣ry of Iob, yt whē ye seruaūts of god came & stode before the Lord, Satan came also among them, & God talketh wt him, and he
aunswereth that he had walked through the land, and craueth of God to suffer him to scourge Iob, without whose lea∣ue he could do nothing. After he rayseth the Sabees against Iob, he kylleth his seruaunts, he slayeth his childrē, he smi∣teth him with marueilous sore byles, frō the sole of his fote vnto his croune, so yt he scraped away the filth of them with a potsherd. Did an affection worck these things, or a spiritual rule and substaūce? To deceiue wycked king Achab, he pro∣miseth that he wil be a liyng spirit,3. Reg. 22 in the mouth of .iiii.C. prophets, he vexeth kīg Saul,Reg. 16. Christ seeth him as lightning, fal∣ling doun from heauen, he blyndeth all those that beleue not the Gospel, he wor¦keth al iniquitie,Luke. 10 he seduced Adam and Eue, he is ye enemy which soweth tares to destroy the sede of euerlasting life,Math. 13 yt is, of Gods worde, he is the strong har∣nessed man, and spirituall Pharao ouer∣comē of our sauiour Christ,Luke. 11 he is the go∣uernour that ruleth in the aier, and king of this world,Ephes. 1 he setteth Christ on the pi∣nacle of the temple, and on a high moun¦tain, sheweth hym the glory of ye world, he buffeteth S. Paul,Math. 4 let he should be
exalted out of measure,2. Cor. 12 Iudas. 1 through the abū∣daunce of reuelations, he striueth wt Mi¦ghel the Archaungell, & disputeth about the body of Moises, he shal cast the faith¦ful congregation into pryson for .x. days he is the dragon cast out of heauē by the bloud of the lambe,Apoc. 2 and pursuing the wo¦man. Then he is no fleshly motiō, vnles our sauiour Christ had such beastly mo∣tions, vnlesse also heauē were ful of such which was ful of traiterous angels. In the countrey of the Gargasites two de∣uils seing christ, cried out, what haue we to do with thee. O Iesu son of God?Math. 8 art thou come hether to torment vs before ye time? And they besech him of leue to go into the herd of swine. Do affections cry talke, kil, smite, fall from heauen, tempt Christ, pursue the church? Christ telleth vs they shalbe punished in the fyre with the wicked, saying:Math. 2 depart from me ye cursed into euerlasting fyre which is pre¦pared for the deuyll and hys aungels. S. Peter sayeth that God spared not hys aungels that synned, but cast them downe into hell and delyuered them in to chaynes of darkenes,Peter. 2 to be kept vnto dampnation. Paull commaunded the
Corinthians to deliuer him which helde his fathers wife to Satā,. Cor. 1 for the destruc∣tiō of the flesh. He meaneth not that thei should giue him ouer to the lustes of the flesh, & suffer him to abide in vaine plea∣sures. Wherfore deuels ar no fleshly lu∣stes, carnal motions, sensuall affections. Deuels beleue & tremble saith Iames. They confesse Christ to be the sonne of God,Iacob. 2 Math. 8 as in the Euāgelists we may read more thē once or twise. But I think our Saduces wilbe edified more by a coniu∣rer, thē by the words of godlines, wher∣fore I send thē to cōiurers, sorcerers, en∣chaūters, charmers, witches, which wyl learn and perswade thē that there be de∣uils, and that they be not lustes of the flesh, but spirituall substaunces, & spirits created for vengeaunce, which now in ye end of the world shall powre out theyr strength,Eccle. 38 to plucke the Lambe of God out of the myndes of al men. If therfore al angels both good and euil be substaū∣ces, and not Godly or beastly lustes, much more God the holy ghost maker of al spirites, knower of thoughtes, go∣uernour of the church, forgeuer of syns, hatcher of ye creaturs, filler of al places, is a
spiritual substaunce & no inspiration. The .xxv. Chapter. ¶Christ is vnconfounded, why he became man, why he was borne of a woman, he toke both the soule and body of man, why he chose a virgin to be borne of, and why a virgin hand fasted and maried, why he was a babe at his beginning, not an able man, as Adam was at his first creation, why he came so long after Adams fal, why he was baptised, tempted, crucified. &c. NOw albeit both Christ be a substaunce and the holy ghost also, yet it doeth not folow, that thei be two per¦sons in the supergloriouse trinitie, for they may be both one, as the Sabellians do teache. Wherfore now I wil proue that they be vnconfounded, yt which being proued, no man can doube hereafter, but thei be two persones: for a persone is an vnconfounded substaunce. We may learne out of Gods boke, that nether the father, nor the holy comforter toke mans nature vpō them, but Christ only. For as through a natural man we were banyshed out of paradise,Whichrist became mā made the children of euerlasting damnation, so it pleased the almightie trinitie nether by
an aungel or Archaungel, but by a natu∣ral man to restore vs againe, & make vs heires to saluation,1. Cor. 15 as Paul witnesseth: by a man came death, & by a man com∣meth resurrection of the dead. For as by Adam al die, euē so by Christ al be made aliue. And the will of God was that he shuld be born of a woman. God sent his son.Math. 1 Galat. 4 Why hee was borne of a womā Factum ex muliere, borne or made of a woman. But why was Christ born of a woman? Truly because syn & death o∣uerflowed the world through ye first wo∣man, he worketh the misterie of life and rightuousnes by an other woman, yt the blame of sinne should not be imputed to his creature, which is good, but to ye will by which Eue sinned. For seing he is a sauiour both of men and women, he be∣cōmeth man, forsomuch as mā is the bet¦ter kind, yet he is borne of a womā, yt we shuld beleue him to be a sauiour of wo∣men also, so that his birth of a woman, & his becomming mā, declareth him to be mindful of both kindes. But here we must note that Christ toke mans nature vpon him, not by the turning of his god¦head into his manhead, but by assump∣ting of manhead vnto his godhead, not
by confusiō or mixture of substaūce, but by vnitie of person. For as the reasona∣ble soul & the fleshly body, is one man: so y• deitie & humanitie is one Christ. Whē I say Christ toke our nature vpō him,Christ toke both soule and bodye. I meane not yt he toke flesh only, as some heretikes haue thought, but the soull of man also, forsomuch as he is no halfe sa∣uiour, but a redemer of both. For he wit¦nesseth of himself: Tristis est anima mea,Marke. 14▪ Ihon. 10 my soull is sad vnto death: & I haue po∣wer to put my soul from me, & I haue po¦wer to take it again, no mā taketh it frō me. Dauid speaketh also in his behalfe, thou shalt not leue my soul in hel,Psalm. 1 nether shalt thou suffer thy saint to se corruptiō. Some are moued to thinke that Christ toke not mans soull vpon hym,An obiection aunswe¦red. but the body only, because his beloued disciple sayth, Verbum caro factum est, the worde was made flesh, makyng no mencion of a soul. S. Iohn sayeth,Ihon. 1 the word was made flesh, as Paul recordeth, that by the deades of the lawe no fleshe shall be iustified:Roma. 3 Galat. 3 The whiche in another place he sayth more plainly, through the lawe no man shall be iustified, vnderstanding by the worde fleshe, not the body only,
but the hole man both body & soul. This maner of speaking is often in the scrip∣ture,Psal. 64 for Dauid saith: thou hearest ye prai∣er, therfore al flesh cōmeth vnto thee, all flesh for al men. And note here a vehe∣mencie in the wordes (thou hearest) as if he shuld say: We pray to thee, for we do know that thou dost hear, but of other we know not that they hear, and therfor we only call on thy name. Thus did the olde Patriarkes, this was their fayth. We neuer read that they praied to any creature.Hiere. 7 And Ieremy curseth him that maketh flesh his arm, that is putteth his trust in man. And Iohn Baptist testifi∣fieth that al flesh shall se the sauiour sent of God. So Ihon the Euangelist saith, the worde was made fleshe,Luke. 3 as if he had said the word was made man, toke mās flesh and nature, which worde is Christ. I haue declared before,Againste ye late Anab. whi he is named a word, and what maner of word he is. But wherof was he made fleshe? Of what matter and stuffe was his huma∣nitie shapen? or did he bring it out of hea¦uen?Gene. 2 No truly. The first Adās flesh was formed of the earth, as it is writtē: then the Lord God shaped man of the mould
of the earth. And wherof the second A∣dams flesh was made the blessed apostle S. Paul telleth, saing: When the fulnes of time was expired, God sent his sonne Factum ex muliere,Galat. ▪ made or born of a wo∣man. He did not passe thorow her as wa¦ter gusheth thorow a pipe or condite, but toke part of her substaunce and nature. Wherfore ye Prophet Esay nameth him a flower or blossome cōming out of the rote of Iesse.Esay. 40 Canti. 2 Salomon nameth hym a Lily, & a Rose among thornes. Doth not euery floure take his nature of the body and stok, out of which it groweth? Doth not the Lily & Rose likewise? Are grapes gathered of thornes, or fygges of appell trees? Besides this it was nedefull, that thesame flesh shuld be punished on ye tre, which offended in eating of the fruit of the tree, that the same flesh shold be iusti∣fied & ryse in rightousnes, which died in synne and vnrightuousnes. For by a man, sayth Paul, came deh,1. Cor. 1 and by a man cometh resurreccion of the dead. And as by the disobedience of one man, many became dead: so by the obediēce of one man many be made aliue. Wy & cō¦sider the cōparison that Paul maketh be¦twene
the first Adam & the second Adam in the .v. to the Romains,Roma. 5 and it destroy∣eth this opinion vtterly. Besides, S. Paul saith that we be flesh of his flesh, & bones of his bones, speaking of Christ: Mēbra sumus de corpore eius,Ephesi. 5 de carne eius & de ossibus eius: We are mēbers of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. But how are we (good christen people) flesh of Christs flesh, except he be flesh of Ma¦ries flesh, and bones of Maries bones? Besides, he did suck his mother, & toke his norishment out of her swete brestes. For we read, that a certain womā came vnto him & said: Beatus venter qui te por∣tauit,Luke. 11 & vbera que suxisti: Happy is the wombe that bare the & the paps whiche gaue ye suck. Nether Christ, who is truth, doth not reproue her as a lyer: wherfore we must neds graūt that he toke his na∣ture, substaunce, manhod & flesh of her. I do touche this matter, because not lōg sith, I communed with a certain womā which denied this point, and when I & M. Whytehead, Thomas Leuer and others, alleadged this text against her o∣pinion: Semen mulieris conteret caput ser∣pentis: The sede of the woman shal grind
or breack the Serpentes head. She aun∣swered: I deny not that Christ is Ma∣ries sede or the womans sede, nor I de∣ny him not to be a man,An obiect. but Mary had two sedes, one sede of her faith, and ano∣ther sede of her flesh and in her body. There is a naturall and a corporall sede, and there is a spirituall and an heauenly sede, as we may gather of S. Ihō, wher he sayth: The sede of God remayneth in him, and he can not synne: And Christ is her sede,1. Ihon. 2 but he is become man of the sede of her faith and belief, of spirituall seede, not of naturall seede: for her sede and flesh was synful, as the flesh & sede of others.Thaūswe The sede which is promised vnto Adam is named to be Semen mulie∣ris, the sede of a woman, the same is the sede of Eue, the self same afterwarde is called the sede of Abraham, of Iacob, the sede of Dauid, and of the blessed Virgin. But the sede that S. Ihon speaketh of, is Semen Dei, the sede of God, that is, ye holy spirit, not Abrahams sede, Dauids sede, or Maries sede. How cā it be their sede which toke no substaunce of them? Further, thesame promise is renued vn∣to Abraham, Iacob, Dauid, and others
with al these special words,Gene. 22 Gene. 26 2. Reg. 7 1. Para. 2 Psal. 122 that of their wombes, of their bodies, of their fruit, of their bellies, of their loynes, of theyr flesh, the sauiour of ye world shalbe born, not of their fayth, of their belief. Wher∣fore it must nedes be a fleshly, a natural, and a corporal sede, of which Christ was made man, maugre the head of the deuil & al heretykes. He toke not, sayth Paul, on hym the angels, but the sede of Abra∣ham taketh he on him.Hebre. 2 Now ye spirituall sede is in aungels more plentifully, then in men, for so much as thei be not depres∣sed with the grosse lompe of the body. And that we shuld firmly beleue & sted∣fastly credit, Ex quibus Christus est secun∣dum carnem,Roma. 9 that he is of the fathers con∣cerning the flesh, S. Mathew & S. Luke reken his kinred fetch his stock and ge∣neration,Math. 1 Luke. 3 from Adam, Enok, Noe, Abra∣ham, Dauid, Salomon, Roboam, Zo∣robabel. &c. Moreouer, Christ came not only to dye fr our synnes, but also to be an ensample vnto vs, and a perfect pa∣tern of good lyuing, as shalbe declared afterward. Forsomuch thē as we be par¦takers of flesh & bloud, he also Participa∣uit eisdem,Hebre. 2 toke part with vs. If he toke
other flesh, not made of his mother, but of what matter it pleased him, he toke no part with vs, nether doeth his ensample belong vnto vs. He is our brother. For S. Paul saith, he is not ashamed to call thē brethrē, saying: I wil declare thy na∣me vnto my brethren. Now brethren be of one nature & substaūce touching their flesh and body. Therfor she that denieth Christ to haue taken his flesh of his mo∣ther, is not the sister of Christ, but the el∣dest & first borne doughter of Antichrist. Yet she pretended that she beleued that Christ was a true & natural man, but in dede she denieth his māhod: for if he had any manhod or humanitie (as no doubt he had) he had it vndoubtedly of his mo¦ther, or els he was no man. If he had it not of his mother, define & shew frō whē¦ce he had it. Yea, they say it is vnknowē and vndefined in the scripturs. How thē can we warrant Christes humanitie a∣gainst heretikes, if we make it vncertain wherof he toke it, and if it be vnknowen wherof it was shapen: But albeit he to∣ke fleshe of his mother, yet it was holy flesh, not synful flesh that he toke, for so much as it was cōceiued, and wrought
by the ouer shadowing of ye holy ghost.Why he was borne of a virgin Al be it the seed and flesh of other be sin∣full, yet hers was not so, but sanctified bi the holy spirite & most cleane: for to her it was said: Benedicta tu inter mulieres: Blessed art thou amongst women. He is Lapis de monte excisus sine manibus, com∣minuens. &c. The stone of which Daniell recordeth,Daniel. 2 that was cut out of ye hil with∣out hands, which hath & shal breake into pouder the goldē, siluer, brasen, and yron kingdmes, that is the .iiii. Monarchies and Empyres of the Caldies, and Babi∣lonians, of the Medies, and Persies, of the Macedonians & Grekes, and of he Romains. The hill out of the which this stone is taken, is the tribe & house of Iu∣da, which dwelt & was situate vpō moūt Sion in Ierusalem: and by the wordes (without hands) is ment that this stone, without mans seed, mans help & nature, came out of ye foresaid hil, in that he toke his flesh on no earthly father, but onelie of the substaunce of Marye his mother, of whose breastes the said flesh was nou∣rished afterward. Christ was conceaued of the holy ghost, not the father, who touching his huma∣nitie
hath no father vpon earth,Luke. 1 Math. 1 as con∣cerning his diuinitie he hath no mother in heauen. Further, he was borne of a Virgin, for somuch as Virginitie is a far more honorable thing then wedlocke. The blessed Virgin Credendo, non concum bendo grauida facta est,Esay. 7 was made fruitful by faith, not bi mans help, by the spirite, not by lechery. For it was seeming that the vnspotted lambe Iesus Christ,Math. 1 who shoulde blot oute our sinnes, as the fyer melteth the waxe, that he should be born without all originall sinne.Whye hee was borne of a virgin espoused & maried. Math. 1 Notwithstā∣ding was borne Ex Virgine desponsata, of a Virgin handfasted and maried, partly yt the yong Virgin shuld not be destitute of a helper, a keper, a nourysher in her aduersitie and trauayle, & her progresse into Egipte, partly also that none shuld recount wedlocke vnelean, or matrimo∣nie vn pure, forsomuch as he vouchsafed to be borne therin. Neither is it any dis∣honor, any defacing to ye diuine nature, that Christ who filleth all ye world, filled the wōbe of ye blessed virgin, no not if her flesh had bene sinful & vnsanctified.The God∣hed, is vn∣defileale. For his diuinitie is not defiled therbi no mo∣re then ye son shining vpō carrein & filthy
akes is dishonoured or defyled through their stinking sents, or rather much lesse for he made the sun. For the diuinitie is said to be vndefilable, not because it tou∣cheth no thing vnclean, but because it cō¦tinueth cleane, whatsoeuer it toucheth. Wherfore, he was not defyled with the Virgins womb, but sāctified it, halowed it with his presence, & made it most clean and chose himselfe a mother in earth, be∣cause before he had a father in heauē. If ani man think, because Christ was borne of the holy ghost,Christ is not the ho∣ly ghostes sonne. that he is ye holy ghost sonne, let him not be deceaued: for it is no sure reason, if any thing be born of an other, to make it straight the son therof, as for example:Ihon. 3 We are borne of water, and yet we are not the sonnes of water: we are borne of the holy ghost, & yet we are not the sonnes of the holy ghost, but the sonnes of our heauenly father. Also lice, heares, & lumbrykes are bred & gen∣dred of man▪ & yet no body calleth them the sonnes of man. Likewise many ar cal¦led the sons of some, and yet they cannot be said to be born of them, as Eschinus is son to Mitio, and yet not borne of him. And ye scripture calleth them,. Reg. 10 Filios Mor∣tis,
the sonnes of death,2. Reg. 1. Iudi. 19 1. Reg. 2 Ihon. 17 the sonnes Belli∣all, the children of the deuill, the children of sin & perdition, the sōnes of wrath, the sōnes of hel, which wer neuer born of it, but made vnto ignominie, and Filios di∣lectionis, ye sōnes of loue, ye sōnes of light,Psal. 8 of promise, of strength, of the kingdome, not borne of it, but such as shalbe felowe heyres with Christ, & are prepared for ye kingdom. So our sauiour Christ is said to be conceaued of ye holy comforter, and borne of him, & yet he is not his sōne, but thonli sōne of God ye father, vnto whom we be also sonnes:Colloss. 1 Ephes. 5 but we be the sons of promise, he is ye sōne begottē, we be sons through adoption, Christ is the sonne of God by nature, for asmuch as the scrip∣ture is, that he was cōceaued of the holy ghost, who being God became man. We cānot gather therof,Roma. 9 2. Reg. 2▪ Math. 8 yt he is Christes father: for touching his humane nature he was borne without a father, as touch¦ing his other nature he lacke a mother: but rather we may reason that he is his mother, for ye mother cōceaueth, not the father, and so he shall haue .ii. mothers, the whiche is vnpossible, wherfore he is the onlie sonne of God the father.
Math. 2But why is he borne a babe, & a litell one, not an able man as Adam was? A∣dam was made an able man, because he was made after the image of God, not in sinful flesh through any sinne of man. But his posteritie and of spring ar born babes,Why al mē be borne babes, nat able men. forasmuche as they are borne in sinful flesh, as Dauid witnesseth, saying: Ecce enim in iniquitatibus. &c. Beholde, saith Dauid, I was born in wickednes, and my mother conceaued me in synne. Vnreasonable beastes, as the calf the lit∣tle lambe, the whelpe, as sone as they ar borne can go, runne, fynde out their mo∣thers teates, and sucke them without a∣ny helpe of other: only man when he is borne, can nether ocupy his tongue in speaking, nor fete in going, nor his hāds to fynd, and except his mother or nourse thrust her breast vnto his lyps, he know∣eth not where they are, nor what to do, and would crie for hunger, yea, famyshe before he ould suck of his own accord. This infirmitie is in our bodies, when we be young, because Adam and Eue sinned when thei were old: forasmuch as then our mindes also be weake & blynd through thesame sinne, that the feblenes
of the body might be agreable to the ig∣noraunce of the minde.Gene. 3 For as both bo∣dy and soul sinned in eating the apple, ye mynd in lusting, the body in taking, so both are punished, the body with infir∣mitie, the mind with ignoraunce. Nowe our Sauiour Christ albeit he were not borne in sinful flesh, yet because he was not borne in the likenes of this synfull flesh, he was borne a babe, not of perfect bygnes, like Adam:Roma.  his flesh was not sin ful in dede, but holy and vndefiled, yet it semeth sinful in that he toke both this, & al other humane infirmities, as hunger,Gala. 4 thirst, cold, heate, pouertie, death vpon hym, which ouerflowed the world tho∣row sin. Misit deus filium suum, God sent his sonne. His comming is his incarna∣tion, and his sending lykewise. The fa∣ther is not sayd to come, or to be sent, be∣cause he was not incarnate. That the co∣myng and sending of Christ is to be ta∣ken of his incarnation,Christes cū¦ming or sē¦ding, wha it is. we may perceiue by this. For who cometh there wher he is alredy? Or who is sent thether? But Christ is euery wher touching his diuini¦tie, for he is the wisdome of the father, which reacheth from one end to another
mightily,Sapien. 8 and ordreth all thinges louing¦ly. Seing therfore he is euery where, how cometh he where he was not, by ap¦pearing in his humanitie? But it is a great question why God sent his sonne, Cum venit plenitudo temporis, in the ful∣nes of time,alat. 4 why he came no soner, but in the endes of the world. If he had com long before, many had ben saued which haue perished. For sith his incarnation many mo haue beleued him, then did in tyme past▪ for he is the light▪ shining in darknes.Whichrist came in the nd of the worlde. Truly he came, when he sawe his coming should be moste profitable, not being moued therunto through the consideration of our merites, but of his own voluntary goodnes: for our deser∣uinges did not constraine him to come. Wherfore we can not blame him for the losse before his in carnation: for it was not vndeserued, it was a iust losse. Cain ye thief blame the iudge for condēpninge him according to the law? Or is the Phi¦sition to be blamed coming of his own accord to heale the paciēt, if he tary lōg? He came therfore when it pleased hym, whē he knew he shuld be most welcom. If thou help one before his nede, he doth
not take it so thankefully as when thou succourest him in great nede. The hun∣gry mā who hath nede of meat, wil thāk the more for it, then he which hath plen∣ty. The poore wil giue the more habun∣daunt thankes for thy money then the rych. Before ye time of Christes coming, men were not nedy, they were not hun∣gry, but thought themselues rightuous, rich in al good workes, true kepers of ye lawe. Wherfore it was necessary,Roma.  that ye preching of the law should go before his coming, by whiche men should learne, that they had nede of a Phisicion.Math. 3 For by the law cometh knowledge of sinne. The lawe is, Sicuris ad arborem posita.The law is an axe. The axe which shal hewe down al those that bring not forth good fruites. The lawe is a glasse wherin we may beholde our nakednesse, our vnclean thoughtes, our filthy liuing. Lex subintrauit. The lawe sayth Paul entred in,Roma. 3 that synne should encrese: where aboundaunce of sin is, there as he recordeth also, is more plentuousnes of grace of the part of the giuer,Roma. 5 and more thanke of the part of the pacient, for asmuch as the sicke thāketh the Phisicion, not the hole man.
Wherfore Christ the Phisition of our soules, wou not come but to helpe the wounded man, to cal sinners vnto repē∣taunce,Luke. 10 to seke the shepe which was lost. For this cause God the sonne of God, equall with his father, in the ende of the world,Math. 9 Math. 18 humbled himself to our nature, to deliuer vs from the bondage of the spi∣tual Pharao the deuil, who held vs pri∣soners perforce vntil Christ entred into his house, which is the world, and boūd him &  him of his goodes. This is the fulnesse of tyme, of which Paul speaketh, saying: When the fulnesse of time was come, God sent his son borne of a woman. The warriour which wyll deceiue his ennemies, putteth away his own apparell, and clotheth him selfe in their apparel, that he may safely go into their region, and behold all their proui∣sion, and afterward easely ouercom thē: so our sauiour Iesus Christ, in the later end of the world did deck and cloth him self with our nature, to deceaue and con∣quere the deuyll, who had seduced and conquered mankinde in the likenes of a serpent: which policie is figured long be¦fore in Iacob,Gene. 27 who stealeth away the
blessing frō his brother Esau in his bro∣thers raiment. Did the father and the ho¦ly ghost take our nature vppon them? were they borne of a woman? were they conceaued of the holy ghost? were they borne litle babes? Did they vse this poli∣cy to deceaue the deuil? If not, then is Christ vnconfounded with them. Christ also was baptised, not the father, nor the holy ghost.Math. 3 For the father sounded these wordes at his baptisme: This is my be∣loued sonne in whom is my delite: and ye holy ghost descendeth like a doue, & sit∣teth vpō him. Wherfore is he christened? not for any spot of sinne,Whi christ was bapti¦zed. any crom of vn¦clennes in him, but for our eruditiō and ensamble. For if he came to be baptised of Iohn his seruaunt, how necessary is baptisme for vs which be his seruaunts, and defiled with original & actual trespa∣ces: If he required baptisme of him, dis∣daine not thou to be christened of thi in∣ferior, dispise not baptisme be thou ne∣uer so holy, neuer so perfit, haue no light opinion of it. If it were a light thinge, Christ wold not haue required it for our exāple. Christ also fasted after baptisme, and was tempted of the deuill, he fasted
for our example, and was tēpted for our victory.Why tēp∣ted Mat. 4 He was tempted in al sinne and ouercommeth, teaching vs by his exam∣ple how to ouercome. The deuil tēpteth him with the lustes of the flesh, with lust of the eies, and with the desyre of world∣ly promocion: with lust of the flesh, say∣ing: If thou be the sonne of God, speake that these stones be made bread.Deut. 8 But Christ answereth, teaching vs to fight in like case: Man shal not liue by bread on∣ly, but by euery word that cōmeth out of the mouth of God.Sapi. 16 He tēpteth him, bid∣ding him cast himself down from the pin¦nacle, because it was written that angels had charge ouer him. Christ answereth: thou shalt not tempt thy Lord thy Ged.Psal. 90 He tempteth him with desire of promo∣tion with the lustes of the eies carying him into the mountain, & promising him the glory of ye world.Deute. 6 But he who made al the world, refused worldly honor, and teacheth vs that God only is to be wor∣shipped. Al sinne is conteined in the de∣uils thre temptacions, and al vertue in Christes aunswers. The deuil with thre proposicions wold inuegle Christ in all heresies, but Christ confuteth him with
thre scriptures. And that thou shouldest not thinke that Christ is the holy ghost, touching his incarnation, he is sayde to be cōceiued of the holy ghost, and in his baptising the holy comforter descendeth vpon him, and when he is tempted, the spirit leadeth him into wildernes: wher¦fore he is vncōfounded with ye holy gost. Christ also suffreth death to deliuer vs from the tiranny of death, not the father nor the holy ghost, for he offred his flesh, an odoriferous, and swete smelling sacri¦fice to the father.Why he suffred death. The cause why he hum¦bled him self vnto death, is forasmuch as our first parentes lost Gods fauour through pride, for it was said vnto them: taste, and ye shal be as Gods: For this cause it pleaseth Christ to ouercome the deuil by humilitie,Gene.  who through pryde entised vs from God, and we also must ouercome by humilitie, recouer Gods fauour by humilitie, enter into the king∣dom of heauē through humilitie. Doun therfore proud stomack, down peacocks fethers, down hygh mountaine, and be∣come a lowe valley:Prou. 15 The Lord wil breake down the house of the proude, & he that humbleth himselfe, shall be exalted, as
we may learne of the Publicane and the Pharisey.Luke. 14 We must returne to paradise by humilitie,Luke. 18 which we lost by pride. Hu∣militie is the porter of heauen gates, F∣ctus est obediens vsque ad mortem crucis.Philip. 2 He became obedient to the death of the crosse. But why is Christ crucified for our sinnes?Why he di¦ed on the crosse. Why did he chose this kind of death before other? Truly because this kind of death is accursed, and al that die of it, as it is written: cursed is euery one that hangeth on tree. For so it commeth to passe that Christ was accursed for vs to deliuer vs from Gods curse,Gala. 3 as Paul saith: Christ hath deliuered vs from the curse of law, in that he was made accur∣sed for vs.Actes. 1 Only he rose from death to lyfe, only he ascended into heauen in the sight of his disciples, not the father, nor the holy ghost. Some searching wittes demaunde whether Christ could not de∣liuer vs, but by assumpting our nature, by suffring moste cruell tormentes. He could,Why he toke our nature. but he would not. He toke our na¦ture, because he came to deliuer our na∣ture, that nether kind shulde thinke they are dispised: he became man, & was born of a woman, that the serpent which sedu¦ced
both man and woman, might be o∣uercome through both.To del∣uer vs. Moreouer he came not only to deliuer vs, but also to be an example of good liuing.For exam∣ple. We be de¦sirous of riches, he preferred pouertie, we hunt for promotion, he would not be a king, we are careful to make heires, to leaue many children after vs, he dispised such fashion, we disdaine to suffer wrōg, he suffred al wrong, we can not abide to be reuiled, he held his tong, we hate our ennemies, we ar vnpainful in doing our duties, he was scourged, and whipped of his own wil for vs, we be sore afrayd of death, he died for vs. He was sent also to heale our infirmities by well doyng,To heal v which came through sinne. How cā our couetousnes he healed but by his pouer∣tie? How can our furiousnes be cured, but by his pacience? How can our vn∣kindnes be recompēsed, but by his loue? How can our timrousnes be boldened, but by his resurrection? Further, howe could he more set forth his exceading lo∣ue toward vs thē in dieng for vs. A grea∣ter loue then this hath no man, then to bestowe his life (saith Christ) speaking of his own death.Ihon. 1 The deitie suffreth no in∣firmitie,
which is impossible, wherfore it was necessary that he should take our nature vpō him, who came to heale our infirmities, and to teach vs to cure them through wel doing. If he had takē them in any other nature, thē we might think that he dispised our nature, that he loued vs not, that the example of his life belon¦geth nothing vnto vs. For if he had ben tempted in another nature, or died, how could we learn to withstand the deuil, to ouercome tēptacions, to dispise death of him?Sapi. 8 Wherfore there was no way, lyke this to redeme mā. He is wisdom, wher∣fore he toke the most wysest way. The .xxvi. Chapter. ¶The holy comforter is vnconfounded, how and why he descended in the likenes of a doue, rather then of any other bird. NOw that I haue proued Christ to be vncōfounded, mine order requireth to for¦tifie thesame thing of the most glorious and holy cō¦forter, the which is done partly already: for in that we haue proued that Christ is not the holy ghost, the blessed & almigh∣ty comforter is vncōfounded with him.
He is vncōfounded also with the father, in that he procedeth of the father, in that he leadeth Christ into the wildernesse,Ihon. 14▪ in that he is sent of the father, as Christ sai∣eth: Whē the comforter shal come, whō the father shal sende in my name,Math. 4 and in that he is sent of Christ also, as it is writ∣ten: When the comforter shal come whō I wyll sende in my fathers name. For Christ sendeth him, the father sendeth both him and the almighty comforter, but he himselfe is vnsent. That he sent Christ, the Apostle testifieth: When the time was ful come,Gala. 4 God sent his sonne borne of a woman, and made bonde to the lawe, the which must be vnderstand of the father, because he sayth:Ihon. 16 God sent his sonne. Wherfore Christ himself say∣eth: I went out from the father, and came into the worlde. His sendyng, and his comming is hys incarnation, as I haue proued before. So the almyghtie comforter is sayde to be sent, bycause he appeared in visible formes as in the ly∣kenes of a Doue, and Fyre, not that he became a Doue and Fyre, as Christe became very man, but that it pleased hym to worke his graces and benefites
by a doue and fier,Why ye ho¦ly ghost ap¦peared. that our harts might beleue his presēce, and know his power through those outward and sensyble ap∣paritiōs. He became not a doue as Christ became man, for asmuch as he came not to deliuer doues, as Chri came to deli∣uer man. God the father, cause he ne∣uer came to shewe him elfe i any visile shape, ne yet toke any nature on him, therfore he is said to be  he Lord saith Moises,Deut. 4 sake vnto , out of the fier in Horeb, & you heard his voice, but ye sawe no Image. Wherfore he is ney∣ther the sonne, nor the holy ghost, which both wer sent, and both appeared in ma∣ny visible formes, For we read I say, of the holy ghost, that he apeared, sicut co∣lumba,Math. 3 in the lykenesse of a doue. Why doth he appeare in ye lykenesse of a doue? This notable apparitiō, was don for ma∣ny causes. One is, that we should beleue ye holy ghost to be a worker in baptisme, to wash vs, to purify vs, to regenerate vs, to make vs Gods childrē, and heires of saluatiō, and therfore the disciples are cōmaūded to christen in his name, as in the name of the father and the sonne,Math. 28 for all be notified here in Christes baptising▪
Pater in voce, Filius iu homine, Spiritus sanctus in columba. The father is notified in the voice which soūdeth, the sonne in mannes nature, the almightie comforter in ye doue. For as al thre be present here, so they  worke inseperablie, in euery mans chening. The next cause is, for∣asmuch as a doue of al creatures, is most innocent, and noyeth no beast, not ye litle worm: most chast, for thei neuer breake wedlocke, once begun, but kepe it vnde∣fyled to the end of their lyues, for if so be the male or female, through vnchastloue haunt the cōpany of any other, then thei flock & gather together, & rend ye aduou∣terer, and aduoutres in pieces: voyde of anger for they haue no gall, louers of a∣mitie & frendshippe. And this apparition was shadowed and figured, by the doue which Noe sent out of the arke in ye time of the generall floude.Gene.  For as that doue retourned in the euentide, with a leafe of an Oliue tree in her mouth, signifyinge peace, so ye holy ghost geueth peace, cau∣seth all frendshippe, engendreth all loue. And why? Verely as he is an ineffable cōmunion of the father & the sōne, as he ioyneth & knitteth them together with a
fast, sure, & vnlosable knot, so he glueth, and coupleth our harts, vpon which cō∣sideratiō, he properli is called charitie or loue. As the doue also mourneth in his loue, so the holy ghost maketh vs to be∣wayle our sinnes, and lament our misde∣des, as it is written: The spirite helpeth our infirmities, for we knowe not what to desire as we ought,Roma. 8 but the spirite ma¦keth intercession mightelye for vs, with gronings which cānot be expressed. The holy ghost doth not grone, but is said to grone, as we call a mery day which ma∣keth vs mery, and a sad day, which cau∣seth sadnesse, and as cold is called pigrum because it maketh vs slowe. But blessed be they that mourne lyke the doue,Math. 5 and in the loue of God, for they shall be com∣forted. Such as grone for pouertie, and ar dismaid, discouraged, & mated throgh enprisonment, or any kind of persicutiō, be rauens, not doues, be wethercocks & worldlinges. For ye rauen retourned not againe to the arke, which is the church. The doue maketh his nest in som holow and high rocke: So let vs set our minds and desires vpō ye rocke, which is Christ. The doue cherysheth the yong of other,
as well as her owne, the which is a lessō vnto vs to loue our neighboures. The doue also wil not eat of al maner of grain but chuseth out ye most fine & pure, teach∣ing such as hunger & long for the truth, to feed of Gods word, & to beware they fal not vpō euery carion. The doue with al diligēce & kindnes cherisheth his mate whē she hath yong ones. Wherfore the alknowing comforter appeareth lyke a doue, who cōmaundeth his to be doues, that is is to say, chast, paciēt, kind, mour∣ners for their sinnes, faithfull & diligent to ther wiues, ernest beleuers in ye rock, readers of Gods word, and louers of all men. This is the innocēcie which Christ inspired with the doue, commaundeth, saying: Be ye wyse as serpents,Math. 10 & inno∣cent like doues. The almightie & alkno∣wing cōforter is vncōfounded also with the father, in that Christ was concaued of him, not of the father, of whome Esay prophesieth:Esay. 11 there shall come a rod forth of the rote of Iesse, & a blossom or floure shal rise out of ye roote. The root of Iesse is ye kinred of ye Iewes, ye rod is ye blessed virgin Mary, ye blossom or floure of Ma¦ry is Chryst, as he witnesseth of himself:
Ego flos campi,Canti. 2 & lilium connallium. &c. I am the flour of the field, the lilie of the valeis,How christ is a floure  a rose. and the rose among thornes. The rose plucked & taken out of the garden lo¦seth not his smel, & stilled with the fyre, smelleth sweter then euer it did, pouring forth an odoriferous water, no lesse hol∣some for many thinges then pleasaunt. Euen so Christ being taken out of the garden of this word, florished more then all the floures therin, grew in a further authoritie, then all the holy Patriares and Prophets, cast an odiferous sauour ouer al the world,Ihon. 12 which drew al men to him, and being digged in the side with a speare of the cruell Iewes which are the thornes, poured forth a water healing al infirmities. This blossom or floure was conceiued of the holy comforter, not of the father. Moreouer the almighty com¦forter is the gift of God, for the Lorde sayth vnto Moises: I wil take the spirit which is vpon thee,Nume. 11 and geue it them, & Christ also as it is written, who spared not his own sonne,Roma. 8 but gaue him for vs al, how shal he not with him geue vs all things. Wherfore the fath Christ, and the holy ghost be distinct a undry per∣sons.
The comforter is vnconfounded al¦so, in that he was borne vpō the waters,Gene. 1 Actes. 8 in that he cōmaundeth Philip the Euā∣gelist to ioyne himself to the chariot of ye gelded man, in that he cōmaundeth Pe∣ter to arise and go with Cornelius ser∣uauntes, in that he cōmaundeth to sepe∣rate Paul and Barnabas, in that he is ye finger of God, in that Christ breathing on his disciples gaue him, saiyng:Actes. 1 recei∣ue the holy ghost. He also descēdeth vpō the disciples in likenes of fyre,Ihon. 20 teachyng them to speake al languages, because ye Gospel should be preached to al naciōs. And Dauid recordeth, there is nether speche ne language, but their voices are heard among them. Their sound is gon out into all landes,Psal. 18 and their wordes to the ende of the world. The Romaine do∣minion hath reached arre, but the prea∣ching of the swete tidinges of the Gos∣pel shal go further. For those nacions which the sharpenes of swerd could not ouercome, shalbe vanquished by hym, yt fighteth not with swerd, but wt wood & word. Christ gaue not the father by brea¦thing, he descended not in the likenes of a doue, or fire, he cōmaūdeth not Peter
to go with Cornelius seruaūtes, he was not born vpō the waters, he is not his own finger, wherfore he is not the holy ghost. But albeit nether Christ, nor the almighty comforter be confoūded with ye father, yet they ar of one & the selfsame substaunce with him. For the scriptures teach Christ to be the hand of God, & the holy ghost to be his finger. The body, ye hand, & finger, ar one substaūce, & yet the finger is not the hand, nor the hand the body, nor the finger the body. If therfor the scripture do graunt to Christ, to ye ho∣ly ghost, to the father, ye meaning of the word person: that is to say, that ye father is a substaunce, Christ is a substaunce, ye holy ghost is a substaunce, and that the father is vnconfoūded, Christ vnconfoū¦ded, the holy ghost vnconfounded, as I haue proued, it must nedes folow yt they be thre persones, for a person is an vncō∣founded substaunce. This is the catholi∣que faith, the confession of martirs, the doctrine of the Prophets, Apostles, & E∣uangelists. The .xxvii. Chap. ¶ Corporal similitudes of God made in the scriptures. why he is named light, fire, the sun. &c. the image of God in mans soule.
NOw gentle reader, seing I ha∣ue declared what a persone is out of the boke of holy scrip∣tures, and also proued with in¦finite authorities, that there be three per∣sons, that is thre vncōfounded, & distinct in propertie, I wil disclose the diuine & blessed nature of the almighty Trinitie, by corporal & earthly similitudes, that yu mayst behold as it were in a glasse, and with a paire of spectacles those thinges which exceade & surmoūt the capacities of all creatures. The inuisible thinges of God saith Paul that is ye eternal power & Godhead are vnderstand, sene, & lear∣ned of his workes from the creation of the world.Roma.  As long as we cōtinue in this tabernacle and mortalitie, we shal neuer haue perfit vnderstanding of the eternal God, forasmuch as the heartes of al mē and women be vncleane.Math.  Blessed be the clean hearted sayth Christ, for they shall se God. Our life is a warfar, a night, & a purifiyng of our hearts from synne and ignoraunce, through charite and faith. We walke in faith saith ye Apostle and se not,2. Cor.  with this only ladder we ascende to the intelligence of the secretes of God,
thinges supernatural can not be percei∣ued with natural light. Cherubin & Se∣raphin and al the blessed company of aū¦gels are ignoraūt of the maiestie of God for they knowe not the day of Christes glorious returne,Math. 24 & yet they haue more plētiful knowledge, then we, forasmuch as they be pure mindes, and were neuer nether blinded through sin, ne hindred through any earthly mansion and cor∣ruptible body. Scrutator maiestatis, oppri∣metur a gloria.Prou. 25 Whosoeuer is an ensear∣cher of Gods maiestie, is oppressed of ye glory. No man is able fully and perfitly to know the nature of a gnat or a litle spi¦der. Be not displeased then, if I shew the the Trinitie in his visible creatures, as it were in a glasse, but glorifie God, and be not vnthankeful to him which hath ope∣ned him self in them to thy capacitie, fe∣ding the with mylke, because thou art not able to disgest strōg meates. And be∣cause no man shal be offended with this maner of teaching, I wyl make no simi∣litudes of the Trinitie, but out of the plē∣tiful storehowses of the scriptures. The best and most liuely glasse that euer I be¦held the Trinitie in, is the vision whiche
appeared to Abraham in the oke groue of Mamre.Abraham vision. Gene. 1 For as there thre waifaring men shew them selues vnto Abraham, so God is three persones, and as these thre men are called one Lord, not Lords, so the thre persones are one God, one Lord, one substaunce. And as Christ and the almightie comforter ar sent of the fa∣ther. So here one sēdeth twain vnto So∣dom and Gomorre, and as the father is vnsent so he is not sent, but sendeth. And as the twaine whiche are sent to destroy Sodom are called one Lord of Lot,Gene. 1 so the faithful congregation confesse & beleue Christ & the alknowing comforter to be one God. I touched this similitude be∣fore, & because it is so notable, I thought it not vnworthy to be rehearsed again. Ther be many similitudes declaring cer¦tein properties of the trinitie, and some agreable in one point, and some in ano∣ther: but none doth so paint and portray it before our eies, as this vision doeth. We may find an image of the trinitie in the sun,Sapi. 5 How God is named ye son of vn∣derstāding for God is called by the name of the sun in the boke of wisdom: Sol iusticie & intelligencie non est ortus nobis. The sun of rightuousnes & vnderstanding arose
not vpon vs. There is but one sun only not many, so there is but one God. The sun shineth vpon both good & euill men, so the liberalitie of almighty God, main¦teineth both. The mone & al the sterres haue not their light of themselues, but of the sun: so the congregation, & godly mē which are called by the name of ye mone, and starres in ye scripturs, haue no light, no crom of vertue, no goodnes of them selues, but by participatiō of the deuine nature. They whiche gase vpon the sun, ar blinded with his clear light, so al sear¦chers of Gods glory beyond the scrip∣tures, are ouerwhelmed with the maie∣stie therof. The presence of the sun che∣reth al thinges, when he is absent nyght cometh, and darkenes, & nothing would growe if he did not ryse on thē. So whē God hydeth his face, they are sorowfull and die, when he loketh on them, they wax yong,sal. 103 Democrit and lusty like an Egle. And as Democritus, and other Philosophers holde opinion that the sun is infinite, so al things be infinite in God. He is of an infinite arme, of infinite maiestie, of infi∣nite wisdom. As the sun is the fountain, out of which cometh both the light, and
the heat, so is the father the fountain out of which issueth the sonne & holy ghost. And as nether the lyght nor ye heat doth send the sun, but the sun send them, so ye father is sent nether of Christ, nor of the holy ghost, but he sendeth them. And as of the sunne and of the beames both to∣gether cometh the heate or warmnes, so from the father and the sunne both toge¦ther procedeth the alnowing comfor∣ter. But as the sun light by diuision is in mani places, so the blessed trinitie filleth places without diuision, nether contey∣ned in place, nether moued in tyme. Now if the sunne were without begyn∣nyng and ending, eternal beames wold come out of hym, and euerlasting heat, wold procede out of ye sun, & his beames. Wherfore in asmuch as God the father is immortal, Christ his sonne also must nedes be immortall, forasmuch as the fa∣ther is lykened to the sunne, and Christ to the clear and bright beames,Sapien.  for he is the bryghtnes of the euerlasting light. I would know of the Paulians & Arrians whether the father in tyme begon to be a father, or was a father euermore with∣out tyme. If they graunt that he was a
father euer the which thei can not denie, then it must nedest folow, that the sonne was euermore. For he was not a father before he had a sonne, but he was called a father of the sonne, and he that is al∣waies a father, hath euermore & alwaies a son. If Christ was not euermore, then time was before him, & the Apostle lieth, calling him,Colloss. 1 Primogenitum omnis creatu∣re, first begotten of al creatures, for time is a creatur, & was before him. But time was made by Christ, for all thinges wer made by him,Ihon. 1 as ye beloued disciple wit∣nesseth. If he wer the maker of time, thē he was before all time, and that whiche was before al time, is not moued in time but is without time, without beginning & immortal. Wherfore Christ is immor∣tal, and then he is God, for only God is immortal after this sort. Likewise the al∣knowyng cōforter was euermore, who is cōpared to the heat, for an euerlasting heat must nedes procede out an euerla∣sting sunne, and euerlasting beames. He is, digitus dei, the finger of god. If I cast out deuils in the fynger of God.Luke. 11 &c. For where Luke sayth in the finger of God, it is in Matthew. I cast out deuils in the
spirit of God.Math. 1 Then ether we must con∣fesse him to be without beginning, and of the substaunce of God, or els graunt that God once lacked a fynger, and de∣nie the same to be of the substaūce of the body. Like reason may be made of christ who is the hand and the arme of God: for God was neuer without his fynger,Ierem. 3 hand, ne arme, and then al thre be of the same nature with the body. And for so much as Gods finger is almyghty, and his hand and arme likewise, both Christ is almighty, and the blessed cōforter al∣so, and Christ is God by nature, and the holy comforter also. For nothing is al∣mighty and of the nature of God, but God only. But the Arians reply that ye father is elder thē the sonne, and that he which begetteth is before him that is be∣gotten. Ego hodie genui te.An obiect answered. This day be∣gat I thee. This is true in fathers vpon earth, but not in an euerlasting father, who must nedes haue an euerlastynge sonne. Nether doth this reason holde in al earthly thinges, for fire gendreth light and heate procedeth from it, and yet the fire gendring, and light gendred, & heat proceding be Coena, not one before the o¦other:
Therfor it is against reason that ye father begetting, and Christ begotten, & the holy ghost proceding should be coe∣terne, coimmortal, & not one before the o¦ther in time, but eche one of them before al time. And wel may the trinitie be like∣ned to fyre and his heat, & light, for God in the scripture is called fyre. Dominus deus tuus ignis consumens est.How God is fier and light. Deut. 4 Ihon. 1 The Lorde thy God saith Moises is a consumyng fire. And Ihon calleth him also light, sai∣yng: Deus lux est, God is light, & in him is no darkenes at al. And Christ witnes∣seth of him self that he is light, saying: I am the light of the world, who is Lumen de lumine, light of light. For as the fyre ministreth light to a multitude,Ihon. 1 & yet is not minished or cōsumed therbi, so God bestoweth innumerable benefites vpon vs, and yet his liberalitie is not hindred therwt. Likewise also in a cādel, of which many other candels be light, the light is not therby in any wise diminished or hurt at al. One supper doth not refreshe or suffise many as wel as few, but ye voice of one preacher teacheth as wel a hūdred as one. The sound of one bell is neuer∣thelesse when it is heard of many: Euen
so he who preserued the smal porcion of meal & oyl for the wydowe and her son,3. Reg. 17 Math. 14 Marke. 6 Luke. 9 that was not diminished, who with a ve¦ry few loaues, & a certein fishes, refres∣shed a great multitude, so yt those things were not diminished but increased, kno∣weth how to employ his benefites with out any losse or detriment to his liberali¦tie. Moreouer as fire sēdeth forth both heat & light, but nether heat ne light sen∣deth fire, so ye father sendeth both Christ and the alknowing comforter, & he is vn¦sent. And as both the light & the heat are of ye fire, so Christ & ye holy ghost both ar of the father, the one begotten, the other proceding, and the father only is of him self, & of no other. And as fire is not be∣fore heat, & light, no more is the father before the sonne and the holy Ghost. But in that place which I rehearsed out of Deuter. God is called fyre, because he melteth the synnes of those that wyll amend,Deut. 4 as the fyre melteth war and pu∣nisheth the sinnes of disobediēt persones with vnquencheable fire: and Iohn cal∣leth him light for the same cause.1. Ihon. For light putteth away darknes, and is contrary to it. For these properties and
diuers other, the scriptures cal God the sun of rightousnes, fier, and light. If we ponder thē diligently, we shal fynde also the Image of the blessed Trinitie in our selues, in our owne natures. For it is written:Gene. 1 God made man after his Ima∣ge, after ye Image of god formed he him. This Image is in our soules, not in our bodies, as I haue proued in my cōfuta∣tiō of the Anthropomorphites,A glasse to se God in. or huma∣niformiās. Mānes soul is a liuely Ima∣ge of God. The soul is a spirit, almigh∣tie God is a spirite, the soule quikneth, & ruleth the body, the Trinitie gouerneth the maruelouse frame of this world. Re∣ason, will, and memory are thre, but one and the same soule. So ye father, the son, and ye holy ghost, are thre distinct in pro∣pertie, and one God. Whatsoeuer thing the soule doth, these thre be the workers therof. Reason cannot discern good and euill, truth, falshed, plainnes and craft, profe & sophisticatiō, without either will or memory. Neither will chuseth what him lyketh, without the other: nor me∣mory remēbreth not things gone with∣out reason and wil. These actions & wor∣kes, which are sayd properly to belonge
only to memory, and only to reason and will, in very dede ar done by the worke∣manship of all thre. So the father, ye son, and the holy ghost,The wor∣kes of ye. 3. persons be vnseperab. worke all things vn∣separablie, not that each of them is vna∣ble to worke by him selfe, but that they all thre are one God, one spirite one na∣ture, as reason, wil, memory, ar one soul. The sonne worketh alwayes wyth the father, for whatsoeuer the father doth,Ihon. 5 y• doth the sōne also, and Christ recordeth, that as his father worketh hytherto, so he worketh▪ The almightie cōforter can not be absent from their works, for he is the spirite of them both, and fylleth the round compasse of the world.Sapien.  If I wold gather all the workes of ch person into an induction, I could manifestlye proue this, to the capacitie of all men, but it is to long to speake of their workes. I will speake of the creation of the worlde, of Christes incarnatiō, of his miracles and resurrectiō, prouing al these to haue ben done by the workmanshippe of the thre persons. For if the Trinitie did worke inseperablye in these, no doubte it hath don likewise in all other. First touching the creatiō of the world, no man distrust∣eth
the fathers workimg, of whom that is supposed to be spoken: In the begin∣ning God created heauen and earth. If thou doubt of Christ & the holy comfor∣ter, herken what ye prophet Dauid saith: by the word of the Lord were the heauēs made, and bi the word of his mouth, the glorious fairenes of them. Wherfore he∣auen & earth be the workmanship of the thre persons. Was Christ conceaued in the wombe of Mary by the workeman∣ship of the holy comforter, and is he not maker of the world? If the thre persons work euermore without seperatiō, why doth the scripture graunt certein works to one person,An obiect. answered. & certein to another? Tru∣ly to teach vs, that ther be thre persons, that ther be thre distincte, thre vncōfoun∣ded. Onely the person of the father soun∣deth the voice in Christes baptisme, only the holy ghost appeareth lyke a doue, & only Christ is incarnate. Notwihstand∣ing both the flesh of Christ, and ye voice of the fathe and the apparitiō of the al∣knowing cōforter, be the workemāship of the whole Trinitie. I meane not that Christ & the holy ghost soūded the voice, but that thei were workers of the voice▪
the father only soūded it, not Christ, not the holy ghost. For they be distinct and vnconfounded, they be thre, not all one, thre persons not thre names. So the ho∣ly ghost only shewed himselfe in ye shape of a doue, not the father, not Chri. Ne∣uerthelesse the doue in which he apeared was the workemanshippe of al thre. So neither the father, ne yet the blessed com¦forter were incarnate, but Christ only. Neuertheles the flesh, & nature of Christ was the workemāship of the whole Tri∣nitie, whose workes be nseperable. This may be gathered of the wordes of the Angell to Mary.Luke.  Spiritus sanctus su∣perueniet in te, & virtus altistimi abūbra∣bit tibi. The holy ghost (saith Gabriell) shall come vppon the, and the power of the highest shall ouershadowe thee. By the highest the father is to be vnderstād, by these wordes, Virtus altistimi the ver, ue or power of the highest, the sonne. For so S. Paule calleth him to the Corrinthians, saying: we peach Christ crucified vnto the Iewes an occasion of fallinge, to the Greekes folishnesse,1. Cor.  but vnto them which are called both of the Iewes and Grekes, we preach Christe
the power and wisdome of God. The word virtus is transated in english, ver∣tue or power, the greke word is, Duna∣mis, both in Paul, and in the aunswer of the aungel. Peraduēture some man wil denie that the father is ment by ye word, Altissimus. Therfore I wil fortifie his o∣peration with an other reason. Christes incarnatiō is his sending, as I haue pro∣ued befor. For who is sent thither, wher he is already? But he is euery wher tou∣ching his diuinitie: Wherfore he is sent thither, where he was not, y appearing in his humanitie. And it is plain that the father sent him, wherfore the incarnatiō of Christ, is the workmanship of the ho∣ly glorious Trinitie. The scripture tel∣leth that our sauiour Christ also by his word and commaundement did cast out many deuils: but the same witnesseth yt the father and the holy ghost did worke with him, lest thou shouldst thinke the works of the trinitie to be separable. For of his fathe he himself sayth:Ihon. 14 The father that dwelleth in me is he which doth the workes. And of the aldoing comforter also: I cast out deuils in the scripture of God.Math. 12 Lyke profe may be brought of all
his other miracles. So only Christ arose from death to life, and yet the holy Tri∣nitie raysed him. For of the father it is wrytten, who raysed Christ from death:Gala. 4 And of himself he testifieth, saying to the Iewes asking a token: Destroy this tē∣ple, and in thre dayes I shall rayse it vp again. And that ye holy ghost raised him,Ihon. 2 Paul is recorde and wytnes, saying: Wherfore if the spirit of him which ray∣sed vp Iesu frō death dwel in you.Roma. 8 Ihon. 6 And Iohn also: ye spirit quikneth. For it is not to be takē only of the quickening of our soules but of our bodies also, nether is it vnlike that the holy comforter did rayse hym, whome he formed in the virgins wombe. Like proue might be made of all the peculier workes of the alworking comforter, and of the father. Wherfore their workes be no more separable, then the workes of reason, wil, and memorie, namely seing they be one God, as the other thre be one soule. The .xxviij. Chapter. ¶How there is but one God only the diuinitie of Christ and the aldoing comforter notwithstan∣ding this vnitie.
NOw I haue almost decla∣red al the contentes of this treatise that is, what God is, what persone signifieth and that there be thre per∣sons in the glorious Trinitie. For the profe of my last matter, and content, I wil first teache with euident scriptures, that there is but one only God, and thē with reasons, not of phylosophy, but ga∣thered out of them, for the scripture is profitable to teache,. Tim. 3 to controll, and to in¦struct. Then I will proue that the same scripture graunteth al and eueri one of ye partes of the definition made of God, to our sauiour Christ, and that done, I wyl fortifie also that al the partes of thesame definition are graūted to the alknowing and almighty comforter. The Christian congregation beleueth the father, ye son, and the holy gost to be one God, not by nuncupation only, but by vnitie of na∣ture. For if the multitude of thē that be∣leued were Cor vnum, & anima vna, one heart and one soul,Actes. 4 if he which is ioyned vnto the Lord, is one spirit, if man & wife be one flesh, one body, as ye Apostle wit∣nesseth,1. Cor. 6 if al men be one substaunce tou∣ching
ther nature, if the scriptures testify that in humaine thinges many be one▪ how much more are the father, the sonne and ye holy ghost one God, which differ not in nature & substaunce? for it is writ∣ten, there are thre which beare record in heauen: the father, the word,1. Ihon. 5 & the holy ghost, & these thre are one. The vnitie of their nature proueth them not to be thre Gods but one God. The damnable set of ye Arrians expoūdeth this text:Aris in∣terpretati∣on cōfuted Hij tres vnum sunt, these thre are one, that thei be one in wil, in assent, & consent, and not in their substaunce, nature, and diuinitie: to which I make answer, that in al the scrip¦ture they can not finde vnum sunt, spokē of thinges which differ in substaūce and nature. Wherfore spoken of the thre per¦sons, thei proue thē to haue no diuersitie in ther nature: & if that be true, thei must graūt of necessitie yt they be one God by nature. S. Paul saith yt he yt plāteth, & he yt watreth, vnū sunt, are one▪ Are they of diuers substaūce & nature? no verely:1. Cor. 3 for both of thē were men. He speaketh these wordes of himself, & of Apollo (for the cō¦gregation reioysed in them) forbidding the Corinthians to reioyse in men,
and teaching them to reioyce in God on¦ly. Wherfore these words, Vnum sunt, in this place are not spokē of things which differ in substaunce. Let vs ponder other textes. The same Paul vnto the Gala∣thians, saith: Al you Vnum estis in Christo Iesu,Gala. 3 are one in Christ Iesu. He speaketh this of the Gala. whiche al were of one nature, of one lompe, and substaūce. For they al were men, of men. Here thou se∣est also reader, that these wordes vnum sunt, are not spoken of thinges which dif¦fer in substaunce. But the Arrians reply that ye Apostle witnesseth, that he which is ioyned vnto the Lorde,1. Cor.  is one spirit, & yet he is not of the same substaunce that the body is. The latin there is not vnum sunt,An obiect. answered. are one of which I doe speake, but Qui adheret domino, vnus spiritus est, he yt is ioyned to the Lorde, is vnus spiritus, one spirit. For vnus ioyned with ano∣ther word, as with spiritus, may be spokē of thinges which are of discrepant na∣ture, as i is here: but vnum sunt, is neuer so spoken. Search al the Bible through out, and thou shalt find this to be true. I graunt that the wordes vnum sunt, be spoken often of assent in wil, but only in
those thinges which differ not in nature and substaunce. And truly the father, the son, & the holy ghost vnum sunt voluntate are one in wil and assent, but also of one substaūce, nature, & diuinitie, forasmuch as vnum sunt, are one, is neuer spoken of things which differ in substaūce.An other obiiection answered. The Ar¦rians replie further, yt Christ praied for his elect, vt sint unum, that they may be∣come one, as he & his father were one. He doth not pray that they & he, & the fa∣ther may be one, but that thei be one, as he and his father be one, both in nature and wil, as it foloweth in thesame texte. Vt omnes vnum sint, sicut u pater in me & ego in te & ipsi in nobis vnum sint.Ihon. 17 That they al may be one, as thou father art in me, & I in thee, that thei also may be one in vs. For mortal men can not be of the same substaunce that God is, they may be one in God, but not with God, they may be one as the father & Christ be, but not of their nature: that is the thre per∣sons of the glorious trinitie are one in wyl & assent, & substaunce also, so the cho¦sen after this life, as they are now of one substaunce, so shal they be then also, not with God, but in God, of one assent, cō∣sent
& wil, & not squaring one with ano∣ther, for thei shalbe al one in Iesus christ & Christ shalbe al thinges in al, and God shalbe all thynges in al, whiche proueth Christ God.Colloss. 3 . Cor. 15 vnum sunt is spoken here of the elect which differ not in substāce, for they be men. Therfore the father, ye son, & the holy ghost, ar of one substaūce & diui¦nitie: and if they be of one substaunce & diuinitie, they ar not thre Gods, but one God, as it is written. Harken Israel, the Lord thy god is one God.Deut. 6 He saith vnto Israel by Moises, where are their gods wherin they trusted? the fat of whose sa∣crifices thei eat,Deut. 32 and dranke the wyne of their vessels. Let thē arise vp & help you, and be your shild. Se now how I am a∣lone, & that there is no God but I. I can kil, & make aliue, & what I haue smitten, that can I heale, I wil lifte vp my hand to heauen and say, I liue euer. If ther be many Gods, their kingdom is deuided: but the kingdom of God is euerlasting, wherfore it is not deuided, for euery kīg∣dom deuided shalbe destroied.Marke. 12 The he∣brue word for God,Elohim. is Elohim, whiche is not of the singuler number, but of ye plu∣rel. For there be thre persones, but it is
alway ioyned with a verb singuler, lest yt we shuld thinke there were many gods. Moises vseth this word for the englishe which is God: when he saith: in the be∣ginning god created heauē & earth, wher¦fore we may learne, that the world is the workmāship of ye hole trinie. This word is vsed cōmonly for god, to signifie that whatsoeuer is done, is the worke of the thre persones, for as they be not sepera∣ble, so they work vnseparablie.The Hea∣then opini¦on cōfuted The hea∣then supposed there were many Gods, because it semed to them impossible for one to rule and gouerne all thinges, yet they deuided the gouernance therof be∣twene thre: geuing heauen and earth to Iupiter, the seas to Neptune, the lowe partes and hell to Pluto. But the scrip∣tures, which is truth & cānot lye, testifi∣eth that the thre persons without deui∣sion, without labour or payne, without tyme, gouerne al thynges, for their wor∣kes be vnseperable. If so  there be ma∣ny Gods then is there somwhat, where in one of them doth differ from another. Now if that be any good thing, he is no God that lacketh, or wāteth any thing yt good is. For as he that nameth a kyng
doth in this one word comprehend ma∣ny excellent thinges, so he that nameth God doth comprehend in this word an infinite sum of al good things. We read of a certain ruler, whiche called Christe good maister, asking him what he shuld do to get and atchiue eternal life, whom Christ rebuked, saying: why callest thou me good?Luke. 19 None is good but God only. If God only be good, thē al goodnes is in him, as I haue proued in my first mat¦ter. He is life, is truth, he is light, he is strength, he is health, he is, Thassos aga∣thon, that is a treasure & heape of al good¦nes. And if that thing wherin they differ be an euil thing, that can not be God yt hath any euil thing in him: for he wileth no wickednes. The Heathen which wor¦ship many Gods, did & do think no euill to come by thē by ye light which thei had of nature, & iudged thē to reuenge & pu∣nish al that thei toke to be sinne. Nowe if God be a rightuous punisher of vice, he must be void of the same. Wherfore na∣turall reason teacheth that there is but one God. Doth not the noble and wor∣thy Phylosopher Aristotle teacheth vs this,Aristotle. prouing that there is but, vnum pri∣mum
mobile, one first mouer, who mo∣ueth al the heauenly spheres. The Ma∣nicheis make two Gods, which thei cal,Against the Mani∣chees. Duo principia contraria, two principles, one contrary to another. For they say ye one is an euill God, maker of visible things, the other a good God, maker of inuisible thinges, and they say also that both of them be vnbegottē, vncreat, & of them selues. Then are they immortall. But if they be immortal, there is no god that only hath immortalitie, & Paul lieth who saith that God,1. Tim. 6 not Gods hath im∣mortalitie. And al the prophets, euange∣listes & Apostles be liers, teaching wt one assent yt God only forgeueth sin, yt God only knoweth al thinges. For if ther be two Gods, both of thē must haue these properties. If ether of thē know not all thinges, then is he ignoraunt, & then no God. If both knowe all thinges, then is ther no God whiche only knoweth all thinges. Both also must forgeue syn, the good because he is merciful, the euill be∣cause he is ye cause of al sin, & then is ther no God, which only pardoneth synne. Moreouer, if both the Manicheis gods be immortal, if both pardō sinne, if both
know al science, thei be not contrary, for knowledge is not cōtrary to knowlege but ignorance, & vnmercifulnes is cōtra∣ry to mercy, & forgeuing, & death to im∣mortalitie. Wherfore ther be not two cō¦trary principles, but one principle, & one God. The christian cōgregation confes∣seth that the father is, Principiū, a princi∣ple or beginning, for so the beloued disci∣ple calleth him, saing: In principio erat verbum.Ihon. 1 In the beginning was the word in the father was Christ. Thei acknowe∣ledge Christ also to be Principium,Ihon. 8 who answereth the cruel Iewes demaūding who he was, saying: ye beginning which spake vnto you. But the father is prici∣pium non de principio, Christ is principiū de principio. They confesse the almighty cōforter also to be principium, forasmuch as he with the father & the sonne made all thinges, and gouerneth them as I haue proued before. Notwithstandinge there be no thre beginnings, but one be¦ginning only, as there be not thre gods, but one God. The papistes also bring in many gods,Agaīst prai¦ng to sain¦es. but couertly & priuely. Thei teach the people to pray vnto saintes, to Saint Luke for the oxe, to Iob for the
pox, to Rocke for the pestilence, to Sith for thinges lost, to Christopher for cōti∣nual health, to the Quene of heauen for women with child, to Clement for good beere, yea they entise the people also to worship & honor their images.The fyrst reason. If thei be to be praied vnto for these thinges, they be gods, for in praying vnto thē, we ac∣knowlege them to hear vs, to be almig∣hty, to be euery where, to know ye thou∣ghtes of al men, to be a strong castel vn∣to such as slie vnto thē, but these thinges belong only to God, as I haue proued before: Wherfore thei make them gods. O crafty deuil, O suttel papistes, the Iewes are reproued by the voyce of the prophetes, for making many gods, in yt they praied vnto Baall, Astaroth, Mo∣loch, and the Quene of heauen for ayde & soccour. Why do we not aske al good thinges of him,Thessa. 2 which is the author & ge∣uer of al good thinges, both to his enne∣mies and frindes, both to the heathen, & to the congregation. Is his hand smittē of that it can not healp?Esay. 50 and .59. Haue we percey∣ued at any tyme crudelitie or vnkind∣nes in hym? Are hys eares stopped that he can not heare? Or his eies so dimme
that they cannot se?Psal. 85 He planted theare, he made the , wherfore he both hear∣eth most easely, and seeth most perfitely. And because he is the oūtaine of al mer∣cy, he graūteth our requestes most mer∣cfully. He is not lyke an earthly kinge▪ who setteth porters at his gates, he is not hard to speak with, for he is the gate himselfe, as he telleth vs, Ego sum via, ve¦ritas & vita.Ihon. 14 Ihon. 10 I am the way, the truth and life, and Ego sum ostium, I am the doore. There is but one way, on doore, and he that entreth in by the doore, fyndeth pa∣sture, he that entreth in, not by the dore, he is a thiefe, a robber. And why? For he robbeth God of the glory belonging on¦ly to him, geuing it to his creatures. They which sly vnto saints, depart, ma∣ke many wayes, many dores and many Gods. If they are to be prayed vnto, we must beleue on them. For the Apostle saith? Quomodo inuocabunt in quē non cre∣diderunt. How shal they cal on him, pray to him,The thyrd Roma. 12 on whom they beleue not. If we must beleue on them, then let vs be chri∣stened in their names. But holy baptis∣me is cōmaunded not to be ministred in their names, but In nomine, in one name
of the father, the son, nd the holy ghost. Wherfore, as they are not to be beleued vpon, so are they not to be called vpon, but God onli whose highnes disdeineth ye felowship of any creature. Let vs ther∣fore praye vnto him,Ieremi. 2 for he is the well of water of life, let vs not dig vyle and bro∣ken pittes which hould no water, let vs take hede of the stretes of Egipt, and of the wayes of Assiria. God is no wilder∣nes to his people, nor lād without light, but a mercifull and a liberal God. Such a make flesh their arme, are accursed.Psal. 39 Ierem. 32 Let vs make Christ our arme, for he is the arme of God, who in al things beca∣me lyke vnto his brethren, that he might be a mercifull and a faithful bishoppe,Hebre. 2 in thinges concerning God, to pourge the peoples sinnes. God only knoweth our nede, scartheth aur thoughts and intēts, graūteth our desires, blesseth and crow∣neth vs, and ther be no more Gods, no more hearers, no more iudgers of thoug¦hts beside him. He saith by his Prophet:Esa. 44. and .45 I am the first and the last, and beside me is ther no God. Haue not I ye Lord done it, withoute whome there is none other God? the tru God and sauiour, and ther
is els none but I, and therfore turne vn∣to me all ye endes of the earth, so shal ye be saued. For I am God, and ther is els none. If ther be many Gods, the diuine power, gouernaūce and rule, is deuyded betwene them, and then it is not an euer¦lasting power, but mortall, for whatsoe∣uer is deuyded, is mortall. But naturall reason, denyeth God to be corruptible, and his power to decaye. Wherfore it protesteth yt there is but one God, which ruleth all. Moreouer the diuine power, is a perfit power, & a general authoritie, for God is almighty and general gouer∣nor. If ther be many Gods, ech of them hath a certeine portion to rule. But they which haue but portions, are no Gods, for the power of God is a perfit power, & a perfit power, cōprehēdeth all power. If there be many Gods, they haue seue∣rall dominions, & euery one of them lac∣keth so much, as the other Gods haue, & so the mo Gods they be in number, the lesse is their power & authoritie. As for ex¦ample, ye king is most mighty who hath all the world vnder him, for al things are his, ye riches of al men belong vnto him. If there be many kings, they are of lesse
power, ther is no such authoritie among thē, no such power, for eueri one of them hath his dominion, his portion to rule, & presumeth not beyond his owne bonds: Euen so if ther be many Gods, they are of lesse power, but reason geueth God a perfit, and an absolute power. Wherfore ther is but one God only, for asmuch as perfit power cannot be in many. Also it ther be many, howe do they knowe that they shal cōtinue of one mynd and will? If thei do not as it is like, for it is a com∣mon saying: Tot capita tot sensus, as ma∣ny myndes as heades, then this diuersi∣tie wil prouoke them to battail, as we re∣ad in Homer, who bryngeth in ye Gods fighting one with another: some of thē takyng parte with the Troyanes, some with ye Grekes, for diuersitie in will cau∣seth warre. The heathē graūt that God hath a generall aucthoritie and a perfite power, but they saye that he hath many Gods of lesse power, which ar called mi∣nores dij, to gouern the world vnder him. But thei lie, for thei be no gods, because thei be ministers vnder him, nomore thē ye officers vnder the king, as chaūcelers, maires, presidēts, iudges, shriues, bailies
and Constables, are kinges. God is not like a man, he worketh all thynges with¦out handes, without any werinees or payne, nether doth tyme measure his workes,Psal. 148 with whom it is, Dixit & facta sunt, he spake the word and it was done. Whēfore he nether hath nede to rule vn¦der him, nether can any such be Gods, wherof it must nedes folow, yt the world is gouerned by one God. No citie is wel ordred but of one Mayre, no host of mē but of one general captaine. Wherfore the Grekes sayling vnto the famous ci∣tie of Troye, chose Agamenon to be king of kinges, and wylled all to be obedient vnto hym. If in one host there be so ma∣ny chief captains, as there be thousands if euery haue his captain, whom he must only obey, no order, no aray can be kept for euery captaine will be with his men where hym lysteth, and euery one of thē wyl refuse to endaunger hymselfe and his men, and wyl passe the ieopardie to hym that is next. Euen so except by one God the whole worlde be gouerned, all thynges wyl decay, and peryshe. If it be true which is comenly sayd among mē, Omnis potestas impatiens est consortis, that
power receiueth no felowship, howe much more is it true in that ineffable po∣wer which apperteineth to God, whose highnes receiueth no felowship of any o¦ther. What a king is to his realme, that God is in ye world, one realme hath but one, so one world hath but on God. For this cause and other the scriptures vse to call him a king. No ship is well gouer∣ned of many maisters, no flock of mani shepeherdes, no schole of many schole∣maisters, no citie of many Mayres, no hoste of many captaines, no kyngdome of many kinges, all thinges stande and are preserued by an vnitie. And Virgill recordeth this thing saying: Principio celū, ac terras, cāpos{que} liquentes, Lucentem{que} globum lune, titaniaque astra, Spiritus intus alit, totam{que} infusa per artus Mēs agitat molē, et magno se corpore miscet First heauē & earth, & clay fields in dede with mone & stars, ye spirit wtin doth fede The mind spread through the vayns, eke moues the mole. Mixing it self vnto the body whole. The Poet Virgil beareth record that there is but one God, for one body hath but one mynd, and God is the mynd of
the world, wherfore as there is but one world, so there is but one God. And that no man shoulde misme this spirit and mynde of whiche he speakith, not to be God, he expoundeth these wordes in an¦other place, saiyng: Deum namque ire per omnes, Terrasque tractusque maris, celumque pro∣fundum. God goeth through al, sene or vnsene with eye. Through earth, and sea, through heauen depe an hie. uide also in his boke called Meta∣morphosis, witnesseth that one God for¦med al thinges of a confused heape. I do not cal poetes to witnesse, that I thinke any credite to be geuen to their wordes, but to shewe that this thing is so mani∣fest a truth, that they which were blynd did se it. But as I haue spoken of poets, so wyl I speake of the Phylosophers. Thales Milsius, one of ye seuen famous wise men,Thales. held opinion that water is the stuffe & matter of which al thinges were made, and that God formed them ther∣of, graūting both one God to be maker of al thinges, & also telling wherof. For
the scriptures call the confused heape, of which al things were made bi the name of water, as it is writtē.Gene. 1 The spirit of god was born vpon ye waters. Pitagoras al∣so defineth god to be a mynd, filling,Pitha∣goras. & ru¦ling al the porcions of ye world. And one body hath but one minde, wherfore the world hath but one God. For God is a mind, & the world is the body. He also said that the nūber of thre, was the begin¦ning of al things, teaching the people of his time that god is a trinitie, in a riddle & obscure speach, because it wold not be born openly. If ther were many worlds as some thinke, it wer some probabilitie to say ther were many gods.Parmeni∣des. Parmeni∣des thinketh yt there is but vnū ens. The noble & worthy philosopher Aristotle de partīg out of this life,Aristotel praied vnto ye same ens, saiyng: ens entium miserere mei. And wel may god be called ens, who only is of himself, & al things haue their being of him. Plato also saith,Plato. yt the ouernāce of this world is a Monarchie, & that God only both made & ruleth it.Hermes. Hermes tris∣magist. teacheth thesame thing, & that he is vnsearchable. Marcus Tullius the fa∣mouse orator agreeth with them,Tullius. who
teacheth that God is, Mens soluta qued & libera & segregata ab omni concrecione mortali, omnia sentiens, & omnia mouens, that is to witte: God is a simple mynde, nether being made of matter & form, ne∣ther mingled with accidēts, knowing all thinges, and ordryng them. The Sibilles also taught the same in old time, which were womē that did pro¦phecie before the cōming of our sauiour Christ, so called because they did disclose many of Gods secrets. For the Aeolians cal the gods, Sions▪ not Theous, & counsel or secrets, not Bou∣len, but Bullen, and there were ten of thē, The most famous of them, which was called Erithrea, saith thus of God. .Sibbella Erithrea. One God alone thete is I wot, Both infinite, and vnbegot. Who is called also for the same skil, ame∣tor, and apator, motherles, and fatherles. She witnesseth also that this god made heauen, and garnished it with lightes, made earth and the waters, saying: . .
Ther is alone one chief god which did make The heauen, the sun, the mone, and eke the stares, The steady earth, and sea fluds that shake, With all fruit bearing trees. &c. And that he is only to be honored and none other thing. . Him only worshyp ye, That ruleth the world alone, Which hath from the beginning be And euer shalbe one. And she bringeth a reason why, for as muche as he is gouernour of the world, and only without beginning & ending. An other Sibille also crieth that this is the voice of God. . I am one God my self alone, And beside me God is there none. Appollo also, whom the folysh people for his wisdom supposed to be god,Apollo. wor∣shipping him as God after his death, when he was demaunded what God was, made this aunswer.
. He that is of himself and of none other Whom naught can hurt, who neuer had a mother, Whose name can by no meanes be ful exprest, Who in the syre doth lyue and take his reste. Lo this is God: as for thangels and we, Of this great God a right smal porcion be. Be not discontent (genle reader) that I myngle the sayinges of Philosophers and Poetes, with the veritie of the scrip∣tures. For Paul citeth Poetes to fortify Gods prouidēce,Actes. 17 saying: In him we liue moue, and haue our beyng, as certein of your owne Poetes saye, for we are also his generatiō, the Prophetes also make relation of Giantes, and of the valley of Titans. Esay telleth of the maremaides and of the doughters of sparowes, and Ieremy saith of Babilō, that the dough∣ters of Marmaydes shal dwel in it. The wyseman also speaketh of thē. Ezechiell mencioneth the destruction of Gog and Magod, which all be spoken of much in
Poetes. The scriptures also vse to teach vs truth by fables, as ye parable of trees in the boke of Iudges wytnesseth, and many other. But to turne to our matter there is but one God, forasmuch as all men confesse hym to be a father,God is a fater. both be∣cause he is the fountaine of all thinges, and also geueth al necessaries to men as a father. But it is against nature for any man to haue many fathers, wherfore it is against natur to worship many gods. He is a Lord also and a Maister, for to hym belongeth to auenge and punyshe. But no man can serue two Maisters. Wherfor if God be to be honored,Luke. 1 he is one god not many. If ther be many, ther can be no God which only is to be ho∣nored. But how can the father, the son, & the holy ghost being thre, be one God? Truly because thei ar one mind,How ye father Christ and the ho¦ly spirit▪ be one God. one spi∣rit, one substance, & can not be seperate. The father is as it were a plētiful spring or fountain, the sonne is a riuer gushing out of it. The father is the sunne, Christ is the beame issuing out of it. The beam can not be seperat from the Sunne, nor the Riuer from the spryng. Christ also is the hād of God, and the holy comforter
is his finger, the hand and finger are not seperat from the body. I wil declare this with a familier example. If a father haue a sonne, whom he loueth so muche that he maketh him ruler of his house, yet ye house is said to be gouerned by one mai∣ster and ruler, not many. So the worlde is the house of one God, & the father and the sonne, because they disagre nether in nature, ne in will are one God. The kin∣ges image is called the king, & Christes image Christ, and yet they be not two kinges, nor two Christes: so the father & Christ are one God, for Christ is the fa∣thers image, no dead image, for he is life and resurrection, nor counterfait, for he is truth, nor dumme, for he is the word. But the Arrians reply that as I say, Da¦uid,An obiect. and Salomon ar of one substaunce, and yet they be thre men, not one man, yt so albeit the father, the sonne, and the ho¦ly ghost be one in substaunce, yet they are not one God. I aunswer, that Isay, Dauid,Thāswer. and Salomon, are called thre mē not one man, because euery one of them, although they be of one substaunce, hath a diuersitie in time, in knowledge, in big¦nes, in place. For there can be no vnitie,
where there is diuersitie. But the father, the son, and the holy ghost, are one god, forasmuch as ther is no diuersitie amōg them. They are al thre immortal, of like knowledge & maiestie, & not conteined in place, but fillers of al places. Many also are called by the name of mā, as the lord is my helper, I care not what man may do vnto me, & it is better to trust in God then in man. But in men there is vnitie of certein thinges only, as of nature,Psal. 117 or loue or faith. General vnitie belongeth only to the father, the sonne, & the holy ghost: wherfore they be one God. Fur∣ther that the father and Christ are one God, the prophet Esay teacheth, saying: the lord hath said moreouer, the occupi∣ers of Egipt, the marchaūtes of the Mo¦rians & Sabees shall come vnto thee wt tribute, thei shalbe thine, thei shal folow thee, & go with cheines vpon their fete. They shal fal down before thee, & make supplicatiō vnto thee, for god is in thee,Esay. 45 & ther is no other God beside thee. God the father speketh these words to Christ who is one God with the father, for ye fa∣ther is in him, & saith that ther is no god beside him. If thou deny them to be one
God, thou deniest the diuinitie of the fa∣ther, who saith to Christ, God is in thee, & ther is no God beside thee, because he is in his son,Ihon. 14 for it is written: The father that dwelleth in me, is he that doeth the workes, & I am in the father, & the father in me, ther is no God beside him, becau∣se thei both ar one God. God is in god, & yet ther be not two Gods, & the Lord is in ye Lord, & yet thei be not two Lords for we are forbidden to serue two Lords. Nemo potest duobus dominis seruire.Luke. 16. But both the father and Christ ar to be hono¦red and serued. For of Christ it is writtē that the thre wyse men kneled doun,Math 2. and worshipped hym and opened their trea∣sures and offered vnto him giftes, gold, frankensence and myrre. By gold con∣fessing him to be a kyng, by frankensen∣ce to be God, and by myrre, to be man, nether ar they blamed therfore. A womā of Cane worshipped him, and obteineth her reuest.Math. 15 Roma. 1 Galat. 1 And Paul in the beginning of al his letters professeth him self to be ye seauaunt of Iesu Christ, wherfore he is to be honored,Math. 4 & thē he is one God with the father, for it is writtē: Thou shalt wor¦ship the Lorde thy God,Ihon. 13 and hym only
shalt thou serue. You cal me, saith Christ Lord and maister, and ye say well for so am I.Math. 23 And he warneth vs that we call not one another maister, for one is our maister. The Apostle also witnesseth yt ther is but one diuinitie, one power and maiestie of Christ & the father, saying: al∣though ther be yt are called Gods, whe∣ther in heauē or in earth (as ther be gods many, & Lordes many) yet vnto vs is ther but vnus deus, one God, which is ye father, of whom are all thinges, & we in him, and vnus dominus,1. Cor. 8 one Lorde Iesus Christ, by whom are al thinges, & we by him. For as in that he saith, that ther is but one Lord Iesus Christ, the father is not denied to be Lord, so these wordes vnto vs ther is but one God, which is ye father, denie not Christ to be God. He numbreth not him emong those whiche are Gods by nuncupation, but ioyneth & coupleth him with the father, frō whō he is vnseperable.Baruch.  The Prophet Baruch saith of him: he is our God, and there is none other able to be cōpared vnto him. Wherfore ether we must graunt him to be one God with the father, or els make the father vnderlyng to hys sonne, for
none is to be compared to him. That the Prophet speaketh these words of Christ the same text folowing sheweth: it is he that hath found out al wisdom, and hath geuen her vnto Iacob his seruaunt, and to Israell his beloued. Afterward did he shewe himselfe vpon earth, and dwelt a∣mong men. This text declareth also that Christ gouerned the congregatiō of the Israelits, in that it sayth, he foūd out all wisdome, and gaue her vnto Iacob and Israell. Read that Chapter, & thou shalt fynd yt he prepared ye earth at the begin∣ning, & filled it with all maner of foules, and beastes, and that he gouerneth the same, and that he wotteth al things, that he is great and hath no end, high, & vn∣measurable, which things, all proue him one God with the father, as he testifieth of himselfe, saying to his father: Hec est vita eterna. &c. This is life euerlasting, that they might know thonly tru God,Ihon. 17 and whome thou hast sent Iesus Christ, that is, that they might knowe the, and Iesus Christ to be thonly true God. Neither doth (only) here deny the holy ghoste to be one God with them, foras∣much as he is of the same essēce that they
be, for he procedeth of them both, nomo¦re then ye father is excluded by the same word and the sonne, where it is written: The thinges of God, knoweth none but the spirit of God.1. Cor.  The father and Christ are not excluded from that knowledge, which is said here to apperteine only to the holy ghost. So whē soeuer they two are said to be the only true God, the al∣mightie cōforter is not denied to be god also with them. We read in the reuela∣tion of S. Ihon, of a name which none knewe but he only, who had it written, that is Christ, & yet both ye father knewe it, who knoweth al sciēce, & the almightie cōforter also, for he searcheth al thinges, yea the botome of Gods secretes. Wherfore whē Moises crieth:Apoca. 19 Harken Israell, the Lorde thy God is one God, when all the Prophets preach that there be no more Goddes but one,Eccle. 42 1. Cor. 2 the diuine nature and essēce is not denied to Christ and to the almightie comforter, nomore then dominion and Lordshippe is denied to the father, because Paule saith, to vs is but one Lord Iesus Christ. So God is said onli to haue immortalitie,1  and yet nether Christ is immortal, who saith vn∣to
the rebelliouse Iewes:Ihon. 8 Verely verely I say vnto you, if a man kepe my word, he shall neuer se death. For if the keping of Christes worde lead vs to immortali∣tie, howe much more is he himselfe im∣mortal, without beginning or end? Nei∣ther ye holy comforter, for of him Paule writeth: If the bloud of oxen, and of go∣ates, and the ashes of an heyfer, when it was spryncled, purified the vncleane, as touching the purifieng of ye fleshe:Hebre. 9 how much more shal ye bloud of Christ, which through the eternal spirit offered himself withoute spotte vnto God, pourge your consciences from dead workes, to serue the liuing God.Luke. 7 1. Tim. 1 1. Tim. 7 Luke. 18 So God is said only to forgeue sinne, only to be wise, only to be mightie, only to be good, which textes and sayinges, are spokē of the gloriouse Trinitie. If they were spoken of the fa∣ther only, as the Arrians teach, then the euangelist wold haue said, who can for∣geue sinnes, but the father only, & none is God sae the father only. Paule also sayth▪ not vnto the father wyse only, but vnto God, king euerlasting, immortal, inuisible, and wyse oniy, that is to the blessed Trinitie be honoure and prayse
for euer and euer. For if we take him o∣therwise, we make him a lier, who graū∣teth power, immortalitie, and wisdome, in diuerse and sundry places, both to Christ our sauiour, and to the spirite the comforter. And these thinges do on∣lye apperteyne and belong to them thre, neither are they attribute to any other. Wherupon it muste nedes folowe, that they be one God. Nothing proueth this more plainly then the hebrue text, wher∣soeuer the scripture cryeth vnto vs, that ther is but one god. Moses saith vnto ye Israelits, Iehoua Elohenou, Iehoua Ecadh,Deut.  that is, the Lord our God, is one God or one Lord▪ This text can not be spoken of the father onlye, for the hebrue word for God is Elohim, of the plurell nūber, not of the singuler, to teach vs that there be thre vnconfounded, which neuerthelesse are declared to be one God, and of one essence, maiestie and power, for so much as they are, Iehoua Ecadh. For Iehoua, is the peculier, special, honorab, and most blessed name of God, for which the Ie∣wes dyd vse to reade Adonai, not that it could not be expressed in their language but for a more reuerence to Gods name.
Moises also saith in another place,Deut. 4 vnto the it was shewed, that yu mightst know that the Lord is God, & that ther is none but he, wheras for god, the english he v∣seth Elohim, so for the Lord, he vseth Ieho∣ua.Esay. 44 and .45 Esay the Prophet doth likewise, spe∣king of one God, and reiecting al other. Wherfore the Trinitie is one euerlast∣ing & the only immutable, inuisible, and almighty God. I will proue this to be true in these foure wordes, power, name light, vertue, for the father is almighty as it is written: I am the Lord almighty And the sonne also is almighty,Gene. 17 for the wyseman calleth him ye almighty hand, and the almighty word of God.Sapi. 11 and .17 The ho¦ly comforter also is almighty forasmuch as he is the finger of God, wherfore thei are one God. They haue also one name, for the Apostles are commaunde to chri∣sten al nations in the name of the father of the sonne,They haue one name. and of the holy ghost. Note here that the scripture sayeth in ye name not in the names,Math. 28 and to teache vs that there is one diuinitie, one maiestie, and one name of the thre persones, the scrip∣ture telleth that Christ, & the holy ghost, come not in diuers and sondry names,Ihon. 5
but in one name Christ saith: I come in my fathers name and ye receiue me not. This name of ye father, is Christes name also, for the Lord sayth in the boke of de∣parture to him. Ego anticedo in nomine meo, & vocabo te nomine meo domini in cō¦spectu tuo. That is, I wyl go before thee in my name, and I wyll call thee by my name Lord in thi presence. Thou learnest here that Christ, and his father haue one name, learne also that the almighty, and alknowing comforter hath the selfsame name, in that he cometh in the name of Christ, as it is writtē: that comforter the holy ghost whom the father wyl send in my name. He is sent in Christes name,Ihon. 14 wherfore he hath one name with hym & the father.Actes.  This is the name of ye blessed trinitie, of which it is wrytten: ther is no other name vnder heauen in whiche we must be saued, wherfore they haue but one diuinite. I wil proue ye same of those thinges which the scripture saith of god. God is light sayth Iohn, & in him is no darkenes. Christ also is light,1. Ihon.  Ihon.  for of Ihō the baptist it is writē: he was not ye light, but to bear witnes of ye light which ligh∣teth al men coming into the world.
God is light. 1 Iohn. 1. Christ is the true lyght. Iohn. 1. Ergo Christ is the true God. Of the almightie comforter also it is written:Psal. 4 Signatum est super nos lumen, the lyght of thy countenaunce, O Lorde, is sealed vpon vs, but who is the light sea∣led? who is the seale? that is ye holy ghost, of whom Paul writeth:Ephesi. 1 ye are sealed wt the holy spirit of promes, whiche is the earnest of our inheritaunce. Note also yt he is not another light but thesame light that the father is, for he is the light of his countenaunce, wherfore he is the same God, and one God with the father and the sonne. But some felowe wil aske me where I find the father to be lyght: tru∣ly in Paul, who calleth Christ the bright¦nes of euerlasting lyght, where by euer∣lasting lyght the father is ment. Christ also is vertue,Hebre. 1 God is ver¦tue. 1. Cor. 1 for Paul calleth hym, Dei virtutem atque sapienciam, the vertue & wisdome o God. We read also that the father is ver∣tue, where it is written: Videbitis filium hominis ad dexteram virtutis, ye shall see Christ,Math. 26 ye shal se the sonne of man on the right hand of the vertue or power. And
that the holy ghost is vertue Christ wit∣nesseth saying: Accipietis virtutem adue∣ientem in vos, spiritus sancti, you shal re∣ceiue vertue or power of the holy ghost.Actes. 1 Luke also speaketh this of the holy gost, Virtus exibat de eo, vertue gushed out of him, wherfore thei be one God.Luke. 6 God is lif Ihon. 14 The son is life who saith: I am the way, truth, & life. So the father also is life, as Ihō wit∣nesseth, saying: that which was from the beginning, which we haue heard, which we haue sene with our eies, whiche we haue loked vpon, and our handes haue handled of the word of lyfe, for the lyfe appeared, and we haue sene & beare wit∣nes, and shew vnto you that eternal life, which was with the father.1. Ihon. 1 Here he na∣med our sauiour Christ the word of life, and eternal life. But what meaneth he bi calling him the word of life, then that he is the word of the father? wherfore the fa¦ther also is lyfe. And if so be the Apostle call Christ lyfe, why is not the alknow∣yng comforter lyfe, who is the spyrite of lyfe, as it is wrytten: The spirite of lyfe was in the wheles. Note here rea∣der that Christ is not another lyfe, but thesame life that the father is,Ezechi.  in asmuch
as he is that eternal lyfe, whiche was with the father. For if he be one life with the father, thē must he nedes be one god with him. The father also is a flud, as he recordeth of himself:God is a floud or streame. Esay. 66 I will flowe vpon you like a water flud of peace, and like a flowyng streame. And Christ caleth ye almigtie comforter a fludde, saying, out of his belly shal flowe riuers of water of life. This spake he of the spirit. Wherfor the holy ghost is a flud or streame,Ihon. 7 and that a mighty and great flud, washyng and clensing the heauenly citie of Hieru∣salem from al filth and vnclennes as Da¦uid winesseth, there is a flud, which with his riuers reioyseth the citie of God, the holy dwelling of the hyghest, no other stream can wash, purifie & clense vs, but this. God graunt that this flud may o∣uerflow the bankes of Englande, God send it into the court, & into the kinges chamber, into his heart, & into his coun∣sels chamber, and into the middest of the parliamēt house, to wash & banish away all couetousnes, in spiritual thinges, as ferming of benefices, pluralities of pre∣bendes & personages, absence frō cures, from colledges, improperations, first
fruites. &c. and parcialitie, and the gredy wolfe of ambicion, pride, vnmercifulnes and oppression out of the hearts of nobi¦litie. God send it into the hearts of By∣shops that they may once againe yet be preaching prelates, and al priestes, that they may power forth clean & pure doc∣trine as diligently as they haue powred holy water many a day. The holy spirite is the true holy water, the true flud was∣shing away our sinnes, not the vnprofi∣table ceremonies of the syre of Rome. Wherfor our sauiour Christ must nedes be a flud also, for out of him gushe these streames of eternal life. They haue also one operation,They haue one grace. & thei do worke al things vnseperabli, as I haue proued in ye chap. before, wher I declared mans soull to be the image of God, wherfore they haue one diuitie. Moreouer it is writtē: grace with you and peace frō God the father,Galat. 1 and our Lord Iesus Christ. Behold thou seest here that one grace commeth from the father and the sonne, & one peace ly∣kewise, thesame also come from the holy ghost, for of peace it is writtē:Galat.  the fruit of the spirit is loue, ioy, peace, long suffring & Zachary calleth him ye spirit of grace.
God hath promised to poure vpon Hie∣rusalem the spirit of grace and mercy, & Peter saith to those that were pricked in their hearts through his preaching,Actes. 2 Ac∣cipietis graciā spiritus sancti, you shall re∣ceiue the grace of the holy ghost.One cha∣ritie. They haue also one charitie & one loue, for of ye father & the son it is written: who loueth me, shal be loued of my father, & I wil lo¦ue him:Ihon. 14 & of the holy cōforter, ye fruit of ye spirit is loue. Through this loue of al the thre persons Christ suffred death yt we might liue,Ihon. 3 for of the father it is written: God so loued ye world, yt he gaue his on∣ly begotten son, & of Christ, I liue by the faith of the sonne of God which loued me,Gala. 2 & gaue himself for me. The spirit also gaue him, for Paul saith of Christ, which through the eternal spirit offred himself without spot vnto God.Hebre. 9 They haue also one counsel, for Esay calleth ye holy gost, the spirit of coūsel & strength, & Christ is called, Anges magni consilij, an angel of great coūsel,Esay. 11 because he is the wisdom of God, they are of one wil, they cōmaund & forbid one thing,One coūcel their calling is not di¦uers, but one. And as the father is called Lord, so is the holy cōforter, so is Christ.
We reade that the spirit of the Lorde came vpon Sampson, whom he calleth also his strength, saying: if my hear were cut of, my strength would go from me.Iudic. 14 But after that his seuen lockes were cut awai, the scripture saith, that the Lord de∣parted from him,Iudi. 16 calling the spirit which gouerned him, Lord. If thei haue one na¦ture, one kingdom, one power, one coun¦sel, one operation, one name, one vertue, one life, one peace, one grace, one cōmaū¦dement, one vocation, one wyll, and se∣yng they be one light, one charitie, one streame, and one Lord, how can they be diuers Gods. There is a generall vnitie of al things in them, wherfore thei must nedes be one God also. I trust now it be sufficiently fortified, and established, that ther is but one god of heauen & earth, who gouerneth & or∣dreth al thinges. Natural reason proclai∣meth this, as it were out of some highe place, vnto al creatures. His almighty & euerlasting power proueth ye same. The Poets confesse and graunt him to be a∣lone, the Philosophers cōdiscend to thē, the Sibilles magnifie and acknowledge him, ye false gods of ye Pagans thēselues
confesse him the Prophetes of the true God euermore taught this, the Euāge∣listes and Apostles fortifie the same, na∣ture preacheth one God, which acknow¦ledgeth one world, faith telleth vs the sa∣me, for there is but one fayth of both te∣staments, as the Apostle witnesseth, and baptisme also, for there is but one bath of holy baptisme, whiche is ministred in ye name of the trinitie. The glorious death of many thousandes of matrs, both of men, children, women, & virgins, which by no maner of tormentes could be pluc∣ked away from this faith, haue sealed it, and the constant and stedfast consent, a∣grement, and conspiration of all tymes and nacions with one minde and accord hath enacted this, so that the gates of hel shal not preuaile against it. The .xxix. Chapter. ¶Al the partes of the difinition made of God are proued to agre vnto Christ. AS I haue spoken of al iii. persones of the blessed tri¦nitie together, so now for a more euident profe of my last content, I wyll fortifie out of the stoore
house of ye scriptures, yt al the parts of my definitiō made of ye only king of kinges, immortal, & almighty God, do belong & appertein also both vnto Christ, & to the alknowing & most blessed cōforter. The first persel of my difinitiō was:Christ is a substaunce God is a spiritual substance. That Christ is a sub∣stance, no mā wil deny, for he is no acci∣dent. Read my .xxiiii. chap. & there yu shalt find this thing proued. But how cā you proue yt he is a spiritual substaunce? The prophet Ieremy saith:Threno.  Spiritus ante faciē nostram Christus dominus, that is ye spirit before vs, Christ ye lord. Note yt he calleth him both a spirit & lord. If ther be no spi∣rit he can not be God, for god is a spirit: and inasmuch as he is a spirit & a substāce he is a spiritual substaunce,Christ is  spirit. not touching his humanitie, but touching yt nature, in which he is lord, as the prophet declareth very wel, saying: ye spirit before vs Christ the lord, meaning that he is Lord in that he is a spirit, for ye Lord is a spirit. Pure nature foloweth in the difinitiō. By the word pure, is ment, that God is one,2. Cor. 3 A single na¦ture, & not mixte. & a singuler substaunce, not myxt, not com∣post. Ether Christ is suche a substaunce, or els he is a creature. If he be a creatur,
thē is he subdued to vanitie, not willing∣ly, for the Apostle witnesseth. Quippe va∣nitati creatura subiacet non volens.Roma. 10 Euery creature is subdued to vanitie, Christ is not subdued to vanitie, Ergo Christ is no creature. That Christ is not subdued to vanitie, I proue thus.Ihon. 14 The ruler of this world came and founde nothing in him. Ergo he is not subdued to vanitie. But some Arrians wil say, yt he was sub¦dued vnto vanitie, in yt he toke our natur vpō him to restore vs, when we wer for∣lorn: for the preacher crieth of all things vnder heauen:Ecclesi. 1 al is but vanitie, al is but plain vanitie. Albeit this were truly spo∣ken, yet can not S. Pauls saying be veri¦fied of Christ, who saith: euery creature is subdued vnto vanitie, not willingly. Christ toke our nature willingly, restord vs willingly by his precious death & pas¦sion, as he himself doth testifie: no man doth take my life fro me, but I put it a∣way my self, wherfore he is no creature. Ergo he is a pure, simple, & single nature, without al mixture or composicion. Im∣mutable: Paul telleth vs that he is im∣mutable,
for in his letter to his countrey¦men, he witnesseth that the father spea∣keth these wordes of the .ci. Psalm. vnto Christ:Aebre. 1 Psal. 110 Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the heauens are the workes of thy handes, they shall perishe, but thou shalt endure. They shal wax old as doth a garment, & as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, & they shalbe chaunged, but thou art the same, that is, vnchaūgeable, & thy years shal not faile, Lo ye father witnesseth that Christ is immutable. We read also,Hebre. 13 Iesus Christus heri & hodie idem est, etiam in se∣cula. Iesus Christ yesterday and to day, and the same continueth for euer. This propertie belonging to no creature, pro∣ueth him God. For, God only is immutable, Iesus Christ is immutable. Ergo Ieus Christ is God. Inuisible: This is another propertie, whiche the scriptures geue vnto God. Christ is a spirit touching one nature▪ then if al spirites, if our soules be vnui∣sible, how muche more is Christ vnuisi∣ble, the maker of spirites and soules? Paul calleth hym touchynge this na∣ture,
vertutem dei, the vertue or power of God. Wherfore he is vnuisible, vnsear∣chable: Paule in the same place calleth him the wisdome of God, & the wisdome of God is vnsearchable. There foloweth in the definition:He flleth heauē and earth. Sapi. 8 Filling heauē & earth. This also belongeth vnto Christ, for of him it is written: Wisdome reacheth from one end to another mightely, and ordreth all things louingly. Herken also what he saith vnto his disciples. Where¦soeuer two or thre be gathered together in my name,Math. 18 ther am I in the middest of them. This proueth him to be the true God, for no creature can be eueri where. Ful of vnderstāding: he is the wisdome of God.Sapien. 8 1. Cor. 1 Full of truth: I am the waye, truth, and lyfe. Full of righteousnesse, Pater non iudicat quemquam, sed omne iu∣dicium dedit filio.Ihon. 14 Ihon. 15 The father iudgeth no man, but hath geuen al iudgement vnto Christ, who in the last day, shall appeare both vnto good men & euel, in that form in which he suffred, not in his diuine na∣ture. The father is said to iudge no man, because neither he nor his son, in his di∣uinitie shall be sene in iudgemēt, for their diuinitie is all one. Then Christ is full of
rightousnesse, for asmuch as he shall iud∣ge ye world in his humanitie, vnto who∣me the father saith:Psal. 44 Hebre. 1 God thy feare shall be for euer and euer. The scepter of thy kingdome is a right scepter. Thou haste loued righteousnesse, and hated wicked∣nes. Full of mercie.Iacob.  Philip. 2 The wisdome from aboue is full of mercie. When he was e∣quall with God, he made himselfe of no reputation, and toke vpon him the shape of a seruaunt for our sakes, which were his ennemies. Ful of wisdome: in Christ are hid all treasures of wisdom & know∣ledge. Full of all maner of goodnesse:Colloss. 2 for in him dwelleth all the fulnesse of the God head bodely,Colloss. 1 and of his fulnes haue all we receiued grace for grace.Ihon. 1 Iacob. 3 Iames also witnesseth: that the wisdome from aboue is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be intreated, ful of mercy, & good frutes. The next propertie of God is to be eter∣nall. This belongeth to Christ, for he is the beginning of all thinges, he is the progresse or middle course, and he is the end and pricke. The beginning and end∣ing, for he saith: I am Alpha & Omega,Ihon. 14 ye beginning & the ending. And he is the middle course, in that he saith, I am the
way. He promiseth lyfe without end to such as kepe his worde,Ihon. 8 saying: Verely verely I say vnto you, if a man kepe my worde, he shall neuer se death. Therfore he himselfe must nedes be immortall. Nothing is without end and begynnyng saue God onely. Chrst is without beginning and end. Er∣go Christ is God. There foloweth in the definitiō of God, maker of all thinges: that Christ made all thinges Paule recordeth,Coliss. 1 saying: for by him were all thinges created, things that are in heauen, and thinges that are in earth, things visible, and things inui∣sible, whether thei be maiestie or lordship either rule or power. He that made all thinges is God. hebr. 3. Iesus Christ made all thinges. Coloss. 1. Ergo Christ is GOD. Then it foloweth in ye same discription: Subiecte to nothing,Ihon. 3 and gouerning all things. He is subiect to nothing, for we read of him, he that cōmeth from heauen is aboue al. He gouerneth al thinges, for he saith:Ihon. 5 whatsoeuer ye father doth, that doth the son also, and my father worketh hitherto, and I worke. Whatsoeuer we
aske the father in his name, he will do it, and without him we can do do nothing. This declareth him to be god by nature, not by nuncupatiō only, as they of who∣me it is written: Ego dixj dij estis.Psal. 8 I haue said you ar Gods. It foloweth: Know∣ing al things: Nothing hath this know∣ledge but God, as I haue proued before. But we read yt Christ knew the inward thoughts and intents of men.Ihon. 2 Iesus did not put himselfe in their hands, because he knew al men,Math. 26 and neded not that any shuld testifie of them, for he knewe what was in man. He knewe the houre of his death, he knew that al his disciples shuld be offended in him that tyme, he knewe that Peter wold fall and ryse agayne, he knew what would become of Iudas, he opened the myndes of his disciples, that thei might vnderstād the scriptures, and the Disciples confesse him to knowe all thinges, saying:Luk. 14 Ihon. 1 Nowe we knowe that thou knowest all things, and nedest not to aske any question. The nexte thing appetteyning onlye to God, is forgeuing of sin: for I haue pro∣ued before, that no creature can do this: but we read that Christ forgeueth sinne,Marke. 2
and is reuiled of the Phariseis therfore,Luke. 7 Apoca. 22 Math. 2.15 and .28 who also forgeueth many sinnes to Ma¦ry Magdalene, because she loued much. To be honored: Ihon would haue wor∣shipped an aungel, but the aungel forbid¦deth him, the wyse men, the Cananite, Mary Magdalene, Ioanna, Mary of Iames and other worshipped Christ, & were not blamed therfore. And Paul in his epistles cōfesseth himself the seruaūt not of any aungel or archaungel,Roma. 1 Philip. 1 but of Iesus Christ. Wherfore he is one God with the father,Math. 4 for one God only is to be worshipped. There foloweth in the definition of God, to be called vpō, and that he pōdreth our desires. That Christ is to be praied vnto for al maner of thīgs the Prophet Esay teacheth vs,Esay. 11 Ictes. 7 saying: The rote of Iesse shal be set vp for a tokē the Heathen shall pray vnto him. Saint Steuen crieth vnto him:Actes. 9 Lord Iesu recei¦ue my spirit. Paul asketh him, lord, lord what shal I do? and he is taught. Paul also praieth vnto him, & the father toge∣ther,1. Thess. 3 saying: God himself our father, & our Lord Iesus Christ, guyd our iournei vnto you.. Thess. 2 And again our lord Iesu christ himself, and God our father which hath
loued vs, and hath geuen vs euerlasng consolation, & good hope through grace, comfort your hertes and stablish you in all doctine and good doing. The Apostle sheweth that he is one God with the fa∣ther, and of equal power, in that he offe∣reth one praier to them both, and in that he putteth otherwhiles ye father formost, and otherwhiles our sauiour Christ. Iu∣stifiyng and sauing vs:1. Ihon. 1 Roma. 10 who iustifieth & saueth vs, but he who is our sauiour, our raunsom, our spokesmā, our mercy stok, the end of the law to al beleuers, of whō Iere. saith:Ierem. 3 This is the name that they shal cal him, the Lord our iustifier. Almi∣ghty foloweth and endeth the definitiō. If it be true which Paul saith:Philip▪  I can doe al thinges through the helpe of Christe which strēgthneth me, how much more is Christ almighty himselfe, of whome Iohn writeth, Dicit dominus omnipot▪Apoca. 1 the Lord almighti saith. And the wisemā calleth him the almighty hnd,Sa 18 the almi∣ghty arme, the almighty word of God. Seing therfore the scripturs do continu∣ally preach one God, and the same doe graunt al thinges belonging to the ma∣iestie of the God head vnto Iesus Christ
ether we must denie the father to be the almignty & only inuisible god, or els we must confesse his sonne by veritie & vni∣tie of nature to be one God with hym. The .xxx. Chapter. ¶All the partes of thesame definition are proued to agree to the almightie comfor∣ter and spirit. THe alknowyng comfor∣ter also is one God with them both, for asmuch as it cānot be denied, but yt all and euery one of the same thinges doe apper∣teine vnto him. For a plaine and euidēt profe of this, I will course ouer the difi∣nition, or rather descriptiō of God once again prouing the same to be the defini∣tion of the holy comforter. God is a spi∣ritual substaunce: so is the holy comfor∣ter. That he is a spirit no man wyl deny: that he is a substaunce, not a godly mo∣cion or cōcitation, not an accidēt, I haue proued in my .xxiii. Chap. He is also a pure nature, vnmixed, vncompost, vncre¦ate, for he is no creature: whiche all and euery one are bonde and seruauntes vn∣to, their maker, not fre, nor at their liber∣tie,
as it is written: Vniuersa seruiunt tibi,Psal. 11 al thinges serue the. The holy spirit spe∣keth this by Dauid. He saith not serui∣mus, we serue the, but seruiunt, thei serue Paul also saith: Creatura liberabitur a ser¦uitute corruptionis.Roma. 8 The creature shalbe deliuered from the bōdage of corruptiō. But of the holy ghost it is written: vbi spiritus domini, ibi libertas,2. Cor. 3 where is the spirit of the Lord, there is fredome. We read also of him,1. Cor. 12 that he deuideth to eue∣ry man seueral giftes as he wil. 1 Cor. 12 All creatures do serue. Psalm. 118. The holy ghost is at libertie, 2 Cor. 3 Ergo the holy ghost is no creature. And if he be no creature, he is a singuler & pure nature, void of all cōposition and mixture. Immutable, what soeuer is im¦mutable, is a creatur: Inuisible, al spirits be inuisible, but not immutable: for to be both immutable & inuisible apperteineth only to the maiestie of God. Wherfore the holy ghost is God. Filling heauen & erth foloweth in ye diffiniciō, which thing truly belōgeth only to ye diuine & blessed nature as ye Psalmograph witnesseth: do¦mini est terra & plenitudo eius.Psal. 3 The earth & the fulnes therof is ye Lords, & he sayth
by Ierem. I fil heauen and earth.Ierem. 23 Sapi. 1 Now that the blessed cōforter doth so, ye booke of wisdom telleth, saying: The spirite of the Lord filleth the round compas of the world:Psal. 138 and Dauid teacheth thesame, say∣ing: whether shal I go thē from thy spi∣rit? whether shal I go from thy presence? If I clime vp into heauen. &c. What an∣gel, what archaungel, what rule, what power, what creature is sayde to fill the world, the whiche the holy comforter doth? Yea & more then the whole world, for he fylled the sauiour of the world,Luke. 4 as it is written: Christ ful of the holy ghost, returned from Iordan. God only is euery where, The holy ghost is euery where, Ergo the holy ghost is God. Vnsearchable: no man can comprehend what maner of thing his own spirit and soul is, and the mynd, which almost iud∣geth and discusseth al thinges is not able to discusse it self, much more the spirit of the almighty God surmounteth our vn∣derstandinges, and not only ours, but also of angels, and archangels, for of the spirit,Psal. 64 Dauid writeth: God which is thy God hath anointed thee with the oyl of
gladnes, aboue thy felowes. The holy ghost is this oyl and anointmēt,Actes. 10 Why the spirit is n¦med oyle. for Pe∣ter witnesseth that Christ was anointed with the holy ghost. And wel is the holy ghost named the ol of gladnes, lest thou shouldest suppose him to be a creature. For the nature of oyl is such, that it wyl not be mingled with any moist creatur, but heaueth aloft, & kepeth aboue, when other naturs descend to the botom. Ful of vnderstanding: for he is the spirite of vnderstanding. Ful of troth:Esay. 11 Sapi. 7 Ihon. 14 and. 15 for he is ye spirit of troth, which the world can not receiue, and which procedeth frō the fa∣ther, & of him it is wrytten: he shal teach you al truth. Ful of rightuousnes: for as the sonne is our iudge, so iudgement be∣longeth to the holy cōforter, as it is writ∣ten: when I depart,Ihon. 1 I wyl send the com∣forter vnto you: when he is come, he shal iudge the world of synne, of rightuous∣nes, and of iudgemēt. This text thacheth him to be a punisher of sinne, an auēger of vnrightuousnes, & wrong iudgemēts. Noble king Salomon through his inspi¦ration gaue rightfull iudgement of the two infantes.Salomon. Daniel except he had bene inspired by him, could neuer haue disclo∣sed
the lie of lechery.Susanna. 1 When Susanna was condempned vnto death through ye false accusation of ye elders, she cried with a loude voyce vnto God, and obteined remedy. When she was led forth vnto death, it is regestred that the Lord raised vp the spirit of a yong child whose name was daniel. &c. Also the spirit of Moises was deuided among .lxx. of the elders of Israel,Nume. 11 that they might iudge the people according to right. Wherfore the holy ghost, who both teacheth other to iudge aright, and is a iudge himselfe, must ne∣des be ful of al righteousnes. Ful of mer¦cy: He is ful of mercy, forasmuche as he sent Christ to restore vs, when we were forlorne, as the Prophet telleth vs in Christes person.Esay. 48 Misit me dominus & spi∣ritus eius, the Lord sent me and his spirit. His sending is his incarnatiō, as I haue proued before. Full of wisdom, for he is the spirit of counsel and wisdom. Full of al maner of goodnes:Ezech. 1 Esay. 11 Ihon. 15 Roma. 1 Esay. 4 Roma. 8 Ephesi. 1 He is the spirit of life, the spirit of knowledge, wisdom, and vnderstanding, counsel, strength, of the fear of God, of truth, of sanctification, of iudgement, of adopcion, of promes, of grace, and loue, ioye, peace, long suffe∣ryng,
gentlenes, & goodnes it selfe,Hebre.  Galat. 5 faith∣fulnesse, mekenesse, temperauncie, be the fruites, and giftes of the holy spirit. Eternal: many things be euerlasting, which had their beginning, as aungels, as the soule of man and other: but they are not eternal, for that apperteineth on∣ly to the maiestie of the deitie. That the holy and almyghty comforter is eternal the Apostle witnesseth, saieng: How mu∣che more shal the bloud of Christr, who through the eternall spirite offered hym self without spot to God,Hebre.  purge your cō¦sciences. He is not content to call hym eternall, but telleth vs also, that Christ through the spirit offered himselfe a slain sacrifice for our synnes. And we reade that Christ,Ephesi.  before the foundacion of the world chose vs. Wherfore the holy comforter who was the worke maister therof, was be∣fore the foundation of the worlde, and for as muche as as he was before all, he hath no ende. For that whiche is with out all begynnyng, is also without en∣dyng.
God only is eternall, The holy ghost is eternall, Ergo the holy ghost is God. Maker of al thinges: Iob telleth that God with his spirite garnished the hea∣uens,Iob. 26 Psal. 31 vnto whō Dauid agreeth saying: the spirit of his mouth formed al the ho∣stes of them. Wherfore in the worke of creacion,Gene. 1 Moises maketh relatiō of him, shewyng vs that the spirit of God was borne vpon the waters. Basyl, who for his great learning was surnamed Mag¦nus, expoūdeth this text of ye holy ghost, and saith that his predecessors toke it so, and S. Austen is of thesame mind, & Phi¦lip Melancthon aloweth their interpre∣tacion, as I declared before. For truly ye word spirit can not signifie wynd in that place, the which when these wods were spoken, was vncreat. What is ment thē by these worde (Borne vpon the waters) Verely no blast of wynd, but that he sate on the waters, for as the hen sitting on her egs hatcheth her yōgones, so the ho∣ly ghost hatcheth al creaturs, which ther are called waters, as it is written: when thou lettest thy spirit go forth, they are made,Psal. 103 so thou renuest ye face of thy earth.
He that made all things is God. Heb. iij. The holy ghost made al thinges, Ergo the holy ghost is god. Iob also saith of him: Spiritus diuinus qui fecit me, the diuine spirit who made me, confessing him both diuine,Psal. 21 and his ma∣ker. And as when we read: Opera manuū tuarum sunt celi.Psal. 8 The heauēs are the wor∣kes of thi hand, we acknowledge Christ the maker of the worlde,Psal. 1 who is Gods hand, so when we read, Videbo celos tuos opera digitorum tuorum, unam & stellas que tu fundasti. That is, I wil behold the heauens the workmāship of thi fingers, the mone & the starres whiche thou hast made. Let vs acknowledge also the holy ghost Gods finger to be our maker, for as much as thesame works in other pla∣ces are called the workes of God. For as when the hand worketh, the fingers worke also, so the hole trinitie formed al thinges of a confused heap, whose wor∣kes be vnseperable as I haue proued be∣fore. Gouernour of al thinges: The can∣ticle of Moises recordeth that he gouer∣ned the congregation of the Israelites. For when they had passed ouer the sea,Exod. 16 they gaue herty thankes for their deliue¦raunce
to al the thre persons: to ye father and the sonne in these wordes. Thi right hand O Lord, is glorious in power, thy right hand hath also dashed the enemies: and to the holy ghost, saiyng with ye spi∣rit of thine anger the water gathered to∣gether as a rock. For Christ is Gods right hand, and by the word spirit the ho¦ly ghost is ment, & in that he saith Lord, he signifieth the father. Wherfore their deliueraunce is the workmanship of the whole trinitie, which worketh al things in heauen and earth. But the Prophet Esay protesteth the gouernaunce of the holy ghost more plainly,Esay. 63 saying: Where is he who brought them from the water of the sea, as a shepeheard doth his flok? Where is he whiche led Moises by the right hād, with his glorious arm? Wher is he that led thē in the depe, as an horse is led in the plain? and he answereth: The spirit of the Lord led thē as a tame beast goeth in the field.. cor. 12 The same spirit gouer∣neth the present congregation, geuyng to one vtteraunce of wisdome, to ano∣ther fayth, to another giftes of healyng, to another power to do miracles, to ano¦ther prophecie, to another iudgement of
spirits, to another diuerse tongues, to an other interpretation, as the Apostle wit∣nesseth, which be necessary offices in the church. Who gaue Simeon an aunswer that he shuld not se death,Luke. ▪ before he had sene our spokesman Iesus Christ? The holy ghost. Who leadeth the congregation in to al truth? who teacheth vs al veritie? ye holy ghost. Who cōmaundeth to sepe∣rate Paul and Barnabas to the worke wherunto he had called them, that is to preach the swete tidinges of the gospel to the gentyles? The holy ghost.Actes.  Who for∣byddeth them to preache in Asia? who cō¦maundeth Peter to aryse and get hym down and go with Cornelius seruaun∣tes?Actes. 10 who sent those seruauntes vnto Si∣mon the Tannars house for Peter? The holy ghost. Who monysheth Philp the Deacon to ioyne hym selfe to the chari∣ot of the gelded man,Actes. 8 which was cham∣berlein to Candace Quene of the Ethio¦pians? The holy ghost. Do not these tex∣tes proue hym to gouerne the congrega¦tion? to be myndfull of both good and euyl? Do they not denie him to be a crea∣ture? do they not fortify him to be ye third
person in the gloriouse Trinitie, and to be God? Yes verelye. All thynges are gouerned by God, The Holy ghost gouerneth all thinges, Ergo, the Holy ghost is God. Knowing al things foloweth, the which belongeth to the alknowyng comforter, for asmuch as he is the spirite of knowe∣lege.Esay. 11 The Apostle witnesseth that man neither by the helpe of his outward sen∣ses, nor through the gift of reason, can at∣teine to the vnderstāding of those things which are prepared for the chosen.1. Cor. 2 He de¦nieth this knowdlege to the senses, say∣ing: Oculus non videt, ne{que} auris audiuit, the eye hath not seene, and the eare hath not heard, for these be the two principall powers: and to all mannes reason and wisdom, by these words folowing: Ne∣que in cor, nethre hath entred into ye heart of man the thinges.Marke. 13 &c. for the heart is the place of vnderstanding. Angels also are ignoraunt of some thinges, as of the last day and houre, which the father kno∣weth only. But of the holy comforter it is written: the spirit searcheth al things, yea the bottome of Gods secretes.1. Cor. 2 Paule is not content only to say this of
the spirite, but he addeth two argumen∣tes prouing the same. The one is a simi∣litude, that as the spirit of man knoweth the thinges of man: so the spirite of God knoweth ye things of God, & al things be his, Ergo he knoweth al things. His oth∣er reasō is, that ye spiritual man, through his inspiration discusseth all thinges. He who knoweth all thinges is GOD, The Holy ghost knoweth all thinges. Ergo the Holy ghost is GOD. The next propertie in my definition belōging to God only, is to forgeue sin. How proue you that the holy ghost can do this? Harken what Chryste our mer∣cy stocke saith? Receyue the holy ghost: whose sinnes ye remit,Ihon. 2 thei are remitted vnto them. Note that the holy ghost par∣donth sinne. No man can remit sin, they do onli minister forgeuenes, in the name of the father, of the sōne, and of the holy ghost: they pray, God pardoneth, they employ their seruice, remssion and mer∣cy cōmeth from aboue, as I haue decla∣red and proued in my Chapt. that God onely forgeueth sinne.1. Cor. Furthermore, ye are washed saith S. Paule, ye are sanctified, ye are iustified
by the name of the Lord Iesu, and by the spirite of oure God: Ergo the spirite for∣geueth sinne. The Prophet Esay telleth, that one of the Seraphins with a hot co∣ale taken from the aulter wyth tongues touched his mouth,Esay. 6 and his sin was mol∣ten away. He meaneth neither charcole, nor sea cole, but the cole of the holy ghost who maye be well called a cole, for he is fier: wherfore the holy ghoste doth for∣geue sinne. No man can deny, but that in baptisme sinnes be forgeuen. The holy ghost by baptisme doth regenerate vs, & make vs Gods children. For that we should beleue him to be a worker in bap∣tisme, with the father and the sonne, the bath of holy baptisme, is commaunded to be ministred in this name also. And for the same skill it pleased the glo∣riouse Trinitie,Math. 28 he should appeare nota∣bly at Christes baptisinge, in the likensse of a Doue. And as for Christ, he was not baptized for any wrincle of sinne, but for our example and only erudition. Seing then the Holye ghoste was a worker in Christes baptisme, much more he is wor¦ker at our christeninges, which proueth him to forgeue sinnes.
God only forgeueth sinne: The Holy ghoste forgeueth sinne, Ergo the Holy ghoste is GOD. To be called vpon and prayed vnto. The holy ghost is to be praied vnto, for what is baptisme,Math. 28 but an inuocation of the fa∣ther, the sonne, and the holy ghost? as all thre be named, so they all thre heare the prayer of the minister, forgeue the sinnes of him which is christned, and make him of the child of dampnation, the heyre of saluation. That we should fastly & firm∣ly beleue this workmanship of the who∣le Trinitie in our christeninges, that thre persons euery one wer presēt at Christes baptising, who had no nede of baptisme, I say,Math.  but only for our erudition and en∣sample. The father notifieth himselfe in the voyce which soūded, the son, in man∣nes nature, the aldoing cōforter appea∣red notably in ye likenes of a doue, Why in the likenes of a doue, rather then of a∣ny other bird, ie declared before. More∣ouer ye holy ghost both heareth our prai∣ers, for he is euery where,Roma.  and he helpeth our infirmities, as ye Apostle witnesseth: Ergo he is to be praied vnto. Again faith is his gifte, prophecie is his gifte, vtte∣raunce,
miracles,. Cor. 12 iudgemēt, tonges, hea∣ling be his gifts. And truth, for he is the spirit of truth,Esay. 11 Roma. 1 Ezech. 1 and wisdom, counsel, sanc∣tification, life by thesame reason, & loue ioie, peace, pacience, gentelnes, goodnes fidelitie, mekenes, temperauncie be his graces and fruites,Galat. 5 as is proued before: which proueth that he is to be praied vn∣to. For the scripture vseth this reason to moue vs to pray vnto God, that he is ye geuer of those thinges that are asked, as the Apostle Iames, saying: if any of you lack wisdom,Iacob. 1 Ephesi. 3 let him aske of God which geueth. And Paul he is able to do abun∣dantly aboue al that we aske or thinke. And Christ vseth thesame reasō,Ihon. 14 saying: what soeuer ye aske in my fathers name he wil geue it you. If the Papistes can shew, that S. Paul and the blessed vir∣gin, & other now being with Christ tou∣ching their souls, & in the earth touching their bodies doe nowe geue giftes and graces vnto vs, truly I wold pray vnto them to geue me some. But who is able to proue this out of the scriptures. The spirit knoweth al thinges, yea the botō of Gods secretes, much more the botom of our hearts, ergo he is to be praied vn∣to.
Doth not he hear our prayers, which commaunded to seperate Paul and Bar¦nabas vnto the worke, wherunto he had called them? Paul was called an Apostle by God, The holy ghost called Paul, Ergo the holy ghost is God. It is no trifle to preache,Preaching is a worke but an earnest worke and labour, and the labourer and workman is worthy of his wages. The worke and office of saluaciō is vnrewar∣ded in England, and thought not eces∣sary, which mus nedes bryng in the vn∣cleane spirit of ignoraunce again. Ther∣fore let vs pray to the holy spirite to a∣mend it, & to seperate mo Pauls to this honorable work and office. It is a com saying, Honos alit artes, rewardes norish ates, and Magistrates are ordeined of God to maintein knowledge, to destroy ignoraunce and sinne. I wold wysh that preachers were sent abrode into the coū∣trey, as wel as to cities, and great tounes for they are the shop of Christ as well as others. And that as Christ disputed in ye temple, and Steuen with the Libertines and Alexandrines. And Paul when he went a preaching,Luke.  Actes▪  disputed in the audiēce
of the people, against those that would not hear the truth, at Athens with Phy∣losophers, and at Ephesus and other pla¦ces: that so now euery preacher which is knowen to be groundly learned and se∣perat to this office,Actes. 17 whē he cometh to a∣ny parish which hath a popish person or curat, that he shuld haue authoritie to ex∣amen them in the sacramentes,Actes. 18 & other principal matters, & that they ether ac∣knowledge ye truth before their parishes or els be cōpelled to say their conscience and knowledge in open disputatiō with the preacher: so that the church wardens of euery parish be ouerseers of thesame for auoiding of tumult & disturbāce. By this meanes papistes & others shuld best be won, and ouercome, and the people shuld learne more of one disputation, thē in ten sermons. Further, if there be any suspected to be an Anabaptist in the sayd parishes, I would to God well learned preachers were authorised to compell & cal such to render accompt of their faith before the whole parishe, and if it were found Anabaptisticall, that the preacher enter disputation with hym, and openly conuict hym, by the scriptures and elder
fathers, & if he remain obstinat, thesame preacher to excomunitate him, and then to midle no further with hym, but geue knowledge therof to the temporall ma∣gistrates, which for ciuile consideratiōs may punishe hym with enprisonment, death or otherwise, as their wisdōs shall iudge most mete for a ciuile quietnes, & a godly order. Now both papistes, & Ana¦baptistes complain that they are put to scilence, & the people haue more aaūce in their scilence, then in the preachers, & do thinke that they could perswade and proue their matters, if they might be suf∣fered. But if this way were takē, it wold apeare most euidēt that al their doctrine wer builded on the sand, not on the rock. There be many discrete & sober wel lear¦ned preachers both in al ye elder fathers, and in the scriptures, whiche if this way were taken or another like, would con∣found al heretikes, and beat down papi∣strie, and discourage the best learned of them, and perswade the people after ano¦ther sort then is done yet. Thus did ye A∣postles, thus did ye elder fathers, as Am∣brose, Iero. Aug. & others, as apereth of their works, which be ether sermōs to ye
people, lessons, homelies, or disputatiōs agaīst heretiks. Now if a preacher come and preache in a parishe in the countrey, if the person, vicar, or curat, be of a cor∣rupt iudgement, as the most deale be, by reason of the dayly company and fami∣liaritie that they haue with their parysh, thei do discredit the preacher when he is gone, and marre all that he hath done, which they nether could, ne durst iusti∣fi before his face. Therfore I would it were remedied this way or some other: namely if they be maried men, then they wil sclaunder them, rayle on thē, frump them: yea some noble and spiritual lords had rather receiue idle sodomites, & dum priests to their chapplains, then maried preachers. They thinke it vnmete yt such should be colligeners, nay it is vnmete yt your chapplains should be prebendaries in cathedral colleges, Deanes, Archdea∣cons, suffraganes, and liue so idly as thei do: and yo which kepe them be gilty of their negligence, do oppres and rob the people of the word of God, & find your seruauntes of their costes. It is vnmete for the kinges chappleins, and Amners to e absent from these colleges, out of
which they haue great liuinges, & to do no good in the countrey about. It is not vnmete for maried priestes, present in ye colleges, and doing their duties to haue their liuings. I wold the kngs maiestie wold geue his chapleine sufficiēt wages and bind them to read  of diuini¦tie euery day, or thrise  in his al: it were a noble order for a kinges house to be a schole of diuinitie, & godly exāple to al lordes spiritual and temporall, then they should be as Esay calleth thē,Esay▪ 4 true nourses of religion. If such as be maried were alowed their wages and coms to their own houses, & bound by some sta∣tutes to preach on holy days in the coun¦trey about, it wer much better thē it hath ben or is, & yet neuerthelesse suche as be single might kepe a comē table, & a comē haull, for al will not mary no more then thei do out of colleges. They should not liue idly as they haue done and do, for Pauls rule is yt he which laboureth not, ought not to eate, & saint Augustin in his boke entitled De opera monachorū,Augustine crieth out against idle coligeners. Were not this a better reformatiō, then to suppres and put down colleges? O liuing God,
this is a straūg kind of surgery, a straūg reformation, to swepe thinges away, to make that priuat which was commen. Wel, Dauid saith that God will make them like to Sisera and Iabin,Psal. 83 Iudic. 7 lyke vn∣to Ored & Zeb, whiche haue the houses of God in possessiō, he wil rote out their generation: euen to the pysser against ye wal. I speake not this of ye vniuersities, but of cathedrall colleges and other, in which be sufficient liuings to mainteine maried men. But to returne to our mat∣ter: like silogismes mai be made of other matters as that. God deliuered the childrē of Israell from the Egipticall bondage. Deu. 5 The holy ghost was their deliuerer.Esay. 30. Ergo the holy ghost is God. If we ponder the circumstance diligētly we shal find that Peter praied vnto the holy ghost when he fell into a traunce & sawe heauen open in Simō the tanners house.Pter prai¦eth to yt ho¦ly spirite. He praieth to him yt sayeth: what God hath clensed, make thou not comē: For it is written: there came a voyce to Peter. Arise, kil & eat, & he said: God for∣bid Lord. But the holy ghost is he who
clensed, for he fel sodeinly vpon the gen∣tils to clense them, & he is called water, & a loud for the same skil: Ergo he prayd to the holy ghost. It is to be supposed, that Peter praid vnto him who answereth, & commaūdeth him in that traunce, to go to Cornelius: but it is written, that ye spi∣rit cōmaundeth him, Ergo he praied to ye spirit. Also the spirit sent Cornelius ser∣uaūts vnto Peter, for he saith vnto him, go wt thē, & doubt not for I haue sen thē. Wherfore it is probable yt Cor. also praied vnto ye spirit, albeit he knew him not wel for his requestes were graunted of him. Moreouer the holy comforter hath a temple, not of stone ne of wood, but far more honorable, the bodies of the  and chosen, for whiche Christ died as it is wrytten: your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost which is in you, whom ye haue of God,1. Cor▪  & ye are not your one for ye ar derely bought, therfore glorify God in your bodies. Lo he both geueth him a temple, and calleth him God, and is he not to be praied vnto and honor▪ That the holy gost is the true God, vnto whom temples are erected and builded, the Actes of the Apostles declare with
plain wordes Ananias (quod Peter) how is it that Sathan hath filled thine hert to lie vnto the holy ghost? and he addeth, th hast not lyed vnto men, but vnto God. o the holy ghost is God, so Ihon calleth Christ the true God. Hic est ve∣rus deus, & vita eterna. He is very God, and euerlasting life. And seing there is but one God, the thre persons are that one God, which is only to be praied vn∣to, to be worshipped, & to whō we shuld dedicate, both the temple of our bodies, and al temples of wood,Temples  to be de¦dicate to God onl. stone, or other stuf, and to no saintes departed, to no aū¦gels or archaungels, for then we honour them which is idolatry and robery. God only hath a temple, The holy ghost hah a temple, Ergo the holy ghost is God. To be honored: Nothing is to be hono∣red but God only, for it is writtē: Seruie rūt craure potius quā creatori,Roma. 1 qui est deus benedictu in secula. They worshipped & serued the creature, more thē the maker, which is God blessed for euermore. He boh monysheth vs to serue God only, and reproueth such as honour creaturs. Now that the holy ghost is to be serued
and honored,Philip. 3 ye same Apostle witnesseth saying: beware of dogges, beware of e∣uil workers, beware of dissenciō, for we are circumciion, seruing ye spirit which is God. Lo Paul confesseth hym selfe to be the seruaunt of the spirite. Some doe read here, spiritu deum colentes, seruyng God in spirit, but ye greke text discusseth that interpretacion to be false, whiche is, , that is to say worshipping ye spirit, which spirit is god. If Paul had ment, Quod spiritu deum cole bant, that they in spirit serued God, he wold haue sayd, , as he sayd in the same place, , reioysing in Christ, and not trusting in flesh. For that the holy ghost is to be worshipped, he declareth also, saying: if all do prophecie, and there come in one that beleueth not, or one vn¦learned, he is rebuked of all men, and is iudged of euery man, and the secretes of his heart are opened, & he falleth downe on his face & worshippeth God, saying that God is in you in dede. But he who spake in thē was the holy ghost,1. Cor. 14 of whō prophecie cometh, & of whom it is writ∣ten: Non estis vos qui loquimini, sed spiri∣tus
patris qui loquitur in vobis.. Cor. 9 It is not you which speake, but the spirit of my fa¦ther which speaketh in you. Wherfore whē thei fal down & worship him which is in them, they worship the holy ghost. If the swete fleshe of our sauiour Christ be to be honored, as we are cōmaunded, adorate scabellum pedum meorum,Psal. 98 Christes flesh is to be worshi∣ped. Luke. 1 Esay. 66 worship the fotestole of my fete, the which is ioy∣ned in vnitie of person to the diuine na∣ture, and promoted to the company and felowship of the deitie, without al doubt the alknowyng conforter is to be hono∣red, of whom this flesh was conceiued. For by the fotestole, earth is vnderstād, as it is written. Heauen is my seat, & the earth is the stole of my fete: and by the erth, Christes flesh is ment. To worship any other earth,An Obiec. is Idolatry: and well may his flesh be called so, for all flesh is earth. The Arrians deny that the holy ghost is to be serued,Ihon. 4▪ because Iohn wri∣teth: The hour now is, when true wor∣shippers shal honour the father in spirit and truthe, for suche the father seketh to worship him. God is a spirit, & they that worship him,Thāswer. must worship him in spirit & in truth. If thei deny the holy ghost to be
honored, because the Euāgelist doth not say, the spirit is to be honored, but God must be honored in spirit, thei must deny likewise, yt Crist is to be honored, because he saith that God must be worshipped in truth, for Christ saith, I am truth.Ihon. 1 God only is to be serued, The holy ghost is to be serued, Ergo the holy ghost is God. Iustifying vs: Paul proueth the spirite to be a iustifier, saying: ye are washed, ye are sanctifietd,1. cor.  ye are iustified by ye name of the Lord, and by the spirit of our god. Almighty: this belongeth to the comor∣ter, for he is the finger of God, or els the finger of God is weake, then is some impotencie in his hande, in Christe, for whatsoeuer the hand doth, that doth the fynger also. But Salomon aleth the holy gost, , that is, omnipotentē & omniscium, almigh¦ty, and alknowing. He is the Lord of na∣ture, and therfore he can doe what hym lyt, as Christ and the father can. God only is almighty, The holy ghost is almighty, Ergo the holy ghost is God. These silogismusses and brief argumen∣tes
may be profitable helpers for thun-learned, as it were with a  dagger to dispatch and sla he bsphemouse he¦resie of the Arrians▪ I could dilate thease thinges into a long volume if I would, but my purpose is not at this present to write a defence of God, but an Image. I do enstruct a beginner not a diuine, I do arme a yong soldiour to faith and beleif, not an ould worne champion to battaile and fight. Hereafter when I shal s oc∣casion, I will put forth a defence with a confutation and answer to contrary rea∣sons. Now I haue proued out of the sto∣rehouse of the scripture, that there is but one definition of the father, of the sonne, and of the holy ghoste, whereof it muste nedes folow, that thei are but one God. All thinges that agre in definition, a∣gre in essence and nature, The father, the son, and the holy ghost haue one definition, Ergo they haue one essēce and nature. This doctrine destroieth all the doctrine of the Arrians, and proueth them cōsub∣stanciall. But me thinke I heare some Patripassian replie, that if they agree in the definition, they are confounded, and
are one person. They agre in the defini∣tion of God, not in the finition of pater∣nitie, or of a sonne, or of a holy ghost, for neyther Christe is the father, nor the al∣mightye, and alknowynge comforter is Christe, they be thre vnconfounded and yet one God and Lorde O God of our fathers, and Lord of mer∣cies,Sapi.  thou that hast made all things with thy word, and ordeyned man through thy wisdome,, that he should haue domi∣nion and lordshippe ouer thy creatures, which thou haste made, and haste willed thy angels to minister vnto him, that he shoulde order the worlde according to e∣quitie & righteousnesse, and execute iud∣gement with a true heart, geue to all thy people wisdom, which is euer about thy seat, endue them with the spirit of know∣ledge, of councel, and vnderstanding, as thou didest promise by thy swete sonne,Esay. 1 Ihon. 14 that he should leade them into all truth, for we are thy seruauntes and thy hand∣maidens, the workes of thy fingers. O send him out of thy holy heauens, and from the throne of thy maiestie, that he may gouerne vs, that we may know what is acceptable in thy sight. For he
knoweth and vnderstandeth al thinges, and can lead vs soberly in all our works, and preserue and continue vs in his po∣wer, so shall our workes be acceptable. For what man is he, that may knowe the councell of God? or who can thinke what the will of God is? The thoughts of mortall men are miserable, and oure forecastes are but vncerteine. And why? our vnderstanding and spirite is depres∣sed with the grosse lumpe and dongion of the corruptible bodie: our time is but a space and shorte, very hardlye can we discerne the thinges that are vpon earth, and greate laboure haue we, or we can fynd thinges which are before our eyes. Who will then, seke out the grounde of the thinges that are done in heauen? Oh Lorde, who can haue knowledge of thy vnderstanding and meaning, except thou geue wisdome, and send thy holy ghoste from aboue, to reforme and re∣dresse the waies of them which are vpon earth, that men maie learne the thinges that are pleasaunt vnto the, and to lyue louingly one with another, euery man being content with his owne vocation, and folowe ye same, be preserued through
wisedome. Graunt this GOD for thy sonnes sake Iesus Christe oure spokes∣man and aduocate, to whome with the and the holie spirite, be all praise, dominion, honoure, rule and thankesgeuing now in our daies and euer. So be it. FINIS.
