15190.5 24602317 27815
A LETTER: Whearin, part of the enter∣tainment vntoo the Queenz Maiesty, at Killing woorth Castl, in warwik Sheer, in this soomerz Progress▪ 1575. iz signified: from a freend offi∣cer attendant in Coourt, vntoo hiz fréend a Ci∣tizen, and Mer∣chaunt of Lon∣don. DE REGINA NOSTRA ILLVSTRISSIMA. Dum lamita ruant vicina ab Regina tumultu: Laeta suos inter genialibus ILLA diebus, (Gratia Dijs) fruitur: Rumpantur et ilia Codro.
Vntoo my good freend, Ma∣ster Humfrey Martin Mercer. AFter my harty commenda∣cionz, I commend me har∣tely too yoo. Understand ye, that syns throogh God and good fréends, I am placed at Coourt héer (as ye wot) in a woorship∣full room: Whearby, I am not only ac∣quainted with the most, and well knoen too the best, and euery officer glad of my company: but also haue poour, a dayz (while the Councell sits not) to go and too see things sight woorthy, and too be prezēt at any sheaw or spectacl, ny whear this Progress reprezented vntoo her highnes: And of part of which sportez▪ auing ta∣kin sum notez and obseruationz (for I can not be idl at ony hand in the world) azwel too put fro me suspicion of sluggardy, az too pluk frō yoo doout of ony my forgetful∣nes of fréendship: I haue thought it meet to impart them vntoo yoo, az frankly, az fréendly▪ and az fully az I can. Well wot ye the blak Prins waz neuer stained with disloyaltée of ingratitude toward ony, I
dare be his warrant, hee wyll not begyn with yoo, that hath at hiz hand so déeply de∣zerued. But héerin, the better for conceyuing of my minde and instruction of yoors, ye must gyue my leaue a littl, az well to preface vntoo my matter, az too discoors sumwhat of Kylling woorth Castl. A Territory of ye right honorabl, my singular good Lord, my Lord the Earl of Leyceter: of whoo∣incomparabl cheering, and enterteyn∣ment thear vnto her Maiesty noow, I wil sheaw yoo a part heer, that coold not sée all, nor had I seen all coold well report y• half. Whear thinges, for the parsons, for place, tyme, cost, deuisz, straungnes, and aboundauns, of all that euer I sawe (and yet haue I been, what vnder my Master Bumsted, and what on my oun▪ affayrs, while I occupied Merchaundyze, both in Frauns and Flaunders (long and many a day) I saw none ony whear so memorabl, I tell you playn. The Castl-hath name of Kylling woorth,Kylling-woorth Castl. but of truth groounded vpon feythfull sto∣ry Kenelwoorth: It stonds in Warwyk∣shyre a lxxiiii. myle northwest from Lon∣don, and az it wear in the Nauell of Eng∣lande,
foure mile sum what South from Couenree a proper Cittee, and a like di∣stauns from Warwyk, a fayre Shyre Tooun on the North: In ayr sweet and hollsum, rayzed on an eazy moounted hil, iz set eeuenly coasted with the froont straight intoo the East, hath the tenaunts & Tooun about it, that pleazauntly shyfts from dale too hill sundry whear with sweet springs bursting foorth: and iz so plentifully well sorted on euery side intoo arabl, meado, pasture, wood, water, & good ayrz az it appeerz to haue need of nothing that may perteyn too liuing or pleazure. Too auantage hath it, hard on the West, still noorisht with many liuely springs, a goodly Pool of rare beuty, bredth, length, deapth, and store of all kinde freshwater∣fish, delicat, great & fat, and also of wyld∣fooul byside. By a rare situacion and natu¦ral amitee séemz this Pool conioynd to the Castlz that on the West layz the hed az it wear vpon the Castls boozom, embraceth it on eyther side Soouth and North with both the armz, settlz it self az in a reach a flightshoot brode, stretching foorth body & legs, amile or too Westward: between a faire Parke on the one side, which by the
Brayz is linked too ye Castl on the South, sprinkled at ye entrauns with a feaw Coo∣nyez, that for coolur and smallnes of num∣ber, séem too be sufferd more for pleasure then cōmoditée: And on ye oother side North and West, a goodly Chase: wast, wide, large, and full of red Deer & oother state∣ly gamez for hunting: beautified with ma∣ny delectabl, fresh & vmbragioous Boow∣erz, arberz, seatz, & wallks, that with great art, cost, & diligens wear very plea∣zauntly appointed: which also the natural grace by the tall and fresh fragrant tréez & soil did so farfoorth commend, az Diana her self might haue deyned thear well inough too raunge for her pastime. The leaft arm of this Pool Northward, had my Lorde adoourned with a beautifull bracelet of a fayr tymberd bridge, that iz of a .xiiii. foot wide, and a six hunderd foot long: railed al on both sidez, strongly planked for passage, reaching from the Chase too the Castl: that thus in the midst hath cléer prospect ouer théez pleazurze on y• bakpart: and forward, ouer all the Tooun & mooch of the Cun∣trée beside. Héertoo, a speciall commoditee at hand of sundry quarreiz of large byl∣ding stone, the goodnes whearof may the
eazlyer be iudged, in the bylding and aun∣ciently of the Castl, that (az by the name & by storiez, well may be gatherd) waz fyrst reared by Kenulph and hiz yoong sun and successor Kenelm: born both indéed within the Ream héer,Florileg. fol. 221. &. 225. but yet of the race of Sax∣ons: and reigned kings of Marchlond frō the yéer of oour Lord .798▪ too. 23▪ yéerz too∣gyther, abooue. 770, yéer ago. Although the Castl hath one auncient strong and large Kéep that iz calld Cezarz Toour, rather (az I haue good cauz too think) for that it iz square and by foormed after the maner of Cezarz Fortz then that euer he bylt it.Guil. Mal mesb. li. 1. Nay noow I am a littl in, Master Martin ile tell ye all. This Marchlond that Storyerz call Mercia, iz numbred in their books, the foourth of the seauen Kyngdoms that the Saxons had whilom heer diuided among them in the Ream. Began in Ann. Domi. 616: 139. yéer after Horsus and Engist, con∣tinued in the race of a 17 kings, a 249. yeer togyther: and eended in Ann. 875. Reized from the rest (sayz the book) at fyrst by Pendaz prezumption: ouerthroun at last by Buthreds Hascardy, and so fell too the kyngdoom of the West Saxons.
And Marchlond had in it,rcia. London, Mil∣delsex, heerin a Bishoprik. Had more of Shyrez: Gloceter, Woorceter, and War∣wik, and heerin a Bishoprik. Chester (that noow we call Chesshyre) Darby and Staf∣ford, whervntoo one Bishop that had also part of Warwyk & Shreusbery and hiz See at Couentree, that waz then afore∣tyme at Lychfeeld. Heertoo: Hereford, wherin a Bishoprik that had more too iu∣risdiction, half Shreusbury, part of War∣wyk and also of Gloceter, and the See at Hereford. Also had Oxford, Buckingham, Hertford, Huntyngdon, and alf of Bed∣ord, and too theez, Norhampton, part of Lecyter and also Lincoln, whear vnto a Bisshop: whooz Sée at Lincoln Cittee that smtime before waz at Dorchester. Heer∣too, the rest of Leyceter & in Nottingham that of olld had a speciall Bishop, whooz Sée waz at Leyceter, but after, put too the charge of the Archbishop of Yorke. Noow touching the name, that of olld Records I vnderstand, and of auncient writerz I finde, iz calld Kenelwoorth. Sins moste of the Worths in England stand ny vntoo lyke lakez, and ar eyther small Ilandz, such one az the seate of this
Castl hath béen & eazly may be, or is lond∣ground by pool or riuer whearon willoz, allderz or such like doo gro:Vpon Taci fol. 142. The Ger∣mains call vverck that vve woork vverlt: woorld. vvermut: woorm-wood. So viel vvert: So mooch woorth. which Altha∣merus writez precyzly that the Germains cal werd: Ioyning theez too toogyther with the nyghness allso of the woords & sybred of the toongs, I am the boolder too pronoouns, that az oour English VVoorth, with the rest of oour ancient langage, waz least vs from the Germayns: éeuen so, that theyr Werd & our Woorth iz all one thing in signifiauns, common too vs both éen at this day. I take the case so cléer that I say not az mooch as I moought. Thus proface ye with the preface. And now to the matter. ON Saterday the nyenth of Iuly, at long Ichingham, a Tooun & Lordship of my lords, within a thrée mile of Killing-woorth, hiz honor made her Maiesty great chéer at dinner, and pleazaunt pastyme in hūting by the wey after, that it was eight a clock in ye éeuening ear her hyghnes cam too Kylling woorth. Whear, in the Park, a¦boout a flight shot from the Brayz & first gate of the Castl,Sibyl. one of the ten Sibills, that (wee réed) wear all Fatidicae & Theo∣bulae
(az partyez and priuy too the Gods gracious good willz) cumly clad in a pall of white sylk, pronoounced a proper poezi in English ryme & meter: of effect, hoow great gladnes her gracious prezenz brought into euery steed whear it pleazed her too cum, and specially now intoo that place y• had so long longed after the same: éended with prophecy certeyn, of mooch & long prosperitee health and felicitee: this her Maiesty beningly accepting, passed foorth vntoo the next gate of the Brayz, which (for the length, largnes and vse (az well it may so serue) they call noow the Tyltyard,The Porter. whear a Porter, tall of parson, big of lim & stearn of coountinauns, wrapt also all in sylk, with club & keyz of quan∣titee according: had a roough speech full of passions in meter aptly made too the pur∣pose: wheaby (az her highnes was cum within his ward) he burst out in a great pang of impaciens too see such vncooth trudging too & fro, such ridyng in & oout, with such dyn & noyz of talk within the charge of his offis: whearof he neuer saw the lyke nor had any warning afore, ne yet coold make too him self any cauz of the matter, at last vpon better vie & auise∣ment
az he preast too cum neerar: confes∣sing anon that he foound him self perced at the prezens of a parsonage so euidently expressing an heroicall Soueraintie ouer all the hole estates, & hy degreez thear be∣syde: callmd hiz stormz, proclayms open gates & free passage too all, yeeldes vp hiz club, hiz heyz, hiz office and all, and on hiz kneez humbly praiz pardon of hiz igno∣rauns & impaciens: which her highnes graciously graunting,The Trum∣petoours. he cauzd hiz Trum∣petoourz that stood that stood vpon the wall of the gate thear, too soound vp a tune of well∣cum: which, byside the nobl noyz, waz so mooch the more pleezaunt too beholld, be∣cauz theez Trumpetoour; being six in number, wear euery one an eight foot hy, in due proportion of parson besyde, all in long garmens of sylk sutabl, each with hiz syluery Trumpet of a fyue foot long, foormed taperwyze, and straight from the vpper part vntoo the neather eend: whear the diameter waz a 16. inchez ouer and yet so tempred by art, that being very eazy too the blast, they cast foorth no greater noyz nor a more vnpleazaunt soound for time & tune, then any oother common Trumpet be it neuer so artifici∣ally
foormed. These armonioous blasterz, from y• foreside of the gate at her highnes entrauns whear they began: walking vpō the wallz, vntoo the inner: had this muzik maynteyned from them very delectably while her highnes all along this Tiltyard rode vnto y• inner gate next ye baze coourt of the Castl: whear the Lady of the Lake (famous in king Arthurz book) with too Nymphes wayting vpon her,Lady of the Lake. arrayed all in sylks attending her highnes comming: frō the midst of y• Pool, whear, vpō a moo∣uabl Iland, bright blazing with torches, she floting too land, met her Maiesty with a wel penned meter and matter after this sorte: First of the auncientée of the Castl, whoo had béen ownerz of the same, éen till this day, most allweyz in the handes of the Earls of Leyceyter, hoow she had kept this Lake syns king Arthurz dayz, and noow vnderstanding of her highnes hither cumming, thought it both offis & duety in humbl wyze too discoouer her and her es∣tate: offring vp the same, her Lake & poour thearin, with promis of repair vnto the Coourt. It pleazed her highnes too thank this lady & too ad withall, we had thought indéed ye Lake had béen oours, and doo you
call it yourz noow? Well we wyll héerin common more with yoo hereafter. This Pageaunt waz clozd vp with a de∣lectabl harmony of Hautboiz, Shalmz, Cornets, and such oother looud Muzik, that held on whyle her Maiesty, pleazauntly so passed from thens tooward the Castl gate: whearvntoo, from the baze Coort ouer a drie valley,The bridge. cast into a good foorm, waz thear framed a fayre Bridge of a twenty foote wyde, and a seauenty foot long, gra∣ueld for treading, rayled on eyther part with seauen posts on a syde, that stood a twelue foot a sūder,Seuen pair of Posts. thikned betwéen with well proporcioned Pillers turnd. Upon the first payr of Posts wear set, too cumly square wyre Cage, each a thrée foot long, too foot wide & hy: in thē, liue Bitterz, urleuz, Shoouelarz, Hearnsheawz, God∣wytz, Syluanus prezents. 1. and such lyke deinty Byrds of the prezents of Syluanus the God of fooul. On the second payr, too great Syluerd Bollz, featly apted too the purpoze, fyld with Applz, Pearz, Cherryz, Fylberdz, Walnuts fresh vpon theyr braūchez, and with Oringez, Pooungarnets, Lemmanz, and Pypinz,Pomona. 2. all for the gyfts of Pomona, Goddes of fruiez. The thyrd payre of Posts, in too such syl∣uerd
Bollz, had (all in earz, gréen & olld) Wheat, Barly, Otez, Beanz & Peaz, az the gyfts of Ceres. The fourth Post on the leaft hand,Ceres. 3. in a like syluerd boll, had Grapes in Clusters, white and red, gracified with their vine leauez: the match Post against it, had a payre of great white syluer lyuery Pots for Wine: and before them, too glassez of good capacitee filld full: the ton with white Wine, the toother with claret: so fresh of ooor, and of look so loouely smiling to the eyz of many, that by my feyth me thought by their léering, they could haue foound in their harts (az the éeuening waz hot) too haue kyst them swéetly & thought it no sin: and théez for the potenciall pre∣zents of Bacchus the God of wine. The fifth payr had,. 4. each a fayr large trey sireawd a littl with fresh grass, and in thē, Coonger, Burt, Mullet, fresh Herring, Oystes, Smon, Creuis, and such like from Neptunus, God of the Sea.Neptuaus 5 On the sixth payr of Posts wear  too ragged  of syluer, as my Lord giuez them in armz, beautifully glitering of ar∣moour thervpon depēding, Bowz, Arroz, Spearz, Shéeld, Head pées, Gorget, Corse
lets, Swoords, Targets, and such like for Mars gifts the God of war.Mars. 6. And the apt∣lyer (me thought) waz it that thooz ragged staues supported théez Martiall prezents, as well bicauz théez Staues by their tines séem naturally méet for the bearing of ar∣moour, as allso y• they chéefly in this place might take vpon them principall protecti∣on of her highnes Parson, that so benignly pleazed her to take herboour. On the seauenth Posts, the last & next too the Castl, wear thear pight, too fayr Bay braūchez of a fourfoot hy, adoourned on all sides with Lutes, Uiollz, Shallmz, Cornets, Flutes, Recorders & Harps, as the prezents of Phoebus the God of Muzik,Phoebus. for reioysing the mynd, and also of Phizik for health to the body. Ouer the Castl gate was thear fastened a Tabl beautifully garnisht abooue with her higness armes, and featly with Iuy wreathz boordred aboout: of a ten foot square: the ground blak, whearvpon in large white Capitall Roman fayr writ∣ten: a Poem mencioning théez Gods & their gyfts thus prezented vntoo her high∣ness: which, becauz it remaynd vnremoo∣ued, at leyzure & pleazure I took it oout, as folloeth.
AD MAIEST ATVM REGIAM. Iupiter huc certos cernens TE tendere gressus, Coelicolas PRINCEPS actutum conuocat omn Obsquium praestare iubet TIBI qnen{que} benignu, Vnde suas Syluanus aues, Pomona{que} fructus, Alma Ceres fruges, hilarantia vina Lyaus, Neptumus pisces, tela et tutantia Mauors, Suaue melos Phoebus, solidam longam{que} salutem, Dij TIBI REGINA hac (cū SIS DIGNISSIMA) prebē: Haec TIBI cum Domino dedit se et werda Kenelm. All the Letterz that mencion her Ma∣iesty, which héer I put capitall, for reue∣rens & honor wear thear made in golld. But the night well spent, for that théez versez by torchlyght, coold not eazly be red, by a Poet thearfore in a long cerule∣oous garment, with a syde & wyde fléeuez Uenecian wyze, drawen vp to his elboz, his dooblet sleeues vnder that, crimzen, nothing but sylk: a Bay garland on hiz hed, and a skro in hiz hand, making fyrst an humble obeyzaunz at her highness cum∣ming, and pointing vnto euery prezent az he spake: the same wear pronoounced. Pleazauntly thus viewing the gyfts az
she past, & hoow ye posts might agrée wt the speech of ye Poet, at the eend of the bridge & entrée of ye gate, waz her highness receiued with a fresh delicat armony of Flutez, in perfoormauns of Phoebus prezents. So passing intoo the inner Coourt, her Maiesty (that neuer rydez but a∣lone) thear set dooun from her Pallfrey, waz conueid vp too chamber: when after, dyd follo so great a peal of gunz, and such lyghtning by fyer woork a long space too∣gyther: as Iupiter woold sheaw him self too be no further behinde with hiz well∣coom, then the rest of hiz Gods: and that woold he haue all the Cuntrée to kn: for indéed the noyz & flame wear hard & séen a twenty myle of. Thus mooch Master Martin (that I remember me) for ye fyrst dayz Bien venu. Be ye not wery, for I am skant in the mydst of my matter. On sūday:Sunday.  the fornoon occupied (az for the Sabot day) in quiet & vocation frō woork, and in diuine seruis & preaching at the parish church: The afternoon in excel∣lent Musik, of sundry swéet instruments, and in dauncing of Lords & Ladyez, and oother woorshipfull degréez, vttred with such liuely agilitée & commendabl grace:
az whither it moought be more straunge too the eye, or pleazaunt too the mind, for my part indéed I coold not discern: but ex∣cedingly well waz it (me thought) in both. At night late, az though Iupiter the last nyght, had forgot for biziness, or for∣born for curtezy & quiet, part of hiz well∣coom vntoo her highness appointed: noow entring at fyrst intoo hiz purpoze mode∣ratly (az mortallz doo) with a warning pées or too, proceding on with encreas, at last the Altitonant displayz me hiz mayn poour: with blaz of burning darts, flying too & fro, leamz of starz coruscant, streamz and hayl of fiery sparks, lyghtenings of wyldefier a water & lond, flyght & shot of thunderbollts: all with such continuanuns. terrour & vehemency: that the heauins thunderd, the waters soourged, the eart shook: in such sort surely, az had wee not béen assured the fulminant deitée waz all but in amitée, and coold not oother wiz wit∣ness hiz wellcooming vntoo her highness: it woold haue made me for my part, az hardy az I am, very vengeably afeard. This a doo lasted while hy midnight waz past, that well waz me soon after when I waz cooucht in my cabayn. And thiz for
the secund day. Munday waz hot,Munday. 3 and thearfore her highnesse kept in tyll a fiue a clok in the éeuening: what tyme it pleazed her too ryde foorth intoo the Chase too hunt the Hart of fors: which foound anon, and af∣ter sore chased, and chafed by the hot pursuit of the oounds, waz fayn of fyne fors,The hūting of the Hart of fors. at last too take soyl. Thear to beholld the swyft fleeting of the Déer afore with the stately caryage of hiz hed in hiz swim∣ming, spred (for the quantitée) lyke the sayl of a shyp: the hoounds harroing af∣ter, az had they been a number of skyphs too the spoyl of a karuell: the to no lss eager in purchas of hiz pray, then was the toother earnest in safegard of hiz lyfe: so az the earning of the hoounds in continu∣auns of theyr cry, the swyftnes of ye Déer, the running of footemen, the galloping of horsez, the blasting of horns, the halloing & hewing of the huntsmen, with the excellēt Echoz betwéen whilez from the woods and waters in valleyz resoounding, mooued pa∣stime delectabl in so hy a degrée, az for ony parson to take pleasuze by moost sensez at onez, in mine opiniō thear cā be none ony wey comparabl too this: And specially in
this place that of nature iz oormed so féet for the purpoze. In feyth Master Martin if ye coold with a wish I woold ye had béer at it: Well the hart waz kyld, a goodly Déer, but so ceast not the game yet. For aboout nine a clok at the hither part of the Chase, whear torchlight attended: out of the woods in her Maiestiez returne, rooughly came thear foorth Hombre Saluagio,The sauage man. with an Oken plant plut vp by the roots in hiz hande, him self forgrone all in moss & Iuy: who, for parsonage, gesture, & vttrauns beside, coountenaunst the mater too very good lyking, and had spéech to effect: That con∣tynuing so long in heez wylde wasts, whearin oft had he fared both far & neer, yet hapt he neuer to sée so glorioous an assemble afore: and noow cast intoo great gréef of mynde, for that neither by himself coold he gess, nor knew whear els to be taught, what they shoold be or whoo bare estate. Reports sum had he hard of ma∣ny straunge things, but brooyled thearby so mooch the more in desyre of knoledge. Thus in great pangz bethought he & calld he vpon all his familiarz & cōpanionz: the Fawnz, the Satyrez, the Nymphs, the
Dryardes, & the Hamadriades, but none making aunswer, whearby hiz care the more encreasyng, in vtter greef & extréem refuge calld he aloowd at last after hiz olld fréend Echo Echo that be wist woold hide nothing from him, but tell him all if she wear heer. Heer ({que} Echo.) Heer Echo,Echo. and art thou thear? (sayz he) Ah boow mooch hast thoow reléeued my careful spi∣ritez with thy curtezy onward. A my good Echo heer iz a marueloouz prezens of dig∣nitee, what ar they I pray thee, whoo iz soouerain, tel me I beseek the or els hoow moought I kno? I kno ({que} she). Knoste thoow sayz he? mary that iz exceedingly well: why then, I dezyer the hartely sho me what Maiesty (for no mean degree iz i) haue we heer: a King or a Queen? A Queen ({que} Echo.) A Queen sayz he? pau∣zing & wysly viewyng a whyle, noow full certeynly seemz it thy tale to be tru. And proceding by this maner of dialog withan earnest behollding her highnes a whyle, recoūts he fyrst hoow iustly that foormer reports agree with hiz prezent sight: toou∣ching the beautifull liniaments of cooūte∣nauns, the cumly proporcion of body, the prinsly grace of prezēs, the gracious gifts
of nature with the rare & singular quali∣tees of both body & minde in her Maiesty conioynd, and so apparaunt at ey. Then shortly rehersing Saterdaiz acts: of Sibils salutation, of the Porters propozition, of hiz Trumpetoourz musik, of the Lake la∣dyez oration, of the seauen Gods seauen prezents: he reporteth the incredibl ioy that all estatez in the land haue allweyz of her highnes whear so euer it cums: een∣deth with presage & praer of perpetual fe∣licitee, and with vmbl subiection of him & hizzen & all that they may doo. After this sort the matter wēt with littl differens I gess, sauing only in this point: y• the thing which heer I report in vnpoolisht proze, waz thear pronoounced in good miter & mater very well endighted in ryme. Echo fynely framed most aptly by aunswerz thus too vtter all. But shall I tell yoo maister Martyn by the mass of a mad a∣uenture? az this Saage for the more sub∣missiō brake his tree a sunder, kest the top from him, it had allmost light vpon her highnes ors hed: whereat he startld & the gentlman mooch dismayd▪ See the be∣nignitee of the Prins, az the foot men lookt well too the hors, and he of generozitee
soon callmd of him self, no hurt no hurt {quod} her highnes. Which woords I promis yoo we wear all glad too heéer, and took them too be the best part of the play. Tuisday,Tuisday. 4. pleazaunt passing of the time with muzik & daunsyng: sauing that to∣ward night it liked her Maiesty too walk a foot intoo the Chase ouer the Bridge: whear it pleased her to stand, while vpon the Pool oout of a Barge fine appoynted for the purpoze, too heer sundry kindes of very delectabl Muzik. Thus recreated and after sum wallk her highnes returned. Wednsday,Weds. 5. her Maiesty rode intoo the Chase a hunting again of the hart of fors. The Deer after hiz property for refuge took the soyl: but so masterd by hot pursuit on all parts that he waz taken quik in the pool: the watermē held him vp hard by the ed, while at her highnes commaundemēt he lost hiz earz for a raundsum and so hadThe Ha pardoned. pardon of lyfe. Thursday,Thursday. 6 the foourteenth of this Iuly and the syxth day of her Maiestyez cum∣ming: a great sort of bandogs whear thear tyed in the vtter Coourt, and thyrteen bearz in the inner.A queast of Bearz. Whoo so euer made the pannell, thear wear inoow for a Queast &
one for challenge & need wear. A wight of great wizdoom and grauitee seemed theyr forman too be, had it cum too a Iury: But it fell oout that they wear cauzd too ap∣peer thear vpon no such matter, but onely too aunswer too an auncient quarrell be∣tween thē & the bandogs, in a cause of con∣trouersy that hath long depended, been ob∣stinatly full often debated with sharp and byting arguments aboth sydes, and coold neuer be decyded: grown noow too so maruayloous a mallys, that with spitefull obrayds and vncharitabl chaffyngs all∣weyz they freat, az far az any whear the ton can heer, see, or smell the toother: and indeed at vtter deadly fohod. Many a mamd member, (God wot) blody face & a torn cote hath the quarell cost between them, so far likely the less yet noow too be appeazd, az thear wants not partakerz too bak them aboth sidez. Well syr, the Bearz wear brought foorth intoo the Coourt, the Dogs set too them, too argu the poynts eeuen face too face, they had learnd coounsell allso aboth parts: what may they be coounted parciall that are retaynd but a to syde? I ween no▪ Uery feers both ton & toother &
eager in argument: if the dog in pleadyng woould pluk the bear by the throot, ye bear with trauers woould claw him again by the skallp, confess & a list, but a voyd a coold not that waz bound too the bar: and hiz coounsell tolld him that it coold be too him no pollecy in pleading. Thearfore thus with fending & proo∣uing, with pluckyng & tugging, skratting and byting, by plain tooth & nayl a to side & toother such exspēs of blood & leather waz thear between them, az a moonths licking I ween wyl not recoouer: and yet remayn az far oout az euer they wear. It waz a sport very pleazaunt of theez beastz: to see the bear with hiz pink nyez léering after hiz enmyez approch, the nim∣blness & wayt of ye dog too take hiz auaun∣tage, and the fors & experiens of the bear agayn to auoyd the assauts: if he wear bit∣ten in no place, hoow he woold pynch in an oother too get frée: that if be wear ta∣ken oez, then what shyft with byting with clawyng, with roring tossing & tum∣bling he woold woork too wynde hym self from them: and when he waz lose, to shake hiz earz twyse or thryse with the blud & the slauer aboout hiz fiznamy, waz
a matter of a goodly reléef. Az thiz sport waz had a day time in the Castl,Gunshot & firevvork. so waz thear abrode at night very straunge & sundry kindez of yer woorks, compeld by cunnyng too fly too & fro and too mount very hy intoo the ayr vpward, and allso too burn vnquenshabl in the wa∣ter beneath: contrary ye wot, too fyerz kinde. This intermengld with a great peal of guns: which all gaue, both too the ear & to the y the greater grace & delight, for that with such order and art they wear temperd coouching time & continuauns, that waz aboout too oours space. Noow within allso in the mean tyme waz thear sheawed hefore her highnes,Tumbling of the Ita∣lia. by an Italian, such eats of agilitee, in go∣ings, turnings, tumblings, castings, hops, iumps, leaps, skips, springs, gam∣bads, soomersauts, caprettyez & flyghts: forward, backward, sydewyze, doown∣ward, vpward, and with such wyndyngs gyrings & circumflexions: al so lightly and wyh such eazyness, az by me in feaw woords it iz not expressibl by pen or spéech I tell yoo playn. I bleast me by my fayth to behold him, and began to doout whither a waz a man or a spirite: and I ween had
doouted me till this tyme: had it not béen that anon I bethough me of men that can reazon & tallk with too toongs, and with too parsons at onez, sing lyke burds, curteiz of behauoour, of body strong and in ioynts so nymbl withall, that their bonez séem az lythy & plyaunt az syeuz. They dwell in a happy Iland (az the book termz it) foour moonths sayling Soouthward beyond E∣thiop. Nay master Martin I tell you no iest:Diodor. Si∣cul. De anti. Egyptiorū gestia. li. 3 for both Diodorus Siculus an auncient Greek historiagrapher in his third booke of the acts of the olld Egipcians: and allso from him, Conrad Gesnerus a great lear∣ned man, and a very diligent writer in all good arguments of oour tyme (but decea∣sed) in the fyrst Chapter of hiz Mithrida∣tesMithrid. Geseri. reporteth the same. Az for this fello I cannot tell what too make of him, saue that I may gess hiz bak be metall lyke a lamrey that haz no bone but a lyne lyke a lute string. Well syr let him pass & hiz feats, and this dayz pastyme withall, for héer iz az mooch as I can remember me for Thurs∣dayz entertainment. FrydayFryday. 7 & Saterday wear thear no o∣pen
sheawz abrode,Saterday. 8 becauz the weather enclynde too sum moyster & wynde: that very seazonably temperd the droought & the heat, cauzed by y• continuauns of fayr weather & sunshyne afore, all the whyle syns her Maiestiz thyther cumming. A Sunday oportunely the weather brake vp again,Sunday. 9 and after diuine seruis in the parish church for the Sabot day, and a frutefull sermon thear in the forenoon: at after noon in woorship of this Kenel∣woorth Castl, and of God & saint Kenelm, whooz day forsooth by the calendar, this waz:A Brideale▪ a solem brydeale of a proper coopl waz appointed: set in order in ye tyltard, too cum & make thear sheaw before the Castl in the great coourt, whear az waz pight a cumly quintine for featz at armz: which when they had doon, too march oout at the Northgate of the Cast omward again intoo the tooun. And thus wear they Marshalld, Fyrst, all the lusty lads & bolld bachelarz of the parish, sutably euery wight with hiz blu buckeram brydelace vpon a braunch of gréen broom (cauz rozemary iz skant thear) tyed on hiz leaft arm (for a that syde lyez the hart) and hiz allder poll
for a spear in hiz right hand, in mar∣ciall order raunged on a fore, too & too in a rank: sum with a hat, sum in a cap, sum a cote sum a ierkin, sum for lightnes in hiz dooblet & hiz hoze, clean trust with a point afore: sum boots & no spurz, he spurz & no boots, and he neyther nother: one a sadel, anoother a pad or a pannell fastened with a cord, for gyrts wear geazon: and theez too the number of a sixteen wight ri∣ding men & well beseen: but the Bride∣groom formost, in hiz fatherz awny wor∣sted iacket, (for his freends wear fayn that he shoold be a bryde groom before the Queen) a fayr strawn hat with a capitall crooun steepl wyze on hiz hed: a payr of haruest glouz on hiz hands, az a sign of good husbanory: a pen & inkorn at his bak∣for he woold be knowen to be bookish: lame of a leg that in his yooth was brokē at football: wellbelooued yet of hiz moother that lent him a n mufflar for a napkin that was tyed too hiz gyrdl for lozyng: It was no small sport too mark this minion in hiz full appointment, that throogh good schoolation becam az formall in his action az had he been a bridegroom indeed: with this speciall grace by ye wey, that euer az
he woold haue framed him the better cooū∣tenauns, with the woors face he lookt. Well syr, after theez horsmen, a lyuely morrisdauns, according too the auncient manner, sir daunserz, Mawdmarion, & the fool. Then, three prety puzels az bright az a brest of bacon, of a thirty yéer olld a pees, that caryed thrée speciall spisecakes of a bushell of wheat, (they had it by meazure oout of my Lords bak hoous), before the Bride: syzely with set coountenanns, and lips so demurely simpring, az it had been a mare cropping of a thistl. After theez a loouely loober woorts, freklfaced, red hed∣ded, cleen trust in hiz dooblet & hiz hoze: taken vp noowe in deed by commission, for that he was so loth to cum forward, for reuerens bylike of his nu cut canuas doob∣let: and woold by his good will haue been but a gazer, but foound too bee a méet ac∣tor for hiz office: that waz too bear the bridecup, foormed of a sweet sucket barrel, a fayre turnd foot set too it, all seemly be syluerd & parcell gylt, adoourned with a beatifull braunch of broom, gayly begyl∣ded for rozemary: from which, too brode brydelaez of red & yelloo buckeram be∣gylded, and galauntly streaming by such
winde az thear waz (for he caried it aloft:) This gentlcupbearer yet had hiz freckld fiznamy sumwhat vnhappily infested az he went by the byzy flyez, that floct a∣boout the bridecup for the sweetnes of the sucket that it sauord on: but he lyke a tall fello, withstood theyr mallis stooutly (see what manhod may doo) bet them a∣wey, kylld them by skorez, stood too his charge & marched on in good order. Then folloed the woorshipfull Bride, led (after the cuntrée maner) betwéen too auncient parishonerz, honest toounsmen. But a stale stallion & a well spreed, (hot az the weather waz) God wot & an ill smel∣lyng waz she: a xxxv. yéer old, of cooler brounbay, not very beautifull indéed but vgly fooul ill fauord: yet marueloos fayn of the offis, bycauz she hard say she shoold dauns before the Queen, in which feat she thought she woold foot it as finely az the best: Well, after this bride cam thear by too & too, a doozen damzels for bride∣mayds: that for tauoor, attyre, for facion & cleanlyness: wear az meet for such a bride. az a tréen ladl for a porrige pot: mo, but for fear of carrying all cléen had been appoin∣ted: but theez feaw wear inoow.
Az the cumpany in this order wear cum intoo y• coourt, marueylous wear the mar∣ciall acts that wear doon thear that day. The Brydegreme for preeminens had the fyrst coors at the fyrst Quintyne,Running at Quintine. brake hiz spear treshardiment: but his mare in hiz mannage did a littl so titu∣bate, that mooch a doo had hiz manhod too sit in his sadl, & too skape the foyl of a fall: with the help of his band yet he recoouerd himself, and lost not hiz styrops (for he had none too his saddl): had no hurt as it apt, but only that hiz gyrt burst, and lost hiz pen & inkorn that he waz redy to wéep for. But hiz handkercher, az good hap waz, founde he safe at his gyrdl: that cheerd him sumwhat, & had good regard it shoold not be fyeld. For though heat & coolnes vpon sundry occazins made him sumtime too sweat, and sumtime rematik: yet durst he be bollder too hiz noze & wype hiz face with the flapet of his fatherz iacket, then with hiz mothers mufflar. Tiz a goodly matter, when yooth iz manerly brought vp in fatherly looue & motherly aw. Noow syr, after the Brydegroom had made hiz coors, ran the rest of the band, a
whyle in sum order, but soon after, tag & rag, cut & long tayl: whear the specialty of the sport waz, to see: how sum for hiz slakness had a good bob with the bag, and sum for his haste too toppl dooun right, & cum tumbling to the post: sum stryuing so mooch at the first setting oout, that it séemd a question betwéene the man & the beast, whither the coors shoold be made a hors∣bak or a foot: and put foorth with the spurz, then woold run hiz race byas among the thickest of the throng, that dooun came they toogyther hand ouer hed: anoother, whyle he directed hiz coors to the quin∣tyne, hiz iument woold cary him too a mare amoong the pepl: so hiz hors az a∣moroous, az him self aduenturoous. Anoo∣ther, too run & miss the quintyne with hiz staff, and hit the boord with his hed. Many such gay gamez wear thear a∣mong theez ryderz: who by & by after, vpō a greater coorage leaft thear quintining, and ran one at a noother. Thear to sée the stearn coountenauns, the grym looks, the cooragioous attempts, the desperat aduē∣turez, the daungeroous coorsez, the feers encoounterz, whearby the buff at the man, and the coounterbuff at the hors, that
both sumtime cam topling too the grooūd By my trooth Master Martyn twaz a lyely pastyme, I beleue it woold haue mooued sum man too a right méery mood, thoogh had it be toold him hiz wyfe lay a dying. And heertoo folloed az good a sport (me thooght) prezented in an historicall ku,Hok Tuis∣day by the Couentree men. by certeyn good harted men of Co∣uentrée, my Lordes neighboorz thear: whoo vnderstanding amoong them the thing that coold not be hidden from ony: hoow careful & studidous hiz honor waz. y• by all pleazaunt recreasions her highnes might best fynde her self wellcom, and he made gladsum & mery (the groound∣woork indéed & fooundacion of hiz Lord∣ships myrth & gladnes of vs all) made pe∣tition that they moought renu noow their olld storiall sheaw: Of argument how the Danez whylom héer in a trooubloous sea∣zon wear for quietnes born withall & suf∣feard in peas, that anon by outrage & im∣portabl insolency,Florilg. li. 1. fo. 3000. abuzing both Ethelred the king then & all estatez euery whear byiyde: at the greuoous complaint & cooū∣sell of Huna the kings cheeftain in warz, on a Saint Bricez night. Ann. Dom. 1012.
(Az the book sayz) that falleth yéerly on the thyrteenth of Nouember) wear all di∣spatcht & the ream rid. And for bicauz the matter mencioneth how valiaūtly oour english wéee men for looue of theyr cuntrée behaued themseluez: expressed in actionz & rymez after their maner, they thought it moought mooue sum myrth too her Maie∣sty the rather. The thing said they iz groounded on sto∣ry, and for pastime woont too be playd in oour Citée yeerly: withoout ill exampl of mannerz, papistry or ony superstition: and els did so occupy the heds of a nūber, that likely inoough woold haue had woors me∣ditationz: had an auncient begynning & a long continuans: tyll noow of late layd dooun, they knu no cauz why: onless it wear by the zeal of certeyn theyr prea∣cherz: men very commendabl for behaui∣oour & learning, and swéet in theyr ser∣mons, but sumwhat too soour in preaching awey theyr pastime: wisht thearfore, that az they shoold continu theyr good doctrin in pulpet, so, for matters of pollecy & goo∣uernauns of the Citée, they woold permit them too the Mayr & Magistratez: and seyd by my feyth, Master Martyn, they
woold make theyr humbl peticion vntoo her highnes, that they might haue theyr playz vp agayn. But aware, kéep bak, make room noow,Captain Cox. heer they cum. And fyrst captin Cox, an od man I promiz yoo: by profession a Ma∣son, and that right skilfull: very cunning in fens, and hardy az Gawyn, for hiz ton∣sword hangs at his tablz éend: great ouer∣sight hath he in matters of story: For az for king Arthurz book, Huō of Burdeaus, The foour suns of Aymon, Beauys of hampton, The squyre of lo degree, The knight of curteyzy, & the Lady Faguell, Frederik of Gene, Syr Eglamoour, Syr Tryamoour. Syr Lamwell, Syr Isen∣oras, Syr Gawyn, Olyuer of the Castl, Lucres & Eurialus, Uirgyls lyfe, The castl of Ladyez, The wydo Edith, The king & the tanner, Fryar Rous, Howle∣glas, Gargantua, Robin bood, Adambell Clym of the clough & Wylliā a cludsley, The churl & the Burd, The seauen wyse Masters, The wyfe lapt in a Morrels skyn. The sak full of nuez, The sargeaunt y• becam a Fryar, Skoan Collyn cloout. The Fryar & the boy, Elynor Running, and the Nutbrooun mayd, with many mo
then I rehearz heer: I beleeue he haue them all at hiz fingars ends. Then in Philosophy both morall & natu∣rall, I think he be az naturally ouerseen: beside poetry & Astronomy, and oother hid sciencez, az I may gess by the omberty of hiz books: whearof part az I remember, The shepards Calender. The ship of foolz, Daniels Dreamz, The book of Fortune, Stans puer ad mensam, The hy wey too the Spittel hoous, Iulian of Brainfords testa∣ment, The Castell of Looue, The booget of demands, The hundred mery talez, The book of Riddels, The seauen sororz of we∣men, The prooud wiues pater noster, The chapman of a peniwoorth of Wit: Beside hiz auncient playz. Yooth & charitee, Hik skorner, Nugize, Impacient poouerty, and héerwith doctor Boords breuiary of health. What shoold I rehers heer, what a bnch of ballets & songs all auncient: Az Brom broom on hill. So wo iz me begon, troly lo. Ouer a whinny Meg. Hey ding a ding. Bo¦ny lass vpon a green. My bony on gaue me a bek. By a bank az I lay: and a hunderd more, he hath fayr wrapt vp in Parch∣ment and boound with a whipcord. And az for Allmanaks of antiquitee, (a point for Ephemerides) I ween hee can
sheaw from Iasper Laet of Antwarp, vntoo Nostradam of Frauns, and thens vntoo oour Iohn Securis of Salsbury. To stay ye no lenger heerin I dare say he hath az fayr a library for theez Sciencez, and az many goodly Monumens both in proze & poetry, and at afternoouz can tallk az mooch withoout book, az ony Inhollder betwixt Brainford and Bagshot, what de∣grée so euer he be. Biside this in the field a good marshall at musterz: of very great credit & trust in the tooun héer, for he haz béen chozē Alecunner many a yeer, when hiz betterz haue stond by: and euer quited himself with such esti∣macion, az yettoo for tast of a cup of Nip∣pitate, hiz iudgment will be taken abooue the best in y• parish, be hiz noze near so red. Captain Cox cam marching on vali∣auntly before cléen trust & garterd abooue the knee, all fresh in a velluet cap (master Golldingam lent it him) floorishing with hiz tonswoord, and anoother fensmaster with him: thus in the foreward makyng room for the rest. And after them prooudly prickt on formost, the danish launsknights on horsbak, and then the English: each with theyr allder poll martially in theyr
hand. Eeuen at the first enfree the mee∣ting waxt sum what warm:The couen∣tree play. that by & by kindled with coorage abothsidez, gru from a hot skirmish vnto a blazing battayl: first by spear & shéeld, ooutragioous in their ra∣cez az ramz at their rut, with furious en∣coounterz that toogyther they tumbl too the dust, sumtime hors & man: and after fall too it with sword & target, good bangz a both sidez: the fight so ceassing, but the battayl not so ended, folloed the footmen, both the hostez ton after toother: fyrst marching in ranks: then warlik turning, then from ranks intoo squadrons, then in too trianglz from that intoo rings, and so wynding oout again: A valiaunt captayn of great proowes az fiers az a fox assauting a gooz, was so hardy too gyue the fyrst stroke: then get they grizly together, that great waz the actiuitée that day too be séen thear a both sidez: ton very eager for pur∣chas of pray, toother vtterly stoout for re∣demcion of liberty: thus, quarell enflamed fury aboth sidez. Twise the Danes had the better, but at the last conflict, beaten doown, ouercom and many led captiue for triumph by our English wéemen. This waz the effect of this sheaw, that
az it waz handled, made mooth matter of good pastime: brought all indéed intoo the great coourt, éen vnder her highnes win∣do too haue béen séen: but (az vnhappy it waz for the bryde) that cam thyther too soon, (& yet waz it a four a clok). For er highnes behollding in the chamber delec∣tabl dauncing indéed: and héerwith the great throng & vnruliness of ye peopl, waz cauz that this solemnitée of Brydeale & dauncing had not the full muster waz ho∣ped for: and but a littl of the Couentrée plea her highnes allso saw: commaunded thearfore on the Tuisday followyng too haue it ful oout: az accordingly az waz pre¦zented, whearat her Maiesty laught well: they wear the iocunder, and so mooch the more becauz her highnes had gyuen them too bucks & fiue mark in mony too make mery togyther. They prayd for her Ma∣iesty, long happily too reign and off too cum thither that they mought sée her: and what, reioycing vpon their ampl reward∣and what, triūphing vpon the good accep∣tauns: they vaunted their play waz neuer so dignified, nor euer any players afore so beatified. Thus though the day took an end, yet
slipt not the night all sléeping awey: for az neyther offis nor obsequy ceassed at any tyme too the full, to perfoorm the plot hiz honor had appoynted: So, after supper waz thear a play prezented of a very good theam, but so set foorth by the Actoourz well handling, that pleazure & mirth made it seeme very short, though it lasted too good oourz & more. But stay master Mar∣tyn all iz not doon yet. After the play oout of hand, folloed a most delicioouz and (if I may so terme it) an Ambrosiall Banket: whearof, whither I myght more muze at the deintyness, shapez & the cost: or els at the varietée and number of the disshez (that wear a three hundred) for my part I coold littl tel them, and noow less, I assure yoo. Her maiesty eat smally or nothing: which vnderstood, the coorsez wear not so orderly serued & sizely set dooun, but wear by and by az disorderly wasted and coorsly consumed, more courtly me thought then curteously: But that waz no part of the matter, moought it pleaz & be like & doo that it cam for, then waz all well inoough. Untoo this banket thear waz appoin∣td a mask: for riches of arry, of an inre∣dibl
cost: but the tyme so far spent and very late in the night noow, waz cauz that it cam not foorth too the sheaw. And thus for Sondayz seazon hauing stayd yoo the lenger (accordyng too the matter) hee make I an eend: ye may breath yea while. Munday the eyghteenth of this Iuly,Munday. 10 the weather being hot, her highnes kept the Castl for coolness, till aboout fiue a clok her Maiesty in the Chase, hunted the hart (az afore) of fors: that whyther wear it by the cunning of the hunsmen,Psal. 24. or by the naturall desyre of the Deer, or els by both: anon he gat hym too soyl again, which reyzed the accstumed delight: a pastyme indeed so intyerly pleazaunt, az whearof at times whoo may haue the full and frée fruition, can find no more sacietée (I wéen) for a recreation, then of theyr good viaundes at timez for their sustenta∣cion. Well, the game waz gotten, and her highnes returning: cam thear vppon a∣swymming Mermayd (that from top too tayl waz an eyghteen foot long) Triton,Triton. Neptunes blaster: whoo, with hiz trumpet foormed of a wrinkld weald, az her Maie∣sty
waz in sight, gaue soound very shrill & sonoroous, in sign he had an ambassy too pronoouns: anon her highnes waz cum∣men vpon the bridge, whearunto he made hiz fish to swim the swifter, and hy then declared: how the supream salsipotent Monarch Neptune, the great God of the swelling Seaz, Prins of profunditees, and Soouerain Segnior of all Lakez, fresh∣waterz, Riuerz, Créekes, and Goolphs: vn¦derstanding hoow a cruell knight, one Syr Brose sauns pitée, a mortall enmy vntoo ladiez of estate, had long lyen aboout the banks of this pooll in wayt with hiz bands héer: too distress the lady of the lake, whearby she hath béen restrained not only frō hauing any vse of her auncient liberty & territoriez in theez parts: but also of ma∣king repayr & geuing attēdauns vntoo yoo nobl Quéen ({quod} he) az she woold, she pro∣mist, and allso shoold: dooth thearfore sig∣nify: and héerto, of yoo az of his good leag and déer fréend make this request, that ye will deyn but too sheaw yoor parson tow∣ard this pool, whearby yoor only prezens shallbe matter sufficient of abandoning this vncurtess knight, and putting all his bands too flight, and also of deliuerauns of
the lady oout of this thralldom. Moouing heer with from the bridge & fleeting more intoo the pool, chargeth he in Neptunes name: both Eolus with all his windez, the waters with hiz springs, hiz fysh and fooul, and all hiz clients in the same, that they ne be so hardy in any fors too stur, but keep them callm & quiet whyle this Queen be prezent. At which peticion her highnes staying▪ it appeerd straight hoow syr Bruse became vnseen, hiz bands ska∣led, and the lady by and by, with her too Nymphs, floting vpon her moouabl I∣lands (Triton on hiz Mermayd skimming by) approched toward her highnes on the bridge: az well too declare that her Maie∣stiez prezens bath so graciously thus wrought her deliuerauns, az allso to ex∣cuze her not comming to coourt az she pomist, and chaly too prezent her Ma∣iesty (az a token of her duty & good hart) for her highness recreation with hiz gift, which was Arion that excellent & famouz Muzicion, in tyre & appoyntment straunge well séeming too hiz parson, ryding aloft vpon hiz olld fréend the Dolphin, (that from hed too tayl waz a foour & twenty foot long) & swymd hard by theez Ilands:
héerwith Arion for théez great benefitez, after a feaw well coouched woords vntoo her Maiesty of thanks gyuing, in supple∣ment of the same: béegan a delectabl ditty of a song wel apted too a melodioous noiz, compoounded of six seuerall instruments al coouert, casting soound from y• Dolphin belly within, Arion the seauenth sittyng thus singing (az I say) withoout. Noow syr, the ditty in miter so aptly en∣dighted too the matter, and after by voys so delicioously deliuerd: the song by a skilful artist intoo hiz parts so sweetly sorted: each part in hiz instrument so clean & sharply oouched, euery instrument again in hiz kind so excellently tunabl: and this in the éeuing of the day, resoounding from the callm waters: whear prezens of her Ma∣iesty & longing too listen had vtterly dam∣ped all noyz & dyn▪ the hole armony con∣ueyd in tyme, tne, & temper thus incom∣parably melodioous: with what pleazure (Master Martin) with what sharpnes of conceyt, with what lyuely delight this moought pears into the heerers harts: I pray ye imagin yoor self az ye may, for so God iudge me, by all the wit & cunning I haue, I cannot express, I promis ye, Mai∣i
bien vieu cela Monseur, que forte grande est la pauuoyr qu' auoit la tresnoble Science de Musique sur les esprites humains. Per∣ceyue ye me? I haue tolld ye a great mat∣ter noow. As for me surely I waz lulld in such liking & so loth too leaue of, y• mooch a doo a good whyle after, had I, to finde me whear I waz. And take ye this by the way, that for the small skyl in muzik, that God hath sent me (ye kno it iz sumwhat) ile set y• more by my selfe whyle my name iz Lanham, and grace a God. A, muzik iz a nobl Art. A, stay a whyle, see a short wit: by my frooth I had allmost forgot. This day waz a day of grace besyde, whearin wear auaunced fyue Gentlemen of woorshipp vnto the degree of knighthood. Syr Tho∣mas Cecyll,Knigh made. sun & heyr vntoo the right ho∣norabl the Lord Treazorer, Syr Henry Cobham broother vntoo the Lord Cobhā, Syr Thomas Stanop, Syr Arthur Basset, and Syr Thomas Tresham; and allso by her highnes accustumed mercy & charitee, nyne cured of the peynfull and daungeroous diseaz, called y• kings euell, for that Kings & Queenz of this Ream, without oother medsin (saue only by
handling & prayerz) only doo cure it. Bear with me, though perchauns I place not theez Gentlemen in my recitall héer, after theyr estatez: for I am neither good he∣raud of armez, nor yet kno hoow they are set in the Subsydy bookez. Men of great woorship I vnderstand they are all. Tuisday,Tuisday.  according too commaunde∣ment. cam oour Couentrée men: what their matter waz, of her highnes myrth and good acceptauns, and reward vntoo them, and of their reioysing therat, I sheawd yoo afore, and so say the less noow. Wednesday,Wedns.  in the forenoon, prepara∣cion was in hand for her Maiesty too haue supt in Wedgenall, a thrée myle west from the Castl. A goodly park of the right honorabl, my very good Lord the Earl of warwyk: for that cauz, a fayr pa∣ilion, & oother prouision accordingly thy∣ther sent & prepared: but by meanz of weather not to cléerly dispozed, the matter waz countermaunded again. That had her highnes hapned this day too haue cummen abrode: there was made reddy a deuise of Goddessez & Nymphes: which az well for the ingenioous argument, az for y• well handling of it in rime & endigh∣ting
woold vndooutedly haue gaind great lyking & mooued no less delight. Of y• par∣ticulariteez, whearof I ceas to entreat: least like the boongling carpentar, by mis∣sorting the peecez, I mar a good frame in the bad setting vp, or by my fond tem∣pring afore hand embleamish the beauty, when it shoold be reard vp in deede. A this day allso waz thear such earnest tallk & appointment of remoouing that I gaue ouer my notyng, and harkened after my hors. Mary syr I must tell yoo: Az all ende∣voour waz too mooue mirth & pastime (az I tolld ye): éeuen so a ridiculoous deuise of an auncient minstrell, & hiz song waz prepared to haue been profferd, if meet time & place had been foound for it. Ons in a woorshipfull company, whear full ap∣poined, he recoounted his matter in sort az it shoould haue been vttred, I chaunsed too be: what I noted, heer thus I tell yoo: A parson very meet séemed he for the pur∣poze, of a. xlv. yéers olld, apparelled partly as he woold him self. Hiz cap of: hiz hed seemly roounded tonster wyze: fayr kem, y• with a spoonge deintly dipt in a littl ca∣pons greaz, waz finely smoothed too make
it shine like a . Hiz beard smgly shauen: and yet hiz shyrt after the nu trink, with rufs fayr starched, fléeked & glistering like a payr of nu shooz: mar∣shalld in good order: with a setting stik, & stroout y• euery ruf stood vp like a wafer: a side gooun of kendall gréen, after y• fresh∣ns of y• yeer noow, gatherd at y• nek with a naro gorget, fastned afore with a white clasp a keepr close vp too the chin: but eazly for heat too vndoo when he lyst: Seely begyr in a red caddis gyrdl: from y• a  Sheffeld kniuez hāging a to side: Oout of hiz boozom drawn foorth a lappet of his napkin, edged with a blu lae, and marked with a trulooue, a hart & a D, for Damian: for he waz but a ba∣chelar yet. Hiz gooun had side sléeuez dooun too midleg▪ lyt from the shooulder too the hand & lined with white cotton. His doob∣let sléeuez of blak woorsted, vpon them a payr of poynets of tawny chamlet la∣ced a long the wreast with blu threeden points, a wealt toward the and of fustiā anapes: a payr of red neatherstoks: a payr of pumps on hiz feet with a cross cut at the toze for cornz: not nu in deede, yet clenly
blakt with soot, & shining az a hoing horn. Aboout his nek a red rebon sutabl too hiz gyrdl hiz harp in good grace dependaūt before him, his wrest tied too a gréen lace & hanging hy: vnder the gorget of hiz gooun a fayr agon chayn (peawter, for) syluer▪ az a squier minstrell of Middilsex, that trauayld the cuntrée thiz soomer sea∣zon, vnto fayrs & woorshipfull menz hoou∣sez: from hiz cheyn hoong a Schoochion, with metall & cooller resplendaunt vpon his breast of the aunciet armez of Is∣lington: vpon a questiō whearof, he, az one that waz well schoold, & coold his lessō par∣t withoout book too aunswer at full, i question wear askt him, declared: hoow the woorshipfull village of Islington in Middelsex, well knooen too be one of the most auncient & best toouns in England next London at this day: for the feythfull fréendship of long time sheawd, azwell at Cooks feast in Alldersgatestreet yéerly vpon holly rood day, az allso at all solem bridealez in the eitée of London all the yéer after, in well seruing them of furmenty for porage, not ouersod till it be too weak of mylk for theyr flawnz, not yet pylld nor challked: of cream for they custards, not
frothed nor thykned with floour, and of butter for theyr pastiez, and pyepast, not made of well curds, nor gathered of whey in soomer, nor mingled in winter with salt butter waterd or washt: did obteyn long a go theez woorshipfull armez in coo∣ler & foorin az ye sée: which ar the armz A feeld argent, az the féeld & groound in deed whearin the Milk wiuez of this woorthy tooun, & euery man els in hiz faculty dooth trade for hiz liuing: on a Fess Tenny be∣tween three milk tankerds proper. The three milk tankerds, az the proper vessell whearin the substauns, & matter of theyr trade is too & fro transported. The Fess Tenny, which is a cooler betokening doout & suspicion: so az suspition & good heed ta∣king, azwell to their markets & seruaūts, az too theyr customerz that they trust not too far, may bring vnto them platez, that iz coyned syluer: three, that iz sufficient & plenty, for so that number in Armory may well signify. For Creast, vpon a wad of ote strawe for a wreath, a boll of furmenty: what (az ye koo) iz the most precious gyft of Ceres:The horn∣spoonz. and in the midst of it, stycking a doozen horn spoonz in a bunch, as the in∣struments
meetest too eate furmenty po∣rage with all: a doozen, az a number of plenty compleat for full cheer or a banket. and of horn, az of a substauns more esta∣mabl then iz made for a great deel: being neyther so churlish in weyght az iz met∣tall: nor so froward & brytll too manure, az stone: nor yet so soilly in vse, nor roough too the lips az wood iz: but lyght, plyaunt & smooth, that with a littl licking wooll al∣weyz be kept az cleen az a dy. With yoor paciens Gentlmen ({quod} the minstrell) be it sayd, wear it not in déed that horns be so plenty, hornware I beleue woold be more set by than it iz: and yet are thear in oour parts that wyll not styk to auoow, that many an onest man both in Citée & cūtree hath had hiz hoous by horning well vphollden, and a dayly freend allso at need. And this with yoour fauoour may I further affyrm: a very idgenioous parson was he, that for dignitee of the stuff, coold thus by spooning deuize, to aduauns the horn so neer to the ed. With great congruens also wear theez hornspoonz puttoo the wheat,Guid. Met. li. 9. as a token & porcion of Cornucopiae, the horn of Ache∣lous, which the Naiades dyd fyll with all
good frutez, corn, & grain, and after did cō∣secrate vntoo abooundauns and plenty. This skoochion with beasts very aptly agréeing both too the armz & too the trade of the bearerz, glorioously supported: Be∣twéen a gray Mare (a beast meetest for carying of mylktankards) her pannell on her bak, az alwayz reddy for seruis at euery feast & brydeale at ned, her tayl splayd at most eaz, and her filly fole, fall & a flaxen mane after the syre. In the skro vndergrauen ({quod} he) iz thear a proper woord,Salern. ca. 9. an hemistichi, well squa∣ring withall the rest, taken out of Salerns chapter, of things that most noorish mans body: Lac, Caseus infans. That is good milk & yoong chéez. And thus mooch Gintl∣men, and pleaz yoo ({quod} he) for the armz of oour woorshipfull tooun. And thear with∣all made a manerly leg, and so held his peas. Az the cumpany pawzed & the minstrell seemd to gape after a prayz for hiz Beau parler: and bicauz he had renderd hiz les∣son so well. Saiz a good fello of the cum∣pany▪ I am sory to see hoow mooch the poore minstrell mistakez the matter: for in deed the armz ar thus.
Thrée milk tankerds proper in a féeld of cloouted cream: thrée gréen chéesez vpon a shealf of cakebread. The fyrmenty bool & hornspoonz, cauz thear profit cumz all by horned beasts. Supported by a mare with a galld bak, & thearfore styll coouerd with a pannell, fysking with her tayl for flyez, and her fylly fole neying after the dam for suk. This woord Lac, Caseus in∣fans. That is, a fresh cheez & cream, & the common cry that théez mylk wiuez make in London stréets yeerly, betwixt Easter & Whitsontide: and this iz the very mat∣ter I kno it well inoough, and so éended hiz ale, and sate him dooun again. Héerat euery man laught a good, saue the minstrell: that thoogh the fool wear made priuy, all waz but for sport, yet too see him self thus crost with a contrary ku that he lookt not for, woold straight haue geen ouer all, waxt very wayward, eager & soour: hoow be it last by sum entreaty & many fayr woords, with sak & suger, we sweetned him again, and after becam az mery az a py. Appéerz then a fresh, in hiz ful formalitée with a loouely look, after three loly cooursiez, cléerd hiz vos with a hem & a reach, and spat oout withall, wy∣ped
hiz lips with the hollo of hiz hand, for fyling hiz napkin, temperd a string or too with hiz wreast: and after a littl warb∣ling on hiz harpe for a prelude, cam foorth with a sollem song,King Ar∣thurs book. warraunted for story oout of king Arthurz acts, the first book and 26. Chapter, whearof I gat a copy, and that iz thiz. SO it beell vpon a Penticost day, When king Arthur at Camelot kept Coourt riall, With hiz cumly Quéen dame Gaynoour the gay, And many bolld Barons sittyng in hall, Ladyes apparaild in purpl & pall, When herauds in hukes herryed full hy Largess Largess cheualiers treshardy. ¶A douty dwarf too the vppermost deas Right peartly gan prik and kneeling on knée, With steeuen full stoout amids all the preas, Sayd hail syr king, God thée saue and see: King Ryens of Northgalez greeteth well thee, And bids that thy beard anon thoou him send, Or els from thy iawez he wyll it of rend. ¶For hiz robe of state, a rich skarlet mantell, With a leauen kings beards bordred about, He hath made late, and yet in a cantell
Iz left a place the twelth to make : Whear thin must stand, be thoou neuer so stoout▪ This must be doon I tell the no fabl, Mawgre the poour of all thy round tabl. When this mortall message frō hiz moouth waz pa Great waz the brute in hall & in boour: The king fumed, y• quéen shriked, ladiz wear agast, Princes puft, Barns blustrd, Lords began too loour, Knights stampt, Squiers startl daz stéeds in a stoour Yeemen & Pagez yeald oout in the hall, Thearwith cam in syr Kay the Seneshall. ¶Sylens my suffrainz quod the curtize Knight, And in that stoound the chearme becam still, The dwarfs dynner full deerly waz dight, For wyne & wastl he had hiz wyll, And when he had eten & fed hiz fyll, One hunderd peeces of coyned golld, Wear giuen the dwarf for hiz message bolld. ¶Say too syr Ryens thoou dwarf quod the king, That for hiz prooud message I him defy, And shortly with basinz & panz will him ring Oout of Northgalez whear az he and I With sweards & no rayzerz shall vtterly ry Which of vs both iz the best barber▪ And thearwith he shook hiz sword Excalaber.
At this, the minstrell made a paz & a urtezy, for Primus passus. More of the song iz thear, but I gat it not. Az for the matter had it cum to the sheaw, I think the fello woold haue handled it well i∣noough. Her highnes tarryed at Kylling woorth tyll the wednesday after, being the .27. of this Iuly, and the nienteenth (inclusiue) of her Maiestiez cumming thither. For which seauen daiz, perceyuing my notez so slenderly aunswering: I took it less blame, too ceas & thearof too write yoo nothing at al, thē in such matterz too write nothing likely. And so mooch the rather (az I haue well bethoought me) that if I dyd but ruminate the dayz I haue spoken of, I shall bring oout yet sumwhat more, meet for yoor appetite, (thoogh a deinty tooth haue ye) which I beleue yoor tender stomak will brook well inoogh. Whearof part iz: fyrst hoow according to her highnes name ELIZABETH▪The sea∣uenz. which I heer say oout of the Hebru signi∣fieth, (amoong oother) the Seauenth of my God: diuerz things héer, did soo iustly in number square with the same. Az fyrst, her highnes hither cumming in this sea∣uenth
moonth: then, prezented with the seauen prezents of the seauen Gods: and after, with the melody of the seauen sor∣ted Muzik in the dollphin, the Lakeladyez gyft. Then too consider, hoow fully the Gods (az it séemed) had conspyred most magni∣ficently in aboundauns too bestow theyr influenez & gyfts vpon her coourt thear, too make her Maiesty merry. Sage SaturnSaturn & Pallas. himself in parson (that bi∣cauz of hiz lame leg coold not so well sur) in chayr thearfore too take order with the graue officerz of hoousholld, holpen indeed with the good aduise of hiz prudent Nees Pallas: That no vnruly body or disquiet, disturb the nobl assemblee, or els be ons so bolld too enter within the Castl gatez. Awey with all rascallz, captiez, melan∣cholik, wayward, froward, coniurerz, and vzurers, and too haue laborers & vnder∣woorkmen for y• beautifying of ony place, alwey at hand az they shoold be commaū∣ded. Iupiter.Iupiter. Sent parsenagez of hy honor & dignitee: Barons, Lords, Ladiez, Iugez, Bishops, Lawyerz, Doctors: with them, vertu, noblness, equitee, liberalitee & cōpas¦on:
due seazō, & fayr weather: Sauing that at the peticion of hiz deer sister Ceres, graūted a day or too of sum swéet shoourz for rypening of her corn that waz so well set, & too set forward aruest: Heerwith. bestoed he such plenty of pleazaunt thun∣der, lightning, & thundrbollts: by hiz hal∣ting sun & fyermaster, Vulcan,Vulcan. still fresh & fresh framed: alweyz so frequent, so intel∣labl, & of such continuauns in the spending (az I partly tolld ye) cōsumed: that surely he séemz too be az of poour inestimabl: so, in store of municion, vnwastabl: For all Ouids censure that saiz. Si, quoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat Iupiter: exigu tempore inermis erit. If Ioue shoold shoot hiz thūderbollts az oft az mē offend, Assure yoo hiz artillary woold soon be at an end. What a number of estatez & of nobi∣litée had Iupiter assembled thear, gess ye by this: that of the sort woorshipfull thear wear in the coourt dayly abooue fourty, whearof the meynest, of a thoouzand mark yéerly reuenu, and many of mooch more. This great gyft biside, dyd hiz deitée cast vpon her highnes, too haue fayr & seazo∣nabl weather at her ooun appointment:
According whearvnto, her Maiesty so had. For her gracious prezens thearfore with this great gyft endewed, Lichfeeld, Worceter, and Middelton, with many placez mo, made humbl sute vntoo her highnes too cum: too such whearof as her maiesty coold, it cam: and they seazon ac∣ceptabl. Phoebus,Phoebus. Biside hiz continuall & most delicious muzik (az I haue tolld yoo) ap∣pointed he Princes too adoourn her high∣nez coourt, Coounselerz, Herauds, and sanguine yooth, pleazaunt & mery, costly garments, learned Phizicianz, & no neede of them. Iuno.Iuno. Golld cheynez, Ouchez, Iewels of great price & rich attyre, woorn in mooch grace & good beséeming withoout pride, or emulacion of ony. Mars. Captainz of good conduct, Men skylfull in feats of armz, pollitik in stra∣tagemz, Good coorage in good quarelz, va∣liaunt, & wizehardy: Abandoning pikquar∣rels & ruffianz: appointing allso pursy∣naunts, currarz & posts still feeding her highnes with nuze & intelligencez from all parts. Venus.Vens. Untoo the Ladyez & Gentl∣wemen:
beauty, good fauoor, cumliness, galāt attyre, dauncing with cumly grace, sweet vois in song & pleasaunt tallk: with express commaundment & charg vntoo her sunn on her blessing, that he shoot not a shaft in the Coourt all the while her high∣nes remayned at Killing woorth. Mercuri.Mercuri. Learned men in Sciencez, Poets, Merchaunts, Painterz, Karuerz, Playerz, Engynerz, Deuiserz & dexteri∣tee in handling of al pleazaunt attempts. Luna.Luna. Callm nights for quiet rest, and syluer moonshine, that nightly in deed shone for most of her Maiestyez beeing thear. Blinde Plutus.Plutus. Bags of moony, Custu∣merz, Exchaungerz, Bankers, Store of riches in plate & in coyn. Bacchus.Bacch Full Cups euery whear, e∣uery oour, of all kynds of wyne. Thear waz no deintee that the Sea coold yeeld, but NeptuneNeptune. (thoough hiz reign at the neerestly well ny a hundred mile of) did dayly send in great plenty, sweet and freash. As for freash water fish, the store of all sorts waz aboundaunt. And hoow bountifull CeresCres. in prouizion waz, gess ye by this: that in lyttl more then
a three dayz space .72. tunn of Ale & Beer waz pyept vp quite: what that might whilst with it of bread beside meat, I re∣port me too yoo. And yet master Control∣ler, Master Coerar and diuers officerz of the Coourt, sum honorabl, and sundry right woorshipfull: placed at Warwik for more rooum in the Castl. But heer waz no ho Master Martin in de∣uoout drinkyng allwey: that brought a lk vnlookt for: which beeing knoen too the woorshipfull, my Lords good neygh∣boourz, cam thear in a too dayz pace, from sundry freendz: a reléef of a .xl. tunn, tyll a nu supply waz gotten again: and then too oour drinking a fresh, az fast az euer we did. Flora.Flora. Abrode & within the hoous mini∣stred of flourz so great a quantitée: of such swéet sauoour, so beautifully hued, so large and fayr of proporcion, and of so straunge kindez & shapez, that it waz great plea∣sure too sée. and so mooch the moore, az thear waz great store yet coounterfet & foormed of featherz by art, lyke glorioous too the sheaw az wear the naturall. Protheus.Protheus. Hiz Tumbler that coold by nymblness cast him self intoo so ma∣ny
foorms & facionz. Pan.Pan. Hiz mery morrys dauns with their pype & taber. Bellona.Bellona. Her quintine knights & proper bickerings of the Couentree men. Polyphemus.Polyphe∣mus. Neptunez sun & heyr (let him I pray & it be but for hiz fatherz sake, and for his good wyll, be allowed for a God, with hiz bearz hiz bear whealps and bandogs. Aeolus.Aeolus. Hollding vp hiz wyndez, while er highnes at any tyme took pleazure on the water, and staying of tempests during abode heer. Syluanus.Syluanus. Beside hiz plentifull prouizion of fooul for deynty viaunds, hiz pleazaunt & sweet synging byrds: whearof I wyll sheaw yoo more anon. Echo.Echo. Her well endighted dialg. Faunus.Faunus. Hiz ioly Sauage. Genius loci.Genius. Hiz tempring of all things within & withoout, with apt tyme & place too pleazure & delight. Then the three Charites: Aglaia,Charites. with her lyghtsum gladnes. Thalia her floorishing freshnes. Euphrosyne, her cheerfullnes of spirite, and with theez three in one assent Concordia: with
her amitée & good agreement. Tha too hoow great effects their poourz wear pooured oout heer among vs, let it be iudged by this: that by a multytude thus met of a three or foour thoouzand e∣uery day: and diuerz dayz more, of so sun∣dry degrees, professions, agez, appetytz, dispozicions & affections: such a drift of tyme was thear passed, with such amitée▪ looue, pastime, agrement, and obediens whear it shoold: and without quarell, iar∣ring, grudging, or (that I coold beer) of yll woord betwéen any. A thing master Mar∣tin very rare & straunge, and yet no more straunge then tru. The ParcaeParae. (az earst I shoold haue sayd) the first night of her Maiestiez cumming: they héering & séeing so precioous adoo heer, at a place vnlookt for, in an vplōdish Cun∣trée, far within the Ream: preassing in∣too euery steed whear her highnes went, whearby soduddld with such varietee of delyghts, dyd set a syde their huswifry, coold not for their harts tend their work a whyt. But after they ad seen her Ma∣iesty a bed, gat them a prying intoo eue∣ry place: olld hags, az fond of nuellries, az yoong girls that had neuer séen Coourt a∣fore:
but neyther full, with gazing nor wery with gadding, leaft of yet for that time, and at high midnight, gate them gigling, (but not alooud) into the prezens Chamber: minding in déed with their pre∣zent diligens, too recompens their former slaknes. So, setting themseluez thus dooun too their woork: alas sayz Atropos I haue lost my sheerz: Lachesis laught apace and woold not draw a threed: And thinke ye damez that ile hoold the distaff whyle both ye syt idle? why no by my mootherz soll {quod} Clotho. Thearwith fayr lapt in a fine lawn the spindell & rok, that waz dyzend with pure purpl sylk,  they safely vp toogyther: that of her Maiestyez distaff for an eighteen dayz, thear waz not a threed spoon I assure yoo. The too systers after that, (I hard say) began their woork again: y• long may they continu, but Atropos hard no tydings of her sheers, and not a man that mone her loss She iz not belooued surely, for this can I tell yoo: that whither it be for hate too the hag, or looue too her highnes, or els for both: euery man prayz God she may ne∣uer find them for that woork, and so pray I
dayly & duly with the Thus partly ye perceyue noow, hoow greatly the Gods can doo for mortals, and hoow mooch allwey they looue whear they like: that what a gentl Ioue waz this, thus curteoously too contriue heer such a treyn of Gods? Nay then rather, master Martin (too cum oout of oour poeticalitéez, & too talk no more serioous tearms) what a magnificent lord may we iusty accoount him, that coold so highli cast order for such a Iupiter & al hiz Gods besyde: that none, with hiz influens, good property or prezēt wear wāting: but all alweis redy at hand in such order & abooundans for the hono∣ring & delight of so hy a Prins, oour most gracioous Quéen & Souerain. A Prins (I say) so singuler in preeminens & worthi∣nes abooue all oother Princez & digniteez of oour time: thoogh I make no compari∣son too yeerz past. Too him that in this point, either of ignorauns (if any such can be) or els of maleuolens woold make any doout: Sit liber iudex (az they say) let him look on the matter. and aunswer himfelf, he haz not far too trauell. Az for the amplitude of hiz Lordships mynde: all be it that I poor sooll can i
conceit no more attein vntoo, then iudge of a gem whearof I haue no skill: ye, thoogh daily worn & resplendaūt in mine ey: Yet sum of the vertuze & propertiez thearof, in quantitée or qualitée so appa∣raunt az cannot be hidden but séen of all men, moought I be the boolder too rea∣port her vntoo yoo: but az for the valu, yoor iewellers by their carrets let them cast & they can. And fyrst: who that considerz, vntoo the stately seat of Kenelwoorth Castl, the rare beauty of bylding that hiz honor hath auaunced: all of the hard quarry stone: e∣uery room so spacioous, so well belighted, and so by roofed within. So séemly too sight by du proportiō withoout: a day time on euery side so glyttering by glass: a nights, by continuall brightnes of candell fyre & torchlight transparent throogh the lyghtsom wyndz, az it wear the Egiptian Pharos relucent vntoo all the Alexandrian coast: or els (too tallk merily with my mery freend) thus radiaunt, az thoogh Phoebus for hiz eaz woold reast him in the Castl, and not euery night so too trauell dooun vntoo the Antipodes. Heertoo so fully furnisht of rich apparell & vtensilez
apted in all points to the best. Untoo thiz,The Gar∣den. hiz honorz exquisit appoint∣ment of a beautifull Garden, an aker or more of quantitée that lyeth on the north thear. Whearin hard all along the Castl wall iz reared a pleazaunt Terres of a ten foot hy & a twelue brode: eeuen vnder foot & fresh of fyne grass: az iz allso the syde thearof toward the gardein, in which by sundry equall distauncez: with obelisks, sphearz, and white bearz all of stone vpon theyr curioouz basez, by goodly sheaw wear set: too theez, too fine arberz redolent by swéet trées & floourz, at each end one. The garden plot vnder that, with fayr alleyz gréen by grass, eeuen voided from the bor∣derz a both sydez, and sum (for chaunge) with sand, not light or to soft, or soilly by dust, but smooth & fyrm, pleasaunt too walk on, az a sea shore when the water iz auaild: then, mooch gracified by du pro∣porcion of foour éeuen quarterz: in y• midst of each, vpon a base a too foot square & hy, séemly borderd of it self, a square pilaster rizing pyramidally of a fyfteen foot hy: Simmetrically péerced throogh from a foot beneath, vntill a too foot of the top: whear∣vpon, for a Capitell, an Orb of a ten in∣ches
thik: euery of théez (with hiz base) from the groound too the top of one hole pées, heawen oout of hard Porphiry, and with great art & heed (thinks me) thyther conueyd & thear erected. Whear further allso by great cast & cost the sweetnes of sauoour on all sidez, made so respiraunt from the redolent plants & fragrant earbs & floourz, in foorm, cool∣ler & quantitee so delicioously variaunt: & frute Trées bedecked with their Applz, Peares & rype Cherryez. And vntoo theez in the midst, against the Terres: a square Cage,The Cage. sumptuoous & beautifull, ioyned hard too the North∣wall (that a that syde gards the gardein, az the gardein the Castl) of a rare foorm & excellency waz reyzed: in heyth a twenty foot, thyrty long, and a foourteen brode. From the ground strong & close, reared breast hy, whearat a Soyl of a fayr mool∣ding waz coouched all aboout: From that vpward, foour great wyndoz a froont, and too at each éend, euery one a fiue foot wide, az many mo eeuen abooue them: di∣uided on all parts by a Transum & Archi∣traue so lykewize raunging aboout the Cage. Each wyndo arched in the top &
parted from oother, in eeuen distauns by at fayr bolteld Columns, all in foorm & beauty lyke, that supported a cumly Cor∣nish oouched all along vpon y• hole square. Which, with a wyre net, finely knit, of mashez sixe square, an inch wyde (az it wear for a flat roof) and likewise the space of euery wyndo: with great cunning & cumlynes, éeuen & tight waz all ouer strai¦ned. Under the Cornish again, euery part beautified with great Diamonds, Eme∣rauds, Rubyes and Saphyres: poynted, tabld, rok & roound: garnisht with theyr golld, by skyllfull hed & hand, and by toyl & pensyl, so lyuely exprest, az it moought bee great marueyl, and pleazure too consider hoow neer excellensy of art coold approch vntoo perfection of nature. Bear with me good cuntréeman, thoogh things be not sheawd heer az well az I woold, or az well az they shoold. For in déed I can better imagin & cōceyue that I sée, thē well vtter or duly declare it. Holez wear thear allso & cauerns in orderly di∣stauns & facion, voyded intoo the wall: az well for heat, for coolnez, for roost a nightz & refuge in weather, az allso for breeding when tyme iz. More, fayr eeuen & fresh
holly treez for pearching & proyning set within, tooward each éend one. Héerto, their diuersitée of meats, theyr fine seaue∣rall vessells for theyr water, and sundry grainz. And a man skyllfull & diligent too look too them & tend them. But (shall I tell yoo) the siluer soounded Lute, withoout the swéet toouch of hand: the glorioous goollden Cup, withoout the fresh fragrant wine: or the rich ring with gem, withoout the fayr feawterd fynger: iz nothing in deed in hiz proper grace & vse: Eeuen so hiz honor accounted of thiz mansion, till he had plaste thear tenaunts according. Had it thearfore replenisht with liuely burds, English, French, Spa∣nish, Canarian, and (I am deceyued if I saw not sum) African. Whearby, whi∣ther it becam more delightsum in chaung of tunez & armony too the ear: or els in differens of coollerz, kyndz, & propertyez too the ey, Ile tell yoo if I can when I haue better bethought me. One day (Maister Martin) az the Gardin door waz open,The Gardi∣ner. & her highnes a hunting, by licens of my good fréend Adriā, I cam in at a bek, but woold skant oout with a thrust: for sure I waz looth so soon too depart.
Well may this (Master Martyn) be sumwhat too magnitude of minde, but more thearof az ye shall kno, more cauz ye shall haue so too think: héer oout what I tell yoo, and tell me when we méet. In the center (az it wear) of this goodly Gardein,The Foun∣tain. was theer placed, a very fayr Foountain, cast intoo an eight square, rea∣red a four foot hy: from the midst whear∣of a Colum vp set in shape of too Ath∣lants ioyned togeather a backhallf, the toon looking East, toother west: with theyr hands, vphollding a fayr foormed boll of a three foot ouer: from wheans sundry fine pipez, did liuely distyll continuall streamz intoo the receyt of the Foountayn: mayn∣teyned styll too foot déep by the same fresh falling water: whearin pleazauntly play∣ing too & fro & roound aboout: Carp, Tench, Bream, and for varietee, Pearch & Eel, fysh fayrlyking all & large, In the top, the ragged Staff. which, with the boll, the piller, and eight sydez beneath, wear all heawen oout of rich & hard white Marbl. A one syde, Neptune with hiz Tridental Fuskin triumphing in hiz Throne, tray∣led intoo the déep by hiz marine horsez. On an oother, Thetis in her chartot drawn
by her dollphins. Then Triton by hiz fyshez. Héer Protheus hearding hiz sea bulz. Thear Doris and her dooughterz so∣lacyng a sea & sandz. The waues soour∣ging with froth & fome, entermengled in place, with whales, whirpoolz, Sturgeonz, Tunneyz, Conchs & wealks: all engrauen by exquisit deuize & skyll, so az I may think this not mooch inferioour vntoo Phoebus gatez,Metam.  which (Ouid sayz) & perad∣nētur a pattern to this) y• Vulcane himself dyd cut: whearof such waz the excellency of art, that the woork in valu surmooun∣ted the stuff, and yet wear the gatez all of clean massy syluer. Héer wear thinges ye sée, moought en∣flame ony mynde too long after looking: but whoo so waz foound so hot in desyre, with the wreast of a Cok waz sure of a coolar: water spurting vpward with such vehemency, az they shoold by & by be moy∣stned from top too to. The héez to sum laughing, but the shéez to more sport. This sumtime waz occupied too very good pastime. A Garden then so appointed, as whear∣in a loft vpō sweet shadoed wallk of Ter∣res, in heat of Soomer, to feel the plea∣zaūt
whysking wynde abooue, or delectabl coolnes of the foountain spring beneath: Too tast of delicioous strawberiez, cher∣ryez & oother frutez eeuē from their stalks: To smell such fragrancy of sweet odoourz: breathing from the plants earbs & floourz: Too heer such naturall meloodioous mu∣zik & tunez of burds: Too haue in ey, for myrth sumtyme theez vnderspringing streamz: then, the woods, the waterz (for both pool & chase wear hard at hād in sight) the deer, the peepl (that oout of the East arber, in the base coourt. allso at hand in view) the frute trees, the plants, the earbs, the floourz, the chaunge in coollerz, the Burds flittering, the Fountin strea∣ming, the Fysh swymming: all in such delectabl varietee, order and dignitee: whereby at one moment, in one place, at hand without trauell too haue so full frui∣cion of so many Gods blessings,Paradisus. Graec. Horrus a∣moeniss. Aur He∣brai. Par∣des id est. Hortus. by entyer delight vntoo all sensez (if all can take) at onez: for Etymon of the woord woorthy too he calld Paradis: and though not so goodly az Paradis for want of the fayr ryuerz, yet better a great deel by the lak of so vnhappy a tree. Argument most cer∣tin of a right nobl minde, that in this ort
coold haue thus all contriued. But Master Martin, yet one wyndless must I featch, too make ye one more fayr coors and I can. And cauz I speak of one: let me tell yoo a littl of the dignitée of one∣hod:The nūber. 1 whearin allweyz, all by Deitee, all Sooueraintée, Préeminens, Principalitée and Concord withoout possibilitee of disa∣greement iz conteyned. Az one God, one Sauioour, one Feyth, one Prins▪ one Sū, one Phenix, and az one of great wizdom sayz: One hart, one wey. Whear onehod remz: thear quiet bearz rule, & discort fliez a pae. Three again, may signify, cumpa∣ny,3 a meeting, a multitude, pluralitée: so az all talez and numbrings from too vntoo thrée, & so vpward may well be coounted numberz, till they moount vntoo infinitée, or els too confuzion: which thing, the sum of Too cā neuer admit: nor it selfe can well be coounted a number, but rather a freend∣le coniunction of too onez: that kéeping in a sinceritee of accord, may purport vntoo vs, Charitee each too oother, mutuall looue, agréement & integritée of friendship with∣oout dissimulation. Az iz in theez. The too Testaments. The too Tabls of the Law. The too great lights: Duo lumina∣ia
magna: The Sun and Moon. And but mark a lyttl I pray, and see hoow of all things in the woorld, oour toongs in tallk doo allweyz so redily trip vpon tooz, payrz & cooplz: sumtymez az of things in equa∣litee, sumtime of differens, sumtyme of contraryez, or for comparizon: but cheefly for the most part, of things that between them seluez do well agree & ar fast linked in amitee: Az fyrst for pastymez: hoounds & hawks: deer, red & fall, hare & fox, par∣trich & fezaunt, fysh & fooul, carp and tench. For warz, spear & sheeld, hors & harneys, swoord & bukler: for sustenauns, wheat & barly, peaz & beanz, meat & drink, bread & meat, beer & ale, appls & pearz. But least by such dualiteez I draw yoo too far: let vs heer stay, and cum neerer home. Sée what a sort of freendly bini∣teez wee oour seluez doo consist & stond v∣pon. First oour too feet, too legs, too kneez, so vpward: and abooue, too shoolderz, too armz & too hands. But cheefly oour prin∣cipall Too, that iz, body & soll: then in the hed whear all oour sensez meet, and all∣most all in Tooz: too nozethrills, too earz & too eyz. So ar we of freendly Tooz, from op too to. Well, to this number of bini∣teez,
take ye one mo for an vpshot, & heer an eend. Too dyallzThe too diallz. ny vntoo the batil∣ments ar set aloft vpon too of the sydez of Cezars toour: one East, thoother Soouth: for so stond they best to sheaw the oourz too the toun & cuntrée: both, fayr, large rich▪ by byse for grooūd & golld for letterz: whearby they glitter cōspicuoous a great wey of. The clokbell that iz good & shrill, waz commaunded too silens at fyrst, and in déed sang not a note all the while her highnes waz thear, the clok stood allso still withall. But mark noow: whither wear it by chauns, by constellacion of starz, or by fatall appointment (if fatez & starz doo deal with dyallz).The diallz at .ii. a clok Thus waz it in deed: The hands of both the tablz stood fyrm & fast allweyz pooynting to iust too a clok, styll at too a clok. Which thing behollding by hap at fyrst: but after, serioously mar∣king in déed: emprinted vntoo me a déep sign & argument certein. That this thing amoong the rest waz for full signifiauns of hiz Lordships honorabl, frank, freendly & nobl hart toward all estatez. Which, whither cum they too stay & take chéer, or straight too return: too sée or too be seen: cum they for duty too her Maiesty or looue
too hiz Lordship, or for both: Cum they early or late: For hiz Lordships part, they cum allweyz all at too a clok, een iump at too a clock: That iz too say, in good hart, good acceptauns, in amitee, and freendly wellcoom. Who saw els that I saw, in right must say az I say. For so many things byside, Master Humfrey, wear héerin so consonant vntoo my constructiō, that thiz poynting of the clok, (too my self) I took in amitée az an Oracl certein. And héer iz my wyndless, lyke yoor coors az pleaz ye. But noow syr too cum to éend. For re∣ceyuing of her highnes, & entertainment of all thoother estatez: Syns of delicatz that ony wey moought serue or delight: az of wyne, spyce, deinty viaunds, plate▪ mu∣zik, ornaments of hoous, rich arras & silk, (too say nothing of the meaner things) the mass by prouizion waz heaped so hoouge, which the boounty in spending did after bewray. The conceyt so deep in casting the plat at fyrst. Such a wizdome and cun∣ning in acquiring things so rich, so rare, and in such aboundauns: by so immens & profuse a charge of expens. Which by so honorabl seruis & exquisit order, curteizy
of officerz and humanitee of al, wear after so boountifully bestoed & spent: what may this express, what may this set oout vntoo vs, but only a magnifyk minde, a singular wizdoom, a prinsly purs, and an heroicall hart? If it wear my theam Master Mar∣tyn, too speake of his Lordships great ho∣nor & magnificens, though it be not in me to say sufficiently, az bad a penclark az I am, yet coold I say a great deel more. But beeing heer noow in magnificens & matters of greatnes: it fallz well too mynde. The greatnes of hiz honorz Tent,The great Tent. that for her Maiestiez dyning waz pight at long Ichingtō, the day her highnes cam to Kyllingwoorth Castl. A Tabernacl in∣deed for number & shyft of large & goodly roomz, for fayr & eazy officez: both inward, & ooutward all so likesū in order & eysight: that iustly for dignitée may be comparabl with a beautifull Pallais, & for greatnes & quātitee with a proper Tooun, or rather a Cittadell. But too be short, least I kéep yoo too long from the Ryall exchaunge noow, and too cauz yoo conceyue mooch matter in feawest woords: The Iron bedstéed of Og the king of Basan,Deut. 3 (ye wot) waz foour yards & a half long, and too
yards wide, whearby ye consider a Gi∣aunt of a great proportion waz he. This Tent had seauen cart lode of pynz pertei∣ning too it: noow for the greatnesse, gess az ye can. And great az it waz (too marshall oour matters of greatnes togyther) not forget∣ting a Weather at Grafton, brought too the coourt, that for body & wooll waz exce∣ding great: the meazure I tooke not. Let me sheaw yoo with what great marueyl a great Chyld of Leyceter shyre, at this long Ichington, by the parents waz pre∣zented: great (I say) of limz & proportion, of a foour foot & foour inches hy: and els lanuginoous az a Lad of eyghtéen yéerz, béeing in déed a voowd too be but six yeer olld: nothing more bewraying hiz age thē hiz wit: that waz, az for thooz yeerz, simpl and childish. Az for vntoo hiz Lorship, hauing with such greatnes of honorabl modesty & be∣nignitée so passed foorth, az: Laudem sine in∣uidia et amicos pararit.Terent. By greatnes of well dooing, woon with all sorts too be in such reuerens, az: De quo mentiri fama ve∣retur. In synceritée of fréendship so great, az no man more deuooutly woorships.
Illud amicitiae sanctum et venerabile nomen. So great in liberalitée,Ouid. az hath no wey too heap vp the mass of hiz treazure, but only by liberall giuing & boounteoous bestoing hiz treazure, folloing (az it séemez) the law of Martiall that sayth. Extra fortunam est, quicquid donatur amicis: Qs dederis, solas semper habehis opes. Oout of all hazerd doost thou set that too thy freend thou gyuest: A surer treazure cāst thoou not haue euer while thoou lyuest. What may theez greatnesses bode, but only az great honor, fame, & renooum for theez parts héerawey, az euer waz vntoo thoz too nobl Greatz: the Macedoniā Alex∣āder in Emathia or Grées, or too Romane Charlez in Germany, or Italy? which, wear it in me ony wey too set oout, no man of all men by God (Master Martin) had euer more cauz: and y• eerby consider yoo. It pleazed hiz honor too beare me goodwil at first, & so to continu. To haue giuen me apparail éeuen from hiz bak, to get me al∣lowauns in y• stabl, too aduauns me vnto thiz woorshipfull office so néer y• most ho∣norabl Cooūcell, too help me in my licens of Beanz (though indéed I doo not so moch vze it, for I thank God I néed not) too per∣mit my good Father to serue the stabl.
Whearby I go noow in my sylks, y• els might ruffl in my cut canuas: I ryde noow a hors bak, that els many timez might mannage it a foot: am knoen too theyr ho∣norz & taken foorth with the best, that els might be idden to stand back my self: My good Father a good releef, that he farez mooch the better by: and none of théez for my dezert, eyther at fyrst or syns, God he kneez. What say ye my good freend Hum∣frey, shoold I not for euer honor, extoll him all the wez I can? Yes by yoor leaue whyle God lends me poour to vtter my minde. And (hauing az good cauz of hiz ho∣nor, az Virgill ad of Augustus Cezar) will I poet it a littl with Virgill,Eglog. 1. & say. Nam{que} erit ille mihi semper Deus, illius arā: Saepe tener nostris ab ouilibus imbuet agus. For he shallbe a God to me, tyll death my lyfe cosumez: Hiz auterz will I sacrifice with incens & perfumez. A singular Patron of humanitée may he be well vntoo vs tooward all degreez: of honor, toward hy Estates: and chiefly, whearby we may learn in what dignitee, woorship & reuerens her highnes iz to be estéemed, honored, & receyued. That waz neuer indéed more condignly doon thē héer: so az neither by the bylderz at fyrst, nor by
the Edict of pacificacion after,1266. An. 50 Hear. 3. waz euer Kenelwoorth more nobld thē by thiz, hiz lordships receiuīg her highnes héer noow. But Iesu Iesu whither am I drawn noow. But tallk I of my Lord onz, een thus it farez with me: I forget all, my freends, & my self too. And yet yoo, being a Mercer, a Merchant, az I am: my cuntrée mā born, & my good fréend withall, whear∣by I kno ye ar compassiond with me: Me thought it my part sūwhat to empart vn∣too yoo, hoow it iz heer with me, and hoow I lead my life, which in deed iz this. A mornings I rize ordinarily at seauen a clok: Then reddy, I go intoo the Chap∣pell: soon after eyght, I get me commonly intoo my Lords Chamber, or intoo my Lords prezidents. Thear at the cupboord after I haue eaten y• manchet, serued ouer night for lyuery (for I dare be az bolld, I promis yoo, az any of my freends the ser∣uaunts thear: and indeed coold I haue fresh if I woold tary, but I am of woont iolly & dry a mornings) I drink me vp a good bol of Ale: when in a swéet pot it iz defecated by all nights stāding, the drink iz y• better take that of me: & a morsell in a morning with a soound draught iz very hollsom & good for the eysight. Thē I am az fresh al
y• fornoon after, az had I eaten a hole pée of beef. Noow syr, if the Coūcell sit, I am at hand, wait at an inch I warrant yoo. If any make babling, peas (say I) woot ye whear ye ar? If I take a lystenar, or a priar in at y• chinks, or at the lokhole, I am by & by in the bonez of him: but noow they keep good order, they kno me well inough: If a be a freend, or such one az I like: I make him sit doun by me on a foorm, or a cheast, Let the rest wallk a Gods name. And heer doth my Langagez noow & than stond me in good stéed, my Frēch, my Spa∣nish, my Duch & my Latten: sumtime a∣moong Ambassadours mē, if their Master be within with ye Councell: sumtime with the Ambassadour himself, if he bid call hiz lacky, or ask me whats a clok. And I war∣rant ye I answer him rooundly, that they maruell to sée such a fello thear: thē laugh I and say nothing. Diner & supper I haue twenty placez too go too, & hartly praid too: And sumtime get I too Master Pinner, by my feyth a worshipfull Gentlman, and az carefull for hiz charge az ony her highnes hath: thear find I allway good store of ve∣ry good viaunds: we eat & be mery, than God & the Queen. Him self in feeding ve∣ry temperat & moderat az ye shall see ony
and yet by yoor leaue of a dish, az a colld Pigeō or so, that hath cum to him at meat more then he lookt for, I haue seen him éen so by & by surfyt, az he hath pluct of hiz napkin, wyept hiz knife, & eat not a mor∣sell more: lyke inoough too stik in hiz sto∣mak a too dayz after: (Sum hard message from the higher officerz, perceyue ye me?) Upon search, hiz faithfull dealing & dili∣gens hath foound him fautles. In after∣noons & a nights, sumtime am I with the right woorshipfull Syr George Howard, az good a Gentlman az ony lyuez: And sumtime at my good Lady Sydneys chā∣ber, a Noblwooman, that I am az mooch boound vntoo, az ony poor man may be vntoo so gracioous a Lady: And sumtyme in sum oother place: But allweyz amoong the Gentlwemen by my good wyll (O, ye kno that cumz allweyz of a gentle spirit) & when I sée cumpany according, than can I be az lyuely too: sumtime I foot it with daunsyng: noow with my Gyttern, & els with my Cyttern, then at the Uirginallz: Ye kno nothing cums amiss to me: then carroll I vp a song withall, that by & by they cum flocking aboout me lyke béez too hunny: and euer they cry, anoother good Langham anoother. Shall I tell yoo?
when I see Misterz—(A, sée a mad knaue, I had allmost tolld all) that shee gyuez onz but an ey or an ear: why then, man, am I best: my grace, my coorage, my cunning iz doobled: She sayz sumtime she likez it, & then I like it mooch the better, it dooth me good to heer hoow well I can to. And too say truth: what, with mine eyz, az I can amoroously gloit it, with my spanish sospires, my french heighes, mine Italian dulcets, my dutch houez my doobl releas,vp syn houe. my hy reachez, my fine feyning, my deep diapason, my wanton warblz, my running, my tyming, my tuning & my twynkling, I can gracify the matter az well az the prowdest of them, and waz yet neuer staynd I thank God. By my troth cuntreman it iz sumtime by midnight ear I cā get from them. And thus haue I tolld ye most of my trade, al the léeue long day: what wyll ye more, God saue the Queen, & my Lord, I am well I thank yoo. Héerwith ment I fully to byd ye fare∣well, had not this doout cum to my minde, that heer remainz a doout in yoo, which I ought (me thought) in any wyze to cleer. Which iz, ye maruell perchauns to see me so bookish, Let me tell yoo in few woords: I went too school forsooth both at Pollz, &
also at saint Antoniez: in the fifth foorm, past Esop fabls twys, red Terens. Vos islaec introauferte, & began with my Uir∣gill Tytire tu patulae. I coold my rulez, coold conster & pars with the best of them. Syns that, az partly ye kno, haue I traded the feat of merchaundize in sundry Cun∣treyz, & so gat me Langagez: which doo so littl hinder my Latten, az (I thank God) haue mooch encreast it. I haue leazure sū∣time, when I tend not vpon the Councell: whearby noow look I on one book, noow on an oother. Storyez I delight in, y• more auncient & rare, the more lykesum vntoo me: If I tolld ye. I lyked Wylliam a Malmesbery so well bicauz of hiz diligens & antiquitee. Perchauns ye woold conster it bicauz I looue Malmzey so well, but I feyth it iz not so: for sipt I no more Sak & suger (& yet neuer but with cūpany) then I doo Malmzey, I shoold not blush so mooch a dayz az I doo, ye kno my minde. Well noow thus fare ye hartely well. I feith, if with wishīg it coold haue béene, ye had had a buk or too this soomer: but we shall cum neerer shortly, & thē shall we merely meet & grace a God. In the mean time cōmend me I beseek yoo: vnto my good freends, all∣most most of thē yoor neighboours, Master
Allderman Pullison, aspeciall freend of mine: and in ony wise too my good olld fréend Master smith Custumer, by that same token: Set my hors vp to the rak & then lets haue a cup of Sak. He knoez the token wel inough, & wyll laugh, I holld ye a grote. Too Master thorogood: And too my mery companion (a Mercer ye wot az we be) Master Denman, Mio fratello in Christo: he iz woont too summon me by the name of Ro. La. of the coounty of No∣singham Gentlmam A good companion I feyth. Well onez agein fare ye hartely well. From the Coourt. At the Citee of Worceter, the xx. of August. 1575. Yoor countréeman, companion, & freend assuredly: Mercer, Merchauntauenturer; and Clark of the Councell chamber doore, and allso kepar of the same: El prencipe negro. Parme. R. L. Gent. Mercer. DE MAIEST ATE REGIA. Benigno. Cedant armatogae, concedat laurea lingu, Iactanter Cicero, aciustius illud habe: Cedant arma togae, vigil et togacedit honori, Omnia concedant Imperio{que} suo, DEO OPT. MAX. GRATIAE.
