19110 99849140 14276
O Lord my God how excellent is thy name in all the world.
Protestants
Papists
halfe
CHRISTIA∣NOGRAPHIE, OR The Description of the multi∣tude and sundry sorts of Christians in the VVorld not subiect to the Pope. With their Vnitie, and hovv they agree with us in the principall points of Difference betweene us and the Church of Rome. Goe yee therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. Mat. 28.19. And they went forth, and preached every where: The Lord working with them. Marke 16.20. After this I beheld, and loe, a great multitude which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne & before the Lambe. Rev. 7.9. LONDON, Printed by T. P. and W. J. for Matthew Costerden, Stationer. 1635.
REcensui Librum hunc cui titulus Christianographie, &c. una cum Epistola Dedicatoria ad R. in Christo Patrem, Franciscum Eliensem, Episco∣pum: qui quidem liber continet folia 88. in quo nihil reperio, quò minús cum pub∣lica utilitate Jmprimatur, modò intra sex menses proximè sequentes typis man∣detur. Ex aedi. Londin. Octobris 30. Samuel Baker.
TO THE RIGHT REVE∣REND FATHER IN GOD Francis Lord Bishop of Elie, my very good Lord. IT was an observation of our late Soveraigne Lord, King James: that VVheras the Ro∣manists cannot con∣firme their Faith, ei∣ther by sacred Scripture, or ancient Traditions; Their manner is to crie up the Visibilitie of the Church, and Authoritie of the same: And thereby they delude many of the ignorant and unlearned, bearing them in hand, that there was no such thing in the
world as a Protestant, before Luther: And that before his time, all the world beleeved as they doe: And that their Church hath not onely beene visible in all ages, and all times, but eminent∣ly conspicuous, and illustrious. And to this purpose one of that Sect lately delivered to a person of qualitie, this writing following, viz. It is plaine in holy Scripture, and confessed by the Pro∣testants, that the Church of God should be alwaies visible, and it was agreed by D. White, and D. Featly, to Mr. Fisher, and Mr. Sweet, to proove a visible succes∣sion in the Protestant Church, that they both could and would in all ages, from Christ to Luther by name, out of good Authors produce Doctors and Pastors professing the Religion, which the Church of England, and Protestants professe. This was promised, This is now required, without shifts, and idle delayes, &c.
VVhereas in this writing, an abso∣lute promise is pretended to bee made by your Lordship, and D. Featley, to Master Fisher, and Master Sweet: I finde in the relation of the conference (testified and subscribed by Honora∣ble personages, and others,) The said promise to bee made but upon condi∣tion onely:Conference. pag. 7. That the forenamed Iesu∣ites would shew visible professors of the intire Doctrine of the Romish Church, (as yet it is comprised in the Councell of Trent) in all ages, and name them out of good Authors, e∣specially for the first 600. yeeres. And in particular your Lordship required them to prove, by Christ and his Apostles,Conference. pag. 22. or by any of the Fathers for the first 600. yeeres, these sixe Te∣nets of the Roman Church, viz. 1. That all power of Order, and Juris∣diction, in respect of the Churches, is to bee
derived from the Church of Rome. 2. That no Scripture sence, or Transla∣tion thereof, is Authenticall, unlesse the same were received from the Church of Rome. 3. That the Roman Church onely was, and is the Authenticall Custos of unwritten Traditions. 4. That all generall Councels were cal∣led by the sole Authoritie of the Pope, and that hee might ratifie and disanull whatsoever pleased him in them. 5. That the Pope hath power to Cano∣nize Saints. 6. That the Pope had or hath power to depose Princes. Likewise,Conference. pag. 7. Doctor Featley required of them, to produce out of good Au∣thors, not any Empire or King∣dome, but so much as any Citie, Pa∣rish or Hamlet, within 500. yeeres after Christ, in which there was any
Visible assembly of Christians to bee named, maintaining and defending either their Trent Creede in generall, or these points of Popery in speciall,Conference. page. 9. to wit: 1. That there is a treasurie of Saints merits, and super abundant Satisfactions, at the Popes disposing. 2. That the Laiety are not commanded by Christs institution, to receive the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper in both Kindes. 3. That the publicke service of God in the Church, ought, or may be celebra∣ted in an unknowne tongue. 4. That private Masses wherein the Priest saith (edite & bibite ex hoc omnes) and yet eateth and drinketh himselfe onely, are according to Christs in∣stitution. 5. That the Popes pardons are requi∣site, or usefull to release soules out of Pur∣gatory.
6. That the effect of the Sacrament dependeth upon the intention of the Mi∣nister. 7. That extreme unction is a Sacra∣ment properly so called. 8. That we may worship God by an I∣mage. 9. That the sacred Hoast ought to bee elevated, or carried in solemne procession. 10. That Infidels, and Impious per∣sons, yea Rats and Mice; may eate the body of Christ. 11. That all Ecclesiasticall power de∣pendeth on the Pope. 12. That hee cannot erre in matter of Faith. 13. That he hath power to cannonize Saints. 14. To institute Religious orders. 15. To depose Kings, &c. He also urged Master Fisher, and Master Sweet, to name but one Father
or one writer of note, who held the particulars above named, for 500. yeres after Christ: which they would not, nor could doe. VVhereby any man may see, that they who call for a Succession in our Church, cannot shew it in their owne. Moreover, it is not a succession of persons, or catalogue of names, that maketh a true Apostolicke Church; But the true primitiue Faith once given to the Saints, set downe in holy Scripture. Our Lord himselfe telleth us, that he that is baptized, and beleeveth, shall be sa∣ved:Marke 16.16. now to perswade such a one that is baptized, & beleeveth, that he is no member of Christs Church, except he can also set downe a catalogue of the names of his spirituall parents, since Christ, is all one, as to perswade such a
one that he is no man, because he can∣not reckon up his naturall parents, and fetch his pedigree from Noah or Adam. Lastly, whereas they clamour for a catalogue of names (as in this wri∣ting) without all shifts and idle de∣layes, they have catalogues plentie, written both by strangers, as by Jlly∣ricus, by Symon de Voyons, Mounsier Plessis, and others, and by our coun∣trymen, as by B. Jewell for the first 500. yeeres, by the Primate of Armagh for the next 500. yeeres; and by the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, for the last 500. yeeres, with divers o∣thers, to which they have returned no answer, as I can heare of, but they lie upon their hands: also of late, Mr. Birckbeck hath written a catalogue, who acknowledgeth Doctor Featlies great furtherance in it, (as I also doe)
but most especially, I acknowledge my selfe bound unto your Lordship, for your helpe and incouragement, which imboldened me both to write, and publish this Treatise. Now although the contents of the former writing have beene sufficient∣ly answered, againe, and againe, and neede nothing of mine, being one of the meanest of all my brethren: Yet I shewed them that brought it me, that in stead of a Catalogue of Names, I would shew them a Catalogue of Churches, in which there now are, and have beene many millions of Christians, who have generally borne witnesse, and now doe, to the truth professed by us, and our Religi∣on, in the principall points in contro∣versie betweene the Roman Church and us, as the Greeke Church, which hath foure great Patriarches.
The first of Constantinople, whose succession I have set down from Saint Andrew to Cyrill, the now Patriarch: which succession,The Cophti have also a Patriarch of Alexandria: Alexandria was inhabited with Greekes, and also many other great Cities and Pro∣vinces, both A∣frica and Asia, have at this day many Greekes in them. hath not beene so interrupted with so many Schismes, as the Romish succession hath beene. The second of Alexandria. The third of Antioch. The fourth of Hierusalem: which Greeke Church, is much bigger then the Romish Church in Europe, and more ancient; The Romish Church having received Christianity from them. Againe, the Moscovite or Russe Christians, who inhabit many coun∣tries not onely in Europe, but also in Asia, as the great Kingdomes of Casan, and Astracan, and other great Provinces, all which together are of greater extent then all Europe besides; As also the Christians under the Pa∣triarch
of Musall in Asia, which Christians Vitriacus the Cardinall reporteth to live in severall,Vt de his qui seor∣sum habitant quo∣rum infinitus est numerus, tacea∣mus, inter Sarace∣nos non pauciores, ut dicitur, sunt Christiani infide∣libus. Vitria. histo. orient. cap. 77. in in∣finite numbers with their King, and also where they live mingled with Saracens, they are not fewer then they: and howsoever some say that these Christians are decayed since Vitriacus time, yet Postell repor∣teth,idem pag. 76. de Iacobitis. that they are yet more then the Latine Church.Postel. Compend. Cosmog. pag. 69. Dico pauci, com∣paratione priorum temporum, on in se, namsunt nobis latinis multo plu∣res. As also the Ja∣cobites dispersed in fortie King∣domes. The Armenian Christians in Europe, Asia, and Africa, who have a thousand Bishops, as Cardi∣nall Baronius reporteth, out of Otho Frisigensis; and also the Abissin Christians in Aethiopia, under their Emperour, who hath many great Kingdomes of Christians vn∣der him. All these, and many more hereafter set downe; as they doe agree
with us in the maine points of Religi∣on, being all baptized in the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, &c. so also, 1. They deny the Popes Supremacie, some of them excommunicating him yeere∣ly for an Hereticke, or Schismaticke, ac∣counting him, and his Church hereticall. 2. They receive the Communion in both kindes. 3. They have no private Masse. 4. They hold no Transubstantiation. 5. They offer no sacrifice for the quicke, and the dead, in their Liturgies. 6. Married Priests doe administer amongst them. 7. They know no Purgatorie, nor use any Prayers, nor sell any Pardons to re∣lease soules from thence. 8. Most of them have their Service in their owne tongues. Now howsoever the Romanists ac∣count
no more of the testimonies of these Christians, then of the testimo∣nies of Iewes & Turkes, and esteeme them damned persons, as they doe us; yet let them know, that these Christi∣ans are baptized, & beleeve in Christ; and also live devoutly to God, obe∣diently to Princes, and sincerely to men: yea many of them, suffer very much for Iesus Christs sake, which they might free themselves of, if they would renounce their Religion, and obtaine great honour, and estate; for the Turkes Janisaries, and Basha's, are most of them renegado Christians, but these poore Christians account their Saviour more deere to them, then all the honours, and riches of the world. Therefore farre bee it from any Christian Soule to account these men damned, as the Romanists doe, onely
for not being subiect to the Bishop of Rome,Bonif. 8. in ex∣trar. de major. & obedi. cap. unam sanctam, &c. according to their Tenet: That every Soule must of necessity of Salvation be subject to the Bishop of Rome. As for the Dedication, in regard I have received many kindnesses from your Lordship, both when you were my neighbour, and since: I am bold to present this Treatise to your Lordship, desiring your patronage and protection; and also most humb∣ly intreating Almighty God to mul∣tiply his blessings upon you, to your owne Comfort, and good of his Church. Your Lordships most humbly devoted, EPHRAIM PAGITT: Parson of the Church of St. Edmonds the King in Lombardstreet London.
To the Reader. THat which J intend in this treatise, is, to shew that there are many Christian Churches as well in Europe, as in the other parts of the world, that doe not adhere to the Ro∣man Church, nor acknowledge the Pope for their head. Invaine therfore, and to no purpose, doe many of that party run up and downe the world, and cry up the Church of Rome, for that one, holy, catholicke Church, which is so assisted by the holy Ghost that it cannot erre, whē she is indeed but a member (and no sound one neither) of that body; as being miserably infested at this day (which also the learned and sober men amongst themselves cannot de∣ny) with many new & fond opinions, and with superstitious practices not a few. The Greeke Church may, for ought I
know, by the same reason say, that she is that one infalible, Catholicke Church, that all are Schismatickes that cōmunicate not with her, & that out of that church there is no salvation to be had. One thing Iadde by way of caution: J haue cited many of the opinions & practices of those Christi∣ans, that live in the Easterne, and other re∣mote parts of the world, but J doe not un∣dertake to justify them in every particular; J would not be so understood: it sufficeth for my present purpose, to shew, that many Millions of Christians in the world, differ from the Papists, J, and that in the most of those things, wherein they, and we do disa∣gree, & which is the maine of all, that few, or none of all these doe acknowledge the Church of Rome for their Mother, or have any dependance on her. The God of peace make peace in Christendome, and grant that all they that confesse his holy name may agree in the truth of his holy word, and live in unity and godly love. Amen. So prayeth Thine in our common Saviour:
The Contents of the first Chapter. THe severall sorts of Christians in the World not subject to the Pope, or differing in Reli∣gion from him. First in EVROPE, Protestants, Greekes, and Muscovites. Secondly, in ASIA, The Christians under the Patriarch of Ierusalem. Antioch. The Armenians. The Georgians The Mengrellians. The Cinassians. The Christians in Asia the lesse. Muscovite Christians in Asia. Christians under the Pa∣triarch of Musall. The Jacobites. Christians of St. Thome. The Maronites. Besides the Curdi, Morduites, Drusi, and the Christians of Taprobana. Thirdly, in AFRICA. The Cophti under the Patriarch of Alexandria. The Abassines, or Ethiopian Christians. The contents of the second Chapter. The severall habitations of these Christians, in Europe, Asia, and Africa.
The contents of the third Chapter. The Vnitie, and how these Churches agree with us in the principall points wherein wee differ from the Church of Rome. Jn this chapter is set downe; 1 The principall differences betweene the Church of Rome and us. 2 The points in which these Churches agree with us, with some of their Liturgies. 3 That I finde these Churches are not hereticall, but orthodox in the maine. 4 Of the harmony of the Protestants among them∣selves. 5 Of the differences, and want of Vnity, amongst the Romanists. 6 Our Ʋnity with the ancient East, West, and South Churches; and especially with Gregory, who is pretended to be the founder of the Romish Religion amongst us. 7 Our agreement with the ancient Britans, our forefathers. 8 The lives and conversations of those Churches comparatively. The Contents of the fourth Chap. Of the Antiquity of these Churches. 1 Some of them are more ancient then the Romish Church. 2 The old Church of Rome, and the now church, are not one, but different.
3 The now church of Rome as it is a new church, so likewise it hath new Articles of Faith, &c. The Contents of the fift Chapter. A Succession of Bishops in Hierusalem. Antioch Alexandria. Rome, for 600. yeeres. In Constantinople for some yeeres. The Metropolites and Bishoprickes of Constan∣tinople. Antioch. Hierusalem. Africa. The Bishops of Constantinople, from Stachys to this day. That the Roman Bishops since Gregory, differ in Title, Iurisdiction, Life, and Doctrine from the former. A Succession of the Emperors of Constantinople, and of Aethiopia. The Contents of the sixt Chapter. By what meanes the Papall Monarchie hath beene raised, and how it hath been, and is upheld; in which is set downe. 1. The primitive estate of the Roman Bishops. 2. How they got the title of head of all other Churches: and how they increased their Jurisdiction.
3 The Popes Temporalties. 4 How the Pope got Superiority above the Empe∣rors. 5 Of their inventions to get money. 6 Of the Popes state and magnificence. 7 Of the Popes munificence and gifts. 8 Guicchardines relation of the Popes rising. 9 How the Popes keepe that they have. Jn giving of Kingdomes to Princes. In dispensing with marriages, and oathes. Their Corrupting the Fathers. Suppressing the reading of holy Scriptures. Their inventing scandalous lies and Bookes &c. The Conclusion. A letter sent from the Patriarch of Alexandria, to the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Answer to the same.
CHRISTIANOGRAPHIE, or the description of the sundrie sorts of Christians in the world, not sub∣ject to the Pope. AMongst the usuall and false pre∣tences, wherewith our Ad∣versaries of Rome have long gone about to deceive the sim∣ple and ignorant. One of the principall, is the Paucitie of the Professors of the Reformed Re∣ligion, and the Multitude and Amplitude of them, and their Religion, as if all the Christian Kings, Emperouns, and Bishops, before King Henry the Eight, and Arch∣bishop Cranmer, and also the whole Church of God had beene subiect to the Bishop of Rome: but onely a few Protestants, shut up in an obscure corner of Europe: To discover the falshood of these, their vaine and glorious boasting. I purpose to set downe. 1 The Churches of Christians in the world, not subiect to the Pope, or differing in Religio from him. 2 The places of their Dwellings, and large Habi∣tations.
3 Their VNITIE, and how they do agree with us in the principall points in Controverfie betweene the Church of Rome and its. 4 The ANTIQVITY of these Churches, some of them being more ancient then the Church of Rome. 5 A SVCCESSION of Bishops in some of their Pa∣triarchall Churches, and other Episcopall Sees. 6 How the Church of Rome hath beene advanced above other Churches, and how it hath beene since supported and held up. The seuerall sortes of Christians In the world, not subiect to the Pope, or differing in Religion from him CAP. I. CHristianity is not confined to one Countrey or Nation, but it is dispersed over the face of the whole Earth. Our Lord and Saviour be∣ing ready to ascend into Heaven, commanded his Apostles,Mat. 28 19 saying, Goe yee and teach all Nations, bap∣tizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. And this his commandement the holy Apostles put in execution.Mar. 16.20. They went forth and preached every where, the Lord working with them. In the Ecclesiasticall histories, the contries & Nations are named, in which and to whom they preached. Peter preached in Iudea,Pererius ad Roman: cap. 30 sect. 27. ANTIOCH, Galatia, Cappado∣cia, Pontus, in Asia, Bithinia, and Rome.
James The sonne of Zebedee, in Iudea and Spaine. Iohn, in Iudaea and Asia the lesse.ex Origene. Dorotheo, En sebio Hierony mo, Isidore aliisque. Andrew in Scythia, Europea, in Epirus, Thratia and Achaia. Iames the brother of our Lord in Hierusalem. Philip in Scythia and Phrygia. Bartholmew in the farther India, and Armenia the great. Matthew in Ethiopia. Thomas to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, Brach∣mans, Hircanians, Bactrians and Jndians. Simon in Mesopotamia, Judas in Aegypt, and both after in Persia. Matthias in the higher Ethiopia, Also Paul and Barnabas, in many countries of Europe and Asia. All these published the same faith for substance,Per Dei vo∣luntatem in scripturis nobis tradi∣derunt fun∣damentum et columnā fidei nostrae futuram, Co len. 1625. Irenaeus ad∣vers. haeres: lib. 3. cap. 1 Mat. 28.20. which we at this day professe in the Church of Eng∣land, for they taught those things that Christ commanded them, which are set downe by the will of God, in holy Scripture, to be the pillar and foundation of our faith, as Irenaeus writeh. And although men are generally perswaded, that these Churches are perished, or be∣come Hereticks, yet according to Gods promise of assistance, not onely to themselves, (viz) Lo, I am with you alway, but also to their Successors, preaching after them, even to the latter end of the world, Christia∣nity remaineth in many of these Regions to this day; maugre the cruelty of the Tyrants, and malice of the
divel, as will appeare afterwards by the testimony of Historiographers, and other unreproveable Authors. Some make but six sorts of Christians in the world. First the East Church, which challengeth to her selfe the first place, in regard of her prerogatives and priviledges, as having almost all the Apostolicke Sees, The greatest number of Patriarcks, the Maiesty of the Empire of Constantinople, for above 1000 yeeres, which hath withstood Paganisme and Mahometis∣me, and of the Empire of Trebizonde and Mosco, for some 100 of yeeres: the authority of Seven Gene∣rall Councells held amongst them: the Syrian lan∣guage, in which the Sonne of God delivered his ho∣ly Oracles, and the Hebrew and Greeke tongues, in which they were registred, and which hath had not onely all the holy Apostles and Disciples, but Christ himselfe when he was in his flesh, preaching amongst them; Of the communion of this Church, are the Grecians, the Muscovites, the Georgians, the Mengrellians, the Circassians, the Syrians, or Melchites and others. The second, They make the Church of Rome in the west: whose Bishops were for some 100, of yeares, many of them holy men and Martyrs. Now their cheife is the Pope, who pretendeth himselfe to be Christs alone Ʋicar, and Head of the Church, and to have all power, not onely spirituall, above Councells and the whole Church of God, but also Temporall above all Princes, Kings, and Empe∣rours,
and that he alone hath the Keyes of Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory, and he hath in his Treasury the good deedes or workes of Supererogation and Supera∣bundant satis factions of all Saints and Martyrs, to be∣stow them upon whom he list, and that he in cathe∣dra cannot erre, and that none can besaved, but those that are under his Iurisdiction Of this Church, Italy, Spaine, and many other Re∣gions are members, as afterwards more largely is set downe. The third is the South or Meridional Church in Egypt under the Patriarch of Alexandria, and the Abassins in Ethiopia under their Abunna. The fourth, are Christians falsely called Nestorians under the Patriarch of Musall, in divers parts of Asia, who are accused to hold the Heresie of Nestorius which they have revoked. The fifth are the Armenians in Armenia; and di∣spersed in Europe, Asia, and Africa. The sixt, are the Protestants of the Reformed Churches who inhabite a greate part of Europe. But that you may the better take notice of these severall sorts of Christians, not subiect to the Pope, I purpose to set them downe according to their habitations in the severall parts of the world. The whole world may be divided into two parts; the Old and the New, The one is called the Old, because it was inhabited many yeares be∣fore
the New was heard of amongst us: either of these, may againe be subdivided into three parts. The old in to Europe, Asia, and Africa, The new, into America, and the North, and the South, un∣knowne continents. Europe the first part of the old world,EVROPE. Travelors breviat. (as I read) hath in longitude from the farther part of Ireland west, unto the River Tanais East, both places having 52 degrees for latitude 2166 miles And in latitude, from Morea in Graecia South, in the degree 35 to 72 North, 2220 or thereabouts. This is the least part of the world, but the best, being best inhabited, and the inhabitants thereof, excelling in Arts and Scien∣ces; And moreover, Christian Religion flourisheth in Europe, more then any part of the world else. There are foure sorts of Christians in EVROPE. 1 The PROTESTANTS or Reformed Churches, under their severall METROPOLITANS or Superintendents. The Papists, under the Pope of Rome. 3 The Grecians, under the Patriarch of Constanti∣nople. 4 The Muscovites, under their Patriarch of Mosco. Asin the second part of the old world, measuring it with a right line from the River Tanais,ASIA. to the pro∣montory Tamos, both places having 50 degrees of la∣titude, it hath in longitnde 4284 miles, and measu∣ring it with a right line, from the 150 degree of E∣oplin octiall unto The promontory Tabin, it hath in North latitude 76 degrees, which being multiplied
by 60 makes 4560 miles, allowing 60 miles for each degree. This part of the world is famous, in re∣gard of the great Monarchies, as of Persians, Medes, As∣syrians, and Babylonians, but indeed most celebrated in holy writt for the CREATION of man in it, for the giving of the law; for the Invention af Acts and Sci∣ences. It being the place also, in which our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ was borne, lived, wrought his Miracles & offered himselfe a sacrifice for our sins. In Asia are these severall sorts of Christians follow∣ing. 1 The Christians in PALESTINE under the Patriarch of Hierusalem. 2 The Syrians or MALCHITES, under the Patriarch of Antioch. 3 The ARMENIANS, under their two Catholique Patriarchs. 4 The GEORGIANS, under their Metropolitan. 5 The MENGRELLIANS. under the Patriarch of Constantinople. 6 The CIRCASSIANS. under the Patriarch of Constantinople. 7 The CHRISTIANS of Asia the lesser. under the Patriarch of Constantinople. 8 Some Christians in Asia under the Patriarch of Mosco. 9 The Christians under the Patriarch of MVSALL. 10 The Iacobites under their Patriarch. 11 The Christians of St. Thomas. 12 The Maronites under their Patriarch.
Also to these Christians, I might add divers others in Asia, as the Curdi, the Morduits, and the Christians inhabiting the great Isle of Traprobana, with the Ilands nere therunto. Theinhabitants of the which Iles never acknowledged, nor their fathers the Popes of Rome,Cos; lib. 10. cap. 15 as Thomas a Iesu reporteth Africa the third part of the old world,AFRICA. is all com∣passed with the Seasaving in one place, where it is by an istmos divided from Asia, measuring it from Gambra on the West; to Cape Gardafu, on the East, (both places having ten degrees North latitude) hath in longitude 4155 miles, and in latitude, from the Cape of good Hope, to the Mediterranean Sea, about 4020 miles, conteining 67 degrees or therea∣bouts. In Africa are these Christians following. 1 The Egyptians or Cophti, under the Patriarch of Alexandria. 2 The Abassins or Ethiopian Christians,Quandoquidem hodie multi sunt, qui cum nihil sci∣ant, scire omnia velint, asscrentes nullos (in his max imis regionibus usque ad Indiam) inveniri Christia∣nos. Id quod verū non est, sed ubique Christus in mundo suoshabet cultores Id quidem verum est omnes Christia nos transmarinos usa Armenos, under their Abunna or Patriarch of Ethiopia. Thus you shall finde it to be true, that Brochardus the Monke writeth of the easterne countries, al∣though there are many now adaves, who knowing nothing, would seeme to know all things, affir∣ming that there are no Christians to be found in these great Regions, evon 10 lia, which is not true, for Christ hath his worship  in all places but it is true that all the Christ is b yond the feas viz, the Armenians, Cappadocians, Greeks, Chaldeans, Medes, Parthians, Indians, Nubeans, Iabeans, Asians, Georgians.
EVROPA
and other Orientall people are thought to be Sara∣cens,Cappadoces Gra∣cos, Chaldos, Me∣dos, Parthos, In∣dos, Nubeanos, la∣beanos, Asianos, Georgianos, et re∣liquos orientales, populos Savaceno∣rum esse putentur at que perfidiae ill∣rum subiacere quum tamen ibi fere omnes sint Christiani, id quod ego expertus sum in Cilicia et Ar∣menia minori quae parent Tartarorū principi tamen sunt meri Christi∣ani qui eas inhabi tant regiones Prae∣terea eos quos nes damnatos esse Iu∣dicamus haereticos ut sunt Nestorian Iacobitae, Maroni∣tae Georgiani, et si∣miles ego plerum∣{que} inveni bonos et simplices esse homi nes sincer equeergae Deum et homines viventes. Brochard: Monac: Terra sancta de∣scriptio pag. 325. and to be subiect to their miscreant impieties, when yet they are almost all Christians. That which I found (saith he) by experience in Ctlicia, and Armenia the lesse, although subiect to the Tarta∣rian Prince, yet they were mere Christians that in∣habit those countries. Moreover those whom we judge to be damned heretiques, as the Nestorians, Iacobites, Maronites, Georgians, and such like, I found them to be for the most part, honest and simple men living uprightly towards God and man. All these severall sorts of Christians before na∣med in Europe, Asia, and Africa, are not subiect to the papall iurisdiction, or differ from the Pope in religion, except the Papists, and some of the Indians & Maronites, who also differ in some things from the Papists. The severall habitations of the Christians before named, and first in Europe. CAP. II. The Protestants. THE Protestants inhabit the Kingdomes of England,England, Scot∣land, Ireland. Scotland, and Ireland, which being two Ilands, the first of them, to wit great
Britaine containeth in compasse 1836 miles,Cambdeni Britan∣nia pag. 2. and Jreland 400 miles in length, and about 200 in breadth. The Monarch of great Britaine hath in actuall possession, 19 antient Kingdomes and prin∣cipalities. England antiently conteined seven, Scot∣land three,Wales hath had 3 principalities. Ireland five, Wales three, and the Jle of Man one: The inhabitants speake nine severall lan∣guages, as English, Scotish, Welch, Cornish, Jrish, Mo∣nish, Gotish, in the Orcade Iles (which are 32) French, in Iarsy, and Garnsy, and Dutch, in severall places where many Netherlanders dwell, having Churches & their service in their owne tongue. The Kingdome of England,Imperiorum mun∣di Catalogus Au∣thore Ioanne Bo∣ter. Rex. Angliae pag. 17. is divided into 52 sheeres. In one onely whereof called Yorkeshire, it is thought that 70 thousand men may be levied. The cheife Citie is London, in which and the Sub∣burbs 2 miles about, there are esteemed to be about 600000 soules. In the last plague there was buried in one yeare about 63000 persons. The whole Ile of great Britaine may be reputed for one impregna∣ble fortres, the sea coasts being generally cliffie and in accessible. The shipping thereof are of great force, and doubled (as I heare) since the beginning of the Raigne of our late Soveraigne Lord King Iames.In Auglia Cantu ariensis Patriar∣cha nominatur Glossa d. 21. verb. Archiepiscopus a∣pud Miraeum notit Episcop. lib. 1 Cap: 14 pag. 34. In these two Ilands before named, are the sees of 8 Archbishops. The Archbishop of Canterbury hath hed the title of a Patriarch. England hath about 25 Bishoprickes, Scotland hath many, and Ireland hath had above 40. Againe, Iread that there are not so
many statly and bewtiful Churches, in so much cir∣cuit of ground in al the world as are in England And last of all, the glory of great Britaine is our religious and pious King Charles, for whose prosperity and long life I most humbly supplicate Almighty God. Also the kingdome of Denmarke, which contei∣neth under it,Denmarke and Norway. Boter. rel univers: par. 2 Rex Daniae Norvegtacoe si stende spatio di piu di mille e trecento miglia: Mirae lib. 4 cap. 23 notit E∣piscop. the Cimbricke Chersonesse, the Bal∣ticke Iland, and others, and the Kingdome of Nor∣way, which alone conteineth in length, about 1300 miles, and in breadth halfe so much; there are re∣koned, in Denmarke and Norwaty; two Archbi∣shops and 14 Bishops, the Archbishop of Lun∣den is primate of Denmarke, and the Archbishop of Nidrosia, is Primate of Norway. To this king∣dome belong some great Ilands in the Ocean. The kingdome of Sweden with Scricfinnia,Sweden, astim∣tur haec terrarum pars: Italia et Francia maior. Im per: munds. Catat: Rex Sueciae. Bi∣armia, and other provinces thereunto belonging, is bigger than France and Italie, but not so peo∣pled. The Swedes possesse in Livonia, Revalia, and Narue, and other peeces of good estimati∣on: It is divided (besides Livonia) into three se∣verall kingdomes, (viz) Cothland, Sweueland, and Ʋandalia; in Sweveland, Ʋpsalia is their cheife Citie and an Archbishopricke, Stockholme is the Kings seat. There is mainreined in Sweve∣land and Gothland about 32 Companies of foote, every troope consisting of five or six hundred har∣quebussiers, and thirteene companies of horse:
The late King, was thought to have eight thousand peeces of great Ordnance, and most of brasse; There are in Sweden one Archbishop, and six Bi∣shops. Part of the Netherlands, (videl.) three parts of the Duchy of Guelders,Part of the Ne∣therlands. Relation of the most famous King domes etcpag. 200 the Earledomes of Hol∣land Zeland, Zutphen, The Lordships of Freezland, Vtrech, Overissell, and Groning, and some part of Brabant and Flanders, and these countries where the Protestants religion is publiquely professed, although they are not so great as the other pos∣sessed by the Papists, yet they are more populous and richer: they keepe about 30000. men in con∣tinuall garison. In Switzerland of the thirteene Cantons, the Protestants in strength,Switzers. Grizons. Sr. Edwins Sands relation, sect. 45. and amplenesse of Terri∣torie much exceed the Papists. I reade that two thirds of the Switzers and Grizous, were Prote∣stants. For the Protestants in Germany,Germanie. preface to Mr. Brerewoods en∣quiries. In the pre∣face to Mr. Brerewoods inquire I finde, the whole Empire excluding Bohemia and Austria: (where of the one, is rather an Arbier, in the election of the Emperor, then an Elector, and the Arch∣duke of the other, hath onely a kinde of extraordi∣nary place in the dyet, amongst the ecclesiasti∣call Princes), consisteth of three orders or Sats, the Princes Ecclesiasticall, the Princes tempo∣rall, and the free Cities. Of the last of these
to wit the cities some of them termed the hanse townes, are seated in the Northerne parts of Germany betweene Dantisck Eastward, and Hamburge Westward. Many of these Cities as Hamburge Stoad and Lubeck (in times past a Dukedome) have beene able to put to sea every one of them 150 shipps. These Sea townes with the rest of the Inland free Cities,Pretestantium partes sequunt libere ivitates omnes: soculares Principes fere om∣nes Catholicoruns a secularibus prin∣cipes pauci ut Ba∣varus Clevensis, Thes: Politie. a potelesma 6. Sled Comment: lib. 24. pag. 302. doe in a manner either in whole or a part professe the reformed religion, except three in lower Swe via, which adhere wholly to the Roman Church (called Gmond whirlingen, and Dickels puhell.) Of the strength and wealth of these inland free Cities we may guesse by a particular losse: Which was in Anno 1554 Al∣bert Marquesse of Brandenburge, whose sword was in a manner a law, and his revenue, besieged the City of Norinberg, he burnt 100 of the vil∣lages belonging to it; 70 Manors and farmes appertaining to the Citizens, and 3000 acres of wood, and yet after all this spoile he compoun∣ded with them for 200000 Crownes and sixe peeces of Ordnance. All the Princes temporall of the Empire were firmly Protestants,Preface before named, anno 162. none of note excepted besides the Duke of Bavaria and Cleve. Now what the multitudes of subiects there are profes∣sing the same Faith with these Princes we may guesse by the amplenesse of the Dominions
under the Government of such onely who for their Commands are chief and most ominent among them: As of the Prince Elector Pila∣tine; the Duke of Saxony, the Marquesse of Brandenburg the Duke of Mirtemburg, Land∣grave of Hesse Manquesse of Buden, Prince of Anhault, Dukes of Brunswike, Holst, Luneburg, Meclenburg, Pomexane, Sweyburg: Amongst whom the Marquesse of Brandenburg, hath for his dominion not onely the Marchisate it selfe containing an circuite about 520 miles, and fur∣nished with 50 Cities, and aborit 60 other wal∣led Townes: but likewise part of Prus  for which he is feudatary unto the King of Poladd: The Region of Prignitz, The Dukedome of Crossèn; the signiories of Sternberg and Coibus. The County of Rapin, and lately the three Dukedomes of Cleve, Gulick, and Berg: of which the two former of them have either of them in circuite 130 miles. There was an old estimate made of Germa∣ny by such as favoured the Papacy:Sr. Ed. Sands loco citato, supposeth the Pupasts to be sixt part. that in the beginning of Ferdinand the Emperór, there was not past on twelfth part of i remaiding. Ca∣tholickle. There can no exact relation be made of we Protestants there at this day, by reason of the daily alteratiomoaused by the wanesHungary preface to Brerw: enquir. In Hungary the Protestants dwell in great multitudes and some thinkle they maked agr∣ter
part; especially being compared onely with such as are there addicted to the Romish super∣stition. And in Transilvania in a manner the whole body of the inhabitants were protestants by the favour of Gabniell Batthorius;Transilvania Preface to Mr. Brer. inquir. late their Prince, who did expell all such as were of the Iesuitical faction. For the Archduke of Austria's and the Arch∣duke of Gratzs Countries,Austria Nobiles fere om∣nes qui in subdi∣tos & clientes Iu∣dicia exercent, ex∣numque nonnulli vitae & necis ha∣bent potestatem, movarum opinio∣num veneno infe∣cti sunt, Thes Polit. apot. 6. Bohemia. A great part of the people, and especially of the Nobility, are that way affected: In Austria freedome of Religion was granted by the Emperors Maxinullian and Matthias. And in the Kingdome of Bohemia, and some places thereto adioyning, in which haue beene 32000 parishes or townes although the Mini∣sters have beene lately expulsed and the King, dome conquered, yet the Protestants dwell in great numbers. In the Kingdome of Polonia having under its dominion,Polonia Preface to Brer∣wood before. Polonia, Lituania, Livonia, Podolia, Rusia, the lesle Ʋolhinia, Massovia, Prussia which united as it were within one roundish inclosure, are in circuite about 2600 miles: and of no lesse space, then Spaine, and France laid toge∣ther. In this so large and ample Kingdome. The Protestants in great numbers are diffused tho∣row
all quarters thereof; having in every Pro∣vince their publique Churches, and Congrega∣tions, orderly severed, and bounded with Dio∣cesses: from whence are sent some of the chie∣fest and most principall men of worth, unto their generall Synods: Of which within these few yeeres, they have held five with great ce∣lebrity, as at Sendomire, Ann. 1570 Cracoria 1573. Petricove 1578. Woodislane 1583. and at To∣rune 1595. In Poland there are also 8 Russe or Greeke Bishopricks.Mira: de notit. opiscop. lib. 4. cap. 19. pag. 213. The Archbishop of Kiow is their Metropolitane. They have also many Armeni∣ans, who have a Bishop of their owne resident at Leopolis. For the kingdome of France and the state of the Protestants there.France. Preface before named. In the yeere 1622. I find this written viz. In this mighty Kingdome, those, as they usually stile them, (of the Reli∣gion) besides the Castles and Forts, that be∣long in a property to the Duke of Bullen, the Duke of Rhoan, the Count of Lavall, the Duke of Trimovile, Mounsier Chastillion, the Marshall of Diguers, the Duke Sally, and others, they are seased of above 70 townes, having Garrisons of Souldiers, governed by Nobles and Gentle∣men of the Religion, They have 800 Ministers retaining pensions out of the publique Finan∣ces, and are so dispersed through the chiefe
Provinces of the kingdome, That in the Prin∣cipality of Orange and Poictou, almost all the inhabitants. Of Gascony halfe. In Languedoe, Normandy, and other Westerne Provinces, a strong party professe the Religion. Now how∣soever the King hath taken Rochell, and most of their Forts into his hands; yet they still en∣ioy their Churches and free libertie; And have now many Churches or congregations at this day: For the assurance of those of the reformed Religion, see the Edict of Nantes, enacted by Henry the Third, confirmed by Henry the 4, and restablished by Lewis the thirteenth, prin∣ted in London, 1623. In Piemont Luooa and some other parts of I∣taly there are some Protestants:Piemont, &c. and also in the Ʋenetian territories. And thus much of the countries inhabited by the Procestants. The Papists inhabit. SPaine containing the kingdomes of Castile,Spaine. Navarre, Portugale, Arragon, Granda and some other,Maginus. which are all in compasse as Maginus writeth about 1893 common miles being somewhat more in compasse then the Ile of great Britaine but not so well peopled.Damiae a Goes Hispania, p. 6.7.8. Da∣mianus a Goes reckoneth in Spaine tenne Arch∣bishoprickes,
and 48 Bishopricks. Their reve∣nues are very great as the Archbishop of Toledo hath 150000 ducats yeerly and about 100000 ducats more yeerely to bestow: The Archbi∣shop of Sevil 24000, &c. Boterus reports that the Clergies revenue is inestimable. The inhabi∣tants of Spaine are detained in superstition, by the vigilancy, of the Inquisition, & their owne ignorance, The Laity being debarred from rea∣ding the sacred Scriptures in the vulgar, with∣out speciall licence whereby they might come to the knowledge of the truth: This country is much exhausted of people by reason or peo∣pling the West Indies & their daily warres. And in Spaine are a sort of people caled Maurani who are said to have exceeded the true Christians in number,S. E. Sands Re∣lat. sect. 44. in some of the South parts. Of these many thousands have beene lately banished. France also is inhabited by Papists mingled with Protestants as before,France. Alotharingia ex∣tendit Caletum us qspatio quasi 200 leucarum francica rum eiusque lati∣tudo paulo minor est. Imperiorum mun∣di Catalogus. Rex Frauci. it is a country in a manner 200, French leagues square as Boterus writeth, within which they reckon the Duke∣domes of Burgondie, Savoy, Lorraine, The sig∣nory of Geneva, and Avignion the Pones coun∣trey: which doe not acknowledge the French command. At this present France is divided in∣to eight Provinces who are under eight Courts of Parliament. The first is the Province of the Ile of France, wherein the Citie of Paris is sci∣tuated,
in which Citie the first court of Parlia∣ment resideth. The second parliament is of Languadec resi∣ding in the citie of Tholouze. The third of Gui∣en in the Citie of Bordeaux The fourth is of Nor∣mandy in the Citie of Roan.Boter relat num∣bers: par. 1. lib. 1. Francia qua itor de chi Arehi∣vescovati pin di cento vescovati Pag. 19. The fist of Burgundy in the citie of Diieon. The sixt of Daulphene in Grenoble The 7 of Province in Aix: the eight of Britannie in Remes, under these eight provinces all France is conteined. In France there are 14 Archbishoprickes and above a 100 Bishoprickes. Italie,Italie The length of this region is about 1020 miles In breadth in some places 410 miles & in other places. 126 miles. It containeth the Duke∣domes of Millane, Florence, the territory of the Church of Rome, the kingdome of Naples. The common wealth of Genoway. and part of the Venetian territories, The Dukedome of Vr∣bin the State Luca and others. The Pope hath in Jtalie the citie of Rome,The Pope. Cam∣pania, part of the Maremna, part of Tuscan, the Dutchie of Spolet, Marca, Ancona, part of Roma∣gnia, the citie of Bononia, in Naples Benevent: and in France Avignion containing 4 cities and 80 walled townes.Mirae lib. 2. page 67. de notit: Epr∣scop. For his clergie under him Miraeus reckoneth 28 Cardinalls Priests 18 Cadinall deacons 6 Cardinall Bishops beside many Metropolitans
and Bishops and to make his Iurisdiction seeme greater then it is; he giveth titles to his follow∣ers of the Patriarchships and Bishopricks with which he nor they haue nothing to doe withall, of which I will speake of afterward. The Venetian signiorie is but part of it in I∣taly as in Lombardie,The Venetians Relat: of the most famous king∣domes pag. 342. Marca, Trevisana, Frivili, in which are beside Ʋenice the Cities of Brescia, Ʋerona, Padoa, Bergamo. And others Domini∣ons they have also out of Italy, as Istria, Slavo∣nia, Dalmatia, Albania, or at least some partes of them.Mirae: pag. 178. lib. citat. And also the Ilands of Corfu, Cephalo∣nia, Zante, Candie and some others. In this sig∣niorie are two Patriarkes, fiue Archbishops, and above forty Bishops. The Papists inhabite these countries, but mingled with Protestants and Greekes. Part of the Netherlands,Part of the Ne∣therlands. as the Dukedomes of Limburg, Brabant; the Marquisate of the holy Empire, The Earledomes of Flaunders, Artoys, Hainault and Namurce, and the Barony of Macklyn; excepting as before excepted as part of Brabant, and Flaunders in which the reformed Religion is publikely professed. Part of Switzerland,Part of Switzer∣land. as Lucerne, Ʋrania, Ʋn∣derwaldt, Soluze, Switts, Zugh, and Friburg: in some of these Cantons they are some Prote∣stants mingled with the Papists.Germany In Germany the Papists inhabite the Duke∣dome
of Bavaria and part of Cleve and other places of lesse note, and also they live mingled with Protestants.Maginus fol. 79. There are in Germādy seven Archbishops and above 40 Bishoprickes many of which are also in the Protestants hands. The Archdukes of Austrias countrey and Grats his, the kingdomes of Hungaria, Bohemia,Austria. and others; are Papists mingled with Prote∣stants as before. In Polonia a great part are subiect to the Pope and in this country there are 2 Archbishops,Polonia. Magin. fol. 151. & 16 Bishops: beside the 8 Greeke Bishops and the Armenian Bishop before named. The Papists have also other places in Europe of lesse note in the continent, and also some Ilands, and so also have the Protestants. And thus much of the Protestants and Pa∣pists in Europe and their habitations. Whereas it may be obiected that there are many Papists in England, and other Prote∣stant kingdomes in secret: I confesse it to be true. And so also there are many Protestants even in Spaine it selfe; against whom al∣though all lawes and witts are strongly bent yet notwitstanding there were thought to have beene a great number in Civill it selfe who were in hart that way affected,Sr. Ed. Sands lib. cit. sect. 44. whom the Inquisitors for numbers sake were com∣manded to forbeare.
The Grecian Christians. THE Grecian Christians (some of them,) ac∣knowledge obedience to the Patriarch of Constantinople,Brer. Enquir. pag. 125. Bot. rel. univ. part 3. li. 1. la iurisdi∣ction di questo Pa∣triarch e grandissi ma. whose jurisdiction is very great, having under him in Europe, the Christians of Greece, Macedon, Epirus, Thrace, Bulgaria, Rascia, Servia, Bosnia, Walachia, Moldavia, and Podolia, to∣gether with the Ilands of Aegean Sea, and others about Greece, as farre as Corfu, besides a good part of the kingdome of Polonia, and those parts of Dalmatia, Croatia, and Hungaria: that are sub∣iect to the Turkish dominion, besides most of A∣sia the lesse:Boter. rel: par. 2 grand Turco: In these places, the Christians make more then two third parts at least of the Inhabi∣tants: for the Turke,Brer. pag. 68 his inquir. so that Christians pay him his yearely tribute, which is one fourth part of their Increase; and a sultany for every Poll, and speake nothing against the Religion, and sect of Mahomet,) permitted them the libertie of their religion, there are in Constantinople, the very feate of the Turkish Empire, about 20 Churches of Christians; and in the Citie of Salonica; or Thes∣salonica, about 30 Churches,Chytrae: pag. 9 de stat. eccle. whereas in the lat∣ter, the Mahometants, have but three Temples, or meskites. In the Calcedon Councell:Concil: Calced. can. 28. Mirae notit episcop lib. 1, cap. 10. 28 Provinces were assigned or confirmed, to the Primitive Autho∣ritie of this Patriarch.
In the Emperour Leos time, Anno 1386. The Patriarch of Constantinople had 81 Me∣tropolitans subiect to him, and about 38 Archbishops. The Patriarches of Constantinople. As of dig∣nity, so they have beene, before the Turkish conquest, men of great estate, as Alexander the Patriarch died worth 800000. Crownes in the yeere 1043. and Theophilack kept 2000 horse, Anno 956. The Patriarch is now elected by his Me∣tropolitans and Archbishops,Chytrae: pag. 158. de statu eccles. Idem pag. 159. according to the Ecclesiasticall Cannons. Being elected, hee is confirmed by the Vizi∣er Basse. For his authority with the Grand Signiors, hee is admitted the Emperours presence, and hath the same freedome, as the Ambas∣sadors of Christian Princes have, bringing pre∣sents to him. For Metropolitans, he hath now under him 74 who have under them, divers Bishops.Christop: Ang∣ e instituti Graeor, cap. 44. Chyt: pag. 4 9, lib. it. As Thessalonica hath tenne Bishops under him. Athens hath 6 Bishops under him. Corinth hath 4 Bishops, &c. The Patriarch hath a Senate or Colledge of 12 noble and learned men,Chyt: pag. 9. lice, Pag. 45. with whose advice he governeth and ruleth the Church under him;
for his mainteinance he hath above 20000. dol∣lers yearely. The Greekes have Monks,Christoph: Ange∣ lib: citat. but onely of the order of St. Basil, the great, they be not Idle beggars, nor belligods, but live on their labour: except onely the Priests, who applie their Spi∣rituall function. The Moscovite. MOscovite Christians inhabit Moscovia or Russia the whole countrie is of great length and bredth,Muscovia. The Russe common wealth Do Fletcher Cap 1. Do Fletcher. from the furthest part west∣ward one the Narve side, to Siberia Eastward is 4400. verst or there abouts, (a verst is lesse by one quarter then an English mile) from East to west about 3300 english miles & from the North to the south from Cola to Astracan; about 4260 verst and the Emperor hath more territories northwards farre beyond Cola, Muscouia lyeth part in Europe and part in Asia The Provinces of Moscovia are Volodomer, Mos∣co, Nisnovograd, Plesko, Smolenso, Novograd, Ve∣lica, Rostove &c. And the two kingdomes of Cazan, and Astracan all which are reduced into foure Iurisdictons which they call Chetfyrds that is, Tetrarchies or fourth parts. The cheife Cities are Mosco,Cap. 4. Novograd, Rosto∣ue, Volodomer, Plesko, Smolensko, Cazan, Astracan, &c.
The Citie of Mosco is reported to be bigger then London twise as bigge as Pragnes.Math. a Micheu de sarmat lib. 2 cap 52 bis maior quam Praga Flet∣cher cap. 16. The Emperors title is Theodore Iuanowich by the grace of God great Lord and Emperor of all Russia great duke of Ʋolodemer Mosco and Novo∣grad: King of Cazan, King of Astracan, Lord of Plesko and great duke of Smolensko; of Twerrig, Ioughoria, Permia, Vadska, Bulghoria, and others: Lord great duke Novograd of the low countrie of Chernigo, Rezan, Polotskoi, Rostoue, Yaruflave∣ley, Bealozera, Liefland, Oudoria, Obdoria and Con∣denfa, and commaunder of all Siberia and of the North parts and lord of many others countries.Ioann. Faber pag. 170 de Theolog: Moscovit: For their Ecclesiasticall government they were subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople but since the time that the said Patriarch hath bin under the Mahometan tyranny they haue a Patriarch of their own at Mosco to whō are sub∣ject two Metropolitans one of Novogrod,Fletcher cap. 21 some say 4 metro∣polites. the other of Rostove Four Archbishops towit of Smo∣lensco, Cazan, Ʋobsko, and vologda, and their Bi∣shops are six, whom they call Ʋladikey, their Priests they call Papaes. The late Patriarch Theodore was father to Michael the now Emperor of Moscovia The Bishops live upon tithes as God hath commanded and they use lordships given to them and also possesse farmes and castles;Ioan. Faber pag 172 Decimis quē admodum a Deo decretum est qo∣que vivunt Epi∣scop. Their Renes and reuenues to mainteine their dignities
are some what large, The Patriarches yeerely rents out of his lands besides other fees is about 3000: Rubbells or Markes. The Metropolites and Archbishops have a∣bout 2500. The Bishops have some 1000. some 800 some lesse. The matters perteining to their jurisdiction are the same in manner, that are used by the Clergie in other parts in Christendome, for be∣side their authority over the Clergie, and mat∣ters meere ecclesiasticall, their Iurisdiction ex∣tendeth to all testamentarie causes, matters of marriage, and devorcements, and some pleas of iniuries &c. This Countrie conteineth two Kingdomes 15 Dukedomes,Imperior mund: catalog. pag. 51 Bot: relat univer. par. 3: lib. Moscovia. and 16 Provinces. They have in so great reverence the holy Scriptures that they touch them not without many bowings of their heads and making the signe of the Crosse; and the like reverence they shew to the foure first generall Councells The Russians in Polonia finding that they could not have recourse to the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople as was fit, being subiect to the tyran∣ny of the Turke in the yeere 1591 fell from his jurisdiction, but yet retaine the Greeke religion.
Churchces in Asia. Hierusalem. THe Christians subiect to the Patriarch of Hierusalem Inhabite (mingled with Turks) and others Palestine,Microcosme pag. 380. The Patriarch doth keepe his residence in Hierusalem, In which there are now remaining about 10 Churches of Christi∣ans;Chytr. destatu  clesiarum pag 24. The Patriarcall Church is the Church of St. Sepulcher in Hierusalem and his house is neere unto it:Tyrius histor: bel∣lisacri lib. 14. cap. 12. There did belong to this Patriarch the three Palestines. Tyrius addeth more two Pro∣vinces (to wit) Rubensis and Beritensis: He al∣so relateth five Metropolitans to have belon∣ged to this Sea, and about 101 Bishops. This Countrie of Palestine, is called the holie land, because the holy One dwelt, and was borne there, who beareth up all things by the power of his word. Antioch. The Christians under the Patriarch of Antioch are called Syrians,Niceph, histor: ec∣cles: lib. 18. cap. 52. of the place of their cheife habitation; And Melchites because their
Bishops have alwayes followed in faith and in the councells the example and authority of the Emperors of Constantinople,Boterus relat: u∣nivers: par 3. lib. 1. de melchiti per che questi nella fe∣de e ne concilii han∣no sempre seguito l'essempio el au∣torita de gl. Im∣peratori Constan in olitani Idem Ibem e i tima che questa siala piu numerosa na time Christiana dievante Tyrius in Histor: Bells sacri lib. 14 cap. 12 pag. 247. Their Patri∣arch is the Patriarch of Antioch, who now kee∣peth his residence at Damascus. They inhabite (mingled with Mahometants) part of Syria, Beri∣tus, Tripolis, Alepo, and other places in Asia these are one of the greatest sort Christians in the Ori∣ent: This Patriarch had fifteens Provinces al∣lotted to him, and Tyrius reckoneth Metropoli∣tans Archhishops and Bishops belonging to Anti∣och 142 The Syrians do boast themselues to be the first Christians of the world: because St. Peter had his seat 7 yeare in Antioch before he went to Rome which is the reason that the Syri∣ans would never submit themselues to the Church of Rome. The Georgians. THe Georgians,Chytreus de stat. ecclesiarum. pag. 1. inhabit the Countrie that was antiently named Iberia, betwixt the Euxine and the Caspian seas. They haue on the North, Cancasus, on the West, the Mengrellians, on the East, and on the South the Armenians. All their Bishops being 18, professe absolute obedi∣ence to their Metrapolitan, without any other higher dependance; these christians liue severally by themselues, without any mixture of Mahume∣tans,
or pagans under their owne King, or Prince They are a very warlike people, valian in Ba∣taile, of great strength and might, with an in∣numerable multitude of Soulders, very terrible to the parazens: As often as they come to visit the Lords Sepulcher they enter into the holy Citie, with their Standards, exected not paying any tribute. As it is reported by Vitriacus the Cardinall. And in their standerds they beare St Gorge In the yeere 1614. Teimurazes being Prince of the Georgians the Persian armie entred into Georgia and spoiled divers Cities, and car∣ried away many prisoners, and amongst others Cetaba the Princes mother was taken in the Ci∣tie Cremen, and caried into Persia; which Ceta∣ba refusing to be come a Mahumetan, and to leave Christianty, was put to death and martyred by the Tyrant, and her body cast out into the feilds unburied: But Moacla who had beene a servant of the Queenes and then slave to a Persian got leave of her Master, to bring home the body in the night, telling her master what profit he might receive by it (her sonne ransoming it) The bodie she imbalmed and put into a Coffin. There were at that time certaine Iesuits in Persia who seeking the body and finding it not, being perswaded that it was devoured by wild beasts, got another dead mans head and imbal∣ming it and wrapping it in lynnen travelled to∣wards
Georgia: and drawing neere, sent a Mes∣senger to the Prince to tell him that there were certaine Roman Christians come out of Persia, who had brought with them the head of the ho∣ly Martyr Cetaba his Mother, which had delive∣red them out of many great dangers: The Prince hearing this went a daies iourney with a great troupe of his Nobility and Clergie, and brought the holy relique to Cachete, And with great honour and celebrity placed it in the Church of holy and great Martyr St. George of Alberdall. And used the Jesuits with all honour and re∣spect and sent them great gifts, which they re∣fused saying, that they had vowed povertie; They also made a shew of great holinesse, using much fasting and prayer. Also they petitioned the Prince that they might live in some Mona∣stery, and haue the custodie of the holy relique which hee graunted them: Now infinite mira∣cles were wrought daily, and great gifts and of∣frings they had out of all Iberia, the sicke and infirme resorted to them. Those that were past cure they told them that their sinnes were very great, and needed long time of repentance and expiation, and so they should returne to them againe for help, in which time they often died, to others of whom they had hope of recoverie, they used meanes, and attributed their health to the holy Relick, and to the Bishop of Rome
whom the most loving Jesus Christ had left his Vicar here on earth. By this meanes they inti∣ced many to the Romish religion; and of the No∣bility and had great hopes of the Prince him∣selfe who was much taken with their miracles, the fame of which filled all Iberia; But in the midst of all this, letters came frō Moacla his mo∣thers maid, that she had the body of his Mother which he might ransome, wherupon the Prince Teimurazes, sent Ambassadors to the Persian, and comming to an agreement with him had home his Mothers body, with Moacla her maide and many Captiues, which they manifestly knew to be her bodie by divers tokens and marks. Whereupon the Prince being angrie, comman∣ded the Iesuits to prison but they were delivered at the intreatie of some of the Nobility; a few daies after came two muleters out of Persia, who reported that they travailed in the said Iesuits cō∣pany, when they cut of the dead mans head wch they thought to be a theife and carried home to their Inne, and saw them anoint it with oyle, and odors, and this they declared to the Prince Teimurazes, who commanded the head to be cast out, and his mothers body to be buried. This historie is written in Greeke by Gregorius Hieromonachus the Patriarcall exarch from Tra∣pezunt. 1626. and by this meanes the Iesuites had almost perverted the prince and Country of Georgia.
The Mengrellians. THE Mengrellians inhabite Colohis which lyeth neere the Euxine Sea,Brerw enq. pag. 135. the people ther∣of received the faith by the preaching of Saint Mathias. The cheife Cities thereof are 1 Alvati, 1 Phasis, 3 Diosourias. In which are many lan∣guages spoken, by reason of the resort of abun∣dance of Marchants of sundry kingdomes, and many Interpreters to mediate betweene the people and the Governour. They are under the obedience of the Patriarch of Constantinople. The Circassians. THE Circassians,Idemibidem. or Zychi. as they were antiently caled are Christians of the Greek Communion, and besides of the Patriarch of Constantinople his obedience. These also liue by themselues, as before under their owne Kings or Princes. The Circassian Countrie extendeth it selfe on Meotis 500 miles, and within land 200 miles, the cheife Cities are Laeoppa and Cromuco. The Russe CHristians which dwell in Asia are under the iurisdiction of the Patriarch of Mosco.
To wit the Christians in the kingdomes of Casan, Astracan: and in other places in Asia sub∣iect to the Emperour of Muscovia. The Christians of Asia the lesse. DOe inhabite Phrygia, Galatia, Bithynia, Pontus, Lydia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Licia, Magnesia, and all the Provinces in Asia the lesse mingled with Turkes, (except Cilicia, and Isau∣ria) which are, or have beene under the Iurisdi∣ction of the Patriarch of Constantinople. The Armenians. THe Armenian Christians, are found in mul∣titudes,Brere. enq: pa. 170 in most Cities of great Trade, But yet the native Regions of the Armenians, and where they still are found, in greatest number, and their Religion is most supported, is in Ar∣menia the greater (named since the Turks first possession of it Turcomania) beyond Euphrates and Cilicia now termed Carmania. Touching their Ecclesiasticall government,Mirae not: Epis. li. 1. ca. 17. pa. 41. Bot:rel:vniv: par. 3. lib. 2. they acknowledge obedience without any fur∣ther or higher dependance to two Patriarcks of their owne whom they terme Catholicks, name∣ly of the greater Armenia who at this present
keepeth his residence in the Monasterie of Ec∣meazin by the Citie of E van in Persia,conv: am: gent: lib. 7. pa. 1. cap. 14. being translated thither, by occasion of the late warres betweene the Persians and the Turks: But his ancient seate was Sebastia: the Metro∣polis of Armenia the greater, The other Patri∣arch of Armenia the lesse, anciently kept at Miti∣lene the Metropolis of that Province, but now is resident in the City of Sis not far from Tarsus in Cilicia. Cardinall Baronius writeth of 1000 Armeni∣an Bishops:Annatom 12. pag. 319. Sands relat. p. 123 another of 300. The same Author relateth, that he comming on a Sunday into one of their Congregations, in the afternoone hee found on sitting in the midst of them in habit not differing from the rest, reading on a Bible in the Chaldean tongue, anon the Bishop en∣tred in a veste of black with a staffe in his hand, to whom they attributed much holinesse, First he prayed, and then he saying certaine Psalmes, assisted by two or three, after all sung ioyntly, at interims praying to themselves, resembling the Turks in the posture of their bodies, & often pro∣strations, the Bishop excepted, who erecting his hands, stood all the while with his face to the Altar, The service ended, one after another did kisse his hands & bestow their Almes, he laying the other hand on their heads & blessing them: Lastly, he prescribed succeeding fasts & festivals
Vpon the mountaines of Arrarat in Armenia, Noahs Arke rested, and from this countrey was the world repeopled.Tradition Cathol: pag. 2. Maiorem partem Asiae, & totius tractus orientalis inhabitabant, Quidam inter Sa∣raceno alij autem proprias absque infidelium consor∣tio occuparunt re∣giones: scilicet Nubiam & mag∣nam, Aethiopiae partem & omnes regiones usque in Indiam, plusquam quadraginta reg∣na,  asserunt continentes: Om∣nes autem sunt Christiani a Bea∣to Mattheo A∣postoo & aliis a postolicis viris ad∣fidem Christi con∣versi: Iac: Vitriac: Cardinal; histor orient, cap. 76. Boter relat: vni∣vers. li. 2. part. 3. de Giacobiti ecclesia Patriar∣chalis huius nati∣onis in Mesopota∣mia extra civita∣tem moradim, &c. Thom. a Ieu de The Iacobites or Dioscorians. THese Christians are called Iacobites: some say from Iacob the Patriarch of whose lineage they pretend to be: others write that they were so called of Iacobus Syrus who was also called Zanzalus: They are also called Dios∣corians of Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria. These Christians (as Cardinall Vitriacus saith) inhabited the greater part of Asia: some of them lived amongst the Saracens, others had their owne proper countries, as in Africa, Nubia, and a great part of Aethiopia, and all the regi∣ons unto India, containing as they report more then 40 kingdomes. These Christians were converted by St. Matthew and other Apostolike men to the faith of Christ. The Jacobites now are dispersed in the cities of Mesopotamia, Babylonia and Syria, and of o∣ther places: for their Ecclesiasticall govern∣ment, they are subiect to a Patriarch of their owne, whose patriarchall Church is in the monastery of Saphran: neere to the City Mer∣din in the North parts of Mesopotamia: but hee
keepeth residence in Caramite the ancient Me∣tropolis of Mesopot amia.Eutichae errores uno cum suo au∣thore condemnant qui duas naturas in nm confunde∣bat at ipsi contr hac opinionem as∣serunt duas in Christo naturas esse unitas unam∣que factam natu∣rm personatam: de duab us natur is non personatis, si∣ne mixtione ta∣men aut confusio∣ne apud Tho a Ie∣su de conuer lib: 7 par, 1. cap. 14. These Iacobites (as Leonard Bishop of Sidon vi∣siter to Pope Greg the 13th. in the East regions) doe condemne Eutiches and his error, who con∣founded the two natures of Christ. And they affirme two naturs to be united in Christ: & one personated nature to be made of the two natures not personated, without mixtion or confusion. They renounce Eutiches and honor Dioscorus. The Maronites. THE Maronites are found in Alepo, Damascus Tripoli of Syria and Cyprus,Mirae not. Epis∣co. lib, 1 cap. 19. but their maine ha∣bitation is in the Mountaine of Lebanus, which conteineth in circuite aboue 700 miles, and is possessed only by the Maronits, who for that pri∣vileidge, namely,Tho. a Iesu lib. 7. p. 1. cap. 22. de convers: omni gnt. to keepe themselues free from the mixture of the Mahometans pay the Turke large Tribute. The Patriarch of the Maronites hath under his iurisdiction 8 or 9 Bishops, and keepeth residence for the most part in Lebanus, keeping ever the name of Peter: Their Patri∣arch hath lately communion with the Pope as before,Boter: rel. pa. 3. lib. 2 de maroni∣tis sonoda minima natione Christina doriete. but with some reservation. Boterus wri∣teth, that the are the least Cristian Nation of the East, whether Maronites inhabiting Damascus, Alepo, Cyprus and other places, have also Com∣munion
with the Pope or no I doe not find. Christians under the Patriarch of Musall falsely called Nestorians. THese Christians inhabit mingled with Ma∣hometans and Pagans a great part of the O∣rient for besides the countries of Babjlon Assyria and Mesopotamia Parthia and Media wherein ve∣ry many of them are found;Brerwood pag. 139 enquir. These Christians are scattered farre and wide in the East both Northerly in Cataya and Southerly to India.Boter. relat: par. 3 lib. 2. de Nestor So that in Marcus, Paulus Venetus his historie of the East Regions and others, we find mentio∣ned of them and of no sort of Christians but them in very many parts and provinces of Tartaria as namely in Cassar, Samarchan Carcham Chinchitalas, Tangut, Cariam, Mangi, Tenduc &c. In so much that beyond the River Tigris Eastward there is not any other sort of Christians to be found for ought I have read, except the Portu∣gales and the Convents made by them in Inda and the late Migration of the Armenians into Per∣fia,Vitriac. histor? Orient cap. 77. pag 149. hi nestoriam cum Iacobinis lon∣ge plures esse di∣euntur quam lati∣ni vel graeci. the Cardinall Ʋitriacus a man well experien∣ced in some parts of the orient, hath left regi∣stred that these Christians with the Iacobites ex∣ceeded in multitude the Christians of the Greeke or Latine Churches About 400 yeeres agoe.Bote: loco citat. The King of Tenduc a Christian ruled farr
and wide in the Northeast part of Asia as ha∣ving under his dominion besides Tenduc, which was his owne native and peculiar kingdome: All the neighboring Provinces which were at that time for a great part Christians, but after that his Empire was brought to ruine, and he subdued by Chinges a rebell of his owne Domi∣nion (and the first founder of the Tartarian Em∣pire) which happened about the yeere.Marcus Paulus Venetus lib. 1. cap. 64 maior pars pro∣vintiae observat fi∣dem Christianam et bi Christiani primas tenent in hac provincia. 1190 the state of Christian religion became in short time altered in those parts: for I finde in Marcus Paulus who lived within 50 yeares after Ʋitria∣cus, and was a man of more experience in those parts then he, as having spent 17 yeeres toge∣ther in Tartaria, and partly in the Emperors Court, and partly in travelling over those regi∣ons about the Emperors affaires, that except the Province of Tenduc 20 whereof Marcus Pau∣lus confesseth the greater part to have professed, the Christian religion at his being in Tartaria, the rest of the Inhabitants being partly Ma∣hometans, and partly Idolators and Christians but a few.Dico pauci com∣paratione priorum temporum, non in se, nam sunt nobis latinis multo plu∣res: compend cosmograp pag. 69 Postell writeth that they are but a few in comparison of former times, not of themselues they being many more then the Latins are. Borchardus who lived since Paulus Ʋenetus hath left record that in some of those parts there were more Christians then Mahometans:
And he speaketh of his owne experience that in Cilicia and Armenia subiect to the Tartars that he found in a manner at the Inhabitants meere Christians William de Rubriquis also re∣ports that these Christians inhabit fifteene Ci∣ties in Cathay and that they have a Bishop in the Citie Segin,Gulielm us de Ru∣briquis lib. 27. cited by Parchas. and that they have also a Patri∣arch in Balduc,Thom. a Iesu lib. 7 par, 1. cap. 4. pa. 358. de conv: omn. gent. in Persia Thomas a Iesu also writeth that under one of these Patriarchs there are many Nations two and twenty Bisho∣pricks. sixe hundred Territories and more &c. Their cheife Patriarch is the Patriarch of Musall,Mirae: notitia e∣pis: lib. 1, cap, 16. in which Citie is recorded the Nesto∣rians to reteine fifteene Temples and the Iaco∣bites three which Citie was in times past Se∣leucia. To the Bishop whereof was assigned the next Place of session in councell after the Bishop of Jerusalem which name and autho∣rity in those parts the Bishops of Musall now hath. There is one Church of these Christians in the great Citie of Quinsay in China.Paul: Venet: de regi orient. lib. 2. cap. 64. Haiton King of Armenia was himselfe in Tartaria and hath wrtten a booke thereof and of the aid he had from the great Cam who was a Christian and of the taking of Mesopotamia Babylon and Syria by the Tartars from the Sa∣sens.
In former time the heresie of Nestorius pre∣vailed much in these parts of the world, who held that Christ had two persons as well as two natures; and they would not yeeld that Mary was the Mother of God: The Christians now called Nestorians acknowledge Christ to be per∣fect God and perfect man from the first mo∣ment of his conception, and that Mary might be rightly said to be the mother of the Sonne of God, Although they have revoked Nestori∣us heresie, yet they are still called by his odious name: The Pope hath a titular Patriarch of Musall. The Christians of St. Thomas. THe Christians of St. Thomas are vulgarly so called,Brere: enq: pa. 144 because by his preaching they are supposed to have beene converted to Chri∣stian religion, and his body as it is thought re∣maineth buried in the City of Matiapar on the Coast of Coromondall: some of these Christians inhabit on the neere point of India, namely in that great Promontory,Boter relat. pag. 3. lib 2. della vec∣chia Christianita dell' India. whose base lying be∣tweene the outletts of the River Indus and Gan∣ger stretcheth out the sides farre towards the South well nigh 1000 miles, till meeting in the point of Comari, in the more Southerly
part of the great Promontory neere to Cape Comori about the Cities of Coulan and Cranga∣nar on the westside and about Maliapar and Ne∣gapatan on the East side, and their habitati∣on is thickest about Angamale, 15 miles from the City Cochin Northward where their Arch∣bishop keepeth residence Now as touching the Ecclesiasticall government of these Indi∣ans their Archbishop till 20 yeeres since or lit∣more acknowledged obedience to the Patri∣arch of Musall,Mirae denotit: E∣piscop, lib. 1. pag. 57. cap. 21. but since it is reported that he he hath submitted himselfe to the Pope. reade miraeus de notitia Episcopatuum. But it is very likely that these Indian Christi∣ans were forced to submit to the Pope, for Oso∣rius writeth that the Portugalls tooke Cranga∣nor by force and also they have Maliapar and other places in which these Christians doe dwell.Lib. 3. pag. 107. de rebus Emanuc∣lis Lusitaniae regis Vesputius writeth that there were many god∣ly Bishops in East India,Americus Vespu∣tius noted by Bi∣shop Iuel pag. 35 defence of the Apo∣log. and also sundry whole Countries converted and christened long before the Portugalls came thither who never heard of the Pope of Rome. Josephus Indus borne in Cranganor in East In∣dia reporteth that there are many Kings in In∣dia who know Christ,Iosep. Ind: navig∣tiones inter rela∣tiones novi orbis. pag. 145, And also that there are Christians from the
river Indus where Jndia beginneth to the Iles Ormus Westward: neere the Persian gulfe; He also reporteth that these Christians have over them a Prelate to whom 12 Cardinalls are subiect beside two Patriarchs,Hi populi habent magnum Antisti∣tem cui adstant duodecim Cardina les patriarchae duo Archiepiscopi & episcopi com∣plures. lib. 2. epistol. 3. cited by Bishop Morton Apol. Cath. p. 345. Historia Aethiop: traduzido en Ca∣stellano per el Pa∣dre Fray Thomas de Padilla. and many Archbishops and Bishops. The great Ile of Socotorie is also inhabited by those Christians of St. Thome. St. Thomas also preached in the Kingdome Sinas and converted a great company to Chri∣stianity there as Xaverus the Iesuite writeth. Also the Portugalls found an infinite num∣ber of Christians in China.
The Christians in Africa under the Patriarch of Alexandria. THE Christians called Cophti, are no o∣ther then the Christians of Aegipt, who have beene called Aegophti or  Touching their Ecclesiasticall government they are subiect to the Patriarch of Alexandria whose Patriarchall seat is at this present translated,Cbyt. de stat Ec∣cles: pag. 26. Scalig. de emen∣dat tempor: lib. 7. pag. 679. and so hath long beene, to the Citie of Caire. In times past all Africa, from the mouth of Nile, to the Gaditane streits, and from the Tirrhen sea North, to the Equinoctiall line south, Was planted with Churches and Cities of Christians belonging to the said Patriarch: Christianitie so florished in Africa;Concil. Carthag 4. Concil: Carthag 6. Vict. lib. 1. de per∣secutione Vanda∣lec: that we read of Synods of 200 Bi∣shops to have beene gathered there, and of some hundred of Catholick Bishops to have beene their expelled by Gensericus King of the Vandalls and in one Province alone zengitana by name, (which is that where Carthage stood) to have been 164. Bishops under one Metropolitan, In this North, part of Africa, Christianitie is in a manner decaied for want of teachers. To this Batriarchs Iurisdiction are now belonging not onely the Christians of Aegipt,Brer. pag. 161. but also, the Christians that are found about the bay of Arabia. And in mount Sinai Eastward and
also in Africa as farre as the syrtes westward Likewise the Christians of Aethiopia have ac∣knowledged obedience to this Patriarch.. Chyt: de stat: ec∣cles: pag. 84. Cyrill the now Patriarch of Constantinople was Patri∣arch of Alexandria: The title of this Patriarch is Cyrill by the grace of God, Pope and Patriarch of the great citie of Alexandria: and Iudge of the world: he is said to weare two Crounes. St. Morke was the first Bishop of Alexandria. The Abassin Christians. THE Abassin Christians inhabit the Ahas∣sin Empire in Aethiopia,Quadus in Com∣pend univers: lib. cap. 20. Postel. compend. Cosmog. pag. 63. Matthias Quadus. boundeth the Abassin Empire on the North with Nubia et Bugia, on the East with the red sea, and Barbarick Gulph, to the Kingdomes of Aiana and Dangali, on the south, to the moun∣taines Lunae; on the west with Manicongo, the floud Niger, the kingdome of Nubia and Nilus Some report this Emperors dominion to be as great as Europe. But Mr. Brerewood maketh it equall in dimension with Germany, France, Spaine, and Italy. For the Emperour he is called Commonly Presbiter Iohn or Negus but of the Abassins Ioaanes Belul.Zaga Zabo apud damian: a Goes pag 241. pretious Iohn or high Iohn, he is the most potent Prince of Africa. The title of this great Emperour runneth after this manner David supreme of his kingdomes,
and beloved of God, the pillar of faith, sprong from the stocke of Iudah, the sonne of David the sonne of Salomon, the sonne of the pillar of Sion, the sonne of the seed of Iacob, the sonne of the hand of Mary, the Sonne Nahu after the flesh, the sonne of Saint Peter and St. Paul by grace, Emperour of the higher and lesser Aethiopia, and of the most large Kingdomes, Dominions, and Countries of Goa, Caffares, Fatigar, Angola, Barn, Baliguazae, Adea, Vangne, Goyam, where are the fountaines of Nile, Amara, Baguamodri, Ambea, Ʋanguci, Trigremaon, Sabaim, the birth place of the Queene of Saba, Barnagassum, and the Lord of all the Regions vnto the confines of Aegypt. They conceive themselves to be deseended from Salomon and the Queene of Suba Maqueda. The Armes of the Kingdome are reputed to be the same with those of the tribe of Iudah, the Lyon Rampant in the feild Or, and their mot∣to is, The Lion of the tribe of Iudah shall overcome. It is written, the Emperour to have set before him at his meae,Godignus cap. 6, pag, 25, de Abass rebus. a vessell full of Ashes, to put him in minde of his Mortality. The Abassins reckon a succession of Christian Emperours from Abraham, called the Saint, Who was Emperor Anno 470.Alvares cap. 13. in Purchas. The Prets or Empe∣rours dwell in a movable citie of tents, on festi∣val dayes he vseth red tents. About 50000 Mules attend the Prets campe to remoue his carriages.
They call themselues as we do  Ithiopia wian In Arabike are called  Elhabaschi vulgarly the Abassines  presbiter signifieth Aposto∣like in Arabike.Scaliger de Emen de temporum pag. 680. For their Ecclesiasticall government:Ecclesiasticall go∣vernment. Myrae: de notitia episcop. lib. 1 cap. 21 pag. 56. They are subiect to a Patriarch of their owne whom they call Abunna. Their Abunna, when Alvares, was in Aethi∣opia, was called Marke,Aluares cap. 14. a Reverend old man aged about 110: a man very gracious in his speech never speaking without blessing God, and gi∣ving thankes: his apparell was white; his upper garment like a Cardinalls cloake butto∣ned before. When he goeth out of his tent he rideth upon a Mule well attended having a Crosse in his hand and three crosses carried on staues about him. Some do report that there are in Ethio∣pia 127 Archbishops.Godig: de Aba∣ssin. rebus. lib. 1. cap. 32. pag. 195. Aluares reporteth in Macham Celacem which is the Church of the holy Trinitie,Alvares cap. 14. he saw 200 mitred preists together, and 64 Canopies carried over them. Their Churches are builded round and ve∣ry rich with hangings of cloth of gold, Velvet and plate They have many goodly Monasteries: to the Monasterie of the vision of Iesus belongeth a∣bout 3000 Monks.Alva, cap, 2.
In Europe there was litle knowledge of these Abassine Christians untill the Portugalls had footing in the East Indies,Damia Goes de Aethiopum mori∣bus. Idem pa. 161. about the yeare 1486. Iohn King of Portugall sent Alphonsus a Pavia and Petrus a Covilham to Prester Iohn. They saild to Caire like marchants & agreed one of them to goe into India, and the other into Aethiopia: Pe∣ter having seene Goa and Calecut and other pla∣ces in India returneth to Caire to meete Alphonso where he heard of his death, and receaved also letters from the King of Portugall, that they should not returne without seeing Prester Iohn; Peter writing back what he had seene in India, traveleth into Ethiopiae to the Emperour, and delivereth King Iohns letters to him, but could never get leaue of the said Emperour to returne, but lived richly there. Afterwards the King of Portugall sent divers men,Idem pag. 169. and amongst others Francis Alvares his Chapline who remained in Ethiopia 6 yeeres, and hath written a booke of the religion and and customes of the Ethiopians. This Aluares returning, brought letters from the Emperour of Ethiopia to the Pope, which were delivered to him in Bonnonia in the presence of the Em∣perour Charles the 5.An 1533. Damia Goes pag. 171. Vpon the receipt of which letters there was great Ioy; and a report of a great Countrie of Christians in Africk as bigg as all Europe that had submitted themselves to
the Pope: and especially in that time when dy∣uers Princes in Germanie,Tum primum lusi∣tanos adijsse Aethi opidni cum fidem ca tholicm Lutherus desert Godig. de Abass rebus lib. 1, pag. 145: cap 23. Dam. a Goes pa. 203. de Aethiopū moribus. and King Henry the eight, had with drawne themselves from the Roman Church, David Emperour of Aethiopia sent a learned Bishop called Zabazago into Por∣gall, a man of admirable faith, learning and Elo∣quence, whose confession of Faith is set downe by Damianus a Goes. The Pope sendeth a Patriarch (with others in∣to Aethiopia) one Johannes Berniudes a Spanish Fri∣er, there went with him 400 shot and some pio∣ners out of the Portugall Jndies; their comman∣der was Don Christopher a Gama, who arrived in Aethiopia, anno 1538, and was suffered their to remaine, vntill Precious Iohn had vanquished the King of Adell, by the help of the said Portugalls. But the said Patriarch was compelled to returne being accused of Sacriledge, for stealing a vessell of gold out of a Church, and with this message that the Emperour would not submit himselfe to the Bishop of Rome. Afterwards, their were 13 Iesuits chosen by Ignatius Eoiola,Godig. de abass: reb. lib. 2. cap. 15 and others to be sent into Ethiopia, of which one of them had the title of Patriarch, to wit Joannes Nonius, Barrtius and two of Bi∣shops, the Patriarch dyed and never saw Aethio∣pia, to whom one of the Bishops Androas Orviedo succeeded in his Patriarch all title, be failing with the Portugal shipps to Goa in the East Indies, the
vice-roy sent a Messenger first into Aethiopia, to know whether the Emperour would receive some learned men Portugals, sent to him from the Pope, and the King of Portugall, which he refused not. Where vpon the Vice-roy sent the said Patri∣arch Andreas with some Iesuits, and twentie at∣tendants according to the dignitie of his person, who landed at a Port in the Red Sea, neere to the Citie of Arquick, in the yeare 1557. From whence he went to a Citie called Baroa, where an Ethiopian King called Barnagasses, received the Patriach with great honour, from thence the Patriach was 50 dayes going to the Emperour Claudius, who receiving his letters, told him that he would never yeild obedience to the Bishop of Rome, he gave him leave to teach the Portu∣gals, but forbad him to speake on word to his Abassines, and that he would not suffer the Ro∣man yoke to be layd on him or his, Claudius the Emperour dying, Adamas succeeded, who ba∣nished the said-Patriarch Andreas. All these Christians before named, are not sub∣iect to the Pope, except before excepted. In Europe the Papists inhabit somewhat a∣bove a fourth part. The Protestants, Muscovits, and Greeke, Christians inhabit, the rest of it with some Turkes, who are mingled with the Greeks, and make one third part with them, some say
much lesse: Bellonius writeth the Greek Rites,Asserlmus Graeca∣uica Ecclesia ritus latius patere quā latina. lib. 1 cap. 35. to extend farther then the Latine: which may be true of the Latins in Europe onely. In Asia, the second part of the old world, and Africa the third part, the last (whereof is three times bigger than Europe) and Asia bigger then the other both) The Pope hath very little. Pos∣sevine the Iesuit writeth,In apparatu de Maronitis. Maronitae Libani Montis in Syria incolae, sub corum Patriarcha, pie∣tatem et fidem er∣ga Romanū ponti ficem et sedem A∣postolicam uni ex omnibus Orientis populis sat integrā a tempore Innocen∣cii 3. retinuerunt. that the Maronites of mount Lybanus only of the East, kept faith to the Church of Rome. And this may serve to confute them that would empale the Church of God, within the limmits of the Roman Church, and pretend that all the Christians of the world, are subiect to the Pope, but only a few Protestants in Europe, for here you may see, that the Church of God is not tied to Rome onely, but that it is Catholike, and vniversall, dispersed vpon the face of the whole earth; and as God hath been mercifull to vs, and caused his face to shine vpon vs, so his wayes are knowne vpon earth; and his saving health amongst all Nations, therefore let the earth prayse thee O God, yea, let all nations praise thee. To this relation of the habitations of the Christians not subiect to the Pope, I thinke good to give the Reader this Caveat, towit, The Pope to make his Iurisdiction to shew greater then it is, giveth many titles to his followers of those Churches which he hath not to doe with
all. As to one he giveth the title of the Patri∣arch of Constantinople, to another of Aethiopia,Bermudes was cal∣led Patriarch of Aethiope Smith of Calcedon Fleming Archbishop of Dublin &c. so also he gives the title of other Bishopricks in Greece, England and Ireland &c. So also their writers in some of their bookes, Write false sto∣ries & tales, to make his Iurisdiction & Church seeme greater then it is, as for example,In a booke printed at Coloin intitu∣led Relationes his¦toricae duae duarū illustrium legatic∣uum &c. Cardi∣nall Baronius writeth a booke, and therein pub∣lisheth to the world, the submission of the Pa∣triarch of Alexandria, and of the Aegiptians, and Aethiopians, which never was; which Treatise is intituled, A relation of the Legats of the Church of Alexandria, to the Apostolike See. The Cardi∣nall in the beginning of the said booke, setteth downe, the great providence of God in gover∣ning his Church, for whereas a few franticke people had forsaken the Roman See; now the Patriarch of Alexandria and all the Provinces of Aegipt, and Aethiopia; had submitted themselves to the Roman Church, and he setteth downe the submission of the Patriarch in these words: In the name of the Father, Sonne and holy spirit, of one God. In the name of God most compassionate, and mercifull; Everlasting, glorie be to God, salvation is from the Lord: O God give vs thy Salvation. Humble Gabriell by the grace of God ser∣vant of the See of Saint Marke, in the Citie of Alexandria in Aegipt, and in all other places there∣unto adjoyning in the south Maritime and in
Ethiopia the 97 of the Patriachs successor to S. Marke the Evangelist, wisheth health, and offe∣reth the spirituall kisse, to the Father Lord, Fa∣ther of Fathers, Prince of Patriarchs, being the 13 of the Apostles of our glorious Lord Iesus Christ. And of the Evangelist, the fifth, Succe∣ssor to St. Peter the Apostle. He after setteth downe his submission at large in this Treatise, which is published by it selfe and also set downe in the latter end of his sixt Tome of his Annalls,Thom: a Iesu: de conv: omn: gent: lib.7. pa. 1. cap. 6. pag. 363. Tempore Clementis 8 legatio ficta Alexandrinae ecclesiae ad Roma∣num pontificem de lataest quae Marcus Patriarcha et cū o omnes Aegipti provintiae, aliaeque sibi coniunctae, ip∣sum (ut par est) summum ecclesiae caput universa∣semque agnosce∣bant Pastorē ut la∣te in fine: 6 Tom. Annal. Cardinalis. Baronius scripsit Re tamen postea diligentius exami∣nata cuiusdam Bartouis impostoris fuisse mendatium ac figmentum ap∣paruit which historie is meere false and feig∣ned as Thomas the Iesuit saith. In the time of Pope Cement the 8. a feigned embassage was brought from the Church of Alexandria to the Roman Bishop, in which the Patriarch and all the provinces of Aegipt and others adjoyning, did acknowledge him (as it was fitting) the cheife and universall Pastor of the Church, as Cardinall Baronius hath writ∣ton in the end of his 6 to me, but the matter be∣ing more dilligently examined, appeared to be a meere lye and a fiction of a certeine Impo∣sture Bartouis. This same Card in at Barontus in the 12 Tome of his annalls writeth, that the legates of the Ar∣meman Bishops and Metropolitan, whom they call Catholike, that is universall for the infinite number of Bishops under him, to witt more then 1000 almost from the furthest part of the
In Africa are The Cophtie Vnder the Patriarch of Alexandria And the Abassin christians in Aethiope Vnder theire Abunna or Patriarch
East brought the submission of that Church to Eugenius the 3, which storie may be doubted as well as the former: he citeth for this Otho Frisin∣gensis. And thus much of the habitations of the Christians not subiect to the Pope, America and the Christians therein AMerica was discovered about 142 yere ago,discovered Anno 1492. in which the King of Spaine hath four regions with some Ilands, the Regions are new Spaine, Castilla del Oro, Peru, and part of Bra∣sile: which are supposed to be a sixt part of America. In the first 40 yeare after the discove∣rie thereof, these regions with the Ilands, were almost depopulated, the Natives being either slaine: consumed in the mines,Nos autem pro certo affirmare a demus iis quadra∣ginta annis quibus Iberi cruentam su∣am tyr annidem  ercuerunt ultra d∣odecim milliones hominum fato sun∣ctos esse. in narrati∣one rerū indicarum pag 7. or carred into captivitie; Bishop Casaus in his booke to Philip Prince of Spaine writeth of the consump∣tion of 12 millions of men; and that in His∣paniola, there were not 300 natives left, and of a very small remaine in the other Ilands, and in New Spaine it selfe. Complaint being made to the noble Emperor Charles the fift, he by his proclamation, freed these Indians from sla∣verie, and gave them the state of free men. For the conversion of these Christians, it see∣meth to be coact,Oviedo histor In∣diae occidental's lib. 1 cap 4 Oviedo reporteth that in Cuba there was scarce any one, or but vey few
that became Christians willingly. And what manner of Christians these were you may iudg by Benzos report of New Spaine,Benzo histor: no∣vi orbis lib. 2: cap. 19 apud Brer. (viz) that they had nothing almost belonging to Christi∣anitie, but onely the bare name of Christians: I hope it is better now. This Church is Governed by foure Arch∣bishops, and foure and twentie inferior Bi∣shops. In America there be divers plantations of the English, Dutch, and French, and there are now more English in Ʋirginea onely then were left of the Natives in New-Spaine after the depopulation before named, I reade of abovt eight thousand Natives remaining there then. CHAP. III. THESE Christians agree with us in the maine points of religion, they are all baptized in the name of the Father, Sonne and Holy Ghost, &c. And in the principall points of controversie betweene the Roman Church, you shall see how they agree with us, and dif∣fer from them. In this Chapter I will set downe therefore.
1 The principall differences betweene vs & the Church of Rome. 2 How the Churches before named, agree with vs in the cheife points in controversie. 3 I find these Churches; not Hereticall, but Orthodoxall in the maine. 4 Of the agreement of the Protestants among themselves. 5 Of the difference amongst the Papists: 6 Of the agreement of the Ancient Roman East and South Church, with vs in the points set downe, and also of Gregorie the great Bishop of Rome, who sent Austen into England. 7 Of the Religion of the Antient Brittans, and of their differences from the now Roman Church. 8 Of the Pietie and Devotion of the Christi∣ans before named. 1 The principall differences be∣tweene the Romanists and us. THE maine difference betweene the Church of Rome and us consists, in certaine points, which they of Rome hold for important and necessary Articles of the Christian faith, which we doe not beleive or receive for such. For the things which we beleeue are verities cleerely founded upon Scripture and summari∣ly
set downe in the Creed, and vnaminously re∣ceived by all Orthodoxall Christianes This Creed; which the Antients thought com∣pleat enough, seemeth to the Romanists defec∣tive, and therefore they have adioyned and ad∣ded to the same, many new Articles yea, to those twelue, which the Apostles set downe, for a sufficient Summary of wholesome doctrine. The Articles of their New Creed and Doctrines are: Their Apocryphall Scriptures. Their Dogmaticall Traditions, which they equall with the holy Scriptures. Their Transubstantiation. Their Communion in one kinde. Their Purgatorie. Their Invocation of Saints. Their Worship of Images. Their Obedience to the Pope, without which no salvation. Their Latine Service. Their Trafique of Indulgences. These and other new doctrines are Canoni∣zed in their late meeting at Trent, and vpon these and the like, is the contestation betweene the Romanists and vs: these are obtruded by them, as vndoubted verities, and to be believed under the Popes curse. These are reiected by vs as hu∣man inventions, some of them cunningly devi∣sed
to advance their ambition & avarice, with∣out any solid ground or countenance of Scrip∣ture, or Antiquitie. He that desireth to see mere of the differences betweene the Romanists and us, let him reade Doct. Field of the Church.Doct. Field of the Church, Booke 3. cap. 7. pag. 83. 2 The Agreement of the Churches before named with us, in the chiefe Points in Controversie following. Of the Greeke Church. AS the writings of the Greeke Fathers, for a∣bove five hundred yeares space after Christ, give testimonie to our Religion in the maine Points thereof: So also the Churches at this day in those parts doe hold with us, and we and they against the now Romish Church. As, 1 The Greekes deny the Popes Supremacie. Cyrill Patriarch of Constantinople.). Cap. 10. pag. 28. Wee beleeve, that no mortall man can be Head of the Church, and that our Lord IESVS CHRIST is the alone Head.
Marke,. Concilium Ptorens. pag. 721. Binius. Archbishop of Ephesus.) We account the Pope as one of the Pariarks, if he be Orthodox. Nilus, Archbishop of Thessalonica) The Greeke Church, though it never denied the Primacie of Order to the Pope of Rome,, &c. Nilus de Primatu, pag. 101. yet their assumed predominancie of Authoritie they have alwayes resisted. The Emperour Ioannes Paleologus) submitted himselfe to the Pope in the Councell of Florence, 1436. in hope of Aide against the Turke:Paulus Aemilius cited by Bi∣shop Iewell, Defence of the Apolog. pag. 411. for which he was so hated of his peo∣ple, that being dead, they denied him Christian buriall. Jsodore Archbishop of Kiovia) re∣turning from the sayd Councell, because he began,Hunc Moscovitae obedienti∣am Romanam praedicantem spoliaverunt, & in necem ex∣tremam impulerunt. Mathias à Michou, de Sarmatia, lib. 2. cap. 1. for unities sake, to move the people to submit themselves to the Pope, was depo∣sed from his Bishopricke, and put to death. 2 They account the Pope and his Church Schismaticall. The Patriarke of Constantinople doth yearely, upon the Sunday,In Praefaclene ante acta & screpta Theelogorum Wir∣tembergensium & Patri∣archae Constantinopolitani, Dom. Hieremiae, An. Dom. 1576. cal∣led Dominica invocavit, solemnely
excommunicate the Pope and his Clergie for Schismaticks.Summum antem Pontisicem Chri∣sti Vicarium omnesque Latinos pre excemmunicatis babens. E∣lench. Alphab. omnium Hare∣seum, lib. 7. pag. 202. Prateolus) The Graecians ac∣count Christs Vicar, the Pope; and the Latines, excommunicate persons. 3 Concerning Transubstantiation. Cyrill the Patriarch of Constanti∣nople.) Cap. 17. pag. 60. In the administration of the Eucharist, we doe confesse a true and reall presence of Christ; but such a one, as Faith offereth us; not such as devised Transub∣stantiation teacheth: For we be∣leeve, the faithfull to cate Christs body in the Lords Supper; not sensibly champing it with their teeth, but partaking it by the sence of the soule: for that is not the body of Christ, which offe∣reth it selfe to our eyes in the Sa∣crament; but that which Faith spiritually apprehendeth, and of∣fereth to us. Hence it ensueth, that if we beleeve, we cate and participate; if we beleeve not, we receive no profit by it.
Hierimi the Patriarch teach∣eth,. Respons. 1. pag. 101. a change of bread into the body of Christ, which he calleth , that is a transmutation, which is not sufficient to inferre a Transubstantiation, because it may signifie onely a mysticall al∣teration, which the Patriarch in the same place plainely sheweth, saying, the body and blood of Christ are truely mysteries,. 1 Patriar. Respons. cap. 10. pag. 86. not that these (saith he ,) are changed into humane flesh, but wee into them: for the better things haue ever the prehemi∣nence. Neither was the flesh (saith he) of our Lord. which he carried a∣bout him given to his Apostles for meate, not his blood for drinke, neither now in the holy mysteries doth the Lords body descend frō heaven: this is blasphemie. Ganlterus.) The Greeks say,Malos, dum consecratum panem accipiunt, non accipere corpus Iesu Christi: hoc ipsum perpe∣ino Calvini Ministri in ore ha∣bent. In Tabula Chronograph. pag. 604. de Photio, 19. that the wicked eating the consecrat∣ed bread, doe not receive Christs body: This also the Calvinists Ministers, have alwayes in their mouthes.
4 They celebrate the Eu∣charist in both kinds.. 1 Patriar. Respons. de Abusib. pag. 129. Hieremie the Patriarch:) You say the holy Supper ought to be received in both kindes, and you say well, so also doe we, when we doe receive those venerable Myst∣eries. Cyrill the Patriarch.. Cyrill cap: 17, pag 61. As the Institutor speaketh of his body, so also of his blood, which Commandement ought not to be rent a sunder, or mang∣led according to human Arbi∣trement, but the Institution is to be kept intire as it is delivered to us. Prateolus.)Item esse, necessario sub vtraque specîe panis scilicet et vini com∣munis andum, adeo quidem, vt qui vna specie tantum communicat, etiamsi laicus sit, peccare dica∣tur. quod (ut aiunt) contra Chri∣sti praceptum agat, qui sub vtra∣que specie communicare praecipit. Prateol elench: Alphab: omni: Haeres: lib: 7: pag. 202: The say of neces∣sitie they must Communicate in both kindes, both of the bread and the wine, so that if any take it vnder one kinde, although a lay-man, he is said to sinne, be∣cause they say, he doth against Christs Commandement: Who hath commanded to communi∣cate under both kindes.
5 They denie Purgatorie fire. Cyrill,. Cap. 18. pag. 66. Patriarch of Constantino∣ple.) We beleeve the soules of the dead to be in blisse, or in damna∣tion; according as every one hath done. Nilus,. Nilus. pag. 119. de Purgator. igne. Archbishop of Thessaloni∣ca.) Wee have not received, by Tradition from our Teachers, that there is any fire of Purgato∣rie, nor any temporall punishment by fire; and we doe know, that the Easterne Church doth not beleeve it. Alfonsus de Castro.) It is one of the most knowne errors of the Graecians and Armenians,Vnus ex notissimie erroribus Grae∣corum & Armenorum est, quo docent nullum esse Purgatorium locum, quo animae ab has luce migrantes purgentur, à sordibus, quas in corpore contraxerant, an∣tequam in aeterna Tabernacula recipi maereantur. Advers. Hae∣res. lib. 12. pag. 188. that they teach, that there is no place for Purgatorie, where soules after this life are purged from their cor∣ruptions, which they have con∣tracted in their bodies, before they deserve to be received into the eternall Tabernacles. Guido) sarth,Quintus error Graecorum est quia dicunt Purgatorium non esse. De Haeresibus Graecorum. It is the fifth error of the Greekes, that they say there is no Purgatorie.
Gaulter.) That there is no Pur∣gatorie,Purgatorium non esse, quod idem Calvinus, &c. De Photio, pag. 603. which Calvin affirmeth, &c. 6 They allow married Priests.. Prim. Patri. Respon. p. 129. Jerem. Patr.) Wee doe permit those Priests that cannot containe, the use of Marriage, before they be consecrated; for GOD hath commanded Marriage: And we are not ignorant, Marriage being forbidden to Priests, filthie things to be committed by them. Pope Stephen the second.) The Priests, Deacons,Distinctio 31. Aliter. and Subdea∣cons of the Easterne Church are married.. Cyril, Resp. ad inter. 4. p. 97. 7 Concerning Jmages. Cyrill the Patriarch.) We doe not forbid Pictures, the Art is noble: We grant unto them that wil have them, the Pictures of Christ, and Saints; but their adoration, and worship, we detest, as forbidden by the holy Ghost, in holy Scripture; lest we should ignorantly adore Colours; Art, and the creature, in stead of our Creator and Maker.
Damascen.). Damascen. lib. 4. cap. 17 p. 343. Basileae. They make no Image of God. Who can make an Image of God? who is invisible, incorporeall, and incircumscrip∣tible, &c. 8 For the Bookes of Canonicall Scrip∣ture, they agree with us. Damascen.). Ortho. fidei, lib. 4. cap. 18. The Wisedome of Salomon, and others, are not num∣bred amongst the Canonicall. Cyrill,. Respons. 3. pag. 91. the Patriarch.) Wee be∣leeve the Bookes of Canonicall Scripture to be those, which the Laodicean Synod hath set downe, and which the Catholicke Or∣thodox Church of Christ, being illuminated by the holy Ghost, hath confessed to this day; to wit, 22 Bookes of the Old Te∣stament. 9 The sufficiencie of holy Scripture. Cyrill.). Cyril, p. 91. Resp. 3. We call the holy Scrip∣tures all the Canonicall bookes, which we receive as the rule of faith, and of our salvation, and so we do retaine them: and chiefly,
because being divinely inspired, they set before vs the doctrine which is sufficient to instruct, to inlighten, and to make perfect him that commeth to the faith. Againe,. Cyrill cap: 2. pag 5. Lomb: lib: 1. Distinct, 11. v. Dicunt quod veritas in Evange∣lio fidem integram continet. . Nilus de caufis di∣ssent. pag 2.1 . de Ortho fide lib. 1 cap. 1. the Authority of the Scripture is aboue the authority of the Church; &c. Men may erre, and be decea∣ved, but the holy Scripture can∣not erre nor deceive, nor be de∣ceived, but is alwayes infallible and certaine. Lombard. The Grecians beleive and say that the truth in the Gospell con∣teineth intirely the faith, that is to say, the doctrine of Faith. Nilus Archbishop of Thessalo∣nica) To accuse the Scriptures is as great a fault as to accuse God himselfe. But God is void of all blame. Damascen whatsoever is deli∣vered unto us in the law and the prophets, by the Apostles & Evangelists, that we receive, ac∣knowledge & reverence, and be sides these we require nothing else.
10 They do not forbid the Laitie the rea∣ding of the Scriptures.. Cyrill Respon. 1. pa. 81. Cyrill the Patriarch) As the hea∣ring of the holy Scriptures is for∣bidden to no Christian man, So no man is to be kept from the Reading of it: For the word is neere in the mouth, and in their harts, Therefore manifest iniurie is offered to any christian man, of what ranck or condition soeuer he be: who is deprived or kept from reading or hearing the ho∣ly Scriptures. 11 They Renounce workes of Supere∣rogation and Merit workes. Hierem:. the Patriarch.) Affir∣meth. That we must doe good workes, but put no confidence in them,. Prim. Respons. Patr. cap 6 pa. 71 we must not trust nor beleeve in Them, Although we have fulfilled all things yet we are unprofitable servants, ac∣cording to the words of our Sa∣viour.
Cyrill the Patriarch:). Cyril cap. 13. We be∣leive a man to be Iustified by faith, not of workes. They concurre in Assertion with the Protestants.Sir Fdwin Sands Relation of the religion in the West. sect. 53. That it is impossible for any creature to merit, as by way of right, the least dramme of reward, at his Creators hands: But whatsoe∣ver reward is bestowed vpon the creature, floweth forth from the meere bountie, and gratious∣nes of the Creator, who as in goodnes alone, and meere grace did make him, so also in meere grace, doth advance him to that high happinesse. 12 They allow not private Masse. Chytraeus, No private Masses are cele∣brated amongst the Greekes,Constat missas privatas absque cō∣municantibus non ab eis celebrari solere: Chyt. de statu eccles: pag 14 without other Communicants, as their Liturgies and Faithfull Relations testifie. Ioannes Hoff-meisterus.)Res ipsa clamat tam in Graeca quam latina ecclesia Non solum Sacerdotē sacrificātem: sed et re-  The thing it selfe doth speake, and cry alowd, both in the Greeke, and in the Latin Church that not only
sacrificing Priest but the Priest and Deacons and the rest of the people or at least some part of the people did communicate toge∣ther.Praesbyteres, Diaconos. Nec non et reliquam plebem aut sal∣tem plebis aliquam partem com∣municasse. Ioannes Hoffmeisterus apud Cassan consult. lib. de solita. miss. pag. 996. Marcus Ephesinus saith that the priest in the Latin Church cateth all and drinketh all himselfe,Feidl of the Chur. lib. 3 cap. pr. pa. 55. gi∣ving no part to any that are pre∣sent, no not to the Deacon that assisteth him, yet cryeth aloud take and eate: So saith he that they do many things contrary to the traditions received from the Fa∣thers, contrary to the words of Christ & contrary to themselves and their owne words in this mystery. 13 They have prayer in a knowne tongue.Bella. de verbo Dei lib. 2 cap. 16 Bellarmine) Confesseth prayer in a knowne tongue continued long in the East and West Chur∣ches. Nicholas) The Greekes do cele∣brate their.Celebrane missa nella lingua loro per poter essere intesi dal com∣mun pepolo. Nicolas lib. 4 cap. 36. Liturgie in their owne Language that it may be under∣stood of the common people.
14 They use not prayer for soules to be delivered out of Purgatory. Nicholas) The Greekes deny Purgatory and affirme that the prayers of the living profit the dead nothing.Negano il purgatorio affirman∣do che 1 prieghi digiuni et elemo∣sine de viventi nulla giovino all anime de deffuncti: idem ibidem. Villamont) The Greekes admit not Purgatory.N'admettent le Purgatoire Vill∣amont uoiag: lib. 2 cap. 21. Prateolus) when they take a∣way Purgatory They affirme also that prayers avayle not the dead.Cumque tollunt Purgatorium dicunt etiam defunctis nihil pro∣desse orationes Prateo pag. 203 lib. citato error. 15. 15 Of extreme unction. Possevin) The Greekes reiect the sacrament of extreame unction.Possevin de Moscovia negano Greci che visiapin dinna ontione di cresima fol 86. Villamont lib. 2. cap. 21 ils ni∣ent le sacrament d'entreme on∣ction. Villamont) The Greekes know not the Sacrament of extreame unction. 16 Of elevating and carying about the Sacrament that it may be adored.Festum vero corporis Christi mo∣re Romanae ecclesiae non veneran∣tur Moscov. religio. Gaugninus) The Grecians do not obserue the feast of Corpus Christi And generally al the Chri∣stians
do accord against the latin Church;Cathol: tradit: quest: 29 pag. 160 and do not keepe the Sa∣crament to imploy it to any o∣ther use, then our Saviour Christ hath instituted it, as to carry it in procession or the like. Sacranus) The Russes and the Greekes do not elevate the Conse∣crated bread to be worshipped at the Alter.In altari positū nemoveueratur ne que elevatur: sacran: elucid: erro∣rum cap: 2: error 20. 18 Of Indulgences and Sale of Masses. Hieremie the Patriarch) They that make gaine of the Sacrament do ill.. Hier. Patr. Respon. 1. pag 130. 19 Of the Sacrifice in the Masse. Neither is there in their Can∣non any mention made of the sa∣crifice of the body and blood of CHRIST for the Redemption of the living and dead.Nee ullam in eorum canone sacri∣ficii corporis et languinis Christi pro redemptione vivorum et mor∣tuorum oblati mentionem fieri Chytrae: de statu eccles: pag: 14. And thus much of the agree∣ment of The Greeke Church with the Protestants: This Cyrill before cited was first Patriarch of Alex∣andria (to whom Archbi: Spalata dedicated his booke) and now the is  atriarch of Constantino∣ple:
being Patriarch of Alex andria he wrot letters to the most Reverend father in God the late Archbishop of Canturbury, and sent one Metrophanes to Oxford who is now returned into Aegipt. The manner of Administration of the Sacraments, of Baptisme and the Lords Supper, in the Greeke Church. FOR the Administration of the Sacrament of Baptisme:The administrati∣on of the Sacra∣ment of Baptisms The Preist having said certaine prayers, taking the child in his armes, and put∣teth him three times into the water, saying, the servant of GOD N. N. is Baptized, In the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost: and so concludeth with certaine prayers as we doe.Eucharist. Hierem: Patr. pag 103. For the Administring of the Eucharist or Lords supper, the Grekes have two Liturgies, one St. Basil for some holidaies, the other St. Chryso∣stomes. St. Basil biginneth. O God our God who hast sent this heavenly bread, the food of all the world,St. Basils Lie∣turgie.  ctc. our Lord Jesus Christ; to be to us a Saviour, a Redee∣mer, and a benefactor blessing, and sanctifying us, blesse this our offering and take it into thy Superce∣lestiall Alter: Remember Lord (thou that art good, and loving to mankind) them that offer, and by whom they offer, and keepe us immaculate in the holy ser∣vice, of thy Divine Mysteries &c.
Many other prayers and thanks givings fol∣low for Gods benefitts bestowed vpon the Church; from the begining of the world, and for the Redemption of man kinde by the Sonne of God, borne for vs: suffering, dying, and rai∣sed againe: etc: And then reciting the words of the Instituti¦on:. Jn the night in which he gaue himselfe for the life of the world, taking bread in his holy and immaculate hands, giving thankes, and shewing to thee God and Father, blessing, sanctifiyng, breaking. He gaue to his holy Disciples and Apostles saying: Take yee, eate yee, This is my body which is broken for you: in re∣mission of sinnes. Likewise he tooke the Cup of the fruite of the vine mingling, giving thanks, blessing and sanctifiyng Hee gave to his holy Disciples and Apostles say∣ing: Drinke yee all of this, This is the blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, and many, for the Remission of sinnes. Do this in remembrance of me as oft as ye eat this bread or drinke this Cup confesse my death, and set forth my resurrection &c. Then the Priests pray that those Antitypes may be Sanctified by God.. And that the Receivers may participate of the Sacrament, not to their condemnation. But that they may finde favour before God, in the company of all the holy Fathers, Prophets, A∣postles,
Mary the holy virgine, Iohn Baptist etc. Then offering the Sacrifice of praise for the Catholicke Church, for them that offered Almes, for the Emperour, for all the people, for the Common wealth, for the Archbishop, for all Ministers of the Church, for seasonable weather, for the rooting out of Haeresies, and Schismes, and that they may all with one heart and one mouth, celebrate God the Father, Sonne and Holy Ghost Eternally. This solemne prayer being ended, and the Letanies, and the Lords prayer premised, all Communicate. And the remainder of the bread and offer∣ings, being carried into the Vestry.Cap: 21: de Insti∣tutis Graecorum, . The Dea∣con and people give thankes to God. Christopher Angelus) writeth, that at the Chauncell dore, the Preist delivereth the Evcha∣rist, the bread and the wine mingled together, saying: N. N. the servant of God receiveth, In the name of the Father, Sonne and Holy Ghost; A∣men. And the people say every one, with an humble voyce, Lord, I doe not kisse thee as Iudas, but as the Theefe, I trust thou wilt remember me in thy Kingdome. There is no mention made in this Liturgie of Saint Basil, of the offering of the body and blood of Christ by the Preist, nor of redeeming of the living, or dead, by this worke.
Or applying of this oblation for others that receive it not. And the bread and wine after consecration, are called Antitypes: and they pray, that God would send his holy Spirit vpon the receivers, and to Sanctifie the bread: &c. For the Liturgy of St. Chrysostome, although there is mention made of an oblation, yet not of a Propitiatorie, of the body and blood of CHSIST, but of an Evcharisticall Sacrifice, of praise, thanksgiving, or Almes. Wee offer vnto thee, this rationall and unbloudy worship, wee In vocate, supplicate, and offer unto thee,: for the Patriarches, Apostles, Evangelists, for the virgine Mary, we offer to thee, this reasonable service for all the world, for the whole Church, for our Kings, and their Armies, as Tertullian ad Sca∣palum, saith, we sacrifice for the health of our Em∣perour to our God, and his, in pure prayer. Although their be some things in this Litur∣gie of Saint Chrysostomes, which I will not Iust∣ifie to be his: which may be added since his death, yet in that I finde no Popish Transub∣st antiation, nor private Masse. The Sacraments are Administred in both kinds. No sacrifice is offered in it, to deliver soules out of Purgatorie. Married Priests administer, and it is admi∣nistred in the Greeke tongue.
The Mengrellians and the Circassians are of the Greeke communion, and of the Patriarch of Constantinoples obedience,Brerwoods enqui∣ries Pag, 135. they live intirely by themselves. The Christians. Inhabiting the greatest part of Asia the lesse, live mingled with Mahometans, and acknow∣ledge not the Pope, but are Christians of the Greekes communion, and also of the Patriarch of Constantinoples obedience. Of the Georgians. There Religion is the same, both in substance and ceremonies with the Graecians, yet in no sort subiect to the Patriarch of Constantinople: but to their owne Metropolitan. For their Liturgies. The Georgians have for their vulgar speech,utūtur Graeco idio∣mate in scripturis divinis et Graeco∣rum consuetudines in sacramentis ob∣servant Vitriac: histor orient: cap. 80. de Georgianis. a peculiar language of a middle temper, which well agreeth with the position of their country, betweene the Tartarian and the Armenians, as Gesner and Postel, have observed in their bookes of Languages: yet notwistanding they have their liturgies in the Greke tongue: as Jacobus
a Vitriaco, Gesner, Postel, Roccha, and divers other; have certainely recorded, cited by Mr. Brerwood. The Moscovites. The Muscovites affirme,Ioannes Faber: ad Ferdinandum Regem Romanorum cui erat a confessionibus in Theol: Muscovit: pg. 170. that they follow that faith which they had preached to them by St. Andrew the Apostle, & also those things which were concluded of by 318 Bishops in the first Nicene councell under Constantine the Great: and which were preached to them by Basill the Great, and St. John Chrysostome, which things They beleeve to be so holy so firme, and sincere: That it was never lawfull for any of them to depart from them in the lest manner: as neither from the Go∣spell of Christ 1 Supremacy. Sacranus) They denie the Popes Supremacy,Dicunt dominum Papam haere∣ticum esse cum ecclefix Romana, et anathematisant ipsum, tempore cenae domini cum suo clero Sacr: cap, 2 error 3. in elucidar. error. affirming the Pope to be an heretick, and they do ex∣comunicate him and his Clergy:
They are subiect to their owne Patriarch of Mosco. Prateolus) They deny the Ro∣man Church to be head over all other Churches.Negant Romanam ecclesiam esse caput omnium aliarum ecclesia∣rum: Prateolus elench: haeres: pag 228. Guagninus) they condemne and curse the Romans,Romanos damnant et execrantur tanquam primitivae ecclesiae deser∣tores et septem sanctarum synodo∣rum praevaricatores Guagn: de: Relig. Mosco. pa. 231. as forsakers of the Primitive Church, and brea∣kers of the seven generall Sy∣nods. 2 They Reiect Purgatory. Sacranus) They reiect Purga∣tory and acknowledge only two Receptacles of soules, heaven,Asserunt Purgatorium non esse, sosū esse duo receptacula amina∣rum, caelum et infernum Sacran: lib citat error: 33. and hell. Guagninus) The Greekes and the Russians deny Purgatory.Purgatorium Graeci et Rutheni negant: Guagnin. pa. 232 lib. citat. 3 They deny the spirituall efficacy of extreame unction. Sacranus,Dicunt sacramentum extremae unctionis nullam adversus pec∣catireatum medelam conferre pos se Sacra. lib: citat err: 14. They say the Sacra∣ment of extreame unction, doth conferre no helpe against the guilt of sinne.
Possevine) They deny the Sacra∣ment of extreame unction to the sicke.Extremae unctionis sacramentum oegrotantibus negant Possevin de rebus Mosoovit pag. 3. 4 They administer the communion in both kindes. The Priest mingling both the bread and wine together in the Chalice,Sacramentum sacerdos cocleari ex calice in portiunculas minutas redactum, et vino commixtum communicantibus distribuit Cas∣sand: litur: cap. 15 esi comuni∣cano sub utraque speciè Bot: rel: univ. par: 3 lib. 1. distributeth it together with a spoone. Boterus) They communicate under both kindes. 5 They allow married Preists. Dresserus) The Russe Priests have their wives,Sacerdotes Rutenici proprias ux∣ores habent, et sunt coniuges apud Neand pag. 559: and are married men 6 They have their service in a knowne tongue. And the Gospell and Epistle is read in their Church in their own tongue,Sacra sive missa slavonica lingua peragitur &c. Guagni. pag: 230 lib citat. and their communion in the Slavonian tongue, with some Greeke hymnes. The Slavon is their vulgar tongue
7 They deny Confirmation to be a Sacrament. Sacranus,)Dicunt Confirmationis Sacra∣mentum nullum esse. Sacran: loco citat. They say, that their is no Sacrament of Confirmation: 8 They abhorre the Jmages, and reiect most of the Saints of the Romish Church. Guagninus,)Habent in Catalogo sanctorum Ro∣manos quosdam pontifices quos in∣ter Sanctos venerantur: Caeteros vero qui post eorum schisma fue∣runt: Execrantur et pro haereticis gravissimis eos habent: Guagni: de relig. Moscovit pa: 229: They haue in the Catalogue of Saints, certaine Ro∣man Bishops, which they reve∣rence as Saints: but the others which were after their Schisme they cursse, and account them grevious Haereticks. Sacranus,Sacran: loco citat: err: 6: They blaspheme the Saints of the Roman Church. Sacranus They abhorr the I∣mages made by the Catholickes.Imagines operis & Artificii Catho licorum horrent Sacranus loco ci∣tat: err: 7 9 The wicked eate not Christs body in the sacrament Possevine They say that they which are defiled with some sinnes,Dicum qui sunt aliquibus peca∣tis inquinati corpus Christi Domi∣ni non recipere. Possev: de rebus Moscovi . doe not receive the Lords body in the Sacrament. 10 They refuse to Communicate with the Roman Church.
Sacranus,Si casu quis Catholicorum pres∣byterorum in altaribus eorum ce∣lebverit mox velut execratū, violant & effringunt. Sacran. lo∣co. citato err: 23. If by chance any Catholicke Priest shall celebrate vpon one of their Altars, they vi∣olate it, and breake it as a thing curssed: This Church, except in exact∣ing mariage of their Priests, dif∣fereth not in any materiall point from the Graecians. The Russe Liturgy or Church-service, their man∣ner of Administration of the Sacanmemts. THEIR morning Service they call Zautra∣na, that is Mattms. It is done in this order: The Priest entreth into the Church with his Deacon following him. And when he com∣meth into the midle of the Church, he begin∣neth to say with a lowd voice, Blasslavey vla∣dika that is, Blesse vs heavenly Father, Blesse vs heavenly Pastor, (meaning of Christ) then he addeth, In the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, one very God in Trinitie: and A∣spod: Pomeluy or Lord haue mercy vpon vs: repea∣ting three times. This done, he goeth on to∣wards the Chauncell or Sanctum sanctorum, (as they vse to call it) and so entreth into the Schars vey Dwere, or the heavenly dore: which no man may enter into, but the Priest only where standing at the Altar or Table; (set neere to the
vpper wall of the Chauncell) he saith the Lords prayer; and then againe, Aspody Pomeluii, or Lord haue mercy one vs, &c. pronounced 12 times. Then praised be the Trinitie, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, for ever and ever, whereto the Deacons and people say, Amen. Next after, the Priest addeth the Psalmes for that day, and beginneth with: O come let vs worship, and fall downe before the Lord etc. Therewithall, himselfe with Deacons, and people crossing themselves, bow downe three times; after this, he readeth the ten commandements, and Athanasius Creed out of the Service Booke. This being done,Boter: par: 3 lib: 1 pag: 81 They haue divers of the fathers translated into their owne tongue: as Basill, Chrysostome, Damascen, and Gregory the great, whose Home lies they do read on holy dayes to the people. the Deacon that standeth without the heavenly doore, or Chancell, read∣eth An Homilie out of Basil, Chrysostome, Damas∣cen, or Gregorie, which they have translated into their owne tongue, or the lives of some of their Saints: After all this, (which reacheth to an houre and an halfe, or two houres of length) he addeth certaine Collects, or prayers vp∣on that, which he hath read, and so endeth his Service. About 9 of the clock, they have another ser∣vice called, Obeidna or complim; if it be some high or Festivall day: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. and we praise thee O God, is sung with a more solemne, and curious note.
Their Evening service is called Vecherna where the Priest beginneth with Blslavoy Vla∣dika: as he did in the morning, and with the Psalmes appointed for the Ʋecherne, which be∣ing read, he singeth: Misule doth magnifie the Lord, &c And thē the Priest, Deacon, & people, all with one voice, sing Aspody Pomeluy, or Lord have mercy upon us, thirtie times together: Where∣unto the boyes, that are in the Church, answer all with one voice, as fast as their lipps can go, Ʋerii, Ʋerii, Ʋerii, &c. Praise, Praise, Praise, &c. thirty times together Then is read by the Priest (and upon the holidayes sung,) the first Psalme, Blesseds the man &c. and to the end of it, is ad∣ded Alleluia, repeated ten times. The next in order, is some part of the Gos∣poll read by the Priest, which he endeth with Alleluia, repeated three times, so having said a collect in remembrance of the Saint of that day, he endeth his evening Service. All this while, the Priest standeth at the Al∣tar, or high table within the Chancell; whence be never moveth all service time: The Deacon or Deacons, (which are many in their Cha∣thedrall Churches, stand without the Chancell by the Scarsvey Dwere or heavenly doore.) The people stand together the whole service time in the body of the church, & some in the church porch, for peiw or seat they have none with∣in
in their Churches: & it were to be wisht, there were none in ours The Priest standeth ready in the Church∣poarch with a tub of water:The manner of the Russ Baptisme. The words used by the priest when he dippeth the child, are the very same, that are prescribed in the Gospell and used by us, viz. In the name of the Father,Guagn. de relig: Moscovit. and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. As often as the Godfathers are asked, whether they do renounce the Divell, so often they spit upon the ground. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, And the manner of their communicating.The administrati∣on of the Lords Supper. First they confesse themselues of all their sinnes to the Priest: Then come they to the Church, and are called up to the communion table, that standeth like an Altar, a little removed from the upper end of the Church; here, first they are asked of the Priest, whither they be cleane or no, that is, whither they have never a sinne be∣hind, that they left unconfessed: If they answer no, They are taken to the table, where the priest beginneth with certaine usuall prayers, The communicants standing in the meane time, with their armes foulded one within an other, like penitentiaries or mourners; when these prayers are ended, the Priest taketh a spoon and fieth it full of Claret wine, Then he put∣teth into it a small peece of Bread, and tempe∣reth them both together: and so delivereth
them both to the Communicants that stand in order, speaking the usuall words of the Sacra∣ment, Eat this &c. Drinke this &c. both at one time, without any pause. After that, he delivereth them againe, Bread by it selfe, then wine, carded together with a little warme water, to represent Bloud more rightly, and the water withall, that flowed out of Christs side. Whiles this is in doing, the Communicants unfold their armes. And folding them againe; follow the Priest three times about the Com∣munion table, and so returne to their places, againe having said certaine other prayers, he dismisseth the cōmunicants with this charg, to be ioyfull, and to cheere up themselves for seven dayes next following: which being ended, he inioyneth them to fast for it as long time af∣ter, which they use to observe with great devo∣tion: eating, nothing else, but bread and salt, except a little Cabbage, and some other hearbs, or rootes, with water or quasse mead for their drinke. The Rites which the Muscovites use this day in their holy meetings ex comentariis Sigismundi Liberi apud Cassandrum, liturg. Car 15 Pag. 32. No Priest dare administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,Nullus sacerdos, ut sacra obire aut batizare aut alio quovis fungi mu∣nere audet nisi Diacono praesente. or Baptize, or do any other spirituall worke, except the Deacon be present.
In every Church they have but one Altar,In singulis templis unicum tant Altare, et in dies singulos unum quoque sacrum faciendum putant and in every day they administer but once. They administer the Sacra∣crament in the vulgar tongue,Totum sacrum, seu Missa, gentili aut vernaculâlinguâ, apud illos perag solet. and in it is their liturgy. They read the Epistle,Epistola praeterea, Evangelium pro tempore, quo magis a popul percipiantur, extra chorum popu∣lo astanti, lata voce, recitantur. and the Gospell without the Quire, (the people standing round about them with a loud voice.) They communicate in both kinds,Communicant sub utrâque specie miscente vino panem, seu corpus sanguine: mingling or putting the bread, and wine together. The Priest taketh a part of the bread, and wine,Sumit sacerdos cocleari, ex calice portiunculam, porrigitque com∣municanti: out of the cup with a spoone, and giveth it to the Communicants. The Melchites. Or Syrians deny the Pope of Romes supremacy,Villam lib: 2 cap: 22 les Syrios se vantent, estre les premiers chre stiens du monde, pour se que sainct Pierro tint son siegè septans en Antioche; au paravant que d'al∣ler a Rome qui est cause que iama∣is les syrious n' ont voul se foubs mettre a' l' Eglise Romaine: and are under the Patriarch of Antioch, they say, they were the first Christi∣ans in the world, and that Saint Peter was their Bishop at An∣tioch, seven yeares before hee came to Rome, and there∣fore they will not submitt them∣selves
unto the Bishops of Rome as before.Idem ibidem quand ils cōmunient cest sou. les deus especes. They receive the Eucharist in both kindes. They acknowledge the Soules of the iust to be in Paradice,ils croient que les iustes sont en Parad's et les meschans en enfer, idem ibidem. and the wicked to be in hell. Their Preists have wives.Sacerdotes eorum utuntur uxo∣ribus: Vitriac: hist. orient cap. 75. Patriarchi pieu ellegono e consecra no Vescovi e gl Archivescovi a lor suaditte Boter Rel. par: 3 lib 2 cap de melchiti. The Patriarch, is chosen by the Archbishops or Bishops, that are under him. They altogether observe the Cu∣stomes,Consuetudines autem et instituti∣ones Gracorum, in divinis officijs et in aliis spiritualibus, Syriani pemtus observant, vitriac: histo. orient: cap 75. and institutions of the Greekes in divine offices, and in other spirituall services. They account the Latins ex∣communicate persons.Omnes latino excomunicates re∣putent Vitriac: hist orient cap. 75 Brerwood page 138. All these Christians before named, are of the same Communion; and in effect, of the same Religion with the Graecians. And whereas the Greeke Church is Charged by the latine Church, with this error, that the holy Ghost proceedeth onely, from the Father, and not from the Sonne. The Greekes use to say;. proceeding from the Father by the Sonne, so say the Patriarchs Iere∣mie and Cyrill, in their confessions. And the Patriarch Joseph, in the Councell of Florence, explaineth himselfe in these words,
We say, that the holy Ghost,. Iraeneus Rodogi∣nus. proceedeth from the Fa∣ther by the Sonne, eternally, and substantially, as from one beginning, and cause. The Greekes de charge the Latins. WITH whom, they will have no Com∣munion, with these errours, and opini∣ons amongst others. With their Image worship, forbidden by the Ephesin Councell. With the Popes Supremacie, which he chal∣lengeth over all the Churches, contrary to the Decrees of Antient Councells; and especially, to the fourth generall Councell of Calcedon, which attributeth Superioritie, to the See of Constantinople. That they scarce reade the Sacred rules, and holy Scriptures; They say, that the Popes com∣mandements, who for the time sitteth in the See of Rome, are their Canons, and Lawes. The Pope and his Priestly traine, will remit sinnes, to a prefixed and determinated time, of Monthes, or yeeres. They sport after the same manner, with by past offences, forgiving the sinnes of dayes, Monthes, or yeeres. And yet they cannot tell by what authoritie, and vpon what grounds, or by what Ecclesiasticall Ca∣non they doe this. They shut up all Priests and Deacons, from mariage by their lawes, and they hold it an a∣bominations,
to receive the Sacrament, from a maried Priest. And yet their are many Church∣men amongst them, who commit whoredōe, and all kinde of uncleanenesse, most securely, without punishment. When the Gospell is reading, & their Masse is singing, all men who please, sitt, and yet they are never blamed by their leaders; Laicks sitt with Priests, and men of holy orders, and some∣time the same Laicks, carrie spurres vpon their heeles, and also rods in their hands; yea, which is worst, they suffer doggs to enter in∣to the Church; and when the Priest is sacrifi∣cing; and celebrating the hoast, which they hold to be life, giving bread; they suffer dogges sitting at the Priests feete, to barke at all those that come in, and to fawne upon the Priests and others, that stand by, at the time of Conse∣cration, The too great and extraordinary exaction of the Popes legates, for when they brought Chrisme or Creme to Constantinople, they demaun∣ded eighty pounds weight of gold for it, be∣side other gifts &c. Thus farrethis author: Constantinople had communion some few yeres which the Bishop of Rome, when the Latins had taken it by force, as also Hierusalem. You may see more of these set down, by Pe∣ter Stewart in Calecam, pag. 407 editione Ingol∣standiensi
1608 ex variis Graecorum monumentis. The Armenians. AMongst the Saints, they re∣verence most,Inter sanctos colunt plus Thad∣daeum Apostolum, asserentes quod eos converter it, et fidem Christi docuerit. Mathias a michou: de Sarmatia Europea lib. 2 cap. 1. Thaddaeus the Apostle, affirming that he conver∣ted them, and taught them the faith of Christ. 1 Supremacy of the Pope. They have a Primate of their owne,Proprium habent Primatem, quem Catholicum appellitant, et cui, velut summo Pontifici, per omnia obtemperant. Romanum si∣quidem Antistitem contemnunt, eum dicentes non esse caeteris su∣periorem: Prateolus de haeres: Armeniorum Liter. A. 67. pag: 63 Vitriac: cap: 79. whome they terme Ca∣tholick, and obey as their cheife Bishop, and the Bishop of Rome they do despise, and say, that he hath no superiority over others. 2 Transubstantiation. Prateolus,)Negant illi verum Christi cor∣pus, realiter in Sacramento Eu∣charistiae, sub panis, et sanguinem sub vini speciebus, contineri. Pra∣teol: loco citat, error. 12 They deny the true body of Christ, to be really in the sacrament of the Eucharist, con∣teined under the species of bread; and the blood under the forme of the wine. They deny the true body of Christ &c. Ʋt supra.Negant illi verum Christicorpus realitur. ut supra: Thom: a Iesu de convers: omnium gentium lib: 7 part 1 cap: 17 pag 399.
They do not beleeve,Non credunt quod consecratione facta: per verba Christi super pa∣nem et vinum, sit sub speciebus panis et vini, vere et realiter, ve∣rum corpus, et sanguis Christi, sed tantum in similitudine, et signo. Guido, de error: Armen: 22. that consecration being made by the words of Christ, over the bread and wine, the true body and blood of Christ, is truely and real∣ly, under the species of bread, and wine, but onely in a similitude and signe. 3 They mingle not Water with Wine. Gau lterus,)In Eucharistia vino mero, ne mi nima aquae stilla permixto, vten∣dum docebant Gaulter. lib. cit: de Armenis pag 549. They teach in the Eucharist, meere wine is to be used, not mixed, with the least drop of water. Guido,)Dicunt enim quod aqua non est miscenda vino in sacramento Altaris, et si aquam ponant, di∣cunt nullum sacramentum esse: Guido de Haer: Armen: 24. They say, that water is not to be mingled with Wine, in the sacrament of the Altar, and if they put water, they say it is no Sacrament. 4 They reiect purgatory. Gulterus,)Purgatorium explodebant, explo∣dit Calvinus; Gualter: loc citat. Asserunt praeterea, nullum esse purgatorium locum, in quo ani∣mae ab hac luce migrantes, pur∣gentur a sordibus, quas in corpo∣re contraxerant antequam in a terna tabernacula recipi merean∣tur Prateol: loc: cotat. 21. They deny Purga∣torie as Calvin doth. Prateolus,) Moreover, they doe affirme, that their is no Purgato∣rie, or place, in which Soules de∣parting from hence, are purged
from the filth, they have received in their bodies; before they shall deserve to be received, into the e∣verlasting Tabernacles. 5 They admit Married Priests. Chytraeus) Married Priests,Nec sacerdotes mariti ab admi∣nistratione sacri arcentur. Chytr: de stat: eccles. pag 23. are not put from their Ministry. 6 They distribute the Eucharist in both kindes. Chytraeus,)Omnibus integrum sacramenlum distribuitur. Chytr. loc. citat. To every one the whole Sacrament is distributed, 7 Of Matrimonie.Negabant matrimonium esse sa∣cramentum. Gaulter: loc. citat. Gaulterus) They deny Matri∣monie, to be a Sacrament. 8 Prayers for the dead, are in vaine. Gualterus) The Prayers are in vaine,Vanas esse preces, quae pro mortuis funduntur. Gaulter: loc. citat. hae∣res. 26. that are made for the dead. 9 They worship not Images. Baronius,)Venerabiles imagines non adorant sed quod magis est, eorum univer∣salis episcopus cum reliquis, eos qi adorant, anathemate percutit; Baron. tom. 10 pag: 256. They adore not the venerable Images, but that which is more, their vniversall Bishop with others, doe Anathematize them, that doe adore them.
They have the service in their owne tongue. Chytraeus,) They use not in their service, any other tongue, but their owne vulgar language. 10 They exercise their common divine service,Mathias Michou de sarmatia lib. 2 cap. 1 Armen: suo ritu guadent,  literis. Vitriac: cap: 79. in the Armenian tongue. And they have their Bible in the Armenian tongue, which translation, is said to be St. Chry∣sostomes worke, after his banish∣ment from Constantinople; hee then living with them. For their Liturgies, Cassander setteth downe three. The Armenian Liturgie, out of the booke of the observations of Peter Bellonius. lib. 3. cap. 12 set downe by Cassander; Liturg. Cap. 13 pag. 31 THe Armenian Priests are ma∣ried,Presbyteri Armeniorum sunt con∣iugati, item ut Graecorum: et in celebrandâ missâ calice utuntur, Latinorum more, eisdemque or namentis vestiuntur, neque vero magno pano consecrant Graecorum more, sed ut Latini minutis obla∣tis seu hostiis. and in Celebrating the Sacrament, (which he calleth the Masse) they use a chalice, as the latines do, and are clad with the
like ornaments, as they are: nei∣ther doe they consecrate with a greate loafe, as the Greeks do, but as the latins, with litle Cakes, or hoasts. As many as stand neere the Priest, answere,Quotquot astāt sâcerdoti, respon∣dent cantando Armenice. singing in the Ar∣menian tongue. When the Armenian Priest rea∣deth the Gospell, they that assist,Cum presbyter Armenicus dicit Evangelium, assistentes in vicem se dextra sinistraque deosculantur kisse one another, both of the right, and left side. The People have their service in the Armenian tongue,O mnes assistentes linguam Arme nicam, qua utitur sacerdos, intel∣ligunt. which they understand, being their vul∣gar. The forme of celebrating the mysteries of the Christians, or Armenians that are in India, out of the booke of Odoardas Barbosa written in Italian; apud Cassand. Liturg. Cap: 14 pag. 31. The Armenians in India say masse at the Altar, as ours doe,Armenii qui sunt in India, dicunt missam ad Altare quomodo no∣stri cum cruce ante se. with a Crosse before them. There are three one in the mid∣dle,Sunt autem tres: unus in medio, et ad utrumque latus singuli. and one on each side. Every one cometh to the foot of the Altar to receive,Vnusquisque vadit, vt partem ac∣cipiat, ad pedem altaris. For the Element of Wine be∣cause
there is no wine in India they take raisons,Pro sacramento vini, eo quod in India reperiatur vinum, accipi∣untuvas siccas, et imponunt aqua ut molliantur una nocte: et aie se∣quente quo dicenda est missa, ex∣primunt: quo succo, utuntur loco vini. and put them into water to moysten them, one night; and in the day following they presse them, and the iuyce thereof they use for wine. Out of the Order of the celebrating the Sacraments, which the Armenians observed in the Citie of Leopolis, in Ruscia, translated out of the Armenian tongue, by Andrew Lubelczik, set downe by Cassander Litur: Cap. 12, pag. 29. In communicating the Priest saith.Fide credo in san∣ctissimam Trinita tem &c. Fide manduco sanctum, vivifi∣cans, et salvificans corpus tuum, Do∣mine Iesu Christe sit mihi, ad absolu∣tionem peccatorum meorum. Fide bibo sanctum impermixtum san guinem tuum pec∣cata delentem, Do∣mine Iesu Christe in remissionem pec∣catorum meorum. By faith, J doe beleeve, in the holy Trinitie, the Fa∣ther, Sonne, and holy Ghost. By faith, I do eate thy holy quickning, and saving body, O Lord Iesus Christ, let it be to me, to the ab∣solution, and remission of my sinnes. Drinking of the Cup. By Faith, J drinke thy holy, and unmingled blood, blotting out my Jinnes, Lord Iesus Christ, for remissi∣on of my sinnes. In this Liturgie, the Eucharist is administred in both kindes. No private Masse is Celebrated, all must Communicate. No Transubstantiation acknowledged. They receive by faith. Married Priests administer. They celebrate divine service, in their owne tongue.
And there is no sacrifice, for delivery of soules out of Purgatory: But I do not take upon me, to iustifie all things in these Liturgies. The Maronites, before their reconciliation. Boterus,) They professe obe∣dience to their owne Patriarch,Boter. Relat. par. 3 lib. 2 cap. de maronit. but have been subiect to the Pa∣triarch of Antioch. Patriarcha Maronitarum) Our Laicks,Interrog. 3 apud Thomam a Iesu lib. 7 part 2 cap. 5 pag 485 Lai∣ci nostri sub utraque specie com∣municant. receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kindes. Idem (In leavened bread,Idem Ibidem in azymo his verbis benedixit, fregit, dedit que etc. with these words: He blessed, and brake, and gaue, to his Disciples, saying, take, eate. Matth: 26.26. Idem, They doe not reserve the Sacrament.Idem Ibidem non asservatur sacra mentum Eucharistiae. Possevine,) Their Priests are married.In apparatu sacro, in maron. These Christians, reconciled themselues to the Roman Church, at what time, the Latins held the holy Land, But when those parts were againe taken by Saladine. These Maronites, forsooke the Roman Communion, untill of late, in the time of Gregorie the 13 and Clement the 8: They have ac∣knowledged
the Popes Iurisdi∣ction. But not all of them, as I heare since. Hierusalem. THE Patriarch of Hierusalem, keepeth Re∣sidence in Hierusalem, in which there re∣maine, 10, or more Christian Churches, as be∣fore. It is reported, that Theophanes is now Pa∣triarch of Hierusalem,Thom: a Iesu. Cosm. lib. 9 apud Cath. traditi. pag 10. The Liturgie of St. Iames. . etc.  who is a Greeke, and of their Communion. The Patriarch of Hierusalem, doth vsually ex∣communicate the Pope. The Liturgie of Saint Iames, Bishop of Hierusalem. Which beginneth, O Lord doe not despise me, defiled with the multitude of my iniquities, for be∣hold, I come to this thy divine, and heavenly My∣sterie, not as one worthy, but trusting in thy good∣nesse: J lift vp my voyce to thee, O Lord be merci∣full to me a sinner; I haue sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am not worthy, to turne my eyes to∣wards thy holy and Spirituall Table; in which thy onely begotten Sonne, our Lord Iesus Christ, is mysti∣cally proposed, for a Sacrifice for me, who am a sin∣ner, and polluted with all sinne, &c. As in this prayer, he calleth the Sacrament,
A divine and Celestiall mystery, a spirituall ta∣ble, in which the Sonne of God, is mystically set downe before them. After, he craveth of God, to declare manifest∣ly that which he setteth forth in signes,. he per∣swadeth the people, to lift up their hearts on high. The Institution of the supper is rehearsed sincerely, to which the people answere, wee declare the death of the Lord, and confesse his resurrection. Afterwards, he prayeth that God would send his spirit on the gifts,. that the bread may be made sacramentally Christs holy body, And the Cup his precious blood, and that it may be to them that partake thereof, for the remission of their sinnes. In this Liturgie, 1 I finde, no propitiatorie sacrifice to be made by the Priest, but a mysticall. 2 The Sacrament to be administred in both kindes. 3 Nor private Masse, all must communicate. 4 A confession against merit. 5 After the words of Consecration, prayer is made, that God would by his holy spirit: san∣ctifie the Bread and the Cup. In this Liturgy, there are some things that can∣not be S Iames his, but are inserted since his time. As a prayer for Monkes, in Monasteries. &c.
Iacobites. THey for their Ecclesiasti∣call Government are under their own Patriarch,Boter. Relat. par. 3 lib. 2 cap. de Iacobitis. whose Patriarchall Church is in the Mo∣nasterie of Saphron, his residence is at Caramite. They admit not of Purgatory.Purgatorium non admittunt Tho: a Iesu lib. 7. par. 1. cap. 23. de conversione omnium gentium. Nor pray for the dead.Nec pro defunctis preces admit∣tunt Thom: a Iesu loc. citat. They minister the Sacrament,Mr. George Sands. of the Lords Supper in both kinds. In vnleavened bread.Salign. Iter. Hieros. Tom. 8. cap. 1. apud Brerwood. Their Priests are married.Sands loco citat. They doe not beleeue aright,Non firmiter sentiunt de primatu Romanae ecclesiae: Thomas a Iesu: loco citat. concerning the primacy of the Roman Church. The Sacrament of extreame Vnction,Sacramentum extremae vnctionis fere non agnoscunt Tho a Iesu lib. 7. par. 1. cap. 23. in a manner they doe not acknowledge. For their error of Eutiches, be∣leeving one onely nature to be in Christ, is long since abolished, as appeareth, by the Confession of the Iacobites of Mesopotamia, Aegipt, Aethiopia, Armenia.
The Iacobites inhabiting in Mesopotamia,Brerwood pa. 194. Ba∣bylon, Palestine, Syria, and Cyprus have their Li∣turgies in the Syria{que} language. In which language, the new Testament hath beene printed at Vienna, the Copie being brought into Europe, by Moses Mardenus a Ia∣cobite. It is thought,The Liturgie of the Iacobites. that the Liturgie called Ana∣phora Basilii, translated out of Syriaque into La∣tin by Masius which is to be found in Bibliothe∣ca veterum patrum in Latin, is the Liturgie of those Iacobites. Which beginneth, O eternall God who in the beginning created men, &c. afterwards, he left to vs a memorie of his passion, these things which we set before you, &c. As often as you doe this, set forth my death untill I come. The people answer, Lord, wee remember thy death, &c. and let thy mercy be upon us all. Priest: Make this bread, the glorious body of our Lord Iesus Christ, for expiation of our fa, remis∣sion of our sinnes, and life everlasting to them that take it. The people, Amen. The Priest: Make this Cup, the pretious bloud of our Lord God, &c. for expiation of sinnes, &c. to them that receive it.
Christians vnder the Pa∣triarch of Musall, falsely called Nestorians. FOr their Ecclesiasticall Go∣vernment,Villam: voiag: lib. 2. cap. 23. leur chef et Primat qu'ils nomment Catholique et qu'ils reverent comme leur Pape: they are subiect to the Patriarch of Musall. Their Primate whom they call Catho∣licke, they reverence as their Pope. The Nestorians,Les Nestoriens appellant le Pape Evesque reprouve Thom: a Iesu Cosm: lib. 10. cap. 25. apud trad: Cath: pag. 18. call the Pope the reprobate Bishop. They celebrate the Eucharist,Eucharistiam conficiebant Ne∣storiani ex pane fermentate Gualt: lib. citat: pag. 377. with leavened bread. They communicate in both kinds.Eucharistiam sub utrdque specie communicabant Gault: de Nestor. The Priest breaking the bread,Mr. Sands lib: cit. layeth it in the palme of the Com∣municants hand, they sipping of Cuppe which is held betweene his. They mingle not water with wine,Villam: loco citat: ne messent point leau a vec le vin. in the Eucharist. They allow their Priests,Sacerdotes mortua prima vxare secundas & vlteriores faciunt nuptias: Tho: a les  lib. 7. pa. 1. cap. 2 pag. 354. 1.2. and 3. marriages, or oftner. They have not the Images of the Crucifixe on their Crosses.Brerwood pag: 145 They kisse the Crosse,Mr. Sands. but pray not before it,
They doe not reverence Images. They use the Caldean language or Syriacke tongue, in their Litur∣gies.Chaldea autem litera utuutur in divinis scripturis Vitriac: lib. cit. cap. 77. For their ancient error, that there were two persons in Christ, as two natures, they have lately reiected that error, as appeareth by their confession, translated out of the Syrian tongue by Masius,Bibli: tom. 4. pag. 1049. extant in Bibliotheca veterum Pa∣trum. Indians of St. Thomas THey call the Bishop of Rome the Reprobate Bishop.Thavet a Iesu Cosmo: lib. 10. cap. 15. apud Trad. Cath: quaest: 2. They receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in both kinds.Lo pigliando sub utraque specie Bot. par. 3. lib. 2 cap: della vecchs christia. del India. Iosep: Ind: relat: novi orbis cap. 134. extremam unctionem non habent. Osorius de rebus Emanuel lib. 3. apud Cathol. trad. They have not extreame vn∣xion. They admit of marriage of Priests. These have their Service in the Syriaque tongue,Brerwood enquir. pag. 194. their Liturgie is translated out of Syriacke in∣to Latin, and to be seene in Bib∣liatheca veterum patrum.
The Masse, which the antient Christians of the Bishoprick of Angamall. in the kingdome of Malabar in the East Indies use, being amended, & purged from the errors and Blasphemies of the Nestorians: by the illustruous & reverend Lord, the Lord Alexius Menesius, Archbishop of Goa, primate of the Indies, in a synode in the Diocesse of Angamall, in the yere 1599. which beginneth; Glory be to God on high Amen. Glory be to God on high Amen. The Cophti or Aegiptian Christians. THey are subject to the Pa∣triarch of Alexandria,Mirae: lib. 1 cap: 11. They say the Pope may err in matters concerning faith.Serenissimū Dominum nostrum papam in ijs quae sunt fidei opinau∣tur posse errare Tho: a Iesu de con¦ver: omnium Gentium lib. 7 par. 1 cap: 5 pa. 360. They minister the communi∣on in both kindes to all.Eucharistiae sacramentum om∣nibus sub utraque specie confer∣tur. idem loco citat: pag: 361. In unleavened bread.Idque infermentato. Idem ibidē: To sicke persons, they mini∣ster not the Sacrament of extreme unction.Infirmis autem neque eleum sanctū administratur etc. idē ibidē They admit not Purgatorie,Purgatorium nec pro defunctis preces admittunt: idem lib: 7 p: 1 cap: 23. nor pray for the dead. They elevate not the Sacra∣ment.Tecla Abissin: apud Thevet, lib: 7 p: 1 cap: 13 pag: 383 Cor∣pus dominicum et calicem nun∣quam elevant in missis. They repute the Roman ChurchSe nos latinos habere excommuni∣catos et haereticos proinde Latino∣rum praxim ac conversationem ad instar Iudaeorum fugiunt Tho: a Ies: lib. citat. lib. 7 pa. 1 cap. 5 pag. 360.
hereticall,Thom: a Iesu de conver: omni gent lib. 7 par. 1 cap. 6 Tertio conces∣su deo aspirante circumcisionis lex primum fuit abrogata. 363. Boterus Rela. univer. par. 3 lib: 3 de comun consenso si annullo la legge della circomcissione. Boter: loc. citat. lib. 3. de Christ. de Aegipt pag. in christe essere due nature. Tho: a Iesu lib. 7 par. 1 Cap. 6 pag. 363. Qui cum idem Deus, idem sit verus homo, et divinam habet a patre iam inde ab omni aeternitate, naturam humanam sumpsit ex matre definitis tem∣perum spaciis. and refuse the Com∣munion and conversation of the Latins, no lesse then the Jewes. For Circumcision used by them;  It is reported to be abroga∣ted in the Synod at Caire Anno, 1583. And for the error of Euti∣ches, they wholy renounce it. They acknowledge Christ to be true God and man. The Cophti or Christians of Aegipt, (although their vulgar be Arabique,) yet have their liturgie in the Sirtaque tongue, which is composed of the Hebrew, Calde, Arabique, and Greeke tongues, but for the Gospell, after it is read in Syriaque: it is afterward read, in the Arabique, or vulgar lan∣guage. The liturgie which they use, is the liturgie of Severus sometime Patriarch of Alexandria, translated out of Syriaque into latin, by Guido Fa∣britius, to be seene in the 6 Tom: of Bibliotheca patrum. For the order of Administration of Baptisme, the Priest beginneth with this prayer. O Almighty God, make us worthy, that we may come with purity, and holinesse to thy divine and glo∣rious mysteries of Adoption &c. Afterwards, the Priestreadeth part of the 8 Chapter of the Acts, from the 20 verse to the 39:
verse, beloved, the Angell of the Lord spake to Phi∣lip &c. And of the third Chapter of the Gospell af∣ter St. Iohn, from the beginning, to the 9 verse; There was a man of the Pharisees, whose name was Nicodemus, &c. And part of the 8 Chapter to the Hebrewes; and after some prayers, The Priest signeth, the partie baptized three times, with the signe of the Crosse: such a one N: is signed, in the name of the Father, Amen, in the name of the Sonne, Amen, and in the name of the holy Ghost, to life everlasting. Then followeth an Adiuration of the Divell, and a Renuntiation or renouncing of him. Then when the party renounceth the Divell, his face is turned towards the west, and he, or his Godfathers say, I such a one, N: that am haptised, I, do renounce the Divell, and all his workes, and all his Angells, all his strength, and all his warfar, and all his feare, and all his pride, and all his worldly error: and every one that doth con∣sent to him, or follow him. Then he turneth him to the East, and saith, J such a one, N: who am baptised, do consent to thee Christ my God, and to all the doctrine that is revea∣led of thee from heaven, by the Prophets, and Apo∣stles, and holy Fathers, I also confesse and beleeve, and am baptised, in thee, and in thy Father, and in thy holy spirit now &c.
Then the Priest saith the Nicen Creed. &c. I beleeve in one God, the Father Almighty, &c. And after many prayers and Crossings, he putteth the partie baptised, into the water say∣ing. Such a one, N: is baptised in the name of the Father, Amen: And of the Sonne, Amen, and of the holy Ghost to everlasting life. And so endeth with prayers. For the administration of the Eucharist The Priest beginneth with, Glorie be to the Fa∣ther, to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost. After some prayers. Let us be made worthy sacrificers of praise, that we may performe our Priesthood to thee O Lord: every thought, word, & worke, being a sweet savour (offring to thee peace offrings) that without spot, we may ap∣peare in thy sight all the dayes of our life. They say in Breaking. Thou art the Lambe of God, that takest away the sinnes of the world, so he suffered, God the word in the flesh, he was offrea and broken upon the Crosse, and his soule was separated from his body, although his di∣vinitie was not separated, neither from his soule, nor from his body, &c. Amongst other prayers he saith. Make us worthy O Lord God, that with contrite hearts, and purged from all euili co
thee O Lord our God, purely and holily, reasonable and spirituall sacrifices, in the faith of thy truth. After other prayers he endeth. The Bible was translated into the Arabique tongue, by Iohn Archbishop of Sevill, Anno Dom: 717. The Habbassin Christians. 1 For their Ecclesiasticall GovernmentZaga Zabo. 240. THey are subiect to a Patri∣arch of their owne, whom they call Abunna;Non firmiter sentiunt de prima∣tu Romanae ecclesiae Tho. a Iesu de conver: lib. 7. pa. 1 cap, 6 pag, 367. whose place is the seventh Session in generall Councells, the next place after the Bishop of Seleucia. They do not well beleeve of the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome. 2 The Eucharist in both kindes. Wee receive the Lords body,Assumimus corpus Domini, et id sub utraque specie confessio Zaga Zabo Episcopi Abassin: apud Damian: a Goes pag, 227 Bote∣rus part, 3 lib. 3 de Christian. del. Abass. and that under both kindes. As the Preist,Sacramentum integrum, verum corpus, et verum sanguinem Chri∣sti, tam clerica quam laici, in Templo accipiunt. Matthaeus Dres¦serus de statu Ecclesiae et Religio: in Aethiopia apud Neand. pag. 535 so the Laicks re∣ceive the whole Sacrament of the true body, and true blood of Christ, in the Temple. All receive the Eucharist under both kindes.Sub utraque specie omnes Eu∣charistiam sumunt Godign, de A∣bassinorum rebus lib, 1 cap 35, pag, 218,
3 They sell no Masses. We receive no price or reward for Masse.Pro Missa, nullum pretium, aut mercedem accipimus. Zaga Zaoo; pag 228. They make no gaine in the Masse.Questum in Missa, nullum plane faciunt. Dresserus apud Nean: pag 537. 4 They reserve not the Sacrament nor elevate it.Sacramentum Evcharistiae, non servatur apud nos in Templis, vt fit hic apud Evropaeos: Zaga Za∣bo. pag 227. apud Dami a Goes. The Sacrament is not reserved amongst us in our Churches, as it is amongst the Europeans. 5 They use not extreame unction for a sacrament. Moreover you must know,Praeterea Sciendum apud nos, Chrisma, five extremam olei Vn∣ctionem, pro Sacramento non ha∣beri, nec in vsu esse. vt video hic ex Romanae Ecclesiae consuetu∣dine fieri, Zaga Zabo. 226. apud Dam: a Goes. that with us Chrisme or extreame unction, is not accounted a Sacra∣ment, nor is in use at all. As I see here, the custome is in the Roman Church.Non usan darla chrisma ni extrema vnction. Francis: Alva∣res. fol: 27. There is no use of Chrisme or extreame unction. 6 They allow maried Priests. Mariage is no esse allowed to the Clergie then to the Laitie,Coningium Clericis et Pres∣byteris non minus quam politicis, permissum est sic tumen vt mor∣tua vxe prim, ducere aliā non liceat ni Pa riarch dispensan∣te: concubinam si quis alat a sa∣cris arcetur. Dresserus apud Ne∣andrum. pag 537. yet so, as that the first wise being dead they are not permitted to marie
any more without dispensation from the Patriarch, if any keepe a Concubine, he is driven from his calling. And both Laitie and Clergie possesse but one wife.Et tam Laici quam Clerici v∣nam tantum possident vxorem Zaga Zabo, apud Damia: a Goes. 215. That the Priests may marrie, we have received from St. Paul, who had rather that the Cler∣gie and Laitie,Et quod presbyteri apud nos vxo∣res possideaut ex Apostolo acce∣pimus: Qui mavult clericum et Laicum, nubere quam vri. Zaga Zabo, lib. cit: pag 215. should marrie then to burne. 7 They beleeve the Soules of their Infants, dying without Bap∣tisme not to be damned. They beleeve, the soules of their Infants departed before Bap∣tisme to be saved,Alvarez Histor: Aethiopica. fol. 27. because they are sprung from faithfull pa∣rents. 8 They doe acknowledge the first 3 Councels. They accept the three first ge∣nerall Councells,Zaga Zabo. lib: citat: pag 236. The Nicen, the Constantinopolitane & the Ephesine. 9 Indulgences. For remission of soules the Pa∣triarch
graunts no Indulgences,Ad animarum remissionem Pa∣triarcha dat nullas Indulgenti∣as nullos dies indulgentiarum Patriarcha concedit. Zaga Za∣bo. pag 213. Indulgentias nulo las dat neque concedit. pag 240. nor gives any pardons at all. 10 Jnvocation of Saints. As for the Saints, It is true, that they love and reverence them,Sanctos quidem amant et vene∣rantur, sed non invocant: Matri Christi Mariae Virgini honorem, magnum tribuunt, sed neque ado∣rant, neque opem eius implorant. Dresser. apud Neandrum. pag 536. Atias Major, pag 352. Aethiopia. but they do not call on them: They doe ascribe great honour to the Virgin Marie the mo∣ther of Christ, but neither do they worship her, nor implore her helpe. 11 They have service in their owne tongue. For they reteine the Epistles and Gospell,Nam et Epistolam, et Evangeli∣um, et verba consecrationis, sine elevatione lingua pooulo nota re∣tinent. Chytreus, pag 28. together with the words of Consecration, without elevation: these I say they reteine in the vulgar tongue. 12 The Conferring of Bishoprickes. The Conferring of Bisho∣prickes,Patriarcha sive Abunna Nullum Episcopatum, aut Ecclesiae be efi∣cium in vllos confert id solum ad Precioum Ioanne spectat. Za∣ga Zabo, 240. and their Ecclesiasticall benefices, (except the Patriarch∣ship) belongeth to their Empe∣ror.Field of the Church. lib: 3. pa. 73. The Emperor hath supreame
authoritie in all causes, as well Ec∣clesiastical as Civill: though the Patriarch also exercise a spirituall iurisdiction. 13 Concerning Purgatorie. Godignus the Iesuit,)Godignus de Rebus Abassino∣rum, lib: 1. Cap: 28. pag 172. ex literis Petri Paes qui praesit Iesuit: in Aethiopia) Purgatoriū negant. They deny Purgatory. 14 They do not expresse the number of their sinnes in Confession.Abassinos, neque species, neque numerum peccatorum in confessi∣one exprimere, sed tantum gene∣ratim dicere, Habessen Habessen (hoc est) peccavi, peccavi. Godi∣gn: lib; 1. Cap: 35. pag 216. They do not expresse in their Confessions neither the kindes, nor number of their sinnes, but onely generally ory out, Habessen Habessen, I have sinned, I have sinned. 15 Concerning Jmages.Mr. Sandes his iourneis. lib. 3. pag 171. They haue pictures in their Churches, but no Carved Images, neither do they bestow any un∣due reverence on them.Idem loco citat. They have no crucifixes, but use the Crosse as a badge of their profession, their preists carrying crosses in their hands. 16 Thomas a Iesu.) They have no oblations
oblations for the dead, neither do they offer for the living.Nullas pro defunctis oblationes habent, nec sacra faciunt pro vivis Tho, a Iesu de convers: omnium Gentium lib: 7 pa: 1 cap: 8 pag: 370. Praeterea traditiones sanctas non admittunt, solumque verbo Dei scripto fidem dicunt se habere. Tho: a Iesu lib: 7 cap: 8 pag, 369. 17 Moreover they doe not admit holy Traditions, but they say that they must onely beleeve Gods word. The Aethiopians, do beleive the holy Trinity,Zaga Zabo apud Damianum a Goes pag. 204 Credimus in nomen sanctae Trinitatis, patrem filium, et spiritum sanctum. that there are three persons, and one God. They have goodly Monasteries, and Monks, but onely of the order of St. Anthony; their Monks are not suffred to begg, but live on their labours. They use the Ni en Creed. In their Lent they tast nothing till the sunne be set, neither old men nor sick,Godignus lib. 1 cap. 35. pag. 218. eate on their fasting time without offence, they begin their Lent ten daies before ours. In their Churches,Idem lib. 1 cap. 2 pag. 133, 134. they do demeane them∣selues most reverently, no man may walke, laugh or talke in their Churches, they suffer not doggs to come into their Churches, or Church-yards, they suffer no man to sit in their Churches, the aged and weake, have onely Crutches to ease them withall. For their manner of Administration of the Sacrament of Baptisme, they are Baptized,They Baptize in the Church-portch in the Church Porch; The Priest, after hee hath said certeine prayers, putteth the partie to be
baptised three times under water, saying, I doe Baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and of the holy Chost the Comforter. Whē he renounceth the Devil, the preist turneth the face of the partie to be baptized to the West, when the covenāt is made with God to the east. They do beleeve that the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme, washeth away origenall sin,Godign: de Abas∣sin: rebus lib: 1 cap. 35 pag. 212. with which the soule is tainted: as soone as it is infused into the bodie in the Mothers wombe, yea, in the very moment of his first being. Whereas the Aethiopians are charged with having many wives,Godign: lib. citat. cap. 36 pag. 225. it is a scandall, for no Nation punisheth Adultery more severely then they. And whereas they are accused of rebaptizing themselves yeerely:Scaliger de emen∣datione temporum lib. 8 pag. 683 True it is, they do veere∣ly upon the day of our Lord IESVS CHRISTS Baptisme, goe into the water and wash them∣selves, as the Moscovites doe and other Chri∣stians, and this they doe onely in memoriall of our Lords Baptisme. And that they absteine from blood,Scalig: loc: citat. and things strangled: as this was forbidden by the Apostles Cannon. Acts 15. so it was the Cu∣stome of the auntient Christians in the primi∣tive Church: read Cannon 53 of those which are called the Apostles. And they doe Circumcise their Children,
they use it not as a sacrament but as a nationall custome, and they Circumcise both Males, and Females (which the Iewes did not, and they are not bound to it by law nor religion. And that they Baptise their Children,Scaliger de emend: temp: lib. 8. not onely with water, but also with fier; It is re∣ported, that it is the custome of the Aethiopians, not onely of the Christians, but also of the Ma∣hometans, to burne their Children with a hot Iron in the temple veines, to stop distillations from falling into their eyes. Some write that the first Aethiopian Emperors,Godignus lib. citat. cap. 35. pag. 213. that embraced the faith of Christ, invented this burning, that every Christian man might beare about, some outward signe of his Chri∣stianity. Others write, that Iohn the Emperor, who was called the Saint, who lived in those mi∣serable times of the Arrians,Idem pag. 214. appointed that after Baptisme, the Aethiopian Children, should receive three prickes in the face with an hot Iron, in signe that they professed the faith of the holy Trinity. The Aethiopian Liturgie set downe by Francis Alvares in the Portugall tongue and afterwards written in Italian, related by Cassan∣der in his Liturgies. cap. 1 pa. 28.This Alvares was chaplin to K. Iohn of Portugall, and was six yeere in Aethi∣opia. Cassander Theologus Belga Imp. Fer∣diu: 1 et Maximil: 2  a consiliis. Printed Parisiis apud Abrahamum Pacard: MDCXVI. THey make a great Cake, or a lesse in their Churches,In Ecclesiis faciunt libum magnum aut paruum, pro multitudine gentis, quia omnes communicant, et pro multitudine faciunt erassum dimidio digito, aut in∣tegro, aut etiam crassiorem magno digi∣to, infundunt vinum calici factum ex uvis pressis magna quantitate, quia quot quot communicant de corpore, totidem tiam communicant de sanguine. ac∣cording
to the multitude of peo∣ple: for all Communicate. For the greatenesse of it they make it halfe a finger, or a whole finger, or more thicke. They power wine into the Cup, made of Grapes pressed in great quantitie, as many as doe Communicate of the bodie, so many do Communicate of the blood.Is qui missam dicturus est, incipit altâ voce, Alleluia Sacerdos facit benedicti∣onem cuvs cruce parvâ, quam tenet in manu. 2 He that saith the service, be∣ginneth with a loud voice Alle∣luia, The Preist blesseth with a little Crosse, which he holdeth in his hand. 3Canunt tam qui foris suut, quam qui intus. They that are without, and within sing. 4 The Epistle is read (the blessing being asked) likewise the Gospell.Legitur Epistola cursim petita prius benedictione Similiter Evangelium le∣gitur. 5Sacerdos maiore digito facit in libo, quinque signa tanquam stigmata. The Priest with his greatest finger maketh five signes or prickes upon the Cake. 6Consecrat in sualinguae iisdem verbis quibus et nos et non sublevat. He doth Consecrate in the vul∣gar
tongue in the same words that we doe: and doth not ele∣vate it. 7Id ipsum quoque facit in calice et no elevat. The same he doth with the Cup, but not elevate it. 8Sacramentum panis in manibus acoi∣piens partitur per medium. Taking the sacrament of the bread in his hands, he divideth it in the midle. 9Ex summitate partis paululum detra∣hit, quam particulam pro se accipit. Of the uppermost he taketh a little for himselfe. 10 The dish with the Sacrament,Lancem in̄ sacramento porrigit ei qui evangelium legit. he delivereth to him that readeth the Gospell. 11 The Cup with the Sacrament,Calicom cum sacrumento porrigit ei, qui legit Epistolam. he delivereth to him that readeth the Epistle. 12Qui continuo dant communionem sacerdotibus, qui astant altari. Then he giveth to the Priests that stand at the Altar. 13 The Deacon taking the Sacrament out of the dish,Diaconus sacramentū ex lance sumens, manuquo dextra tenens, minutim distribuit. and holding it in his right hand doth distribute it in parts. 14 In the meane season, the subdeacon delive∣reth the blood in a golden silver or wodden spoone,Interea Subdiaconui pauxillum de sanguine co∣chleari aureo argenteo, vel ligneo sumptum porigit il∣lis, qui sumpserunt sacra∣mentum corporis. to them that have received the sacra∣ment of the body.
15 In the same manner,Eodem modo datur com∣munio illis, qui stant ante primam cortinam, et aliis qui stant iuxta alteram cortinam. the communion is given to them that stand neere the other Cortin 16 Last of all,Postea fecularibus, qui stant inxta portam princi palem, tam viris, quam mulieribus. to the lay people, both men and women. 17 Whilst the communion is administring,Dum datur communio, aut altud quippiam officii sit amnes stant erecti. or any other service is doing in the Church, all the people stand upright. 18 To the Communion all come,Ad communionem om∣nes veniunt sublatis compli¦catisque manibus. lifting up their hands and folding them together. In these Liturgies before named, although some of them seeme to be corrupted, and expur∣ged as they plainely confesse the expurging of the Jndian Liturgie, yet the Eucharist is admini∣stred in both kinds. There is no privat Masse. There is mention made of a spirituall sacri∣fice, I finde not Transubstantiation in them. There is no elevation of the Sacrament. Maried Priests administer. And Mans merit is renounced in them as before &c. And the like will also appeare in the other old antient Liturgies, attributed to St. Peter, St. Matthew, St. Ambrose, St. Andrew, St. Dennis, St. Clement. &c. And for the Masse now used in the Roman Church, fathered upon St. Gre∣gorie, although it hath beene purged, and purged againe, yet therein still appeareth some footing of truth and Antiquitie.
As the bread and wine are called Dona, and Munera, And after Consecration, they are cal∣led Creatures, per quem haec bona semper Creas, commaund thy Angells to carry up these to thy high Altar in heaven, whereas the Preist would have us beleeve, that after he hath gone over them, that they are no more Creatures, but the Creator that made all things. One thing more I note by the way, that there is a Liturgie attributed to Saint Peter, set downe in Bibliotheca veterum Patrum, used in some part of Calahria. Now who can beleeve that the Church of Rome hol∣ding so much of Saint Peter, that under his name, shee exalteth her selfe over the whole world, would offer Saint Peter so much wrong, as to drive his Liturgie out of Rome, and suffer a few Preists to use it, inhabiting the Mountaines of Basilica in Calabria. Also, whereas the Romish writers call all these Liturgies Masses, as the Masse of Saint Basill, the Masse of Saint Chryso∣stome, the Armenian Masse, the Aethiopian Masse, There is a difference betweene the Romish Masse, and their Liturgies, for the Church of Rome in their Masse, intendeth cheifely a Sacrifice, but these Churches a
Communion; The Aethiopians call the Com∣munion Codash and the bread Corban. The Greekes call it the Liturgie, as the Li∣turgie of Saint Basill, the Liturgie of Saint Chrisostome. As these Liturgies before named, agree with us in many things, so also there are some things in them which I doe not Iustifie as be∣fore, and in viewing them, and comparing them with our service booke, I have great cause to magnifie Gods great goodnesse, and mercie to us, and this section, I will con∣clude with the words of the Reverend and holie Martir, Docter Rowland Tailor vnto Bi∣shop Gardiner, and others. There was saith he,Ecclesiast: hist: 3. Volum. fol: 171. Printed, 1631. set forth by the most innocent King Edward for whom God be praised everlastingly, the whole Church service, with the best advice of the learned men of the Realme, and authori∣sed by the whole Parliament and received, and published gladly by the whole Realme, which Booke was never reformed but once, (said my author in his time) and yet by that once refor∣mation it was so fully perfected; according to the rules of our Christian Religion in every be∣halfe, that no Christian Conscience, can be offended with any thing therein conteined.
I find that these Churches are not he∣reticall but Orthodox for the maine. Wheras these Churches are charged by some, to be heretiques, you shall find divers good Au∣thors to have written to the contrary. As first for the Greeke Church, Azorius think∣eth them to be no heretikes, and sheweth a rea∣son therefore,Azorius Instit: moral: lib: 8. cap. 20. quest: 10. because in those articles wherein they are thought to erre, they differ verbally onely, and not really from those that are un∣doubtedly beleevers, and giveth instance in the question touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost, wherein he thinketh they differ in the forme of words only.Lomb: lib: 1. div. 10. And the like saith Peter Lombard. The Craecians affirme, that the holy Ghost proceedeth frō the Father only, and not from the Son, yet they doe acknowledge, the Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the Son, as well as of the Father, because the Apostle saith, that he is the Spirit of the Sonne, and in the Gospell,Gal. 4 He is called the Spi∣rit of Truth, and now seeing it is no other thing,Iohn 10. to be the spirit of the Father, and the Sonne, then to be from the Father and the Sonne, they seeme to agree with us in iudgement, though they differ in words, as also Thomas a Iesu writeth:Lib. 6 pag. 248. solis verbis differ∣re. But for full satisfaction in this point, reade the Confe∣rence betweene the most Reverend father in God the Lo: Archbishop of Canterburie his grace, my honorable Patron, and Fisher the Iesuit bound with the Lo: Bp. of Elies booke against Fisher.
Secondly, in questions touching the Pope his power, Priviledges and authoritie, the said Azorius affirmeth, that the Greekes have no o∣ther opinion then Gerson, and the learned men of Paris held, who were yet never accounted Heretiques, (nor Schismatikes either,) for they yeild a Primacie to the Pope, if he be Ortho∣dox, but no Supremacie. They acknowledge him as Patriarch over his owne Iurisdiction, but they deny as the French doe, that his power is Supreme, or his iudgment is infallible, and and affirme, that he is subiect to a Councell. All which things were defined, in the Councell of Constance and Basil, and the contrary positions condemned as Hereticall. Neither wants there at this day, many worthy divines, living in the Communion of the Roman Church, who strongly adhere to the Councells before nam∣ed, as the whole king dome and State of France admitted these, and reiect the Councells of Flo∣rence & Trent, who would no lesse, with drawe themselues, from the Communion of the Ro∣man Church, if they were pressed to acknow∣ledge, the Popes power and authoritie is Su∣preame, that he cannot erre, and that he may depose Kings, and dispose of their Kingdomes, as the Iesuits, and other flatterers affirme, and defend, wherefore the Greekes are no Heriticks, as Azorius resolveth. So that the Romanists,
have done the Greekes infinite wrong, in con∣demning to hell so many millions of Christian soules, redeemed with the precious bloud of his deerest Son, for this point onely.Andr: Fric: de Ec∣clesia: lib: 4 cap: 2. Andreas Fricius also saith that there are some who thinke that the Rus∣sians, Armenians, and other Christians of the East part perteine not to Christs Church, but seeing they use the same Sacraments which we do, seeing they professe to fight under the banner of Christ Crucified, and reioyce in their sufferings for his sake, farr be it from us, ever to thinke that they should be cast out and reiected, from be∣ing fellow Citizens with the Saints, who have endured, the heate of the day so many ages, in the vineyard of the Lord; Nay rather I thinke, that there can be no perfection, nor union, of the holy Church without them. Many of these Christians, live under the Turke, and Pagans, and suffer very much for Iesus Christs sake, which they might quit themselves of, if they would renounce their religion, and also might enioy many immunities, and priviledge, which they are for their religion, only deprived of as before. The lamentable Calamities, of these afflicted and distressed Churches, should cause all true hearted Christians, in true sence and compas∣sion of their miseries, to make their prayers, and humble petitions to Almighty God, to cast downe his pitifull eyes upon them: And farr
be it from us to boleive, that all these Christi∣ans are excluded heaven and plunged into hell for not submitting themselves onely to the Bi∣shop of Rome. Also, although the greatest part of Christi∣ans in Assyria, Persia, Tartaria, and other Ea∣sterne Provinces, are called by the odious and hatefull name of Nestorians, yet they hold no∣thing,Onuphr: in vit: Iulii. 3. hi: Nest∣oriani, nomen poti∣us Nestorij haere∣tici, quam errores retinuisse mihi vi∣dentur: nam nihil plane quod ad il∣lam sectam refe∣rat comperio. Thom: a Iesu cou∣vers: lib: 7. part: 1. cap. 3 et 4. savouring of the Nestorian heresie as O∣nuphrius writeth, and the same appeareth also by the confession of Elias their Patriarch of Musall sent to Rome which was found Orthodox, and right, as Leonardus Bishop of Sidon reporteth Also the Amenians are Iudged by many to be Eutichian heretickes, for that they received not the Councell of Calcedon, which they refused to subscribe unto, upon a false suggestion and apprehēsion that in that Coūcell the heresie of Ntorius conde mned in the Councell of Ephe∣sus was againe revived,Genebrard Cron: ad Annum. 1153. of this imputatiō Gene∣brard also cleereth them. The Christians of Aegypt,Asserunt duas in Christo naturas, esse vnitas, vnam∣que factam natu∣ram personatam de duabus natu∣ris, non personatis fine mixtione ta∣men et confusione: apud Tho: a Iesu. lib: citat: cap: 14. and Aethiopia, with the Jacobits of Syria, are thought also to be in∣fected with the heresio of Eutiches, whom they curse for an hereticke, as Leonardus Bishop of Sidon reporteth, for the confounding the two Natures of God and Man in Christ, but yet af∣firmed, that the two natures, are so vnited, that there is one personated nature, arising of the two
natures not personated: without mixtion, or confusion. Likewise, Mr. Brerwood writeth,Brerw: Enquirie, pag 183. That the Christians of the East, haue disclaimed, and abandon∣ed, those Hereticall phantasies, touching our Savi∣our, wherein by their misleaders, they haue been aun∣tiently plunged, doth manifestly appeare, first of the Iacobites, Secondly, of the Nestorians, by their se∣verall Confessions, Translated out of the Syrian tongue, by Masius, extant in Bibliotheca veterum Patrum. Thirdly, of the Armenians, by their owne Confession, translated by Pretorius. Fourthly, of the Cophti, by their owne Confession of faith, mentioned by Baronius, & also by Tho: a Iesu, and of the Abas∣sines, by the Relation of Zaba Zago. Moreover the Romanists scandall these Chur∣ches, with false imputations, as Guido the Car∣melite and Prateolus, impute unto the Graecians sundry errours, which Lucinianus of Ciprus,Possevin: Bibliosk, lib: 6. cap: 1. a Bishop and a learned Dominican, and a worthy man, as Possevin accounteth him, sheweth to be fasly ascribed unto them. 1. As first, simple fornication to be no sinne. 2. That they condemne second Mariages, which he sheweth to be untrue. 3. That they thinke, that the contract of mariage may be broaken, and the band dissol∣ved, at the pleasure of the parties, whereas con∣trary he affirmeth, they allow no divorce, to
permit a secōd mariage while both parties live. 4 They are said to affirme, that the Sacra∣ment consecrated on Maunday Thursday, is of more force, vertue, and efficacy, then consecra∣ted any other day, wherin he sheweth that they are wronged, as in the other imputations. 5 They are charged to teach, that it is no sin to lend upon usury, and that it is not necessary to make restitution of things, uniustly taken away. 6 They are said to thinke, that if a Priests wife die, he ceaseth to be a Preist any longer, which is as meere a slander as the rest were. So that it is true that Thomas a Iesu saith, that one of the principall things; that maketh the Graecians so averse from the Latins, is, that they are wronged by them; by untrue reports, and uniust imputations. And as they use them, so also us, and the re∣formed Churches, and many others whom they scandall, and accuse of divers heresies, and errors which we and they abhorre, and detest. This point, I will conclude with Doctor Fields observations. First,Doct. Field of the Church. lib: 3. cap. 1. that by the mercifull goodnesse of God, all these different sorts of Christians, though di∣stracted and dissevered, by reason of delivering certaine points of faith, mistaking one another, or variety in opinion, touching things not Fun∣damentall;
yet agree in one substance of faith, and are so farre forth orthodox, that they reta in a saving profession of all divine verities, absolut∣ly necessary to salvation, and are all members of the true Catholicke Church of Christ. The second, that in the principall contro∣versies touching matters of Religion; betweene the Papists, and those of the reformed Chur∣ches, they give testimonie of the truth, of that which we professe. As Docter Field also hath collected 1 They all denie and impugne that supreame universalitie of Ecclesiasticall Iuris∣diction, which the Bishop of Rome claimeth. 2, They thinke him subiect to error, as other Bi∣shops are. 3. They deny that he hath any pow∣er, to dispose of principalities & kingdomes, of the world, or to depose Kings. 4, they ac∣knowledge all our righteousnesse to be imper∣fect, and that it is not safe to trust thereunto, but to the meere mercy and goodnesse of God. 5, They adnit not of the merit of Congruence, condignitie, nor works of Superrogation. 6, They teach not the doctrine of satisfactions, as the Romanists doe. 7, They beleeue not Purga∣torie, and pray not to deliver men out of tempo∣rall punishments after this lfie. 8 They reiect the Romish doctrine, touching Indulgences and pardons 9 They beleeve not that there are se∣ven Sacraments. 10. They omit many cere∣monies
which the Roman Church useth in Baptisme, as spittle, &c. 11. They haue no pri∣vate Masses. 12. They minister the Communi∣on in both kindes to all communicants. 13 They beleeve not transubstantiation, nor the now reall sacrificing of Christ. They have their divine service most of them in their owne tongue. 15. Their Preists are married, and al∣though they permit thē not to marrie a second wife, without dispensation, yet if any do, they do not avoid or dissoluethe mariage. 16. They make no image of God. 17 They have no Mas∣sy Images, but pictures onely. 18. They think that properly, God onely is to be invocated, and howsoever they have a kinde of invocation of Saints, yet they thinke that God onely heareth them, and not the Saints. And thus much of the Vnity of these Chur∣ches with us. 4 The Vnitie of the Reformed Chur∣ches appeareth, by their severall Confessions. OF Auspurge,Set downe in a booke, called the Harmonie of Con∣fessiōs of the faith, of the Chrislian & Reformed Chur∣ches. Printed, Cambridge 1586. which was first presented in the Germaine tongue, at the Citie of Auspurge, in the yeare 1530: to Charls the fift, being Emperor, by certaine most renowned Princes of Germa∣nie,
and other States of the sacred Empire, whō they call Protestants. Of Straugsborough, Constance, Meminga, Lindan, presented to the said Emperour. Of Basill, called also the Confession of Millaine Of the Helvetian Churches. Of the Saxon, and Meissen Churches. Of Wirtemberge, presented by the Ambassa∣dours of Christopher Duke of Wirtemberge, and Tecca, Earle of Mountbelgard, presented to the Councell of Trent, the 24 of the Month of Ia∣nuary, Anno. 1552. Of the French Confession, which was in the yeare 1559. presented to Francis the second King of France. Of the latter Confession of the Helvetian Church, which was written by the Pastors of Zurich, in the yeare 1566. Of Belgia, which was published in French, in the name of all the Churches of Belgia, in the yeare 1566, and in the yeare, 1579. In a publique Synod, held at Belgia: it was re∣peated, confirmed, and turned into the Belgian tongue. Of Bohemia, published in divers places, was also approved by common testimonie, of the Vniversitie of Wirtemberg, published in the yeere, 1532. Of Scotland, subscribed by King James of fa∣mous memorie, and the States thereof, to the
glory of God, and good example of all men. At Edenborough, the 28 day of Ianuary 1581, and in the 14 yeere of his Maiefties Raigne. Although, some private men led more by pas∣sion, and their owne selfe pleasing conceipt, then by the sacred rules of piety and truth, have laboured to sow the tares of dissention, in the vineyard of the Lord, and have made Crooked some branches, cleaving unto them, as Ana∣baptists, Brownists, and others, yet the generall societies, of these Orthodox Churches, in the publique confessions of their faith, do so agree, that there is a most sacred har mony betweene them, in the more substantiall points of Chri∣stian Religion necessary to salvation, as touch∣ing the Holy Scripture, the Sacred Trinitie, the person of the Sonner of God, God and man, The providence of God, Sinne, Freewill, the Law, the Gospell, Iustification by Christ, faith in his name, Rogeneration, the Catholique Church and supreme head thereof, Christ, the Sacraments, their number, and use, the state of Soules after death, the Resurrection,Doctor Potters want of charitie, pag. 93. Doct: Field of the Church pag, 819. and life e∣ternall: They differ rather in Phrases and formes of speech, concerning Christs presence in his holy Supper, & other things, then in substance of doctrine, and also in Ceremonies. And to manifest,preface to Mr. Brerwoods enqui∣ries. this their unity. The first Act in the Polonian Synods, of which they have
had divers lately, as before, in which assembly, are Protestants embracing Bohemick, Augustan, and Hel∣vetique confessions, The first Act is a religious con∣fession, of their unfeined consent in the substantiall points of Christian faith, necessary to Salvation, and also, that all disputation should be cut of concerning the manner of Christs presence. All of them belee∣ving the presence it selfe, and that the Eucharisticall elements are not naked and emptie signes; but doe truely exhibite to the faithfull receiver, that which they signifie and represent: And for as much as they all accord in the substantiall veritie of Christi∣an doctrine, they professe themselves to be content, to tollerate diversities of ceremonies, according to the divers parctise of their particular Churches. 5 Of the differences and want of unitie in the Roman Church. WHereas our Adversaries boast much upon unitie, and thinke it to be the glorie of their Church, as Coster writeth that the Catholickes in the world are under one Pope, whom they all obey, and constantly retaine one faith, they speake one thing, they thinke one thing, and beleeve one and the same in all things, so that they disagree not in the least point of Religion Yet for all this their want of unitie will appeare, not onely in the want of con∣cord and love one to another, but also in their dif∣ference
in opinions amongst themselves, and more∣over, they in their new doctrines; differ from all the true Catholike Churches of the world, yea, even from holy Scriptures it selfe. Their want of concord and unitie,Schismes. may appeare in their severall schismes, of which there have been 26,In Chrono∣log: as Cardinall Bellarmin reporteth, in which there have beene 2 or 3 Popes at a time, of whom the strongest in Battaile wore the triple crowne: what want of concord was in the Church of Rome, in those times you may guesse; by the Cruell and bloo∣dy battailes, fought onely betweene Pope Vrban the sixt, and Pope Clement, in which many 1000 of Chri∣stians were slaine, the French and others, held with Clement, and our Nation and others with Pope Vrban this scisme continued above 40 yere one residing in Rome and the other in Avignion. This Ʋrban,Platin: in vi∣ta Vrban: after that he had tormented 5 of his Cardinalls, he cut of their heads, and cast them into the River Tiber. Also their want of concord,Bellum pon∣tificium. and unitie, may be seene in the cruell and hatefull warr, betweene the Popes and the Emperors, called Bellum Pontificium; wherein the Popes not onely thundred out their ex∣communications against the Emperors, but also ab∣solved their subiects from their oathes, made unto them: stirring them up against their Princes yea sometime their owne Children, against their natu∣rall Parents, as Henry and Conrade against their
naturall Father, Henry the 4 who was taken against oath given, as he was going to a Dier, and im∣prisoned, where he miserably ended his daies. And after his death, by the Popes command, he was un∣gtaved and kept above ground 5 yeares. Their want of concord and Vnitie, may appeare,Crueltie of one Pope to another. Platin: in vit: horum Pontifie: by the crueltie of one Pope to another, as about the yeare 900. Pope Stephen the 6, abrogated all the de∣crees of his predecessor Pope Formosus, and not con∣tented with that; tooke his dead body out of his grave, and cut of two of his fingers. After him, suc∣ceeded Pope Romanus, who abrogated the decrees of Stephanus, Pope Theodore the 2, and Pope Iohn the 10, who all confirmed Pope Formosus doings. But after them, succeeded Pope Sergius, who not onely dissanulled the former Popes Acts, but also againe, tooke up the body of the said Pope Formosus, & cut of his head, and cast his body into the River Tiber. Their want of Vnity also may appeare, by the bit∣ter contentions betweene the Franciscans and Domi∣nicans,Differences betweene the Dominicans, &c. about the Virgin Mary, whether she was con∣ceived in sinne or no As also by the qnarrells be∣tweene the Dominicans, and Iesuits about grace and freewill. Their want of unitie may appeare,Different o∣pinions. Bish. Halls peace of Rome. in their diffe∣rent opinions: Doct: Hall now Lord Bishop of Exeter in his booke called the peace of Rome, setteth down 300 contradictions, or differences of opinions, main∣teined in the Popish Church set downe by Cardinal
Bellarmine himselfe, And also, 60 differences of opi∣nion amongst their doctors, in the point of confes∣sion, onely set downe by Navarr. Doct:Doct: Willets 4 pillar of Papistrie Willet also setteth downe, the like, with one hundred contradictions in their canons, which are the very synewes, and marrow of Popery. And their differences are not onely amongst pri∣vate men,Differences Nati∣onall. but Nationall, as the French, and Veneti∣ans, differ from other Popish Nations in opinion. For the French,French decree 1611. besides their pragmaticall sancti∣on, by a publique decree, Anno 1611. expelled the Iesuits, except they approved these 4 Articles. 1 That the Pope hath no power to depose Kings. 2 That the Councell is aboue the Pope. 3 That the Clergy ought to be subiect to the civil Magistrat. 4 That consession, ought to be revealed, if it touch the Kings person. Cardinall Bellarmines booke, of the Popes power in temporalls, was condemned in the Parliament of Paris, Ano 1610 and with Marianaes booke, de Rege et Regis institutione, cast into the fiar, by the hands of the hangman. You may see also,Varia tamfaculta tis theologicae et curiae Parisiensis, quam aliorum Theologorum et Iureconsultorum opuscula decreta, et censurae, Item commoncsactiones et postulata Regio∣ru in Gallia the arrest of the Parliament of Paris, against Cardinal Bellarmines booke, in a booke intituled, the workes, and decrees, and censures of the Theologicke faculty, of the Court of Paris, and of other divins & Lawyers, in which the cheife head of the Iesuits faith is overthrowne, to wit, of the Popes power, over Kings, and Princes, and their
subiects, and Principalities,Cognitorum qui∣bus primarium Ie suiticae fides caput de Remani Ponti∣ficis super omnes Reges et Princi∣pes, corumque sub ditos Regna et principatus everti∣tur. and of the lawfull pow∣er of secular Magistrates, over persons Ecclesiasticall. Amongst others, there is a treatise in that booke, called Ius Regum, written by Mr. I: Bedaeus advocate of the Parliament of Paris, against Cardinall Bel∣larmine, and other lesuits; who do extoll the Pope, (as he saith) not onely above all that is called God, in spiritualities, but also in Temporalities. Moreover, the Kingdome of France doth ac∣knowledge the Councell of Constance, assembled by Sigismond the Emperor, with a concurrent consent of other Christian Princes, decreeing a generall Synode, to be superior to the pope, to be a true Councell, and so likewise the Councell of Basill: And affirmeth, that the assembly of Trent, to be no lawfull Councell, and the Canons thereof to be esteemed the Popes decrees, they being made by the Popes Creatures &c. And for the Venetian difference, reade the full sa∣tisfactorie answere; to the late and unadvised Bull, thundred by Pope Paul the fift, against the renow∣ned state of Ʋenice, by father Paul a Frier of the or∣der of Servie. Moreover, their want of Vnity, will appeare in the manifold difference, betweene Pope and Pope,Betweene Pope & Pope. Councell and Councell, contradicting one another.Greg: imagines adorare omnibus modis devita: lib: 9 ep: 2 Zeged: specul pont pag, 36. For the Popes, Gregorie the 1. forbad Image worshi∣pers, Pius the 4 commands it by his bull, Gelaius & Hillary taught against Transubstantiation, Innocent the
3 and Pius the 4 stood for it. Reade doctor Iames his Bellum papale,Bellum pa∣pale. of the difference between Pope Sixtus the 5. and Clement the 8, the one commanding one bible onely to be used, the other another, and no o∣ther, under their curses; In which treatise the author before named, setteth downe the manifold aditions, and contradictions, betweene the two Popes in their bibles, in which one of them must needs err; By which, the Roman Catholickes are involved, into a miserable necessity, either to use no bible at all, or to under goe the Curse of Pope Clement, if they use Six∣tus bible, or of Sixtus, if they used Clements. The like difference, appeareth in their Councells, wherof some forbid Image worship, as the councel of Toledo,Councels. Canon 2. others command it, as the 2 Councell of Nue The Calcedon Conncell condemned Eutiches; the Ephesine approved him, and so it may be said of many others. Moreover, their want of unitie will appeare, in that the Popes of Rome, as Lawgivers, set them down in St. Peters Chaire as they pretend, and made lawes and constitutions, contrary to Gods commande∣ments, and Christs institutions. As Clement the 5 gathered a Councell at Vienna, 1311, in which it was ordeined, that the Emperor should give his oath of Allegiance to the Pope,Roman. 13.1 1 Pet. 2, 13. con∣trary to the written word of God Let every soule be subiect to higher powers: And to the King, as supreme. Also in the Councell at Constance, Anno 1414, the Pope and his Prelates, altered the Testamentall
legacy of Christ himselfe, in taking from the Laitie, the use of the Cup in the Sacrament, the holy Sym∣boll of Christs bloud, which caused many true hear∣ted Christians to tremble, for that their Prelates durst, set their mouthes against heaven, and cor∣rect the ordinance of Christ himselfe, and in that rude manner, that although Christ did administer to his disciples, under the formes of bread and wine &c. Yet they commanded no Priest, to communi∣cate to the people in both kindes, under the paine of excommunication. And last of all, Paul the third, summoned a Coun∣cell at Mantua, after removed to Irent, wherein some few Bishops assembled, being the Popes Creatures,Flaccus Illy∣ricus in prote statione ad∣versus conci∣lium Triden∣tinum. of which holy fathers, some were titular, as Richard Pates Bishop of Worcester, and blind Sr. Robert Bi∣shop of Armagh; and also two of them were taken in Adultery, as Illyricus reporteth, the one stroken with a dart, the other taken in a trap by the hus∣band,Bp. Iuell de∣fence pag. 625. & hanged by the neck out of a window; these helped to make the new articles of faith before men∣tioned, and upon this Councell, the now Roman Church dependeth, Against this assembly,Bellarm. de effect; Sacra∣ment. lib. 2 cap. 25. Francis the French King protested, and held it but for a pri∣vate Conventicle, and divers other Christian Na∣tions, have disavowed the same, Many of the Ca∣nons therein decreed, and established for Articles of faith, are repugnant to the holy Scriptures, as for example they decreed.
That Images may be made to be worshipped contrary to Deut. 27, 15. and to the very second Commandement it selfe. That prayers may be made to the Virgin Mary, and to the Saints departed, contrary to Math. 6.9. & contrary to the practise of the Patriarches, Prophets, and Apostles, and holy men in Scripture. That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be ministred, and received in one kinde, contrary to Christs institution Mat. 26.27. 1 Cor 10.16. They that desire to see more particulars of the popish doctrines,Barnard pag. 18.19.20. contrary to holy Scriptures, let them read Mr. Barnards booke called Looke beyond Luther.Doct: Feild of the Church lib. 5 pag. 114. Frequentur acci∣dit ut quae opinio paucis ab hinc an∣nis usu, non erat modo communi consensione recipi∣atur in Gallia et Germania nonulli scriptores tradide runt Crucem non esse colendam hono re et veneratione atriae sed alio infe viore cultu at in Hispania commu∣ni consensione doce tur Cruci cultum et honorem latriae deferendum Azori mora instit. Tom 1. lib. 2 cap. 13. And moreover, their opinions are different accor∣ding to times, places, as Azorius the Iesuit saith it fals out that that which was the Comon opinion a few yeares since, is not the opinion now, and that which is the common opinion of Papists in one place is not the opinion in another. As for example, it is the comon opinion in Spaine and Italy that Latria, or divine honor is due to the Crosse: which in France and Germany is not so but some inferror kinde of worship is due thereunto, And Navare the Iesuit saith, that at Rome no man may say that the Councell is above the Pope, nor at Paris that the Pope is above the Councell, and thu s much of their want of unity, & difference, between the Romanists.
VI. The Agreement of the antient Roman, East, and South Churches, with us in these points following;Which sent Au∣sten the Monke to us. and especially of Gregorie Bishop of Rome, who is pretended to be the founder of the Roman Religion amongst us, who lived about the yeere 600. (which Tenets are condemned by the now Roman Church) which plainely sheweth the Novel∣tie of the Doctrine of the now Romish Church, and the Antiquitie of ours. 1. The Popes Supremacie. GRegory] I say confidently,The old Ro∣man Church Ego autem siden∣ter dice, quia quisquis se uni∣versalem sacerd∣tem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum pracurrit. lib. 6. Epist. 30. whoso∣ever calleth himselfe, or desires to bee called the universall Bishop, is in the pride of his heart, the fore∣runner of Antichrist. None of my Predecessors, Bishops of Rome,Nullus unquam decessorum mee∣rum hoc tam pro∣fane vocabulo uti concessit. lib. 4. Epist. 36. Distinct. 99. Vni∣versalis autem nee etiam Romanus Pontifex appel∣letur. ever consented to use this so profane a name. Pope Pelagius] Gregories Predecessor decreed that no Bishop, no not the Bishop of Rome him∣selfe, ought to be called universall Bishop.
Saint Chrysostom,The Easterne Church. Distinct. 40. C. multi ex Chrysos. Quicunque desi∣deraverit Prima∣tum in terra, in∣veniet confusio∣nem in coelo, nec inter servos Chri∣sti computabitur, qui de primatu tractaverit. Chrysost. hom. 3. ad Popul Antiochen.  fol. 474. Savil. Patriarch of Constantinople] He that seeketh primacy in earth, in Hea∣ven hee shall finde confusion: and hee that doth but once intreate of primacie, is not wor∣thy to bee numbred amongst the servants of Christ. Our Citie of Antioch is most dearest to Christ above all others, and like as Peter did first preach among the Apostles, so among Cities, this had first of all the name of Christians, as a certaine wonderfull Crowne. Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo in Aphrick,]The South Church. Saint August. de Verb. Domini Ser. 13. Super me aedi∣ficabo te, non me super te. Cyprian in senten∣tijs Concil. Car∣thag. ad Quirinū. On these words: thou art Peter, and on this rocke which thou hast confessed, I will build my Church: I will build thee upon me, and not me upon thee. None of us maketh himselfe a Bishop of Bi∣shops, neither was Peter so arrogant to take things so insolently upon him, as to advance himselfe as primate, and one, unto whom the rest, as novices and punies, should bee sub∣ject.The old Ro∣man Church Greg. moral lib. 19 c. 13. art. 6. de qua re non inordinate agimus, si ex libris licet non canonicis, sed tamen ad adi∣ficationem Eccl. editis, testimoniū proferamus. Ele∣azar namque, &c. 2. Canonicall Scripture. Gregory] Wee doe not amisse, if wee bring forth a testimony out of the bookes not Cano∣nicall,
which though they are not Canonicall, yet are they set forth for the edification and instruction of the Church: for Eleazar, in Ma∣chabes the 6. &c. Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea,] The Maccabees are not received amongst us for divine Scrip∣tures. Saint Hierom] The booke of Wisedome,The Easterne Church. Sapientia quae vulgo Salomonis inscribitur, & Iesu filij Syrach liber, & Iudeth, & To∣bias, & Haster non sunt in Canone Hierom. Tom. 3. praef. in lib. Regū. of Ie∣sus the sonne of Syrach, of Judeth, of Tobyas, and Haestor, are not in the Canon. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria]Athana. in Synopsi. The bookes of the old Testament are. 22. There are others that are not canonicall, as the Wisedome of Sa∣lomon. St. Augustine]De mirabilibus sacra Scripturae. lib. 2. cap. 34. not found in the Canonicall Scriptures, but in the booke of Maccabees. The South Church. 3. The sufficiency of the Scriptures. Gregory] Whatsoever serveth for edification and instruction,The old Ro∣man Church. Greg. in Ezek. lib. 1. hom. 9. In hoc volumine, cunct quae aedificant, om∣nia quae erudiunt, scriptacontinentur. is contained in the volume of the Scriptures. Saint Chrysostom]In opere imperfect. lib. 4.  Chrysost. in 2. Thessal. hom. 3. He commandeth Christi∣an men that will bee assured of true faith, to re∣sort to nothing else but to the Scriptures. A∣gaine hee saith, in holy Scripture all necessary things are plaine, Idem. The Easterne Church.
St.Que pertinent ad veram religionem quaerendam, & tenendam, divina scriptura non ta∣cuit. August. E∣pist. 42. in ijs enim quae aperte in Scripura posita sunt; inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi: de doctr. Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 9. tom. 3. Augustine] All those things that pertaine to the attaining and keeping of true Religion, the holy Scripture hath not concealed. St. Augustine] In these things which are laid downe plainely in Scriptures, all those things are found, which appertaine to faith, and di∣rection of life. 4. Reading of the Scriptures. Gregorie] The Scripture is an Epistle sent from God to his Creature,The old Ro∣man Church Gregor. lib. Epist. 40. ad Theod. me∣dicum. Quid au∣tem est scriptura sacra, nisi quaedam Epistola omnipo∣tentis Dei, &c. that is, to Priest and people; And if thou receive a letter from an earthly King, thou wilt never sleepe, nor rest till thou understand it: The King of Heaven, and God of men and Angels, hath sent his let∣ters to thee, for the good of thy soule, and yet thou neglectest the reading of them: I there∣fore pray thee studie them, and daily meditate of the word of thy Creator, and learne the heart and minde of God in the words of God. St. Chrysostom] The Easterne Church.Epistol. ad Coll. hom. 9. Heare you Lay people, get you Bibles, the Physicke of your soules. St. Augustine]South Ch.Sermo. 112 feria sexta post dom. passionis. Lectio assidua purificat omnia. Daily reading purifieth all things. 5. Concerning Transubstantiation. Gregorie]The old Ro∣man Church Greg. in 6. Psal. paenitent. Quis ex∣poenere queat quā∣tae fuerit misera∣tionis, sacratissima pretiosi sanguinis effusione genus humanum redi∣mere, & sacro∣sanctum vivifici corporis, & san∣guinis sui myste∣rium membris suis tribuere, cujus perceptione corpus suum, quod est Ecclefia, passci∣tur, & pouitur, abluitur, & sanctificatur. Christ with the effusion of his most
precious blood redeemed mankind, and giveth unto his members the most holy mysteries of his quickning body and blood, by the partici∣pation whereof, his body, which is the Church, is nourished with meate and drinke, and is washed and sanctified. St. Chrysostome] If any man taketh it fleshly,The Easterne Church. In Iohan. homil. 46. it profiteth nothing. Idem:In opere imper∣fecto in Mat. pag. 810. Bas. in quibus non est verum cor∣pus Christi, sed mysterium corporis Christicomiretur. In the holy vessels the true body of Christ is not contained, but the mysterie of his body. St. Augustine] The South Church. Cont. Adimant. cap. 12. Non enim Dominus dubitavit dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret coporis sui. Ad quid paras dentes & ventrem? crede, & manducasti. super Ioan. tract. 25. Tom. 9. Christ spake these words, This is my body, when hee gave the signe of his bodie. Jdem: Why dost thou provide thy teeth and thy belly? beleeve, and thou hast eaten. 6. Private Masse. Gregorie] Let not the Priest alone celebrate Masse;The old Ro∣man Church In lib. Capitulari. cap. 7. apud Cas∣sand. liturg. cap. 33. pag. 83. sac dos missam solus neqnaquam cele∣bret; quia sicut illa celebrari non potest sine salutatione sacerdotis, & responsione nibilominus plebis, it a nimirum nequaquam ab une debet celebrari: esse enim debent, qui ei circum∣stent, ques ille salutet, a quibus es respondeatur, &c. for as hee cannot performe it without the presence of the Priest and people; so like∣wise it ought not to bee performed by one a∣lone for their ought to bee present, some to
whom hee ought to speake, and who in like manner ought to answer him. Chrysostome] Neither doe we receive more,The East: Church. 2. Thess. cap. 2. Homil. 4. De sacrificio mis∣sae contra Muscuū apnd Cassand. li∣turo. cap. 35. pag. 86. Oim omnes tum sacerdetes, tum ici quicunque intererant sacrificio missae, peracta oblatione cum sacrifieante communicabant, &c. Definivit sanctū concilium, ut nul∣lus presbyter prae∣sumat solus mis∣sam cantare. apud Cassand. pag. 83. or you lesse of the holy table, but tast thereof e∣qually together. Cochleus] Antiently, all the Priests, and people did communicate together. Concilium Nanetense] The holy Councell hath decreed, that no Priest should presume to celebrate alone. 7. Communion in both kindes. Gregorie] You have learned what the blood of the Lambe is,The old Ro∣man Church Tom. 2. Hom. 22. in Ewang. Quid namque sit sanguis Agni, non audi∣endo sed bibendo didicistis, &c. Dial. lib. 4. cap. 58. Ejus sanguis non jam in manns infidelium, sed in or a fidelium funditur. De conse. dist. 2. c. Comperimus, quod divisio unius, ejus∣demque mysterij sine grandi sacri∣legio nequeat pro∣venire. apud. Cassand. pag. 1020.  not by hearing, but by drink∣ing. Againe, the blood of Christ is not powred into the hands of unbeleevers, but into the mouthes of the faithfull people. Pope Gelasius] Decreed to communicate in both kindes, because the division of the one mysterie from the other, could not bee done without great Sacriledge.
Saint Chrysostome] In some cases,2. Corinth. Ho. 18. Tom. 3. Edit. Savilij. pag. 647.  there is no difference betweene Priest and people, as when they must enjoy the Reverend Mysteries. A∣gaine, But one Body, & one Cup is given to all. Cassander] It is sufficiently manifest,Consult. de utra{que} specie. pag. 1025. Eccle. orientalis in hunc us{que} diem, occidentalis verò, five Romana mille amplius annis continuis, non ali∣liter quam sub du∣plicispecie in con∣ventu Ecclesiae sacramentum hoc Dominici corporis & sanguinis administrasse legitur, &c. that the universall Church to this day, and the We∣sterne or Roman Church, for more then a thousand yeeres, did exhibit the Sacrament in both kindes, to all the members of Christs Church. 8. Merit of Workes. Gregorie] There are some which glorie that they are saved by their owne strength,The old Ro∣man Church In 28. Iob. lib. 18. cap. 25. sunt non∣nulli, qui salvos se suis viribus exul∣tant, suis{que} prce∣dentibus meritis redemptos esse glo∣riantur, quorum assertio invenitur sibimet ipsis contraria: quia dum & innoce se asserunt, & re∣demptes, hoc ipsum in se redemptionis nomen evacnant. & brag that they are redeemed by their owne prece∣dent merits, but herein they contradict them∣selves, & whilest that they affirme that they are innocent, and yet redeemed, they frustrate the name of Redemption in themselves. Chrysostom] Although we die a thousand times,Chrys. de Com∣punct. cordis lib. 2.  and if wee fulfill all the vertues of the minde, yet wee doe nothing worthie to those things which we have received of God.
Saint Augustine] God Crowneth in us the gifts of his mercy.In Ioh. tract. 13. Tom. 9. Coroat in nobis Deus dona mise∣ricordiae suae. The old Ro∣man Church Adorare ima∣gines omnibus mo∣dis devita. lib. 9 epist. 9. 9. Worshipping of Images. Gregory] The Adoration of them avoid by all meanes. The ancient Greeke Church long withstood Images, which was a principall cause of the di∣vision of the Empire, The Popes excommuni∣cating, Leo, Constantine, and others of the Greeke Emperors, who were against Images; and the weakenesse of the Christians divided, was a great cause of the Mahumetan con∣quests, and greatnesse: To the Iewes and Mahu∣metans, the worship of images is abominable. And wheras the Turkes know much of Christ,Postel. Compend. Cosmograp. p. 76. as that hee was borne of the Virgin Mary, conceived by the Holy Ghost, received by the Christians, being the Christ promised in the Iewes Law, who is in heaven, in body & soule; and that he shall come to judge the quicke and the dead, with just judgement: yet the image∣worship used by some Christians, is so offensive to them, that it may bee supposed to bee a hin∣drance of their conversion.The South Church. De morib. Eccle. lib. 1. cap. 34. Augustine] I know certaine worshippers of Tombes, whom the Church condemneth. Thus as you have seene the agreement of the Moderne Churches beforenamed with us, as
also of the old antient Roman, East & South Churches in the points before named, which doctrines then taught by Saint Gregory, Saint Aue, Saint Chrysostome and others, are not now owned by the Roman Church; but by them disallowed and anathematized. VII. The Religion of the Antient Britaines, and the differences from their now Roman Church. THe Ancient writers testifie, that most of the points before named, were the Tenets of the Britains, both before and also af∣ter the comming of Austen, for although the the Romanists pretend, that at the comming of Austen, Christianity was lost amongst us; yet Historiographers witnesse the contra∣rie,Bed. Eccle. hister. lib. 2. cap. 2. as Beda testifieth, that at the com∣ming of the said Austen, which was about the yeere 600. there were here 7. Bishops, one Archbishop, and above 2000. Monkes of Ban∣gor, and many learned men: And also the Queene was then a Christian: and that Chri∣stianitie was amongst us before,Bishop Iewell Defen. pag. 11. Bishop Iewell proveth out of Saint Chrysostome, who lived a∣bout the yeere 400. and Saint Hillarie, who li∣ved about the yere 360. And Origen, who lived about the yeere 240. And Tertullian, who lived
about the yeere 230.Haec epistola com∣muniter habetur inter leges divi Edvardi. Antiq. Britan. pag. 5. in margine. And this will also appeare by the letter of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome to our King Lucius then a Christian: and as the in∣habitants were Christians as before, so the an∣tient writers testifie, that they were them diffe∣ring from the now Romish Religion in their new Articles. For the sufficiency of Scriptures,Tantum ea quae in Propheticis, Evā∣gelicis & Aposto∣licis literis discere poterant, obser∣vantes. Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 4. Omnes aut legen∣dis Scripturis aut psalmis discendis operam dare. Bed. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 5. Beda re∣cordes the Successors of Columkelle, that they observed onely those things which they could learne in the Propheticall, Evangelicall, and A∣postolicall writings. They had them also in their owne lan∣guage, and Beda reporteth amongst others of a translation made by the appointment of King Adelstan: The Clergie and Laitie were bound to read the holy Sciptures, and they ac∣counted them their chiefe riches, according to that of Columbanus. Sint tibi Divitiae divinae dogmata legis. Beda also commendeth Altfrid the King for a most learned man in the Scriptures,Alfrit vir in scrip∣turis doctissimus. lib. 4. cap. 26. and also their service was in their owne language, as Bi∣shop Iewell proveth in his replie.Bishop Iewell. pag. 142. For the Doctrine of Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the same was taught then which wee teach now.Hom. in die sanctae. pascae. pag. 17. As you may see in the Homilie of Elfrick ap∣proved
by divers Bishops in their Synods,This booke is sub∣scribed by the two Archbishops of Canterbury and of Yorke, and 13. other Bishops. and appointed to be read upon Easterday, before the receiving of the Communion: who saith; There is a great difference betwixt the bodie wherein Christ suffered, and the body which is hal∣lowed housell. The body truely that Christ suffered in, It was borne of the flesh of Mary, with blood, with bone, with skin, and with sinne wes, in humane limmes, with a reasonable soule living. And his Ghostly bo∣die which wee call the housell, is gathered of many cornes without blood and bone, without lymbe, with∣out soule, and therefore there is nothing to be under∣stood bodily,Beda in vita Cut∣berti. cap. 15. pag. 163. Vt mittas Presbyterum qui illam priusquam moriatur visitet, ique Dominici corporis & sangu∣inis Sacramenta ministret. Antoninus archi. Florent cronic. 2. par. pag. 623. Northmanni au∣tem confessioni pec∣catorum vacantes mane Dominico corpore & sangui∣ne communicave∣runt. Mat. Paris in Harald. Nor∣mani mane Domi∣nici corporis & sanguinis munimi∣ne saginati, &c. pag. 3. but it is ghostly (or spiritually to bee un∣der stood.) And this Doctrine also Scotus our Country∣man did teach, for the Communion in both kindes: Beda also reporteth in the life of Cuth∣bert, that one Hildmar an officer of Egfrid King of Northumberland, intreated Cuthbert to send a Priest that might minister the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood unto his wife that then lay adying. Antoninus Archbishop of Florence writeth that William the Conqueror and his whole Armie received the Communion in both kindes; And Mathew Paris saith the same, to wit the Normans the morning before they fought with Harald, strengthened themselves with the body and blood of Christ.
For the marriage of Priests, it was accounted as lawfull then as now. Anselme was the first that made a decree a∣gainst Priests marriage in this Kingdome,Hon. Hunting. lib. 7. pag. 378. An∣selmus prohibuit uxores sacerdoti∣bus Anglorum an∣te non prohibitas. as Henry of Huntington reporteth: Anselme, saith he, held a Synode in London, in which he fore∣fended Priests to have wives, which they were not inhibited before to have, which was about the yeere 1104. It seemeth that the Priests kept their wives af∣ter Anselmes time by the Decree made by the Cardinall of Cremen in the yeere 1131. against Priests marriage; who having in a long oration commended Chastitie, and in a Synod in Lon∣don made a Decree against the marriage of Priests, was himselfe that night found in bed with a whore, as Mathew of Paris reporteth, to the no little shame of the Clergie. What Anselme or the Cardinall did against Priests marriage, proceeded from the Pope Gregorie the seventh, who under the colour of Chastitie forbad mar∣riage. His Bull is to be seene against Priests ma∣riage, which the Germans and French resisted: what a holy man this Gregory was appeareth by the sentences of the Councell of Wormes and Brixia, in which the said Gregory was, deposed for his perjurie, for necromancy, for beeing a Conjurer, and many other crimes.Ord Baptizandi & visitandi. For Merit, reade a booke set foorth by An∣selme
Archbishop of Canterbury to be used in his province, called the order of Baptizing and vi∣siting the sicke, in which are these words; Dost thou beleeve that none can bee saved by his owne me∣rits, but by the merits of Christs passion (to which the sicke partie was taught to make answer,) all this I be∣leeve: And the Priest concluded, Goe to there∣fore, as long as thy soule remaineth in thee, place thy whole confidence in his death onely, &c. And for the Supremacy, what did King Hen∣ry the eighth assume more then Bishop Eleuthe∣rius gave to Lucius our King, and that the anti∣ent Kings of the Britans assumed to them∣selves. Of these points and others, you may reade more in the most learned discourse of the Religion antiently professed by the Irish and British, written by the most reverend Father in God Iames Vsher Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland. And thus you may see how King Henry the eight, or King Edward brought in no new Religion amongst us, but restored the old ancient Religion suppressed for some yeeres by the Church of Rome. By this it manifestly appeareth, that most of the Doctrines before named, now taught and urged for Catholike in the Roman Church, were neither the Doctrines of the other Christi∣ans in Europe, Asia, and Africa, nor the anti∣ent Roman, Easterne, Southerne Churches, nor of
Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome, who sent Au∣sten hither, nor of the antient Britaines our forefathers. And whereas inquirie is made for the visibi∣litie of our Church, or for any one professing our Religion before Luther, heere you may see the whole true Catholike Church of God, upon the face of the Earth; of the which these Chur∣ches are members professing the same faith with us. For which common Vnion, we have greate cause to rejoyce,Hieremie. as the Greeke Patriarch having seene the Tenets of some of the reformed Churches, congratulateth with them after this manner: Wee give thankes to God, the Author of all grace; and wee rejoyce with many others, espe∣cially in this, that in many things your Doctrine is a∣greeable to our Church. So let us thanke God for the holy harmony and agreement of these Churches with us in the point before mentio∣ned, in controversie betweene the Roman Church and us; and let us endeavour to keepe the uni∣tie of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
VIII. Of the Devotion and pietie of these Churches. BRochardus the Monke telleth us,Brochard Monac. that he found the Nestorians, Jacobites, Maronites, and Georgians, and such others, whom they judge to bee he∣retickes, to bee for the most part, honest and simple men, living sincerely towards God and man, men of great abstinency, attentively hea∣ring the word of God. And that the Armenians and Georgians have for their Prelats, men of the best conversation, going before them, aad teaching them, as by word, so also by example.Devotion. Godignus de A∣bass. rebus p. 133. In oratione fre∣quentanda non fa∣cile similes repe∣riri censeo, omni namque diluculo cuncti corum toto corpore in pulve∣rem ipsū prostra∣ti orationes ad Deum fundunt. Faber in Relig. Moscovit. p. 180. These Christians use great reverence in their Churches, no man is allowed to walke, talke, or sitt in them; the old and weake may leane a∣gainst the walls: Godignus reporteth that the Aethiopians doe allow the old & weake, crutches to sustaine them withall as before; and Faber reports of the Russes, that hee hath not seene of them the like, for their frequenting prayers and devotion in their prayers, which, lying prostrate on the ground, they poure out unto God:
They touch not the holy Scriptures, but with great reverence, and place the Bible in their houses in the most honorable place. The Greekes much blame the Latines for their unreverent sitting in their Churches, and suffering Lay men with Bootes and Spurres to sit by the Priests at time of Divine Service, and also for not keeping dogges out of their Chur∣ches, as before. Of these Churches I may say, although wee thinke them not to be so learned as we are (they wanting the meanes that we have) yet they are more devout. For their Fasts,Their Fasts. these Christians tast nothing at all till Sun sett: The Aethiopians doe so mace∣rate themselves in their Lent-fasts (which they begin tenne dayes before ours) that their ene∣mies commonly set upon them at the end of their Fasts, hoping then to finde them feeble and weake: in their Fasts, especially upon good-friday, beside their great abstinence, they goe like mutes, not saluting one another, with their countenances dejected. The Greekes also blame the Latines for drinking in their Fasts,Irineus Rdginus pag. 15. and that some of them are drunke before their fasts are ended, and that when their fasts are ended, generally they eate and fill their bellies plentifully. For their obedience to Princes,Obedience to Princes. their Patri∣arches
and Bishops, although they are subject to many greivous pressures, yet they submitt themselves to their Kings and Princes that God hath placed over them, according to that of Lactantius Religion is to bee defended, not by killing, but by dying; not by crueltie, but by patience; not by wickednes, but by faith, &c. For their Chastitie, among the Russes, adulte∣rie is severely punished, and the Aethiopians pu∣nish all fornication and lust, and none of the Patriarches of these Churches allow brothel∣houses or Stewes that I reade of. Whereas the Pope of Rome, howsoever they pretend Chastity, yet they onely of all Christi∣ans Patriarches allow stewes, & brothelhouses; where a father,Sixtus pontiex maximus Romae nobile admodun∣lupanar extruxi Agrippa de van tae scientiarum cap. 64. Atque utrique sexui assignavit Zeg. spec. ponti. pag. 79. Dici nequit qua incredibili Chri∣stianorum tum p∣dore, tum etiam orum qui vere tales sunt, cordo∣lio, ut Iudae filiae scortari non licea Dei filiae liceat. his sonne and his brother may commit uncleannesse with one whore; yea Sixtus the fourth built a famous Stewes in Rome for both Sexes. This wickednes is not un∣punished among the Iewes themselves. Bishop Espensous reporteth to the great shame of (Ro∣man) Christians, of a Iew maide, who renoun∣ced her Religion, and turned (Romish) Christi∣ans, that she might freely exercise the art of Ri∣bandie not permitted by herown Religion; his words are, It cannot bee spoken, but with incredible shame of Christians, & with the great heart griese of them that are the like; that it is not lawfull for a daughter of Judah to commit fornication, but law∣full
for the daughter of God:Imo Israe is filia meretricari non a∣liter ante possit, quam facta per Baptismū sanctū Christi soror, & filia. yea the daughter of Jsrael may not otherwise play the whore, before shee bee made by holy baptisme sister and daughter of Christ, &c. Moreover, he writeth that we cannot but be offended to see so many Stewes in one Citie; and that it may be almost said of Rome Christian as of Rome Ethnick, that the whole Citie is one stewes. Againe, these Patriarches and Bishops sell no pardons to deliver soules out of Purgatorie, nor allow the sale of any Sacrament, that I reade; wheras the Roman Church maketh infinite gaine of their Masses,Romana scorta in singulas hebdema∣das juliū poudent Pontifici, Agrip∣pa loco citat. Zeg, loco. Citat. Taxa Cancell. Apostolicae. Pa∣risiis. 1613. Pardons, and Dispensations; yea the Popes themselves have a rent out of the brothell houses, every whore paying weekely a Iulie to his holines, which rent is more some yeeres then 40000. Duckets. In the booke of taxes of the Apostolike Chancerie and sacred penitentiaries, you may see the prises and rates of all dispensations and absolutions, as for mur∣thers of all kindes, as of Clergie men, Lay men, of Father, Mother, Sonne, Brother, Sister, Wife, &c. For impoisoning, inchantment, witchcraft, sacriledge, simony, &c. for fornica∣tion, adultery, incest, without any exceptiō or distinction, &c. Also for dispensations for oathes, vowes, and many things more, although there be many sinnes raigning amongst these
Christians and us; yet they are not allowed by them and us, and so they are not the sinnes of the Churches, as fornication is one of the sinnes of the Roman Church, as before. To put an end to this: some of their sinnes are not only personall, but Cathedrall, from whence they seeme to have a liberty of sinning (to use their own distinctiō) their veniall sins are easily done away with a short shrift; & as for mortal sins, a man may have for money a warrant dor∣mant,Anton. sum. par. 3 tit. 1. cap. 11. Crantzius. saxon. lib. 5. cap. 8. Quid enim hodie per dispensationem Apostolicam non obtinetur? Quinta causa dissidij Graecorum credipotest species austerioris vitae quaein eorum Hi∣ere monachis, Me∣tropolitis, Archie∣piscopis at que episcopis frequen∣ter cernitur. Haec igitur austerioris vitae ratio Latines contemnendi prae∣buit occasionem, &c. Tho. a Iesis. de convers. p. 284. or dispensation to commit sinnes against nature, as to marie his Aunt, his brothers wife, his neece, & his own daughter: for which Pope Martin the fift gave a dispensation, as Antonius reporteth: and what (saith Crantzius their own writer) cannot be gotten by dispensation? To conclude, Thomas the Iesuite confesseth, that the fift cause of difference betweene the Greekes and Latins, may bee thought to be the shew of a more austere life, which is often seene in their holy Monkes, Metropolites, Archbi∣shops, and Bishops: this their more austere life causeth the Greeks to contemne the Latins, &c. But the Greekes are to know that Christian righteousnes doth not consist chiefly in mace∣rating the body, but in Charity, Faith, & Hope, Humility, and Patience, and other vertues. WHereas there is come to my hands a booke of Possevins the Iesuit written against Chytraeus, in which he challengeth these
Churches for agreeing with them; In pray∣ing for the Dead, invocating Saints, worship∣ping Images, having of Monkes, &c. I answer, that I finde these Churches in these things also to differ from the Papists. 1. As in praying for the dead, they pray not to deliver Soules out of Purgatorie, nor from any temporall punishment, as the Papists do, but for their generall resurrectiō,Field of the Ch. pag. 59. publicke acquital, &c. 2. For their invocating of Saints, some doe it not at all,pag. 109. of this booke. as the Aethiopians, as before, but I will not justifie all these Churches in their invoca∣tions. 3. For Imageworship,Nullas habent sanctorum imagi∣nes. Iosephus Indus cap. 133. some have none at all, as the Indians, others have Pictures onely, to which they give no undue reverence as the Aethiopians, yet will I not justifie some of them in this point. 4. For their Monks,Singuli pro sui Monasterij oecone∣mia sustinenda laborant, alij vine∣as fodientes, &c. Bellon. obser. lib. 1. cap. 35. they are not idle bellygods, or beggers, but live on their labour as before. For other things mentioned, the Iesuit hath a streame of witnesses against him. And last of all, if these Churches agree with the Roman Church, why doe most of them ex∣cōmunicate the Pope and his clergie as before And more especially, to shew their disagree∣ment with the Aethiopian Church,Godign. de Abass. rebus. pag. 225. the Bishop of Sydonia gave new orders to Tecla Maria an Ae∣thiopian Priest in the Chapell of the Cardinall of Saint Severin by the cōmandement of the Pope and advice of the Cardinals.
Of the Antiquitie. CHAP. IIII. WHereas the Church of Rome boasteth of her Antiquity, I purpose to set downe in this Chapter, three things. 1. That some of these Churches, are Churches more ancient then the Church of Rome, and that the ancient Church of Rome received Christianitie from them, or some of them. 2. That the now Church of Rome, and the ancient before Boniface the third, are not one and the same Church, but different. 3. As the now Church of Rome is a new Church, and a different from the old, so it hath new, and different Articles and doctrines of Faith, unknowne to the old Church, and not to be found for such, in the writings of any of the ancient Fathers, for five hundred yeeres after Christ. FOr the first, The Church of Hierusalem is more ancient then the Church of Rome;Hierusalem: where our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ him∣selfe preached, and offered himselfe a Sa∣crifice for our sinnes, and where the Apostles,
and Disciples first preached: for although they were sent to preach to all Nations, yet they preached first to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel, according to Christs Commandement. This Church is most ancient; St Iames was the first Bishop there The Law went out of Si∣on,Matth. 10.6. & the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. This Ci∣tie was Emporium,Isay 2.3. , &c. Histor. Eccles. Lib. 5. cap 9. the Mart of Christian faith, & the mother of all Churches, as Theodoret saith. 2.2. Antioch. Acts. 11.26. The Church of Antioch in Syria, where the Disciples were first called Christians; Of this Church Saint Peter was Bishop some yeres before he went to Rome; ad populum An∣tioch. homil. 3. and this Church is al∣so more ancient then the Church of Rome: Saint Chrysostome calleth this Church the Head of all the world. 3. The Greeke Church was planted by Saint Paul,3. Graecians. and Saint Andrew, from whence, and the fore named Churches, the name of Christ flowed,Eia igitur Graecia mater nostra, cui id totum debet quod habet Latina Ecclesia. Conc. Trid. orat. Episc. Bitont. as from a spring, over all the world; and the faith was spread in all places; and this the Bishop of Bitonto acknowledged in the Coun∣cell of Trent. It is our mother Graecia to whom the Latine Church is beholding for that which she hath: the Easterne Church was before the Church of Rome in Time, and from thence the Church of Rome hath received Christianitie, the new Testament, the three Creedes, the very name of Baptisme, Eucharist, Bishop, Priest, and Deacon. 4.4. Aethiopia. Aethiopia received Christianitie from the
Eunuch of Queene Candases,Huic Philippus, responsis Sancti Spiritus jussus primò ex omnibus Gentibus mysteri∣um fidei & sacra∣mentum Baptismi tradidit, & velut quasdam eum Dee primitias omnium consecrat nationū. Eusch. Eccles. histor. lib. 2. cap. 1. to whom (as Eu∣sebius reporteth) first of all the Gentiles, Philip (by the command of the holy Ghost) delivered the mysterie of Faith, and the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme, and consecrated him to God, as the first Fruits of all nations. Saint Matthew also prea∣ched to the Aethiopians. 5. For the Antiquity of the Church of Rome, both St Hierom and Eusebius testifie, that St Peter came to Rome in the raigne of Claudius the Em∣perour,5. Rome. Hierom Catalog. Eccles. script. pag. 265. Euseb. Eccles. his. lib. 2. c. 14.16. and in his second yeere saith Hierom. 6. The Church of England received Chri∣stianitie (as some say,) from Joseph of Arimathea; others from Simon Zelotes the Apostle:6. England. Guildas Sapiens de excidio Britan. Christus suos ra∣dios (id efl) sua∣praecepta indulget tempore, ut scimus sūmo Tiberij Cae∣saris, quo absque ullo impedimento eius propagabatur religio. Bibli. vet: Pat. tem. 5. par. 3. pag. 675. Britannia omniū provinciarum pri∣ma publicitus Christi nomen recepit Sabel. in Ennead. 7. lib. 5. Guildas reporteth that our Island received Christianitie in the time of Tiberius Caesar, who dyed in the yeere of our Lord 39. which if it bee so, the Church of England received Christianitie be∣fore the Church of Rome, some yeeres before Peter came to Rome; which was in the time of Claudius, who succeeded Tiberius. And for the Honour of my Mother Church, I speake, that Christianity was first publickly professed by authority in this Kingdome, about 130. yeeres before it was in Rome; Lucius our King beeing (as I reade) the first Christran King in Europe, who reigned about the yeere of our Lord, 170. And moreover, Constantine the Christian Empe∣rour was borne amongst us, who gave the first publique libertie of Religion to the Roman
Church. So that Rome was beholding for the publique liberty of Religion to Constantine Our country man.Speedes histerie. pag. 207. Also the inhabitants of Britaine as I reade were instructers unto others, as frō hence was Netherland converted to Christianitie, as te∣stifieth the storie of Swithbertus: Burgundie by our Columbanus, saith Sigebert: Swedia by Gallus, as saith Petrus de Natalibus: and Frisia by Wilfred, as it is recorded by Beda, and Matthew of West∣minster: The Franconians, Hassians, and Turingi∣ans by Winifred our Devonshire man. The Nor∣vegians by Nicolas Breakespere of Middlesex. And the Lituanians by Thomas Walden of Essex, and all the reformed Churches in Christendome de∣rived their light from the learned Wickleffe of Oxford. In regard of this, Polidor Ʋirgil doth rightly call England the Parent or Mother-Mo¦nasterie of all Europe. And Peter Ramus termeth Britaine to be twice Schoolemistris to the King∣dome of France:Terra Britanniae ante adventum Christi unius Dei consensit religio∣nem. hom. 4. in Ezech. moreover Origen writeth, that the Britaines received the religion of one God, before the comming of Christ. Secondly, whereas the Church of Rome boa∣steth of Antiquity, The Church of Rome since Boniface the 3 and the old Church of Rome plan∣ted by St Peter, & St Paul, are not one, and the same, but are farre different. The old Church of Rome as St Paul telleth us, was a branch of that Tree whereof Christ Iesus was the root: The now Church of Rome will bee no branch, but the roote it selfe.
The ancient Church of Rome was but a member of the Catholique Church of God, of which Iesus Christ was Head: But the now Church of Rome is the Catholique Church it selfe, of which the Pope is head; and such a Church was never in Rome for 600. yeares after Christ: for so long no Bishop of Rome durst pre∣sume to take upon him Christs title, to be head of his Church, & husband of his spouse, till Boni∣face the third; & with him began this Church. Thirdly, And as they have a new Church, so they have a new Creede, and Articles of Do∣ctrine: as for example sake. 1. That the Pope, the head of the Church, cannot erre in the matter of faith. 2. That all Ecclesiasticall power dependeth upon the Pope. 3. That he hath power to canonize Saints. 4. That he hath power to depose Kings. 5. That the Popes pardons are requisite or usefull to release soules out of Purgatorie. 6. That there is a treasurie of Saints merits, and superabundant satisfactions, at the Popes disposing 7. That the Priest can make his Maker. 8. That the sacred Host made by the Priest, ought to bee elevated, and carried in solemne procession, and adored. 9. That the effects of the Sacrament depen∣deth upon the intention of the Priest.
10. That Infidels and impious persons, yea ratts and mise, may eate the body of Christ. 11. That the Laiety are not bound by Christs institution to receive the Communion in both kindes. 12. That private Maffes, wherin the Priest saith Eat & drink ye all of this, & yet eateth & drinketh himselfe only, is according to Christs institutiō. 13. That extreme Vnction is a Sacrament properly so called. 14. That the publique service of God in the Church, ought or may be celebrated in an un∣knowne tongue. 15. That wee may worship God by an I∣mage, &c. These and other new Tenets and Doctrines defide, of the now Church of Rome, cannot be shewed to bee the Doctrines of faith of the old ancient Church of Rome. To conclude this point, as there is Antiquity of Time, so also of Truth and Doctrine: for a people to receive Christianity, & the true faith from the Apostles, or Christ himselfe, profiteth nothing, except they doe still retaine the said Faith & Doctrine, as our Lord told the Pharises boasting of antiquity, that they had Abraham to their Father: That they were of their father the de∣vill, not doing Abrahams workes. So it may be said of them,Iohn 8. that boast only of Antiquity of Time, without Antiquity of Truth & Doctrine.
The succession of Bishops. CHAP. V. WHereas inquirie is made but for one Bishop of our Religion before Cranmer, although wee neede no witnesses, having our blessed Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, the great Bishop of our Soules, and the twelve Apostles, with Saint Paul, Saint Iohn Baptist, St Marke, and St Luke for our Bishops & Doctors, teach∣ing the truth professed by us, yet I have set downe a fuccession of Bishops in some of the Patriarchall Churches, as of Hierusalem, Anti∣och, Alexandria Constantinople, and also of Rome, for the first 600 yeeres amongst whom you may finde, very many noble witnesses. Hierusalem. St. Iames. Simeon Cleophas Iustus a Iew Zacheus Tobias Benjamin Iohn Matthias Philip Sennecas Iustus the second Levi Ephrem Ioseph Iudas Marcus Cassianus Publius Maximus Iulianus. Caius Symachus Caius the 2. Iulianus the 2. Capito Maximus Antoninus Valens Dolychiauus
Narcissus Dios Germanon Gordius Narcissus and Alexander Mazabanes Hyminaeus Zambdas Hermon Macarius Maximus Cyrillus Herenius Heraclius Hilarius Cyrillus Iohn Nepos Prayllius Invenalis Polycbronius Theodosius Anastasius Martyrius Salustius Helias Petrus Macarius Eustochius Iohn, &c. Antioch. St Peter Euodius Ignatius Heros Cornelius Theophilus Maximinus Serapion Asclepiades Philetus Zebinus Babylas Fabius Demetrianus Paulus Samosate∣nus Domnus Timaeus Ciryllus Dorotheus Tyrannus Vitalis Philogonus Eustathius Eulalius Euphonins Placitus Steven Leontius Eudoxius Anianus Meletius Euzojus Dorotheus Paulinus Evagrius Dorotheus Meletius Flavianus Porphyrius Alexander Theodotus Iohn Domnus Maximus Martyrius Iulianus Basilius Peter Gnapheus Stephen Calandio Peter Gnapheus Paladius Flauianus Severus Paulus Euphremius Domninus Anastatius Gregorius, &c.
Alexandria. St. Marke. Anianus Abilius Cerdo Primus Iustus Eumenes Marcus Celadion Agrippas Iulianus Demetrius Heraclas Dionysius Maximinus Theonas Peter Achillas Alexander Athanasius Gregorie Peter Timothie Theophilus Cyrillus Dioscorus Proterius Timotheus Aelurus Timotheus Basilicus Peter Athanasius Iohn Theodosius Zoilus Appollinarius Iohn Eulogius. Rome. St. Peter. Linus Clemens Cletus Anacletus Euarestus Alexander yxtus Telesphorus Hyginus Pius Anicetus Soter Eleutherius Victor Zepherinus Calistus Vrbanus Pontianus Anterus Fabianus Cornelius Lucius Steven Xystus Dionysius Felix Eutychianus Caius Marcellinus Marcellus Eusebius Miltiades Silvester Marcus Iulius Liberius Felix Demasdele Siricius Anastasius Innocentius Zosimus Bonifacius Celestinus Sixtus Leo Hilarius Simplicius Felix
Gelasius Anastasius Symachus Hormisda Iohn Boniface Agapetus Silverius Vigilius Pelagius Iohn Benedict Pelagius Gregorie the great. &c. Constantinople. St Andrew. Stachis Onesimus Polycarpus Plutarchus Sedecion Diogenes Elutherius Felix Polycarpus Athenodorus Euzoius Laurentius Alippius Pertinax Olympianus Marcus Cyrillianus Constantius Ciriacus Castinus Titus Domitius Metrophanes Probus Alexander, &c. AS there is a Succession of Bishops in the Patriarchall Churches before-named, so generally of the Metro∣politans and Bishops, kept in the Registers, as is reported. Titus was the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians,Tit. cap. 3. placed there by St Paul; hee was not a Parson,Tit. cap. 1.15.5. or Minister of one Parish, but Bi∣shop of the whole Isle, called Hecatompolis, of one hundred Cities; placed, as aforesaid, by St Paul, to ordaine Elders in every City;Mirae. lib. 4. pa. 181. de notitia episcop. Miraeus re∣porteth, that there are in the Isle of Crete, one Archbishop, and seven Bishops.
Of Ephesus, Timothie was the first Bishop,2 Tim. 4. in fin. placed there also by St Paul; Caius succeeded him, and many other famous men, as Marke, so famous in the last Florentine Councell. Of Thessalonica, Silvanus was the first Bishop,Theatrum con∣vers. gentium an∣thor. frat. Arnol. Iohn Merman. pag. 42. Chryt. de statu. Eccles. pag. 159. Idemibidem. placed there also by St Paul; I heare that Atha∣nasius is now Metropolitan thereof; and I read ten Bishopricks to be under that See. In Corinth, Silas was also placed by St Paul: The Metropolitane of Corinth hath foure Bishops under him. Of Caesarea, Apollo, was the first Bishop.Idem. pag. 44. & 45. Of Sardis, Clemens, the first Fruits of Achaia, or Convert of the Gentiles. Of Nicomedia, Procorus the Deacon. In Nice, St Andrew placed Calistus. In Iconium, Tertius was first. In Smyrna, Polycarpus. In Thebes, Rusus. In Philpipi, Hermas. And so I might name some others: But to shew the Greatnesse of some of these Churches, I will set downe a Catalogue of some of their Metropolites.
Of the Metropolites and Archbi∣shoprickes which are, or have been belonging to the Patriarch of Constantinople. Metropoles. 1 Caesarea 2 Ephesus 3 Heraclea 4 Ancyra 5 Cyzicus 6 Sardes 7 Nicomedia 8 Nicaea 9 Calcedon 10 Sida 11 Sebastea 12 Amasea 13 Melitene 14 Tyana 15 Gangra 16 Thessalonica 17 Claudiopolis 18 Neocaesarea. 19 Pissinas 20 Mira 21 Caria 22 Laodicea 23 Synada 24 Iconium 25 Antiochia 26 Sylaeum 27 Corinthus 28 Athenae 29 Mocissus 30 Seleucia 31 Calauria 32 Patrae 33 Trapezus 34 Larissa 35 Naupactus 36 Philippopolis 37 Trajanopolis 38 Rhodus 39 Philippensis 40 Adrianopolis 41 Hierapolis 42 Dyrrhachium 43 Smyrna 44 Catana 45 Ammorium 46 Camachus 47 Cotyaium 48 Sancta Seueri∣nae 49 Mitelena 50 Novae Patrae 51 Euchaita 52 Amastris 53 Chonae 54 Hydrus 55 Kelzene 56 Colonia 57 Thebae 58 Serrae 59 Pompeiopolis 60 Rossia 61 Alana 62 Aedelenus 63 Tiberiopolis 64 Euchania 65 Cerasus 66 Nacolia 67 Germanicia 68 Madyta 69 Apamea 70 Basileum 71 Drystra 72 Nazianzus 73 Corcyra 74 Abydus 75 Methymna 76 Christianopolis 77 Rusium 78 Lacaedaemonia 79 Naxia 80 Attalia, &c.
Archiepiscopatus. 1 Bizya 2 Leontopolis 3 Maronea 4 Germia 5 Arcadiopolis 6 Parium 7 Miletus 8 Praeconesus 9 Selybria 10 Chius 11 Apros 12 Cypsella 13 Nice 14 Neapolis 15 Selga 16 Cherson 17 Messana 18 Garella 19 Brysis 20 Dercos 21 Carabyzya 22 Lemnus 23 Leucas 24 Misthea 25 Cudrae 26 Soteropolis 27 Pedachthea 28 Germa 29 Bosporus 30 Cotradis 31 Eroina 32 Carpathus 33 Mesembria 34 Gotthia 35 Sugdaia 36 Phullae 37 Aegina 38 Pharsala 39 Matracha Bishoprickes which have belonged to the Church of Antioch. Sedes 1. Tyrus: sub qua sede sunt episcopatus. XIIII Porphyreon Archis Ptolemais Sydon Sarepta Byblium Botryon Ortosia Arados Antarados Paneas Maraclea Araclia Tripolis
Sedes 2 Tharsus: sub hae sede sunt episcopat. V. Sebastia Mallos Thina Choricos Poderades Sedes 3 Edissa: sub hae sede simt episcopat. X. Virchi Constantiae Capron Marcopolis Varnon Cedmaron Himeria Querquensia Tapsaron Celimeos Sedes 4 Apamia: sub qua sede sint episcopat. VII. Epiphania Seleuconvilla Larissa Valanea Mariania Ruphania Arethusa Sedes 5 Hierapolis: sub qua sede sunt episcopat. VIII. Zeuma Surron Varnalis Neoecaesaria Perri Ormion Dolichi Europi Sedes 6 Bostra: sub qua sedesunt episcopat. XIX. Cerasson Philadelphia Adraon Midanon Anstamidon Belmindon Zoroyma Herry Iceny Entemy Constantia Paramboli Dionysia Conothaton Maximopolis Philippolis Chrisopolis Heylon Lorea Sedes 7 Anaverza sub qua sunt epi∣scopat. IX. Epiphania Alexandris Hirenopolis Cambrisopolis Flavias Rossas Castravalet Egnas Lysia Sedes 8 Seleucia: sub hac sede sunt episcopatus. 24. Claudiopolis. Diocaesarea Oropi Dalysanidos Serinla Celenderis Anemory Titopolis Lamosy Antiochia parva Nephelia Ristra Selinuntis Hioropy Philadelphia par∣va. Hermopolis Germanicopolis Mosoda
Demenopolis Sbydi Synopolis Adrasson Myim Neapolis Sedes 9 Damasens: sub hac sede sunt episcopatus. XI. Ably Palimpon Laodicea Euria Renocora Hiabanda Danabi Carathea Hardam Surra Quini Sedes 10 Amida: sub hac sede sunt episcopatus. VII. Hynilon Valentium Arsamosata Sophin Caytaris Riphi Zeuma Sedes II Sergio∣polis: sub hac sede sunt epis. IIII. Byzanonias Marcopolis Venethall Ermenia Sedes 12 Theodosi∣opolis: sub hac sede sunt epis. VII. Oricos Mazmini Mauriocastron Agyamaria Axieri Tarosia Palitinios Sedes 13 Emissa: sub hac sede sunt episcopatus IIII. Arqui Orisson Herigem Oragison Metropolitani per se sustinentes. VIII. Piericus Heliopolis Laodicia. Samosata Cyros Pompeiopolis Mopsphestia Adama Archiepiscopi. XIII. Verea Calquis Gabula Scleucia Piperia Anasar Phon Paltos Germanicia Salamias Varcosos Fassos Ananagarthon
The Bishoprickes which have be∣longed to the Church of Hierusalem; set downe by William Metropolitane and Archbishop of Tyre. Sedes 1. Caesarea maritima:Tyrrius histor belli Sacri lib. 14. cap. 12. sub hac sede sunt episcopat. XX. Dora Antipatrida. Idmnias Nicopolis Onus Sorutis Raphias Regium Apatos Regium Hierico Regium Livas Regium Gadaron Azolus Hiaralias Azotus Hippon Estomason Triconias Taxus Saltum Constantinianum Sedes 2. Scythiopo∣lis: sub hac sede sunt episcopat. IX. Capitoliados Miru Gadaron Pelon Philippus Terraconias Clima Gallanis Comanas Sedes 3. Rubba Mo∣abitis: sub hac sede sunt episco. XII. Augustopolis Arnidilla Carah Hierapolis Memsidos Eluris Zora Virossam Pentacomia Mamapson Mitrotomias Saltum Hieraticon Sedes 4. Becerra A∣rabiae: sub hac sede sunt episcopat. XXXV. Adrasson Dias Medavon Hierasson Nein Philadelphia Hierapolis Esuos Neapolis Phenustus Philopopolis Dionysius Constantianis Pentacomias Tricomias Conafados Saltu Vocaneos Hexacomias Euacomias Comagannas Comogeros Comostanis Comis Mahederon Comocoreatos Comis Copion Comis Iulianos Comis Pygmarethō Comis Petius Comis Anathon Comis Neotis
Clima Anatolis quae visinon Comis Anochis Comis Traliconos Comis Nephdomos Suffraganeae. Lidda Ioppe Ascalon Gaza Lennas Diocletianopolis Bergrobin Neapolis Sebastea Hiericuntos Tiberiadis Diocaesarea Legionum Capitolina Mauronensis Gedera Nazareth Thabor Caracavel Petra Hadroga Aphra Helem Faran Helenopolis Mons Syna For the Church of Alexandria. SAint Marke consecrated with the mysteries of Christian Religion Aegypt,Merman Thea∣trum conversionis. pag. 80. Libya, Marmarica, Aemmoniaca and Pentapolis.Idem. pag. 30. Alexandria, for the worship of God flourish∣ing therein, is often called the Paradise of God. To this Patriarch belonged ten Provinces;Mirae, lib. 1. cap. 11. pag. 24. de notitia Epis. so many Metropolitanes, Theodosius and Valen∣tinianus commanded to be Convocated in the Epistle to Dioscorus, which is repeated in the first Act of the Calcedon Councell. The Church of Alexandria challengeth a succession from St Marke to Gabriel, the late Patriarch of Alexandria
The Bishoprickes which have beene in Africa, Alphabetically sett downe by Miraeus in his Notitia Episcopatuum. Page 94. Abbezēsis Episcopus Abiddensis Abbiritensis Abbirmaius Abbissensis Abitinensis Abbrensis Abziritensis A casis Favensibus A casis Silvanae Acemerinianus Aceniensis Adequizirensis Adrumetinus Advocatensis Aggeritensis Aguensis Agnensis Ajurensis Altiburitensis Amburensis Ammoderensis Amphorensis Ancusensis Anguiensis Apissanensis Aptucensis Aptugnitensis Aquae Albensis Aquae-Nonensis Aquensis Regiorum siue Aquisregiensis Arenensis Asenemsalensis Assabensis Assuritensis Aturburnitensis Avicoateriensis Avinicensis Auincensis Auvidarcensis Ausugradensis Auzagerensis Azugensis Badiensis Bagvaiensis Bajesitensis Bahannensis Bamaccorensis Bartiniziensis Bauzarensis Bazarididacensis Bazaritanus Bazienus Bazitensis Betagbarensis Bennefensis Beucennensis Bicensis Bizaciensis Bladiensis Bonustensis Bosutensis Botrianensis Boucarensis Bucaborensis Buccomensis Bullensis Burensis Buritanus Burugiatensis Caesariensis Calamensis Calanensis Canianensis Caniopitaneorum Capsensis Carcabianensis Carianensis Carpitensis Carthaginiensis Casensis Medianēsis Casensis Nigrensis Castellanus Catagnensis Catharensis Cathauguritensis
Caviopipavorensis Cebarsussensis Cediensis Celerinensis Cellensis Cenculianensis Cenensis Cenestensis Centenariensis Centurionensis Centuriensis Ceramuensis Cerramusensis Cessitensis Cilibiensis Cillitensis Cincaritensis Cliensis Clypiensis Constantiniensis Creperulensis Cresmiensis Cubdensis Cufrutensis Cuiculitensis Cullitensis Culusitensis Dianensis Dionysianensis Druensis Drusilianensis Drusitensis Dusensis Dydritensis Edistianensis Eguilguilitensis Eguizetensis Eptiminensis Ermianensis Euerensis Felicianiatensis Feraditensis Ficensis Fissanensis Flumen-Piscensis Furvitensis Gaguaritensis Garbensis Gartanensis Gazabianensis Gegitensis Gemellensis Germaniensis Ginesittensis Girbitensis Gisipensis Gittensis Giuiritensis Gobbensis Gratianopolitanus Guirensis Guzabentensis Gypsuriensis Habensis Hermianensis Hierpinianensis Hiltensis Hippensis Hipponiensis Hirenensis Icositensis Iadessensis Idicrensis Idicrisensis Idurensis Imuntensis Infitensis Inucensis Iubaltianensis Iucundianensis Iziarianensis Labdensis Lacuducensis Lamasbensis Lamasuensis Lambiensis Lambiritensis Lamiggigensis Lampuensis Lamsortensis Lamzellensis Larensis Laritensis Legensis Lelalitensis Leptitensis Lettimiensis Libertinensis Lubertimensis Lucimagnensis Macanianensis Macomadiensis Macomarensis Macrensis
Macrianensis Mactaritensis Madaurensis Margarmelitensis Magnensis Magomaziensis Malianensis Mamillensis Manazenensis Mandasunutensis Marazenensis Marcellianensis Masculitensis Masdianensis Mataritanensis Mazacensis Mazulitanensis Medefessitensis Medianensis Melzitensis Memblositensis Membressitensis Merferaritensis Mesarfeltensis Metenensis Metensis Midicensis Midiliensis Migirpensis Milensis Mileuitanus Moptensis Mullitensis Munavilitensis Mustitensis Mutigennensis Muznensis Muzucensis Naraggaritensis Narensis Nasaitensis Nationensis Neapolitensis Nebbitensis Neglapolitanus Nigizubitensis Nomapetrensis Nonasinuensis Nouasumensis Novensis Numidiensis Nurconensis Obbensis Oënsis Olivensis Omzensis Oriensis Pauzerensis Perdicensis Pisitensis Presidiensis Pudentianensis Puppitensis Putiensis Putisiensis Refalensis Regensis Ressianensis Rotariensis Rusipitensis Rusticianensis Rusubiccariensis Rusuccadensis Rusuccuritanus Rusucensis Sapensis Satafensis Satatensis Scillitensis Segiomitensis Seleuciamensis Serrensis Serteitensis Siccesitensis Sicilibbensis Sifaitensis Signitensis Sililitensis Sillitensis Simidiccensis Simittensis Simmaritensis Simungitensis Sinitensis Sinnipsensis Sitensis Sitifensis Sitipensis Solencianensis Suboabburitensis Subratensis Sucardensis Sufasaritensis Sufetelensis Sufetensis
Sululittensis Tabaicariensis Tabanensis Tabazagensis Taborensis Tabracensis Tabudensis Tabudesensis Tacapitensis Tacaratestensis Tacaratensis Tagannitensis Tagaratensis Tagareyensis Tagorensis Talensis Tamagristensis Tamallensis Tambalensis Tamiggigensis Tanudaiensis Tanussensis Tamogadensis Tasfaltensis Tebestinus Tegulatensis Telensis Teleptensis Temonianensis Tenitensis Tesaniamensis Teodalensis Tibaritensis Tibilitensis Tibizabulensis Ticcnsis Tigillanensis Tigillabensis Tigisitensis Tigimmensis Tignalensis Tignensis Tignicensis Tigualensis Tunicitensis Tinistensis Teseditensis Tisilitensis Tiuicitensis Traprurensis Tricensis Trigisitensis Trisipensis Trofimianensis Truvascaninensis Tubiensis Tubiniensis Tubulbacensis Tuburbitanus Tuburbitaronensis Tubursicensis Tubusubtensis Tuccensis Tuggensis Tullitensis Tumidensis Tuneyensis Tunsudensis Tunugabensis Turensis Turreblansiensis Turreamallumēsis Turrisalbae Turubitensis Turudensis Turuzitensis Tusdritensis Tusuritensis Tuzummensis Tzellensis Vagalitensis Vagealensis Vagensis Vaiensis Valletensis Vamaccorensis Vanarionensis Vatarbensis Vazaritanensis Vcimaius Vculensis Vensanensis Verronensis Vesceritensis Vicensis Villagerensis Viltensis Vindensis Virensis Visitensis Viuensis Vndesitensis Volitensis Vosetensis Vrugitensis
Vsilensis Vticensis Vtimarensis Vtinensis Vtinicensis Vtinunensis Vtunnensis Vzalensis Vzittarensis Vuaggiensis Vuazensis Zamensis Zaraitensis Zaritorensis Zattarensis Zellensis Zenitensis Zertensis Zicensis Zipparitanus Zugabbaritensis Zummensis. The Church of Constantinople fet∣cheth her Originall from St Andrew the Apostle, as Nicephorus testifieth, who hath had a succession to Cyrill, the now Patri∣arch. St Andrew ordayned Stachis, Bishop of Bizantium, now called Constantinople. The Bishops and Patriarchs of Constantinople.Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 6. pag. 540. St Andrew. Stachis Onesimus Polycarpus Plutarchus Sedecion Diogenes Elutherius Felix Polycarpus Athenodorus Euzoius Laurentius Alippius Pertinax Olympianus Marcus Cyrillianus Constantius Ciriacus Castinus Titus Domitius Probus Metrophanes Alexander, Paulus
Euscbius Macedonius Eudoxius Demophilus Euagrius Gregorius Nazian∣zen. Nectarius Iohannes Chrysost. Arsacius Atticus Sisinnius Nestorius Maximianus Proclus Flabianus Anatolius Genadius Acasius Phrabitas Euphenius Macedonius Timotheus Iohannes Cappadox Epiphanias Anthinius Menas Eutichius Iohannes Eutichius Iohannes Diaconus Cyriacus Thomas Sergius Pyrhus Paulus Petrus Thomas Iohannes Constantinus Theodorus Georgius Paulus Calinicus Cyrus Iohannes Germanus Anastasius Constantinus Nicetas Paulus Tarasius Nicephorus Theodorus Antonius Iohannes St Methodius St Ignatius Photius Stephanus St Anthonius Nicholaus Euthimius Nicolaus Stephanns Polyenostus Basilius Anthonius Nicolaus Sisimius Sergius Constantinus Iohannes Cosmius Eustratius Nicolaus Leo Michael Cosmus Theodosius Basilius Nicetas Leontius Dositheus Georgius Xiphilinus Iohannes Michael Theodorus Maximus Manuel Germanus Methodius Manuel Nicephorus Arcenius Germanus Iosephus Iohannes Iosephus Georgius Athanasius Iohannes Athanasius Niphon Iohannes Gerasinus
Isaias Iohannes Calistus Philetus Macarius Nilus Antonius Calistus Euthymius Iosephus Gregorius Genadrus Sophronius Simeon Maximus Niphon Pachomus Theoliptus Ieremias Dionisius Ioseph Metrophanes Ieremias, to whom the Ministers of Germany sent their Confessions, 1576. Macarius Mattheus Gabriel Theophanes Meletius Mattheus Neophitus Mattheus Raphael Neophitus Cyrillus Tymotheus Cyrillus
The pretended Succession of the Bishops of Rome. FOR the Succession of the latter Bishops of Rome, of which Bo∣niface the third, was the first; they succeeded the former Bi∣shops, many of them onely in name, and place; but not in Title, Iurisdiction, holinesse of life, nor faith, as is hereafter shew∣ed and so, not worthy to be named, or ranked amongst them. 1. Generally for the Title, the former Bishops of Rome, were most of them, men of great hu∣militie, their glorie was to be members of the holy Catholike Church, of which Christ Iesus was the alone head: But these latter Bishops, have presumed to take vpon them, the Title due onely to Christ, to wit, to be head of the univerfall Church of God, and Husbands of Christs Spouse, the Church. 2. For their Iurisdiction, The former Bishops were subject to higher powers; even to cruell Nero, and other persecuting Emperours 25 of them were Martyrs; but these latter by de∣grees haue got Iurisdiction, not onely Spirituall but also Temporall, above Princes, and the Emperours themselues.
3. For life, the former of them were most of them holy men; these latter, most of them most wicked ad vitious. 4. For doctrine, for the former (their Faith was heard of in all the world: these latter are fallen from the truth, in many maine points, as afterwards followeth. First,Title. Pelag. distinct. 99 for Title, Pope Pelagius the second, in his dayes perceiving that Maurice the Emperour went about to make and establish an vniversal Bishop, very much opposed it, and decreed, that no Bishop, no, not the Bishop of Rome him∣selfe, ought to be called the vniversall Bishop. And Pope Gregorie his Successour writeth, that none of his Predecessors, ever consented, to vse so prophane a name, as before. Secondly,Iurisdiction. for Iurisdiction the Pope claim∣eth both Spirituall, and Temporall, not onely over all Bishops, and the Church of God, but aboue all Kings and Emperours, causing some of them to lie under his feete, some to hold his stirrop, Kings to leade his horse by the bridle, some to kisse his feete, placing and displacing Emperours, Kings, Duks, whom, and when he li, taking vpon him: to translate the Empire at his pleasure first from Greece to France, from France to Germanie, preferring and deposing, whome he pleased.
3. For the life and conversation of some of them, Baronius reporteth,Baron. Annal. 985. that Boniface the se∣venth, was a very villaine, a Church robber, a Savage theefe, the cruell murtherer of two Popes; and invader of Peters chaire;Sigon. reg. Ital. lib 7.963. Iohn the thirteenth, Was accused in a Synod for Mur∣ther, Adulteries, Incests, Periuries, and vices of all sorts, &c.Btron. Ann: anno. 912. What was the face of the Roman Church (saith Baronius, and how most filthily did it appeare, when the most impudent and base Queanes bare all the sway at Rome, chan∣ged Sees, and gave Bishoprickes at their plea∣sure, and (which is most abominable, and not to bee named) placed their Paramours into St. peters Chaire. Their owne Genebrard, confesseth that there were fiftie of those Popes irregular, disordred,Quod per anno 150. pontifices circiter. 50. a Ie∣annc scilicet. 8. ad leonem 9 a virtute maiorum prosus defecarint. Genebrard. Chron lib. 4. pag. 553. Iohn 5.39. Psal. 1. and Apostaticall. Fourthly, for their Doctrine, some of it is cō∣trary to the Word of God, pernicious to mens consciences, and iniurious to Christ him∣selfe, viz. 1. Whereas Christ hath commanded us to reade the holy Scriptures; and the Holy Ghost blesseth them that delight therein. The now Church of Rome, forbidd th the reading thereof to the Laitie in the vul∣gar tongue, without speciall licence
2. Whereas Christ hath taught vs to pray to God; (and St. Paul) to call on him, in whom we be∣leeve.Rom. 10.14. They invocate Saints, in whom they do not beleeve, and call on Some, whom they are ignorant of, whether they be in Heaven, or Hell 3.Matth. 26.26. Whereas Christ hath commanded us to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kindes, in his holy Institution (as it is set downe in the holy Scripture.) They now sacrilegiously forbid the peo∣ple under a Curse, the Symboll of Christs pre∣cious Blood. 4. Whereas holy Scripture testifie, that mar∣riage is honorable unto all men,Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 10.9. and che bed undefiled and Saint Paule teacheth, it is better to marrie, then to burne. They now Teach Doctrines of Devills,Gravius peccare sacerdotem si uxo∣rem ducat, quam si dni concubi∣nam foveat. Coster in enchrid. cap. 17. rop. 9. 1 Cor. 14. forbidding Marriage; & that it is better for a Priest to have a concubine then to marrie. 5. Whereas Saint Paule teacheth us to pray in spirit and understanding. They teach men to pray in an unknowne Tongue without understanding. 6. Whereas the worship of Images is flatly forbidden by God in his morall Law, under Gods curse; Confounded be all they that serue gra∣ven Jmages.
They now command due worship, and veneration to be given to Images, under the Popes curse. 7 Whereas God curseth all them that adde or diminish to his holy word.Rev. 22.18.19. They have made many new Articles of Faith, contrary to Gods holie word; & curse them, that observe them not. 8. Whereas holy Scripture teacheth us to relie onely on the Merits of Christ,Psal. 2.12. Blessed are all they that trust in him. Bell. de iustif. 5 l. cap. 7. which Bel∣larmine confesseth to be the safest way; They joyne their owne Merits with Christs Merits. 9 Whereas we are to build our Faith on the Scriptures, which cannot erre;Regula credendi certissima & tu∣tissima. Bell. de verbo Dei. lib: 1. cap. 1. They on the Pope and his Church, which doe erre. 10 And whereas St. Paul telleth the Roman Church, that they are not the Roote, but a branch grafted into the Tree; and bidds them take heed of Pride: Yet the now Church of Rome will not ac∣knowledge herfelfe to be onely a branch or member of Christs Church; but will bee the Roote or Head, of the holy Catholike Church, & teach that no man can bee saved unlesse he be a Member of that Chuch. Thus you see how the latter Popes of Rome
differ from the former Bishops in Title, in Iu∣risdiction, in Holinesse of Life and Doctrine: so not worthy to be numbred amongst them, or to be accounted their Successors. To the Succession of Bishops, I have added the Succession of the Emperors of Constantinople, who have many of them, opposed the Popes greatnesse, and Doct∣rines, and also the Emperours of Ethiopia, who have never been subject to the Pope as farre as I can reade, viz. The Emperors of Constantinople, before the division. Constantinus Constans Constantius Iulianus Apostata Iovintanus Valentinianus Gratianus Theodosius Arcadius & Hono∣rius Theoddosius 2. Martianus Leo Zeno Anastatius Dicorus Iustinus Iustinianus Fl. val. Iustinus Tib. Constantinus Mauritius Cappa dox. Phocas Heraclius Constantinus Constans Constantinus Pogo natu Iustinianus Leontius Absimarus Philippus Bardanes Artemius seu Ana∣stasius Theoaosius Leo 3 Isauricus Constantinus Co. Leo 4 pronymus Irene.
Emperors since the Division. Nicephorus Michael Curopa∣lates Leo Aminus Michael Balbus Theophilus Michael Basilius Macedo Leo Philosophus Alexander Constantinus Romanus Nicephorus Phocas Ioan Cimifces Basilius Porphyro∣genitus Constantinus Romanus Argyrus Michael Paphlago Michael Calaphates Zoe Constantinus Mo∣nonachus Theodora Michael Stratio∣ticus Isacius Comnenus Constantius Ducas Romanus Diogenes Mich. Parapinacius Niceph. Boteniates Alexius Comnenus Caloioanes Manuel comnenus-Tryphon Andronicus Com∣nenus Isacius Angelus Alexius Angelus Alexius Iunior Baldninus Comes Flandriae Henricus Petrus Altisiodo∣rensis Robe tus Balduinus Michael Palaeolo∣gus Andronicus Palao∣log us Andronicus Iunior Ioannes Palaeologus & Ioannes Cata. cuzenus Eminuel Palaeolo∣gus Ioannes Palaeolo∣gus Constantinus Palae∣ologus Emperors of Aethiopia. Baazena Lacasa seu Candace cujus Eunuchus a Philippo fuit bapti-Zatus Baazena Mesve Sectua Agdala Agba Mali Able Ddima Autetes Alda Zeahim de Rama Gafeles Beseseoch Azgua Agua Hherch Besane Guachena Hadas Saghell Affe Asgehba Asgueba Samra Aiba Stendhem Zacham San Igaam
Alamida Achinna Abraham & Azba fratres deinde solus Abraham Asfa Asba Albamedon Abra Sahell Ghebez Sekul Azba Abrā & Adakana zaham Amida Sahan AZba Zahan Gabed Iacob & Dabid frat. Arma Zittahana Iacob Constantinus Beth Esrael Gabra Mafchall Nalek Bazen Bensaghed Bahar Saghed Gherma Aapher Saliuba Callula Sion Sargue Zarui Bagaharna Gianscheda Zeonechia Malgeres Sepharad Agdai Abraham Asbaha Asfa Afra Amsi Ahan Arcada Aladana Alameda Tabena Caleb Gabra Maschel Constantinus Beza Agher Asfa Arma Gianasfa Gianascheda Fressennai Adazahaz Aizar Delnahadan Madai & Sahada regina Ambazandin Gemoasfare Girgas Degva Michael Bedegaz Arma Cullandin Sbinahanni Tredda Gabez regina Gabez filius Tredda Gabez Nep. Tredda St. Zalibala St. Zimra Naakutolah Icum Nuam Lach Iacba Hazcon Baazarda Ezbrahad Cadem Saghed Vdim Raah Amdezeon Sepharab Vdma Asfan David Theodorus Isaacke Andreas Hezbinaam Zarach Bethemariam Schender Amdezcon Nabud Helena Lebnadenghel danid cum matre Helena Asnasgahet Caudius Adamastus
By what meanes the Papall Monar∣chie hath beene raised, and how it hath been, and is, upheld. CHAP. VI. THere was a Time when the Bishops of Rome were holy men, painefully la∣bouring in the Lords harvest,Of the primi∣tive estate of the Bishops of Rome. many of them suffering Martyrdome: And then they acknow∣ledged our Lord Iesus Christ to be the onely Head of his Church. Pope Pius the second testifieth, that before the Nicen Councell,Aeneas Silvius in epistola 301. Ante Nicenum concilium sibi quisque vivebat & ad Romanam ecclesiam parvus habebatur Re spectus. the Bishops of Rome had small or no respect: That Councell divided the Regiment of the Church, into foure Patri∣archall Sees; Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, and Hierusalem. They had all equall Authoritie given them in their owne Provinces, as appeareth by eight Councells, cited at large by Doctor Willet. Afterward,Synopsis pag. 148. there was a certaine Primacie
of Order,Can. 28. quia urbs illa imperaret granted to the Patriarch of Rome; as, To have the first place, to sit first; To give sentence first, for that Rome was then the Im∣periall Citie: This reason is yeelded in the Cal∣cedon Councell. 2. For the Popes Title, about the yeere 604. Boniface the third obtained with much con∣tention of Phocas,2. Popes Title. Egit is ab initie administrationis, cum Phoca, ut Romana Ecclesia esset omnium alia∣rum capnt, nec sine multa contentione Apostolicae sedi datum, Sabell. Ennead 8. lib. 6 pag. 396. For this read Mouns. Plesses, his Historie of the Pa∣pacie who proveth it by many Testi∣monies. who murthered his Master Maurice the Emperor, the title of Vniversall Bishop, and that the Church of Rome should be head of all Churches. This Phocas murthered also the Empresse with her children, and being displeased with Cyriacus Patriarch of Constantinople (who would not allow of his cruell Murthers) gave the title which he claimed, to Boniface Bishop of Rome. This murtherer tyrannizing over the No∣bilitie: some of them with Photinus (whose wife he had ravished) tooke him and cut off his head, feet, and privities, giving his body to the Souldiers, who burnt it. Platina reports, that since this time the Popes have in all their Mandats used these words;Init Bonifacij. 3. Volumus & Iubemus, We will and command. Also Pope Adrian the second, flattering ano∣ther Traytor, to wit, Basilius, who had mur∣thered Michael the Emperor,Baronius. the said Basilius deposed Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople, who
had debar'd him from the Communion, for his murthers, and advanced the Bishop of Rome, suffering none to enter the Councell then cal∣led, that did not subscribe to the Popes Supre∣macie: This Basilius also came to an untimely death, being killed by a Stagge: and thus was the Supremacy founded. Donnus the first, subjected the Church of Ra∣venna to the Papacie,Sabell. Ennead. 8. lib. 7. pag. 415. by the helpe of Theodore the Archbishop. After whose death Felix the Archbishop his Successor, going about to shake off the Roman yoke, had his eyes put out with a hot yron, and was banished into Pontus. Stephen the ninth, subdued the Church of Millan to the Papacie, which had bin free from the Apostles time. 3. For the Popes Temporalties,3. Popes Tem∣poralties. Stephanus 9. Ec∣clesiam Mediola∣nensem quae a temporibus Apo∣stolorū libera fuit, sub obedientiam Romani Pontificis redegit. Zeged specul. Pontif. pag. 15. Sigon: de reg. Ital. lib. 3. ne i tributū darent, aut aliâ ratione obedirent, indixit. Gregorie the third, did excommunicate his Lord, and Empe∣ror Leo the third: who was desirous to abolish the Worship of Images, (then creeping into the Church) and caused them to be defaced. Also the said Pope forbad the Italians to pay the said Leo tribute, or to obey him: Vpon this Sentence and inhibition of Popes, part of Italie rebelled against their Emperor, and laid violent hands upon his Deputies and Leivetenants, of whom they slew two, and put out the eyes of a Third: by reason of which uprore and tu∣mults
ensuing, part of the countrie that rebelled was conquered by the King of Lombardy and Rome: and the dominions of the Roman Duke∣dome, fell unto the Pope. So the Pope, who till that time had beene a Bishop onely, became a Prince,Zacharias Papa ex authoritate sancti Petri Apo∣stoli mandat populo Francorū ut Pipi∣nus qui potestatere∣gia utebatur, etiam nominis dignita∣te frueretur. Ita Hildericusultimus Merovingorū qui Francis imperabt depositus est, & in monasterio missus est. Marian. Scot. historiae. lib. 3.4. How the Pope got Superiority a∣bove the Empe∣rors. and that also by Treason. Pope Zacharie the first, absolved Pipin, and the French, from their oathes to Chilperich King of France; who beeing put into a Mona∣sterie, Pipin was made King in his stead: for reward hereof, the Exarchat of Ravenna, and other lands are given to the Papacie; which lands are now called St Peters patrimonie: and by this meanes also the Popes Temporalities are increased. Nicholas the second, giveth Apulia, Calabria, and Sicilia to the Normans, conditionally, that when they should conquer those Regions, and take them from the Greekes, they should hold them of the Papacie, and pay an Annuall tri∣bute for them.Gregor. 7. primus imperium pontifi∣cum condidit, quod successores invito mundo, invitis Imperatoribus adeò duxere, ut inferos, superos in ser vitutemredege∣rint, &c. Avent. Lib. 5. Gregorie the seventh, before called Hil∣debrand, founded the Pontificall Empire, which his Successors have enjoyed to this day in despite of the World, and of the Empe∣rors. For although since the time of Charles the great, the Popes have often opposed the Em∣perors:
Yet it was not the will of Almightie God to suffer them totally to cast off the yoke of obedience, by holy Writ invested upon Prin∣ces, untill the time of this Gregorie: who con∣trarie to the custome of his predecessors, usurped the Papacie without any consent of the Emperor at all. And hee also decreed that hee had not onely power in Heaven to binde,Formula Decreti extat. C. si quis deincep. and to loose, but also that hee had plenitude of Jurisdiction in Earth, to take away, and to give Empires and Kingdomes, and Principalities, &c. Henry the fourth being then Emperor, although infinite∣ly perplexed with the Warre of Saxonie; yet to suppresse this novell pertinacy of this Pope, cal∣leth a Councell at Wormes, in which a Decree was made: That sithence Hildebrand, a fugitive Monke, first of all other, incroached upon the Papa∣cie, without the good liking & privitie of the Emperor, constituted of God, to bee his Soveraigne lord, and that contrary to the custome of his predecessors, con∣trary to Law, and contrary to his oath of Jnstal∣ment, &c. ipso facto he was deposed:Platina in vita Grego. 7. Hildebrand receiving this sentence, excommunicateth the Emperor: Him he proscribeth, depriveth of all Kingly authoritie, despoileth of his King∣domes, and absolveth his Subjects from their Oathes of obedience: Some of the Princes of Germanie taking notice of this Curse, and threat∣ning
a Revolt, This great Emperor being a man neither unlearned,Vspergen. Croni∣con. pag. 170. nor a coward (for hee had fought above 60. battells) was compelled to waite barefooted, clad in canvas, with his Empresse and his son, three dayes at the Popes gate for Absolution: to whom also, in token of obedience, hee resigned his Imperiall Orna∣ments. The Pope fearing that the Emperors great stomacke would not digest this indignity, for all his absolution given, goeth about to depose him; and sendeth an Imperiall crowne to Rodulph Duke of Swevia the Emperors bro∣ther in law: who although he was his Leige∣man, and had received many benefits from him, yet seduced by the Pope, he taketh upon him the title of Emperor, and invadeth the lands of his Soveraigne: The Pope to helpe, reneweth his excommunications,Vspergensis Chron. folio 172. Fertur in extnis positus & abscissam dex∣teram intuitus ad Episcopesqui forte aderant graviter suspirans dixisse Ecce haec est ma∣nus qua Domino meo Henrico fidem sacramento firma∣vi, &c. Vspergensis Chron. pag. 171. impres. Argentorat. 1609. Idem. pag. 170. and sendeth forth his Mandates, full stuffed with furie. Hen∣rie, after many bickerings, in a battell over∣throweth Rodulph, who being deadly wounded, and having lost his right hand, saith to his Bi∣shops who were present, looking upon his hand, My lords, this is the hand, with which I plighted my faith to my lord Henry, at your intreaties, thus and thus many times, yet hath unfortunately fought against him. Returne yee, and make good your first Oath to him: I am to depart to my fathers. Rodolph being
dead, Henry calleth a Counsell at Brixia: where the Acts of Hildebrand being examined, hee had judgement to be deposed, and expelled; For un∣advisedly preaching of Sacriledges and Factions, de∣fending perjuries, and scandals, a beleever of dreames and divinations: a notorious Negromancer, a Man possessed with an uncleane spirit, an Apostate from the true faith, &c. This being done, the Pope stirreth up the Saxons to create Harman Prince of Luxenburg Emperor, who was slaine by a woman with a stone cast from a wall: Then he seduceth Ecbert Marquis of Saxonie to take upon him the Empire, who was slaine in a Mill by the Emperors Guard, hard by Bruns∣wicke. All these Plots failing, the Emperor Henry calleth an Ecclesiasticall Diet, wherein Heldebrand is againe condemned and deposed; and Gilbert Archbishop of Ravenna is chosen Pope, and called Clement the third: Hildebrand dyed in exile; after whose death Ʋrbane in∣truded upon the Papacie, aided with the Dutches Matildas Money, and the Armies of the Normans, who confirmeth Hildebrands De∣crees; and also draweth into Parricide the Emperor Henries sonne, Conrade, who was by his Father made Vizeroie of Jtalie: and the Pope bestowing Matilda, the rich Princesse upon him, they expulse Clement. But Ʋrban the Pope,
and Conrade being quickly dispatched, Paschal, by the aforesaid Faction, was made Pope: who reviveth Hildebrands curse against Henry; and procureth the Emperors other sonne Henry, to take Armes against his Father, and to take up∣on him his Imperiall Estate: Henry the Father, whom they could not quell by force, was taken by treason, against publique oath of safe con∣duct, as hee was travelling to Ments to a Diet, and so was degraded by his Sonne, and by him committed to Prison, where hee finished his troublesome dayes in most miserable manner. Thus by the meanes before named, the Papacie hath obtained such greatnesse, that whereas before, the Popes were to have the Allowance and Confirmation of the Emperors: since Gregorie the sevenths time, the Emperors crave the Popes allowance, and confirmation. For meanes to get money to support Pa∣pacie,Meanes to get Money. Agrip de vanit. scientiarum. eap. 61. primus in dul∣gentiarum nun∣dinas, primus in purgatorium ex∣tendit indulgen∣tias. idems. they have invented many; as, Pope Boniface the eighth, first instituted the sale, or Market of Pardons; hee first made par∣dons extend into Purgatorie: Of their blasphe∣mous Bulls, and Indulgences reade a booke called Fiscus Papalis. The summes of money which the Pope recei∣veth for first fruits, Palls, Jndulgences, Bulls, Con∣fessionalls, Jndults, Rescrips, Testaments, Dispen∣sation,
tot quots, cannot be counted. The Archbishop of Ments, paid for his Pall to the Popes, 26000. Florence. The Curtezans of Rome pay yeerely about 40000. ducats. The Popes Legats demanded, or received for Chrisme, in one City before named,Ireuaeus Rhodogi∣nus. 80 pound weight of Gold. What may he have in all other places, also, for Palls, Curtesans and Chrisme? The Archbishop of Maidenburg, writeth, that in the time of Pope Martin the fift; There was brought out of France, to Rome, nine times 1000. Crownes: What then might the Pope have out of Germany, Spaine, England, and other Countries? You may see a relation of the Popes receipts out of England,pag. 640. in Bishop Jewells defence. The Popes Treasure issuing out of Purgato∣rie onely, is inexhaustible: a Mint lately found out, and possessed by the Pope alone, for no Patriarch in the world, hath any share in it,Boter in Latin, printed at Coloine. Pape non deerunt pecuniae, quans diu ipsi manus eruns & calamus. or ever had. For the Popes meanes it is reported; That Sixtus the fourth was wont to say, that the Pope could never want money, solong as his hand could hold a pen. For the Popes State and Magnificence,His State and Magnificence. it is set downe in the bookes called Caeremoniae Ecclesiae
Romanae,Sacrarum Caee∣moniarum. lib. prim. pag. 17. in words to this effect: Whensoever the Popes holinesse is perswaded to ride on horseback, then must the Emperor, or King, which is present, hold his stirrop, and after a while, leade the horse by the bridle in his hand. And alwaies when the Pope will be carried in a Chaire; then is the Emperor or King, whosoever it bee, bound of duty; to how downe his necke, and to take up the Chaire upon his shoulders. And likewise, when the Pope goeth to Dinner, the duty of the Emperor, or King, is to serve him with water, wherewith to wash his holy hands: And he must besure to attend at the Table, untill the first course beserved; And all men living are bound of Duty, as soone as they come within his presence, to fall three times downe upon their knees, and then to kisse his feete; And wheresoever he passeth by, there must they all fall down upon their knees, and worship him, &c. as it is set forth in the Booke aforesaid. As you have seene the Popes Magnificence, so his munificence,For his Mu∣nificence and gifts. Camden in the life of Queene Elizab. 141. Idem ibidem. and largesses issuing out of his Treasury, are not very great, as Pope Cle∣ment the 8. gave to Tyrone, for all his good ser∣vices in Ireland, a plume of Phenix feathers; And Vrban the third, gave Earle John, sonne to Henry the second King of England, a Coronet of Pea∣cockes feathers; Leo the tenth, gave a Rose to Fredericke Duke of Saxony; and Iulius the se∣cond, a sword to King Henry the seventh: And
some Princes they reward with Titles, or give them their Feete to kisse for a Favour. And of∣tentimes he payeth his men of Warre, with his treasure issuing out of Purgatorie, as Clement the sixt gave to his crossed Souldiers by his Bull, power, every one of them, to deliver three or foure Soules out of Purgatory, even whom they would. And by reason of this his wealth, & greatnesse before named, the Pope taketh upon him superlative Authority, and hee is very un∣like our Lord and Saviour, whose Vicar he pre∣tendeth to be: for whereas Christ paid Tribute to Caesar, he maketh Caesar pay him Tribute: And whereas Christ washed his Disciples feet, the Pope maketh the Emperor his Lord, kisse his Feete. To confirme the forenamed relation of the Popes rising, reade Guiccardines historie,His Relation. Lib. 4. prope finem. who in the latter end of his fourth Booke, not onely denieth the feined Donation of Constantine, but affirmeth, that divers learned men reported, that Silvester, & he, lived in divers Ages; Then he sheweth how obscure, & base they were, du∣ring the time that the barbarous nations made havocke of Italie. Secondly, that in the Institu∣tion of the Exarchate, the Popes had nothing to doe with the Temporall Sword, but lived as subject to the Emperors; Thirdly, that they
were not very much obeyed in matters Spiritu∣all, by reason of the corruption of their man∣ners. Fourthly, that after the overthrow of the Exarchate, the Emperors now neglecting Italie, the Romans began to bee governed by the ad∣vice, and power of the Popes. Fiftly, That Pipin of France, and his sonne Charles, having over∣throwne the Kingdome of the Lombards, gave unto the Popes, The Exarchate, Vrbin, Ancona, Spoleto, and many other Townes and Territo∣ries about Rome. Sixtly, That the Popes in all their Bulls or Charters, expressed the date of them in these formall words; Such a one our lord the Emperor reigning. Seventhly, That long after the translation of the Empire from France to Germany, the Popes began to make open pro∣testation; that the Pontificall Dignity was ra∣ther to give Lawes to Emperors, then to receive any from them. Eighthly, That being thus raised to an Earthly power, they forgot the Saluation of Soules, Sanctitie of Life, and the Commandements of God, Propagation of Re∣ligion, and Charity towards men. And to raise Armes, to make Warre against Christians, to invent new devices for the getting of Money, to profane Sacred things for their owne ends, and to enrich themselves, their Children, and kindred, was their onely study; and this is the
substance of Guiccardine in that place; an Au∣thor above all Exception. Having thus a little glanced at the meanes by which the present demeasnes of the Church of Rome, were first gotten, and increased:The policies by which the Popes keepe that which they have. Let us consider by what Policies, the Monarchie hath been held up in respect, and magnificence. The donation of severall Kingdomes to those that have no right, or Title to them, but from the Pope, and in force of his Donation, cannot but oblige them to him. Their allowance of Marriages prohibited by God and Nature; the issue of which can∣not but uphold the Popes infinite Authoritie, without whom, their Birth is unnaturall, and their persons not capable of their Estates. Their dispensing with Oathes of Princes, which both preserve their Credits, in not bee∣ing perjured, as they thinke (since allowed by the Church) and also get somewhat, for which they cannot be unthankefull to the Papacy. Their State hath the firmest foundation of any, as being laid in the Conscience of men, by perswading them of their infallible Power, and their Ecclesiasticall, and temporall Iurisdiction, which they have over Heaven, Hell, Earth, and Purgatory. The Choosing of younger Sonnes of potent
Families into their Cardinall-ships, by which meanes, the whole Lineage are ready to sup∣port him, as the chiefe staffe of their Brothers, or Cozens preferment. The innumerable Preferments of men of all sorts and humors, as having well-nigh in their disposing all the Benefices and Bishopricks of Italie, halfe in Spaine, divers in France, and Germany, which keepe the Clergie in an infal∣lible bond of Allegiance, especially enjoying divers priviledges, which they of the tempora∣lity are not capable of. The multitude of Friers, their spirituall Knights or Souldiers, whose hopes depend upō his safety, are known to be more then a Million whereof halfe at the least, would grow fit to be imployed in any Warlike service, and all them are maintained at other mens costs, them∣selves not disbursing a penny. The readinesse of their Ministers to kill such as resist them, cannot but deterre Princes from injuring them, and constraine them to keepe their Friendships, especially since by a Writ of excommunication, they can arme the Subjects against the Soveraigne, and without levying of a Souldier, either utterly to destroy him, or bring him to good Conformity. The Severitie or Tyranny of the Inquisition
crusheth not only the beginnings, but the smal∣lest suppositions, in being contrarily affected. To which I adde, that the Church of Rome having beene conscious of their errors, and Corruptions, both in Faith, and manners; have sundry times pretended Reformation; yet their great Pride, and infinite Profit, arising from Purgatory, Pardons, and such like, hath hindred all such Reformations: Therefore to maintaine their greatnesse, errors, and new Ar∣ticles of Faith; 1. They have corrupted many of the ancient Fathers, and reprinting them,Doctor Iames, in his treatise of the Corruption of Scriptures, Coun∣cels, and Fathers. &c. make them speake as they would have them: as Doctor Iames hath set downe at large. 2. They have written many Bookes in the Names of the ancient Writers, and forged ma∣ny Decrees, Canons, and Councells, to beare false witnesse to them. As for example; Whereas in the beginning of this Chapter, you heare of Pope Pius the 7. his report, that the Church of Rome was but of little esteeme before the Nicen Councell:The answer of the now Archbishop of Arimagh to a Challenge made by a Iesuite: pag. 12. You shall have (as the Primate of Armagh relateth,) a Crafty Merchant (Jsidorus Mercator, I trowe they call him) that will helpe the matter, by counterfeiting Decretal Epistles, in the name of the primitive Bishops of Rome, and in bringing in Thirtie of them in a row, as so many Knights of
the Post, to beare witnesse of that great Authoritie which the Church of Rome enjoyed before the Nicene Fathers were assembled; If the Nicene Fathers have not amplisied the bounds of her Iurisdiction, in so large a manner as shee desired, shee hath had her well-wil∣lers that have supplyed the Councells negligence in that behalfe; and made Canons for the purpose in the Name of the good Fathers, that never dreamed of such a businesse. As if the power of Judgeing all o∣thers will not content the Pope, unlesse hee him∣selfe may bee exempted from being judged by any o∣ther. Another Councell, as antient at least as that of Nice, shall be suborned, wherein it shall bee conclu∣ded,Concil. Rom. Sub Syluest. cap. 20. Nemo enim judi∣cabit primam sdem. Concil. Sinuessan. circa finem. by the consent of 284. Jmaginarie Bishops, that no man may Iudge the first Seate: And for failing, in an elder Councell then that, consisting of 300. Buck∣ram Bishops of the selfe same making, the like Note shall bee sung, Quoniam prima sedes non judi∣cabitur a quoquam, The first Seate must not bee judged by any man. Lastly, if the Pope doe not thinke that the fulnesse of Spirituall power is sufficient for his Greatnesse, unlesse he may bee also Lord Paramount in temporalibus, hee hath his followers ready at hand, to frame a faire Donation, in the name of Con∣stantine the Emperor, whereby his Holinesse shall be estated, not onely in the Citie of Rome, but also in the Seigniorie of the whole West: Jt would require a
volume to rehearse the Names of those severall Tractates which have beene basely bred in the for∣mer dayes of Darkenesse, and fathered upon the an∣tient Fathers of the Church, who if they were now alive, would be deposed, that they were never privie to their begetting. 3. As they have expurged antient Writings; so also the holy Commandements of God. And lest the Lay people should smell their Idolatrie, they leave out the second Commandement of the Ten, out of  Psalters and Catechismes: and they are published by the Church of Rome in this manner following. 1. I am thy Lord God, thou shalt have no other Gods but me. 2. Thou shalt not take the name of God in vaine. 3. Remember to sanctifie the holy daies. 4. Honour thy Father and Mother. 5. Thou shalt not kill. 6. Thou shalt not commit adultery. 7. Thou shalt not steale. 8. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse. 9. Thou shalt not desire thy neighbours wife. 10. Thou shalt not desire thy neighbours goods. 4. And that which is worst of all, they for∣bid
the Reading of the holy Scriptures,Haeresin esse si quis dicit necessarium esse ut scripturae in vulgares lin∣guas convertan∣tur: Sander. visib. monar. lib. 7. hares. 191. Credo institutum hoc a Diabelo esse inventum. Peresius de Trad. par. 1. Assert. 3. pag. 47. Characteres mor∣tui, Lindan. Lib. 2. Stromat. cap. 3.6. tradu∣cing them, and blaspheming them, viz. that it is  that it is the Devils in vention to permit the Laitie to reade them: that they are dead Characters, and not to be permitted. Which if they should be suffered to be read, they would casily discover their new Articles of Faith, to bee blasphemous, their Image-Worship to bee Idolatrie, and their not erring Bishop, to bee a meere Imposture, and Deceiver. 5. And also to breede an Antipathie, and ha∣tred betweene the Papists, and Protestants, they are taught to beleeve, that the Protestants are Blasphemers of God, and all Saints; That in England, Churches are made Stables, and that the people are growne barbarous. To these they have wilfully feyned many scandalous lies of us, and the Reformers; set downe by learned Doctor Hall,In his scrious dis∣swasive from Po∣perie, pag. 37. now Lord Bishop of Exeter, as of Wickliffs Blasphemies, of Luthers advice from the Devill, of Tindalls communitie, of Calvins blasphe∣mous death, of Bucers breaking his necke, of Beza's Revolt, of the blasting of Hugonites, of Englands want of Churches and Christendome; of our putting English Catholikes into beares skinnes, and casting them to dogges to be baited; of the Lutherans night∣revelling, of Scories drunken or dination of our Bi∣shops in a Taverne, of the casting of the remaine of
our Sacraments to Doggs, of Mounsier Plessis over∣throw, and the like. And lately they have published two Bookes, commonly sold in Jtalie, and in France: one of them of the late Right Reverend Father in God, Doctor King, late lord Bishop of London, his Apostacie: the other, containing a relation of Gods Iudgement showne upon a sort of Protestant hereticks, by the fall of a house in Black-fryers London; in which they were assem∣bled to heare a Geneva Lecture, Octo. 26. Anno. Dom 1623. By which the simple people were made to beleeve, that Iudgement to bee upon the Protestants, which God sent upon the Pa∣pists: and as they scandall us, so also the other Christians, not subject to them. Thus you may see in the Church of Rome, Religion to be Me∣tamorphised into Policie, and all their Policie tending to maintaine their atchieved Majesty and greatnesse. The Conclusion. TO Conclude, in this little Treatise you may see the Church of God not to be in Rome onely, but to bee Ca∣tholike, and dispersed over the face of the whole Earth; Here is also set downe the large habitations, and dwellings of the Christi∣ans
not subject to the Pope; and how they doe agree with the Protestants in the mayne Points in difference, and the Harmony of the Prote∣stants amongst themselves; with the differences in the Roman Church: Also the Antiquitie of some of these Churches, with a succession of Bishops in some of their Churches, not subject at all to the Pope, nor acknowledging the Pa∣pall Iurisdiction. And as these Churches agree with us, so you may see what Correspondency they have with the Bishops of Rome. The Greeke Church excommunicateth yere∣ly the Pope and his Church, for Schismatickes. The Muscovites account him an Hereticke. The Christians under the Patriarch of Mu∣sall call the Pope, the reprobate Bishop, as be∣fore. The Churches of Asia answered Pope Iohn the 23. who wrote to them, that hee was the a∣lone Head of the Church, and Christs Vicar, after this manner: Wee firmely beleeve thy great authority over them that are subject to thee; we can∣not indure thy great pride and ambition: we cannot satisfie thy great Covetousnesse, &c. And whereas Pope Gregory (as before) cal∣leth him Antichrist, and Lucifer, who shall but in the pride of his heart, desire to be called uni∣versall Bishop; what would hee say, if hee lived
now to see the Pope lifted up above Kings, and Emperors, and the whole Catholike Church. To conclude; I wish every man that hath a care of his Soule, to follow the grave and di∣vine instruction of that excellent Light of the Church, Saint Augustine, for establishing of his Conscience, to performe our Saviours Com∣mandement, Search the Scriptures. 1. Now search diligently, whether you can finde in holy Scripture; that Christ made Saint Peter and his Successors, his alone Vicars 2. Or gave them dominion over the other Apostles. 3. Or gave them power to depose Kings. 4. Or to dispence with oathes, made Sacred by Gods holy name. 5. Or to license incestious marriages. 6. Or to give pardons for money. 7. Or to release Soules out of Purgatory. 8. Or whether in holy Writt marriage is for∣bidden to Priests. 9. Or the reading of the Scriptures to the Laiety. 10. As also the Symbol of Christs blood in the holy Sacrament 11. Or power given to a Priest to make his Maker. 12. Or to Communicate alone.
And if thou canst finde none of these things in holy Scripture; remember what Saint Paul saith, Gal. 1.9. if any man preach any other Gos∣pel unto you, then that you have received, let him be accursed. And whereas our Adversaries boast, and make a great cry of the Catholike Church; here you may see how the Catholike Church of God agreeth with us. Now to put an end to this Treatise, I thanke God for his truth revealed unto us, and his Church, and most humbly intreate his divine Majesty, to open the eyes of them that erre, and have gone astray, that they may returne to the great Shepherd and Bishop of their Soules; and for them that are in darkenesse, that they may also know the great Mystery of Salvation in Ie∣sus Christ: Now to Him that is able to doe ex∣ceeding abundantly, above all that we can aske or thinke, to Him be Glory in the Church, by Iesus Christ, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen.
Literae à Patriarcha Alexandrino ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem, ex Aegypto in Britaniam transmissae, ex autographo Cyrilli graeco in Latinum, jussu Archie∣piscopi traductae à Daniele Featleyo, eidem Archiepiscopo à sacris. Inscriptio literarum. Beatissimo & magnificentissimo Domino Archiepis∣copo Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primati, & Metropolitano, Georgio Abbati, mihi multis nominibus colendissimo, officiose cum honore & debitâ reverentiâ in Britaniam tradantur istae. Subscriptio. Cyrillus dei gratia Papa & Patriarcha magnae urbis Alexandriae, & Iudex oecumenicus. Exemplar Literarum. BEatissime & amplissime Archiepiscope Cantuariensis, totius Angliae Primas & Metropolitane, Domine Georgi, Domine & frater charissime. Exopto amplitudini vestrae prosperam valetudinem ad∣emolumentum & coagmentationem concrediti tibi gregis. Cum jam Christi gratiâ Aegypto nostrae redditi,
pace fruamur Ecclesiasticâ, res postulat, ut fidem per literas Beatit: vestrae astrictam liberemus. Nusquam siquidem magis, quam hac innostrâ Christus Ecclesia altam agit pacem, nulla de fide lite aut contentione inter nos gliscente, idque adeo inimicis Christiani nominis acerrimis & infestissimis ha∣benas moderantibus. A quibus etiamsi variis exagitemur exerceamur que modis, nobis tamen pro Christinomine quem spiramus, cujusque stygmata in corpore circumferimus, ab istiusmodi hominibus perquam volupe est affligi, vexari, & sinecesse est, durissima atque ultima sustinere, ut hac explo∣ratione fides nostra magis magisque splendescat, & Dei glo∣ria illustretur. Ab his igitur nihil nobis timemus, sed à cani∣bus potius & operariis sudolis, Hypocritis dico, quibus so∣lenne est, aliud clausum habere in pectore, aliud promptum in linguâ; qui deum ipsum projecta audacia impetere haud eru∣bescunt, dummodo Romani pontificis tyrannidi quoquo modo velificentur: hi emissarij terrorem mirum in modum nobis incutiunt, nostraeque imponunt simplicitati, cui mancipandae varias admovent machinas, maxime frcti eruditionis fuco, & spinosarum disputationum aculeis, cum nos intereà erudi∣torum penuriâ laboremus, qui cum sciolis istis aequo marte congrediantur. Etenim propter peccata nostra despicabiles factisumus prae omnibus gentibus, & cum imperio artes quoque liberales amisimus. Haec cum crebrò animum feriret cogitatio, negotium tandem cum charitate vestra contulinus, vestrumque consilium, & auxilium imploravimus, Ac ex re∣sponso vestrae Beatit; maximum cepimus solatium: quo (non sine mandato principis) nobis authores fuistis, ut quendam è nostratibus transmitteremus, qui sedulam sacro-sanctae Theo∣logiae apud vos navaret operam. En igitur hominem graecum, gradu presbyterum, graecis literis non leviter tinctum, Eccle∣siae nostrae Alexandrinae alumnum, haud obscuro loco natum, ingenio ad reconditiorem eruditionem imbibendam probe comparato. Cujus progressus non poenitendes fore speramus, gratiae Divinae aurâ caelitus aspirante, & Beatit: vestra dex∣tram
auxiliatricem porrigente. Ac quia (utexte audio,) allubescit hoc consilium nostrum serenissime, & a Deo corona∣to regi Iacobo primo, gratiae debentur ipsius humanitati qua adcaelestis regis bonitatem & misericordiam proxime acce∣dit. A quo certe nec aliud expectari poterat, utpote cui Deus coelitus benedixerit, & uberrimis eum gratiae donis lo∣cupletaverit, & ex speciali providentiâ tanti talisque impe∣rij gubernaculis admoverit. Quapropter prime a Beatit. vestra petimus, ut nostro nomine, summa cum reverentiâ, & humillima corporis inclinatione, celsissimam ipsius majestatē venerabunde salutes, cui ex intimis nos sensibus vitam pro∣lixam, & senectutem productam comprecamur. Deinde ab ipsius humanitate submisissime petimus, ut pro innatâ, & pro∣pe dixeram immensâ, benignitate, scintillulam beneficentiae aliquam huic nostro Metrophani jubeat affulgere. Ad ex∣tremum, si quid in hisce literis nostris, quod ad hunc hominem instruendum perpoliendumque pertinet, desideretur; id om∣ne tua facile assequetur, supplebitque prudentia, quem deus extulit, & tanquam facem clarissimā in edito loco constituit, ut & aliis solatio esse possis, nec tuis tantum Britannis, sed & Graecis nostratibus lucem porrigas. Vale vir beatissime: largiatur tibi Dominus Deus, diuturnam & felicem vitam, unáque vires subministret, quibus & regninegotijs, & Eccle∣siae curis par sis subeundus: ex Aegypto, calendis Martijs aerae Christianae, Anno Millesimo Sexcentesimo decimo sexto.
A Letter sent out of Aegypt into Eng∣land, from the Patriarch of Alexan∣dria, to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury: Translated by his Graces appointment into La∣tin, out of the Greeke originall, by Doctor Featley, his Graces Chaplaine in house. The Indorsement. To the most Reverend, and Gratious Prelate, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,Adverbum, most blessed and mag∣nificent. Primate of all England, and Metropolitane; George Abbat, my most honoured Lord, with due respect, and reve∣rence present these, in England. The Subscription. Cyrill by the grace of God,Many Christi∣ans call their Priests Papas. Pope and Patriarch of the great Citie of Alexandria, and oecumenicall Iudge. The Letter. MOst Reverend,Adverbum, most blessed and great. and right Honourable Lord, George Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, and Metropolitane; our dearest brother. I pray hartily for the con∣tinuance of your Graces health, for the welfare
of the flocke committed to your charge. Now that, through the favour of God, we are retur∣ned into Aegypt, and enjoy peace in our Church, It is requisite, that by our Letters we should acquit us of the promise whereby wee stand engaged to your Grace: for, there is no Church (God bee blessed) at more peace, then ours is at this present; no contro∣versies, nor variances arising amongst our selves concerning faith: And, which is more to bee admired, the mortall enemies of Christs name, sitting at the sterne, and bearing all the sway: by whom though wee are many waies molested, and disquicted; yet for the name of Christ which wee professe, and whose markes we beare about in our bodies, it is a joy to us to be thus afflicted, and vexed: yea also (if so it be the will of God) to abide the utmost extre∣mity of their crueltie, that in the fierie triall our faith may shine more brightly, and God re∣ceive the greater glory; from these therefore wee feare little hurt, but rather from Dogges, deceitfull workemen, I meane Hypocrites, who speake one thing, & meane another; who blush not with boldnesse, to set upon God himselfe, so that by any meanes they may advance the Papacie These Romish Scouts doe verie much terrifie us, and put trickes upon our simpli∣citie,
endeavouring to enthrall us, with sophisti∣call arguments and Logick quirkes, but especi∣ally they beare themselves upon a shew of lear∣ning, and acutenesse of disputation, wee wan∣ting learned men to deale with them at their owne weapons: for by reason of our sinnes, we are in comparison of other nations become despicable, and together with our libertie, have lost all liberall Arts: When this thought often came in my minde, in the end, I brake the busi∣nes to your Grace by letters, and implored your councell and assistance, and from your Graces answer I received extraordinary comfort, in which, by order from his Majestie, you wished us to send over one of our Countrimen, to study Divinitie among you; and loe, heere now I have sent you this Grecian, a man in holy orders, not meanely skild in the Greeke tongue, a member of our Church of Alexandria, well borne, and of readie capacitie: who, we hope through Gods grace, and your helping hand, will make no small progresse in learning in short time: And for that (as your letters testifie) this our Mo∣tion is well entertained by the most renowned, and the Lords anoynted, Iames the first: let thankes first been returned to him, for his great goodnes, wherein he doth neerely resemble the bounty of our heavenly King: And indeed no lesse could be expected from him, upon whom
God hath plentifully showred downe his bles∣sings, and by his speciall Providence set him upon the throne of so great and powerfull an Empire: wherefore wee beseech your Grace, to tender our most humble respects, and duti∣full prostration, to his most excellent Majesty, to whom wee wish from the very bottome of our heart, a long life, and fulnesse of dayes. Next we humble crave of his Majesty, that he would be pleased out of his imbred (I had well-nigh said) infinite bounty, to vouchsafe to let a little sparke light upon our Metrophanes: Lastly, if any thing bee omitted in these our letters, which might conduce to the farther instructiō and furthering of this our countriman, it may easily bee supplied by your Graces wisedome, whom God hath lifted up, and set as a beacon in an high place, to give light, not onely to the Britaine, but also to the Grecian coasts: Fare∣well most Reverend and wise Prelate.Adverbum, most blessed. The Lord grant you a long and prosperous life, together with strength to undergoe your great charge, and to manage the weighty affaires both of Church, and common wealth. From Aegypt Cal. Mar. in the yeere of our Lord. 1616.
Georgius Abbat, divina providentia Ar∣chiepiscopus Cantuariens is, totius An∣gliae Primas & Metropolitanus, sanctis∣simo domino, & fratri, Cyrillo, Papae & patriarchae Alexandrino, & Iudici oecumenico, in Christo salutem. CVmmulta sint quae universalis Ecclesiae in membris sym∣pathiam, suavissimamque conspirationem loquantur: tum eandem vel hinc maxime in hoc tempore persentisco, quod mihi fraternitatem vestram de facie nunquam cogni∣tam, longissimisque adeo terrae marisque spatijs dissitam, tan∣quam praesentem ambabus datur ulnis amplexari; utrum∣que nempe fideiunitate colligante, & communi charitatis vinculo constringente, per unum eundenoque spiritum. Quo Christum, quem uterque spiramus, meritis celebramus lau∣dibus, vobisque pacem ecclesiasticam, nullo (ut affirmas) schis∣mate, aut malo intestino turbatam ex animo gratulamur, nec non externam tranquillitatem haud quidem omni ex parte inviolatam & halcyoniam, stapendam tamen, quâctiam inter hostes Christiani nominis acerrimos infensissimosque fruimi∣ni,Psal. 110.2. juxtaillud prophctae Regis de Christo vaticinium, domi∣nare in medio inimicorum tuorum. Vestram & nos vicis∣sim rogamus pietatem, ut nobiscum unâ laetetur de varijs dei donis in ecclesiam Britanicam affatim effusis. In qua (quod olim de nostris insulis vester Chrysostomus) audire est ubique populum è scripturis sacris Philofophan∣tem,Chrysostom. ho∣mil. quod utilis sit sacrae scripturae lectio. voce quidem peregrina, fide domestica, linguâ bar∣barorum, utentem moribus sanctorum. Etenim quod in
ecclesijs Romano pontifici dicatis obtineri nequit, populas Christo colendo addictissimus in clarissima evangelij luce versatur, & aquae vivifica rivis limpidissimis, arcente ne∣mine, sitim abunde explet. Ac ad disciplinam quod spectat (quod in alijs ecclesijs etiam a faece papismi repurgatis, aliter habet) antiquissimam ecclesiastici regiminis formam distin∣ctosque ministrorum gradus retinemus. Haec nobis aeternùm servet bonorum omnium largitor Deus, at nos (quae naturae nostrae est pravitas) propter peccata nostra, maxime labem animi minus grati jamdiu meruimus, ut candelabrum no∣strum aureum, suo dimoveretur loco, nosque omni sacra∣rum scripturarum luce penitus destitueremur. Nec enim haec quibus fruimur bona, nostris (quae nulla sunt) meritis ac∣ocpta ferimus, sed divinae primum misericordiae, deinde sin∣gulari qua electum suae gloriae organum complectitur chari∣tati, regem dicoserenissimum Iacobum, qui laudatissimae Eli∣zabethae, tum regni, tum religionis haeres, utraque & firmat legibus, & illustrat exemplo. Etenim non solum ass iduum se praebet sacrarum concionum auditorem, & ad tremendam mensam dominicam in celebrioribus praesertim ecclesiae festis convivam, sed etiam, quod exemplo majus, & in Rege magno maximum, Qui tot sustineat, qui tanta negotia solus: de abstrusissimis scholae mysterijs cum episcopis in palaestrâ theologicâ exercitatissimis nervose disserit. Imo & de re the∣ologicâ multacalamo regio accuratè exaravit, quae nuperrimè typis mandata sunt, ad fidem orthodoxam statuminandam, & errores praesertim pontificios convellendos. Talem tibi tan∣tumque regem perquàm gratulor amicum, qui lectis vestrae sanctitatis ad me literis, vestram Beat: pie resalutat, & de vobis honorificè loquitur. Ac quosuam erga vos benevolentiā testatiorem redderet, mihi in mandatis dedit, ut dilectissimus vester Metrophanes humaniter, amiceque exciperetur. Quem quidem ego, ut amor is in me vesti obsidem, arrhamque pre∣tiosissimam in sinu habebo, & quae illi necessaria erunt,
aut opportuna, omnia haud gravate impendam. I am verò etiam generosum hunc è seminario graecanico surculum, quò apud nos germinet, fructusque maturè proferat horto amae∣nissimo inscrui, Academiae Oxoniensi, Bibliotheca instructis∣sima, & septendecim collegiis splendidissimis conspicuae, in quibus, studiosorum, eruditorumque gens numerosa tanquam in Prytanaeo publice alitur, Horum catalogo vester inscrip∣tus iam est Metrophanes, qui cum matururit, & fructus ubercs exerurit, prout vestrae prudentiae visum fuerit, & e re crit vestrae ecclesiae, aut apud nos fixas aget radices, aut in natale solum denuò transplantandus remitietur. Quod reliquum est, vestram (sanctisime frater) imploramus pietatem, ut preci∣bus ad deum assiduis ecclesiam Britanicam habeatis com∣mendatam, sicut & nos pro vostra graecaitidem interpellabi∣mus: utia una cum tota catholica divinae providentiae pre∣sidio seu muro circumcincta, in veritate juxta ac pace firme∣tur. Nec non ut ab emissariis istis novatoribus Christianam veritatem pariter ac libertatem cuniculis oppugnantibus li∣beretur. Quos inter imprimis cavenda & averruncanda pseudomonachorum turba recense figulinà prodeuntium, inte∣mer andum seruatoris cognomen sibi arrogantium, qui pacem sectari se profitentur, turbant tamen miscentque omnia, & veritatiunice studere videri volun, equivocum tamen men∣dacium, etiam perjurio implicitum dogmatizant. Ab his vulpeculis lupisque rapacibus universis gregem suum tuea∣tur magnus ille ovium pastor, unaque vestram pietatem in gratia perpetuaque felicitate conservet. Londini Novembris 17. 1617. vestrae beatitudinis frater amantissimus, & in Christo conseruus, Georgius Cantua∣riensis.
George Abbat, by the divine pro∣vidence Archb. of Cant. Primate of all England,Ad verbum most holy. Bis. ad ver. Pope. which title was anciently given to all Bishops and and is retained this day in the Greeke Church. and Metropolitan; to Cyrill his most honoured Lord and brother, the Bi∣shop and Patriarke of Alexandria, and judge ccu∣menicall sendeth greeting in Christ. AS in many things else the sympathy of the catholique Church, and the most sweet communion among her members mani∣festeth it selfe: so at this time especially it appea∣reth to me, in this that I haue opportunity to sa∣lute your brotherhood, whose face I neuer saw, and embrace (as it were) with both armes, a per∣son distant from me many 100. miles, & severed by a large tract both of land & sea. yet the unity of faith joyneth us, and the bond of charity ty∣eth us fast together, through one and the same spirit.Professe. ad ver. we both breath. By which we worthily magnifie one Christ, whom we both profesle, & hartily con∣gratulate the peace of your Church troubled with no schisme (as you intimate) nor other in∣testine evill. Also we rejoyce together with you for your outward tranquility and after a sort halcyon dayes, which you enioy, and though even amidst the sworne and most implacable enemies of the Christian faith,Psal. 110.2. whereby the words of the Kingly Prophet are concerning
Christs king dome accomplished in you, be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. We in like man∣ner,Ad verb, pietie. beseech your Grace to blesse God with us for the manifold gifts of his bounty liberally bestowed upon our Churches of great Britaine, wherein that which your Chrysostome spake of old concerning our brittish Islands is veri∣fied at this day, every where a man may heare the people discoursing of the scriptures, strangers indeed in speech, yet of the houshold of faith, in tongue barba∣rians, but in conuersation drawing neerer unto Saints, for the Christian Laitie in our Churches (which is not permitted in the Romane) walketh in the most cleare light of the Gospell, and drinke their fill of the pure streames of the wa∣ter of life in Scripture, none driving them from thence, but rather encouraging them there, a∣bundantly to quench their thirst. And for dis∣cipline (which is not so in other reformed Churches) wee retaine the most antient forme of Church governement, and distinct orders and degrees in the clergie in every Diocesse. The fountaine of all goodnes continue these bless∣ings unto us still, though wee (such is the cor∣ruption of our nature) by reason of our sinnes, especially the staine of ungratefull hearts, have long agoe deserved, that our golden Candle∣stick should be removed, and we left in the dark utterly destitute of all comfortable light of
Gods word: for farre be it from us to ascribe these extraordinary blessings of God to our me∣rits, which we know are none at all. But first we attribute them to Gods merey; next, to the sin∣gular love which he beareth to his anointed, our Soveraigne King Iames, the choise instru∣ment of his glory, Heire to Queene Elizabeth of blessed memorie, aswell in her Religion, as in her Realmes: both which, he establisheth by Law, and is a principall ornament to both, by his princely example: for he is not onely a con∣stant hearer of Sermons, and a most devout per∣taker of the Sacrament, and religious observer of the festivals of the Church: But, which is beyond example, and most to be admired in so great a King, who alone beares the burthen of so weightie affaires, he strongly maintaines ar∣gument with his Bishops (best versed in con∣troversies) about the most intricate points of Schoole Divinity. Moreover we are indebted to his Royall pen for many excellent Treatises written by him, and lately printed by speciall command, wherein he fortifieth the orthodox faith, and demolisheth the Romish forts newly erected against it. I am exceeding glad that your Grace hath purchased unto you the friendship of such, and so great a Monarch, who most curteously returnes your Salutations and speakes all good of you; and in testimony
of his great good will unto you, gave mee charge to make much of your Metrophanes whom I receive from you, as a pledge of your love, and most precious pawne of our indissol∣uble friendship, and accordingly I will see him provided of all things fitting. And for the pre∣sent, I have set that noble plant takē out of your Greeke Nurserie, in a most fertile garden: to the end, it may grow the faster, and more kindly and maturely beare fruit among us; I meane the Vniversity of Oxford, beautified with seven∣teene Colledges fairely built, and a Library fur∣nished with infinite variety of Bookes, in which Academie, as in the Prytaneum of Athens, a mul∣titude of learned Students is maintained at the publique charge: into which number your Metrophanes is admitted, who as soone as hee shall grow ripe, and fructifie among us, as your wisedome shall thinke fit, and it shall stand with the good of your Church: either his Root shall bee fixed with us here, or hee shall bee returned backe, to bee transplanted in his native soyle. For conclusion, wee most earnestly desire your affectionate prayers (most holy brother) for our Brittish Churches, as we also shall not cease to offer up our fervent devotions for your Greeke Church, that you together with all the members of the Catholique Church may bee compassed with the Divine custodie, as with a
of brasse, and may bee established in Truth and Peace together, and withall, that you may bee freed from those prying innouators (you speake of) who undermine, as well Christian verity as liberty, among whom you are chiefly to beware of a sort of Monkes newly come out of the Romish forge, assuming to themselues the most venerable name of our Saviour, who pre∣fesse themselves to follow peace, yet trouble all the Christian world: and they would seeme to teach onely the truth, yet deliver doctrinally the art of lying, even with implied perjurie, under the name of equivocation, from these Foxes and rauenous Wolues,Ad verb. Pietie. the great Shepheard of the sheepe preserve his flocke, and in it your Grace, crowning you with his manifold favors and perpetuall felicity. London, November the 17. Your Graces most loving brother and fellow servant in Christ,Ad verbum. Your blessednes. GEORGE CANT.
IN the Epistle, pag. 11. Line 13. The Armenians have not so many Bishops as the Card. reports. Jn the Contents, pag. 19. line 16. r. most of them. p. 4. l. 21.To be aded. Part . read Ierusalem and others. pag. 10. line 23. in England 4. ships, for one. pag. 20. line 19. adde Luxenburg and part of Guelders. pag. 22. line 1. Some of the Gre∣cians. p. 32. l. 27. Meotis and Tanais. p. 33. l. last reade, one of. p. 44. l. 9. Alexan∣dria hath two Patriarchs, one a Cophite, the other a Greeke. p. 130. l. 2. r. most. p. 152. l. 14. for these, r. some of these p. 154. Espens. de continent. l. 3. c. 4. Margent, Nicephorus setteth downe most ofthem. p. 40 l. 16. some of the. p.Part 2. 41. l. 14. r. 1000. 1000. p. 44. l. 11. r. some Psalters. p. 55. l. 2. in the margent put, Mi∣crocosme. the same pag. 50. l. 12. p. 52. l. 19. Zeged speculum pontif. Pag. 1. l. 9. of the Epistle, r. their Church. p. 14. l. 5. r. Wit temberg. p. 18. l. 3. r.Errata Part 1. 100000. margent adde extendit. p. 19. in the margent, for numbers univers. p. 22. l. 5. r. Bulgaria Rascia. p. 44. mar. . pag. 49. l. 13. for called r. of. p. 59. mar. 6. r. . p. 6. mar. r. . l. 4. . p. 63. mar. read  p. 66. mar. r. . p. 94. marg r. non reperiatur. Ibid. for vas, r. uvas. p. 136. l. 25. r. Navaret. p. 137. mar. r. consensit. p. 141. mar. r. pascitur & potatur. p. 139 mar. for Hester r. Paster. p. 146 for Andrew stusten. Page 9 l. 16. for desmadell, Damasus. p. 10. l. 3. for Silverius, r. Liberius. l. 6. add Felix. p. 11. l. 20. r. Philipi. p. 12. l. 21. for Caria, r. Stauropolis. l. 2. adde Creta.Errata Part 2. 4. Rhegium. 10. for Euchania, r. Achaia. p. 42. l. 6. for Henry the Seventh, reade Henry the Second. p. 52. l. 10. r. as before p. 56. l. 13. for sudolis, r. subdolis. Other literall faults mend with thy pen.
Protestants.
Papists
Papists Protestants
Greekes mingled with Turkes.
Moscovites
