20583 99837725 2065
The Mothers Counsell OR, Liue within Compasse. Being the last Will and Testament to her dearest Daughter. Modesty In Chastitie. Chastity of body is the key to Relig. Wanto∣nesse. In Temperance. Temperance is the mother o Ma¦ne In Beautie. ry is a womans golden Crowne. Odio¦ness In Humilitie. Humilitie is a womans best Armor. Pride. Printed at London for Iohn Wright, and are to be sold at his Shop in spur street without Newgate, at the signe of the Bible. 16
Good Counsell to the Christian Reader. 1 THat you keepe a narrow watch ouer your heart, words, and deedes conti∣nually. 2 That with all care the time be redeemed that hath been idly, care∣lesly, and vnprofitably spent. 3 That once in the day at least, priuate prayer, and meditation bee made. 4 That care be had to doe, and receiue good in company. 5 That your family be with all di∣ligence and regard, instructed, wat∣ched ouer, & Christianly gouerned. 6 That no more care bee spent in matters of this world, then must needs.
7 That you stirre vp your selue to liberalitie to Gods Saints. 8 That you prepare your selues to beare the Crosse, by what meanes soeuer it shall please God to exercise you. 9 That you giue not the least bri∣dle to wandring thoughts. 10 That you bestow some time in mourning, not onely for your owne sinnes, but for the time and age wherein you liue. 11 That you looke daily for the comming of our Lord Jesus Christ, for your full deliuerance out of this world. 12 That you acquaint your selues with some godly person, with whom you may conferre of your Christian estate, and open your doubts, to the quickning of Gods graces in you. M. R.
The Mothers counsell, OR, Liue within Compasse. Being the last Will and Testa∣ment to her dearest Daughter, which may serue for a worthy Lega∣cie to all the Women in the World, which desire good report from men in this world, and grace from Christ Je∣sus in the last day. Liue within Compasse: In Chastitie. FIrst my Daughter vnder∣stand, that Chastity is the beautie of the soule and puritie of life, which re∣fuseth the corrupt p¦sures of the flesh: onely possessed of those who ke
bodies cleane and vndefiled; and it con∣sisteth either in sincere virginitie, or in faithfull Matrimony. The chaste soule is a rich chamber, one∣ly fit for Christ. The most bountifull God is a chaste and pure Spirit, and therefore aboue all things thou oughtest to call vpon him with chaste prayers. If the body be not kept pure and vn∣spotted from whoredome, the Soule can hardly be feruent in deuout prayer. Pure chastity is beauty to the Soule, grace to the body, and peace to all wor∣thy desires. Beautie is like the flowers of the Spring, but chastitie like the starres in heauen. So must the flesh be nourished, that it may serue thee; so must it be tamed, that it be not proud. As nothing is more vile than to be o∣uercommed of the flesh, so nothing is more glorious, than to ouercome the flesh. Frugalitie is the signe of chastitie. Chastity is a vertue of the soule, whose companion is fortitude.
Chastity is the Seale of Grace, the staffe of deuotion, the marke of the Iust, the crowne of virginity, the glory of life, and a comfort in Martyrdome. Idlenesse is the enemy to chastity. Chastity without charity, is without oyle. Chastity and modesty are suff to enrich the poore: And age, rather make choyce o manners, than loosenesse o our with great Lands and rich possessions. If chastity bée once lost, there is no∣thing left prayse-worthy in a woman. The first step to chastity, is to know the fault, the next, to auoyd it. Where necessitie is ioyned vnto cha∣stity, thence Authoritie is giuen to vn∣cleannesse; for neither is she chaste which by feare is compelled, neither is shée ho∣nest which with néede is obtained. Doe not say thou haste a chaste minde, if thine eye be wanton: for a lasciuious looke is a signe of an inconstant heart. Amongst all the conflicts of a Christi∣an soule, none is more hard than the warres of a chaste minde, for the sight is continuall, and the victorie rare.
Chastity with the raines of Reason bridleth the rage of lust. A chaste eare cannot abide to heare that which is dishonest. True felicity though hid from mortall eyes, yet is it the obiect of a chaste spirit. The first felicitie that a chaste woman shall haue after this life, is the rest of her Soule in Christ: the second shall be the immortalitie and glory of her body. That chaste woman hath got to the height of felicitie, whom no feare trou∣bleth, no pensiuenesse consumeth, no car∣nall concupiscence tormenteth, no desire of worldly wealth afflicteth, nor any foolish∣nesse moueth vnto mirth. A chaste woman is to be measured not by her beauties, but by her vertues. A woman is the wonder of Nature if shée wrong not Nature. A chaste woman is an admirable Angell, till shée be drawne by angells to become a Deuill. Women that are chaste when they are trusted, proue often wantons when they are causelesse suspected. A virgins heart is like the Cotton trée, whose fruit is
so hard in the Bud, that  it soundeth like steele, and being ripe puts forth nothing but wooll. Chastitie is a veile which Innocents adorne, th' vngatherd rose defēded with the thorne. O Chastitie the gift of blessed soul, comfort in death, a crowne vnto the life, which all the passions of the minde con∣trols, adorne the minde, and beautifies the wife; that grace, the which nor death, nor time attaints, Of earthly Creatures, making heauenly Saints. Penelope in spending chaste her dayes, as worthy as Ʋlysses was of prayse. Beleee't, a woman cannot take vpon her with Beauty, Riches, nor with hie nobility, to claime the true deserued praise of honor, if chastitie doe faile by her fragilitie; for that's the vertue which defends her ho∣nor. Chastitie is strong, when all that wooe it doth resist, and turnes them vertuous too. Vnchaste words vtter'd to a vertuous dame, turne and defile the speaker with red shame.
A Wife is like a garment vs'd and torne, A Maid like one made vp, but neuer worne. Gold is not knowne by sight, but by the test: Thought makes not chaste, but tryall proues them best. Misfortune still such proiects doth pursue, He makes a false Wife that suspects a true. Their carriage, not their Chastitie alone, Must keepe their name chaste from suspi∣tion. Out of Compasse in Chastitie, Is Wantonnesse. WAntonnesse when it turnes to lust, in a womans bosome, is a desire against reason, a furious and vnbridled appetite, which killeth all good motions in her minde, and leaueth no place for vertue.
Shame and infamie waits at the héeles of vnbridled wantons. Wantonnesse is an enemy to the purse, a foe to the person, a canker to the minde, a corrosiue to the conscience, a weakner of the wit, a befotter of the senses, and lastly, a mortall bane to all the bodie; so that thou shalt finde pleasure is the path-way to perdition, and wantonnesse the load-stone to ruth and ruine. Wantonnesse maketh a woman co∣uet beyond her power, to act beyond her nature, and to die before her time. Sensuall and wanton vice hath euer these three companions. First, blindnesse of vnderstanding; secondly, hardnesse of heart; and lastly, want of Grace and perfection. Wantonnesse is inseparably accompa∣nied with the troubling of order, with im∣pudency, sloth, and dissolutenesse. Adultery desireth not procreation, but onely pleasure. Wantonnesse is a strong tower of mischiefe, and hath in it many keepers and many defenders, as Needinesse, An∣ger, Palenesse, Discord, Loue, and Lon∣ging.
Euery good woman makes not for e∣uery man a good wife, no more than one dish of meat can please all stomackes; but euery euill woman makes an abso∣lute ill wife, as a drop of Coloquintida marres the whole pot of pottage. Wanton dwarfe women, or foolish ones, are the worst to make wiues of; for the first brings forth but a race of Pies, and for the latter, there is no∣thing so fulsome as a she-foole. Wantonnesse is attended on by riot, and they two impaire health, consume wealth, and transforme a woman to a beast. Wantonnesse is a sin of no single rank: No ordinary station, that neuer walkes vnattended with a traine of misdemea∣nors at the heeles. Corrupt company is more infections than corrupt aire; therefore let women be aduised in their choise; for that text of thy selfe that could neuer bee expoun∣ded, thy companion shall as thy com∣mentarie, lay open to the world: for it is seene by experience, that if those which are neither good nor euill accompany with those that are good, they are
trans∣formed  into their vertue. If those that are neither good nor euill consort with those that are euill, they are incorporated to their vice. If the good companie with the good, both are made the better; if the euill with the euill, both the worse; for such as the companie is, such is the condition. There be foure vices a wanton woman is euer most troubled with, sloathfulnesse, carelesnes, vaine curiositie, and nicenesse. Hate and Disdain shines in a wantons eyes; Deceit and Treason in their bosome lies. Th' are mad that thinke by any meanes to stay a wantons mind that is disposd to stray. Such is the crueltie of women kind, when they haue shaken off the shamefac'st band, with which wise nature did them strongly bind. t'obey the hests of mans well ruling hand, that then all rule & reason they withstand, to purchase a licentious libertie. But vertuous women wisely vnderstand that they were borne to Humilitie, vnlesse the Heauens them lift to lawfull Soueraigntie.
'Tis certaine that the wanton woman neuer Loues Beautie in her sexe, but Enuie euer. There cannot be a greater clog to man, than to be troubled with a wanton woman. 'Tis euermore obseru'd 'mongst men, that be she Base or Hie: A wanton eye doth guide her wit, and not her wit her Eye. Loose women doe repine their sinnes to heare, and folly flings, if counsail touch thē neare. The foolish and the wanton women vse T'obey them most, who doth them most abuse. A witlesse foole & wanton we may guesse, that leaues the more, & takes her to the lesse. When wantons finely sooth their owne desires, their best cōceits do proue the greatest liers. Liue within Compasse: in Temperance. ABuse not thy body in thy youth by Surfet, Riot, or any other
distemper  through an ouer-weening abilitie of strength; for youth and Nature passe o∣uer many Infirmities that are growing till their age. Liue temperately and vertuously, that thou mayst dye patiently; for who liues most honestly, will dye most willingly: and for thy long dayes and better health on earth, afflict not thy body with too much vnnecessary Physicke, but furnish thy minde in time of plentie to lay vp for it selfe and others in the time of want; for surely her end shall be easie and hap∣pie that death finde with a weake body, but a strong Soule. Grieue not to groane vnder the hand of sicknesse; for as sometimes it purgeth the body from intemperate humors, so doth it oftentimes the Soule from more dangerous securitie, and the rather, since there is no perfect health in this world, but a newtralitie betweene sicknesse and health. The eyes are the instruments of lust, therefore make a couenant with them, that they betray not thy heart to vanitie. Suffer with those that suffer, be cruci∣fied with those
that are crucified: so shalt  thou be glorified with those that are glo∣rified. True grace and Temperance doe not lift vp, but humble a good woman; there∣fore she is not yet partaker of true grace which doth not walke in humilitie of heart. The streames of Gods grace doe flow downwards, not vpwards. God creates of nothing, and he repaires of nothing; that therefore thou maist bée partaker of the Regeneration and Repa∣ration, be nothing in thine owne eyes, that is, attribute nothing to thy selfe, arrogate nothing to thy selfe. Women are weake and fraile; but iudge none frailer than thy selfe: to be inferiour to all, hurts none, to be aboue any, offends many. Temperance is an enemy to lust, and last is an euer-waiting seruant to the plea∣sures of high bloods. Temperance calleth a womun backe from all grosse affects and carnall appe∣tites, and lets her neither exceed in foolish reioycing, nor in vngodly sor∣rowing. Shee is firmely to be accounted tem∣perate, which from the ground of reason can gouerne and bridle the vice of sensu∣alitie,
and all other grosse affections of the minde, and passions. Temperance is the true Peace-maker in all the tumults betweene reason and passion. When the vntamed passions of a wo∣man haue their full careere, and are nei∣ther ouer-ruled with Temperance nor discretion; then is the soule lost and for∣saken, or at least, deformed and misera∣ble; and the more delicately the body is handled, the more stubbornly it wrastleth against the minde; for the heauie bur∣then of the body is onely the oppresson of the soule. Shee cannot commend Temperance that imagineth the best felicitie to consist in pleasure. O it is Temperance, with his golden squire Between our passions, measures out a mean, Neither to melt in pleasures hot desire, Nor fry in heartlesse griefe & dolefull teen: Thrice happie shee that stayes them both betweene. O in what safetie Temperance doth rest, When it finds harbor in a modest brest.
Of all Gods workes which doe this world adorne, There's none more faire, more sweet or ex∣cellent Then womans body, both for power and forme, Whilst it is kept in temperate gouernment. 'Tis harder for to learne faire continence In ioyous pleasure than in grieuous paine, For sweetnes doth allure the weaker sense So strongly, that vnneath it can refraine From that which feeble nature couers fain; But griefe and wrath that be her enemies And foes of life, shee better can restraine, Yet vertue vaunts in both their victories. Let Wolues and Beasts be cruell in their kinds, But women meeke, and of faire temperate mindes. Though men mindes can couer with bold sterne lookes, Pale womens faces are their owne faults bookes. Those vertues that in women praise doe win, Are sober shewes without, chaste thoughts within; True faith & due obedience to their make, And of their children honest care to take.
They melt with words as wax against the Sunne, So weake in many women's modestie, For what sometimes they most would seeme to shield, Another time vnaskt, poore soules they yeeld. Out of Compasse in Temperance. Madnesse. A Mad woman is like a rough stir∣ring Horse, and as he must haue a sharp bit, so must shee haue a sharp restraint. As a blocke though it be decked with gold, pearles, gems, and precious orna∣ments, is not to be regarded except it represent the shape of some thing: euen so a woman be she neuer so rich and glori∣ous, yet if shée want obedience, she is of no account or estimation. Such wiues as would rather haue foo∣lish Husbands whom they might rule, than to be ruled by sober wise men, are like them that would
rather lead a blind  man in an vnknowne path, than follow one that can both see and knoweth the way directly. She that forsakes her husband because she dislikes his manners, is like her that forsakes the Honey least the Bee might sting her. They which sacrificed to Iuno the god∣desse of married women, tooke euer the galls from the beasts which they sacrifi∣ced; signifying thereby, that all anger, madnes, and displeasure should euer be farre from married couples. In three points women and fooles hold small difference; they are full of vaine affections, they are curious and peeuish to please, and euer wilfull to disobay. There is no creature that more desireth honour, and worse keepeth it than a mad woman. The intemperate woman with her light∣nesse, and children with their small know∣ledge, occupy their minds in things pre∣sent: but vertuous wise women do thinke on that is past, they ordaine for that which is present, and with great study and care prouide for the time to come.
There are in outragious womens eyes  two seuerall sorts of teares, the one of griefe, the other of deceit. Beautie in womens faces, and out∣rage in their hearts, are two wormes which fret life, and waste goods. Mad women for a little goodnes looke for a great recompence, but for much euill no chastisement. A fierce beast and a dangerous for is an outragious woman to a Common∣wealth: for shée hath much power to doe much harme, and is not apt to follow any goodnesse. A mad woman once defamed beleeues after in no woman vertue, but defameth all to make her owne vice worthie of a companion. The tongue of a mad woman is a slip∣perie instrument, nimble to doe mischiefe; for commonly by it friendship is decayed, worldly riches diminished, the life most miserably wasted, and infamy and immor∣tall paine purchased. Such a mischieuous euill is the sinne of detraction in the heart of a proud and vn∣ruly woman, that there is neither long familiarilie, accustomed fellowship, nor causes of approued friendship, neither yet
any estate or degree that can once bridle them, or stay them from doing infinite mischiefe. She that is giuen to the vice of detrac∣tion, is worthily subiect to the common hatred of men, and to be eschewed of all as a most pestilent infection; and at her enterance into any place among good women, euery mouth to be either stop∣ped against her, or otherwise opened to hisse her out of doores, as a thing altoge∣ther voyde of delight, and filled vp but with danger onely. Amongst temperate women, madde women are made bright; but amongst madde women, temperate women are made glorious. It is a great madnesse in any woman to amuse vpon those things which are farre beyond her vnderstanding. A faire woman without discretion, is like a faire house and an uill host har∣bored therein. Many times of wise maides becom∣meth foolish wantons, and of foolish wantons, wise maides. Let euery woman behold her selfe in a Looking-glasse, and
if shee appeare  beautifull, let her doe such things as be∣come her beautie; but if shée séeme foule, then let her make good with good man∣ners the beautie which her face lacketh. As the body being alwayes opprest with labour loseth his strength, and so perisheth; so doth the minde of a woman oppressed with passions and pleasures of this world, lose the force, lust, and desire which shee had to the rest of eternall life to come. Excesse of passions may euer hurt, they can neuer profit. When sensualitie reigneth, (especially amongst women) there reason taketh no place. A madde Woman knoweth things done, but a discreet woman conside∣reth things long before they come to passe. Praise and indiscretion can neuer be coupled together. From idle wit there springs a brain-sick will, Which wise men lust, which foolish make a god; This in the shape of vertue reigneth still, But 'tis the onely vice, one worst and odde.
Will puts in practice what the wit deuiseth; Will euer acts, and wit contemplates still, And as from wit the power of wisedome riseth, All other vertues daughters are of will. The heedlesse will true iudgement doth ensnare, Who's rul'd by it doth neuer want her care. Where womens actions measure no regard, There lawlesse will is made his owne regard. Such is the crueltie of women kinde, When they haue maken off the shame-fac't band, With which wise nature did them strongly binde T'obey the hests of mans well-ruling hand, That then all rule & reason they withstand, To purchase a licentious libertie: But vertuous women wisely vnderstand, That they were borne to base humilitie, Vnlesse the Heauens them lift to lawfull souereigntie. What iron band, or what sharp mouthed bit, What chain of Diamond; if such might be,
an bridle womens wrath, or conquer it, nd keepe them in their bounds, and true degree? Craft makes a woman oft appeare in show, Merry and sad, when shee is neuer so. The louely lookes, the sighs that storme so sore, The due of deep dissembling doubtfulnesse, These may attempt, but are of power no more, When beauty leanes to wit & soothfastnes. Liue within Compasse: in Beautie. THere is nothing harder for a woman than to know her selfe; for blinded with beautie and selfe-loue, they flatter themselues in all things. There is in euery woman two pow∣ers, which draw and conduct her; a desire of pleasure bred in the beautie of the bo∣dy, and a good opinion coueting onely good things▪ betweene these two there is continuall
strife in women, and when  the opinion hath the maistry, it maketh a woman sober, chaste, discreet, & quiet: but when desire getteth ye vpper hand, it makes her lustfull, riotous, couetous, & vnquiet. Three things a woman ought to hold re∣markable, her soule, her body, the substance of this world: The soule first, because it is a thing beautifull, & immortall, made after the shape of God himselfe: The body next because it is faire, and is the case and se∣pulcher of the soule, and the nearest seruant to the secret spirit: lastly the substance of this world being necessary, and the prin∣cipall instruments and tools of the body. Let then the eyes of euery womans in∣ward minde first respect the beautie of her soule, then the comelinesse of her body, and lastly, the necessitie of riches. She that loueth beautie more than ver∣tue, shall either lack that she coueteth, or els lose what she hath got with great paine. Shée that is in loue with her owne beau∣tie is like one that trauelleth on the Seas; if she escape the dangers (which are scan∣dals) shee is fortunate, but if shée perish, shee is wilfully deceiued. Trust not beautie, for it neuer payeth what it promiseth.
Beautie in this world is the delight of n houre, and the sorrow of many dayes; ut in the world to come, eternall rest and ong ioy. Beautie is of two sorts, as of the body, which is a séemly compositiō of all ye mem∣bers, wherein all the parts with a certain grace agree together; and the other of the winde, which is a conueniency meet for the excellency of man or woman, and that wherin their nature doth differ from other liuing creatures; & as the outward beauty moueth & reioiceth the eies, so this shining in their liues by order & moderation, both in deeds & words, draweth vnto them the hearts of them amongst whom they liue. Beauty is such a fading good, that it can be scarce possessed, before it be vanished. The greatest gift that euer heauen be∣stowed on a woman, is beautie; for it both delighteth the eye, contenteth the minde, & winneth good fauour of all men. The beauty of the body withereth with age, and is impaired by sicknesse, but the beautie of the soule, which is innocency and humilitie, can neuer be consumed. A beautifull countenance is a silent commendations.
The fairest creature that euer Go created was the world. Beautie, honor, and wealth, are thre deepe perswasions to make loue frollick and men miserable. In all things diuisible there is some¦thing more, something lesse, somethin equall more or lesse: what can be more e¦quall than beautie or wit? The Scorpion if hee touch neuer s lightly, inuenometh the whole body; th least sparke of wild-fire sets the whol house on a flame, the Cockatrice kils me with his sight, the sting of loue and beauti woundeth deadly, the flame of fancy set all the thoughts on fire, and the eyes of louer wounded with beautie, are accoun¦ted incurable. Shée that is an enemy to beautie is a fo to nature, and shée that doats on beauti is a high traytor to nature. Beauties that should be concealed, too grosly discouered, are faire signes hung out to entice to an vnhospitable Inne. Beautie without honesty is poyson pre∣serued in a box of gold. Let not a womans beauty, but her ver∣tue be her dower, for her
good deeds will  remaine when age hath taken her beautie from her. Let no woman striue to excell in beau∣tie, but hold the golden meane, which is the true mediocritie and best part of any action, and must be vsed in all things: it containeth the full effects of prudence tou∣ching gouernment, and tranquilitie con∣cerning the soule. Curiositie and extremity banished wo∣man from the first modesty of her nature. To liue on the mountaines, and haue too much heat, is to be Sunne-burnt; to liue in the valley and haue too little, is barren; to hold the meane is euer most fruitfull. 'Tis sacred Beautie is the fruit of sight, The curtesie that speaks before the tongue, The feast of soules, the glory of the lights, Enuy of age, and euerlasting young, Pitties commander, Cupids richest throne, Musicke entranced, neuer dully sung: The summe and court of all proportion. And that I may dull speeches least afford, All Rhetorickes flowers in lesse than a word.
'Tis beauty that is a womans golden crown, Mans conqueresse, and feminine renowne, Not ioynd with loue, who deare yet euer sold it? For Beauty's cheape, except loues eye behold it. Beautie is still an Adamant to all, And Natures bush that passengers doth call. Beautie it selfe doth of it selfe perswade The eyes of men without an Orator: What needeth then Apologies be made, To set forth that which is so singular? O how can Beauty master the most strong, And simple Truth subdue auēging wrong? O what is he whose youth can say he loues not, Or who so old that womens beauty moues not? Neuer were cheeks of roses, locks of amber Ordaind to liue imprison'd in a chamber. Heauen made Beauty like it selfe to view, Not to be lockt vp in a smokie mew: A rosie vertuous cheeke is heauens gold, Which all men ioy to touch, all to behold.
The ripest corne dyes if it be not reapt, Beauty alone is lost too char'ly kept. Out of Compasse in Beautie, Odiousnesse. TO exceed Nature or thy condition, is a ryotous excesse in lust, appa∣rell, or other ornament, it is also a part of pride, and contrary to decency and com∣linesse. Excesse of brauery brings a woman of wealth quickly to pouertie, and excesse of beautie to hate and odiousnesse. They that rather delight to decke their bodies than their soules, seeme women rather created for their bodies than their soules. As the wéed cannot be esteemed preci∣ous for the faire flower which it beareth, so ought no woman to be accounted ver∣tuous for the gay garment shée weareth, or the beauty shée borroweth.
Beautie may be ouerthrowne with age,  and apparell consumed with moaths: what folly is it then for women to delight in that which an houre can waste, or a very little worme destroy? Raine can neuer cause the Corne to bring forth any fruit which is sowne vp∣on hard stones, nor speech cannot per∣swade a proud woman to become an ene∣my to braue apparell. Gorgeous garments are markes of pride, and nests of riotousnesse. As a man would iudge one to be ill at ease which weareth a plaster vpon his face, or one that hath beene scourged to be punished by the Law; so doth painting betoken in a woman, a diseased soule mar∣ked with adultery. As it is no wisedome in admiring the scabard to despise the blade, so is it meere folly to praise a woman for her brauery, & discommend her for her modesty. Odious is that beautie which sleepeth not with the face. If by the ciuill Law the child may haue an action of the case against him which shall deface the portraiture of his father, we may well imagine what action God will haue against those women which by
artificiall painting, seeke to correct his workmanship. Painting hastens wrinkles before old age come. All kinde of painting, artificiall gar∣nishing, and colouring of haire, was for∣bidden among the Spartans, despised of wise men, and loathed of good men. There are three things which cost dear∣ly, and consume quickly; a faire woman that is vnchaste, a rich garment that hath many cuts, and a wealthy stocke in the hands of an ill husband. The tongue of a bitter woman pier∣ceth deeper than her eyes. A painted womans sorrowes, howso∣euer extreme, ought not to be redressed: for being trimmed vp with dissimulation, she should not be beleeued. A painted womans eyes haue two sorts of teares, the one of sorrow, the other of dissimulation. False beautie in the faces of women, & folly in their heads, are two wormes that fretteth life, and wasteth goods. Ill women for little goodnesse looke for great praise, but for much euill no cha∣stisement.
A fierce beast and a dangerous enemy to the common-wealth is a wicked wo∣man, for shee is of much power to doe much harme. An ill womans heart is full of holes, apt to receiue, but not to retaine. He that can endure a curst wife, needs not feare the Deuill for his companion. The closet of a bad womans thought is euer open, and the depth of her heart hath a string that stretcheth to her tongues end. A painted womans face is a liuer smea∣red with carrion, her beauty baits of dead wormes, her lookes nets, and her words inticing charmes. An vnconstant faire woman may bée likened to Prasiteles Picture which hee made of Flora, before which if one stood directly, it seemed to weepe; if on the left side, it seemed to laugh; if on the right side, to sleepe. A sparke of beautie burnes a world of creatures, When it is of sophisticated features. O beauty, still thine Empire swims in blood
And in thy peace warre stores himselfe of food. Beautie a begger, fie it is too bad, When in it selfe sufficiency is had: It was not made to please the wandring eie, But an attire t'adorne sweet modesty. If modesty and women once doe seuer, Farewell all fame, farewell all name for euer. O beautie that betrayes thy selfe to euery amorous eye, To trap thy proud professors, what is it but wantons try? Where through it seldome haps, the faire from meane deceits to flye. Truce, war, and woe, doe wait at beauties gate, Time lost, laments, reports, & priuy grudge, And last fierce loue is but a partiall iudge, Who yeelds for seruice shame, for friend∣ship hate. The Bees of Hybla haue besides sweet honey, smarting stings; And Beautie doth not want a bait that to repentance brings.
The fairest cheeke hath oftentimes a soule Leprous as sin it selfe, than hell more foule. Liue within Compasse: in Humilitie. SHee that gathereth vertues without Humilitie, casteth dust against the winde, and loseth her labour. Happie is that woman whose calling is great, and her spirit humble. Humilitie is a twinne to Chastitie and Nobilitie, and as necessary in a woman as her virginitie. Nothing can repaire a decayed Chasti∣tie but true Humilitie. Since the Countrey which a woman desires to dwell in, is high and heauenly, and the way thither Lowlinesse and Hu∣militie, why then desiring this Countrey, should they refuse the way? There are three degrees of Humilitie: the first, of Repentance; the second, a de∣sire of Righteousnesse; and the third, the workes of mercy. Shée that cannot haue what shée would,
must be humbly content with what shee can get. Sufferance maketh women Angels, but pride maketh them Deuils. Let not thankes waxe old, when gifts are in thy possession. She that refuseth to buy good counsell cheape, shall buy repentance deare. Mocke not at any in misery, but by it auoid the like misfortune. Giue no vaine and vnnecessary gifts, as is Armour to thy maids, Bookes to thy plow-swaine, or Nets to a Stu∣dent. Let thy best apparell be Iustice, and thy vppermost garment Chastitie; so shalt thou be happy, and thy dayes prosper. Let Vertue be thy life, Humilitie thy loue, Honour thy fame, and Heauen thy felicitie. Let not thy bounty exceed thy meanes, nor thy free mind thy modesty, kéepe thine eye in equall pace with thine eare, and thy tongue short of thy feet. Rather liue wal'd vp with an Ancho∣rite, than hous'd with an euill woman. Be not secure, lest want of care pro∣cure thy calamitie; nor
too carefull, lest  pensiue thoughts oppresse thee with mise∣ry. Behold thy selfe in a Looking-glasse, and if thou appeare beautifull, doe such things as becomes thy beautie; but if thou seeme foule, then performe with good manners the dutie which thy face wanteth. If thy Parents waxe poore, supply their want with thy wealth; if froward with age, beare patiently with their im∣perfections. Liue and hope as if thou wert not to liue a moment. Neuer wish impossible wishes, for it expresseth but a wanton passion, or a most greedy couetousnesse, both grounded on folly. To friuolous questions silence is euer the best answer. Beware what thou grantest in any sort, for inconueniences follow one in the necke of the other. If thou doubt in any thing, aske counsell of the wise, and be not angry at their reproofe, least (as Martiall the Poet said) it be truth that thou louest, not truth.
Shée that talketh much to little purpose, is like him that sailes with a side-winde, and is borne to a wrong shoare. As a woman without humilitie is vn∣pleasant, so humilitie without seueritie draweth neare to prostitution. She only may properly be called a womā that in her behauiour gouerneth her selfe like a woman, that is to say, conformable to such things as reason willeth, and not as the motions of sensualitie requireth. Where any demand is a iest, the fittest answer is a scoffe. Rather labour to be deliuered from contempt, than practise to be reuenged. The eye can neuer offend if the minde would rule the eye, but where there is de∣uision, there is euer confusion. Solitarinesse is the onely slie enemy that separateth both woman and man from doing well. Liking is not alwayes the childe of beautie, but iealousie is euer the busie har∣benger to disdaine. Shee that will needs stirre affections in others, must first shew the same passion in her selfe.
Shee that blameth another, must  first be blamelesse her selfe, especially in the matter she blameth another for. Forbearance of speech is most dange∣rous when necessitie requireth to speake. Humilitie is aged, hoary, gray, With looke full lowly cast, and gate full slowe: Who on a staffe his steps doth stay, To whom who comes must euer stoope most low; For strait and narrow is the way that he doth show. Humilitie to heauen is step and staire, Both for deuotion, sacrifice, and prayer. The bending knee in safetie still doth goe, when others stumble, as too stiffe to bow. Ah, God shield maid, that any one should learne to looke aloft: This reed is rife, that oftentimes great climbers fall vnsoft. In humble dales is footing fast, the troad is not so tickle: And though one fall through heedles hast, yet is his misse not mickle.
As on th'vnsauory stock the Lilly's borne, And as the Rose growes on the pricking thorne: So modest life, with sobs of glorious smart, And cryes deuout, comes from an humble heart. More honor's in humilitie, than safetie is in wals: Ill liuers proue not monuments, saue onely in their falls. Meeknesse this noble vertue and diuine, Doth make a woman still so rare and od, As in that one she most resembleth God. Euer as rage kindleth the fire of wrath, Meeknes to quench it store of water hath. Out of Compasse in Humilitie, Pride. PRide perceiuing Humilitie to be ho∣nourable, desires oftentimes to bée couered with her garment, for feare least appearing
alwayes in her owne likenesse,  she should be little regarded. Immoderate wealth causeth pride, pride bringeth hatred, hatred worketh re∣bellion, rebellion maketh an alteration and changeth Kingdomes, euen in wo∣mens dissentions. That kind of fantasticke contemplati∣on which tends to solitarinesse, is but a glorious title to proud idlenesse. The proud conceit of young women, is, that they can speake wisely, when they cannot vnderstand themselues. When Dogs fall on snarling, Serpents on hissing, and Women on weeping, the first meanes to bite, the second to sting, and the last to deceiue. As rewards are necessary for well-do∣ers, so chastisements are meet for proud offenders. Pride is alwayes accompanied with Folly, Audacitie, Rashnesse, Impudency, and Solitarinesse: as if one would say that the proud woman is abandoned of all the world, euer attributing that to her selfe which is not, hauing much more boast than matter of worth. Pride did first spring in men from too much abundance of
wealth, in women  from too much trust in beautie, and the flattery of men. Pride is the mother of Enuie; strangle her, and her daughter dieth. She that knowes her selfe best, will e∣uer esteeme her selfe least. It is hard for a faire woman not to be proud. A proud woman is like Theocritus his fisherman; shée onely feeds the vanitie of her fancy with dreames of gold. If a mans folly make a woman once his equall, her pride will soone make her selfe his superior. Women be of so tender condition, that they will complaine for a small cause, and for a lesse will rise vp into infinite pride. There is no creature that more desires honour, worse kéeps it, and sooner loseth it, than a proud woman. Proud women in mischiefe are euer wiser than men. It is naturall to a proud woman, to despise that which is offered her; and death to her to be denied any thing shée deman∣deth. Sophocles being asked, why, when he brought in the
persons of women, hee  made them alwayes good, whereas Euri∣pides made them all bad: Because (quoth he) I present women as they should be, and Euripides presented them such as they are. A proud womans will is like a Sheffild knife, sometimes so sharpe it will cut a haire, and otherwhiles so blunt it must needs goe to the grindstone. If women be beautifull, they are to be won with prayses; if coy, with prayers; if proud, with gifts; if wonton, with pro∣mises; but if good, with prouidence and vertue. Those women which esteeme them∣selues most wise, are euermore the soonest tickled with selfe-loue. A proud womans mind is euer vncer∣taine: it hath as many new deuices as a tree hath leaues, for shée is alwayes desi∣rous of change, and seldome loueth him heartily with whom shee hath beene long conuersant. Trust not a proud woman when shee weepeth, for it is her nature to shed teares when shée wants her will. A proud woman in her wit is pregnable, in her smile
deceiuable, in her frowne re∣uengeable,  and lastly in her death accep∣table. Of grisly Pluto, Pride the daughter was, And sad Proserpina the Queene of hell, Yet doth she thinke her pearles worthy to passe, That parētage with pride so doth she swell; And thundring Ioue that hie in heauen doth dwell, And wield the world, shee claimed for her fire; Or if that any else doth Ioue excell, For to the highest she doth still aspire; Or if ought higher were, then that doth she desire. O pride the shelf close shrouded in the port Of this lifes Ocean, drowning all resort. Pride makes her rounds, for shee hath neuer end, And Soners, for she neuer leaues her noise: She makes her dumps, if any thing offend, And to her idoll selfe, with warbling voice, Sings Hyms & Anthems of especiall choice: And yet prides quire's put to silence clean, Wanting a Base, a Tenor, and a Meane,
Pride is the scourge of sin, the Deuils fee, The head of hell, the bough, the branch, the tree. From which doe spring and sprout such fleshly seeds, As nothing else but moane and mischiefe breeds. Such is the nature still of haughtie pride, Can nothing lesse than others praise abide. A proud maid may her owne musitian be, Her heads deuice makes pauens to her heart This hart with lips & pleasures dāceth free, All but the measures framing euery part; Like Organs worthy of so sweet an Art, Her thoughts playes marches on her vaul∣ting mind, And Memory her Recorder stands behind. FINIS.
