22124 99841889 6504
A SECVLAR SERMON CON∣CERNING THE DO∣ctrine of the Gospell by the goodnes and power of God restored in the fifteenth age from the birth of our Lord Iesus Christ. MADE BY THE REVEREND AND WOR∣thy Preacher Mr. ABRAHAM SCVLTETVS, in the High-dutch tongue. AFTER BY ANOTHER TRANSLA∣ted into Latin, and now out of Latin into English. LONDON, Printed by William Iones, dwelling in Red-crosse streete neare S. Giles Church, Anno 1618.
A SECVLAR SER∣MON MADE IN THE Arch-Palatine court, in the yeare 1617. And of Ianuary the first. Seculum itin, signifieth  age, contain an hundered yeares. There this Sermon  called secular cause it contneth the story  the last hun yeares, whe the Gospell  restored, from  yeare 1517,  this yeare THat which is written by the Kingly Prophet Dauid wee see Psa. 145. certainely helpeth at this pre∣sent. The mercy of God is ouer all his workes. For, from this mercy wee doe freely acknow∣ledge that wee haue receiued this benefit, that we liue, and in good health begin this new yeare. From this mercy it is, that being free from pestilence, and death, wee haue not seene bloody warres, nor other publicke ca∣lamities. From the same mercy we haue receiued it, that by the celebration of the Natiuitie of Christ, (which we haue heere liberty solemnly to keepe) we ioyfully vnderstand, how, for our good, Christ was
borne at Bethlehem; how the Angels sweetely deligh∣ted vs with their hymnes, how the shepheards of Bethlehem daunced, with a holy ioy; and how Simeon and Anna entertained with kisses the Sauiour newly borne. Goe too then, O Palatinate, magnifie the Lord thy God with due praises: and thou O Heidle∣berg, with pious affection, publish his name and glo∣ry, which is most worthy to bee worshipped and a∣dorned. And because now this is the hundred yeere, since which time the euerlasting and Almightie God, loo∣king vpon our Auncestors with the eye of his grace and fauour, deliuered them out of the horrible dark∣nesse of Popery, and brought them into the cleare and faire light of the Gospell, let vs also looking backe to these times, behold and consider, how graci∣ous, God hath declared himselfe to his Church in the saide hundred yeares, and how mercifully hee hath gathered it together, hauing beene before dis∣persed and scattered heere and there, and being ga∣thered, how wonderfully hee hath preserued it, vnto this present time. 2 For so it will be made manifest, that the Lord Ie∣sus Christ, doeth worthily and agreeably to his pro∣ceeding, beare the name of Iesus (that is a Sauiour) that was giuen at his Circumcision, expressing it by really sauing his people, and to be our true Iesus and Sauiour, not onely by the excellency of his merit, but also by the vertue and power of his effectuall operati∣on and working which he sheweth out most mightily in, and towards his Church, and people.
Moreouer also (as I perswade my selfe) here will be matter and occasion aboundantly ministred vnto vs, for the celebration and praise of the name of God, where we shall behold his wisedome, omnipotency, goodnes and iustice, euery where most clearly shining in his gouernment of the Church in this century, or last hundred yeeres. And that I may shortly comprehend all this mat∣ter: euen as God in times past reformed the world by the Apostles and their faithfull successors: So like∣wise in the fifteenth hundred yeere from the birth of Christ, God I say began to order the reformation and gouernment of his Church? All which things my purpose is at this present, euidently to shewe and demonstrate vnto you. 1 Whereas it behoued that Christ should be borne one thousand sixe hundred and seuenteene yeeres a∣gone: God sent Iohn Baptist as a forerunner, that hee might prepare and make ready a way for the Lord: In like sort when the same Christ was (as it were) to bee borne againe, it pleased God that diuers preparatory helpes and furtherances to the rest that was to follow should be furnished, before he tooke in hand the re∣formation it selfe of Christian Religion. Amongst which meanes of preparing way to the saide reformation, most worthily I may name and ac∣count first the liberall arts and sciences, and the daily exercises of good sciences, and chiefely of the three learned tongues and languages, as instruments to make way to the reformation that was to follow. In the next place I nominate and ranke Vniuersities and particular Schooles (as they call them) which by a
commendable purpose and worthy example for imi∣tation and following, were in that time, partly foun∣ded and erected, and partly also preserued and en∣larged. To these I adde also the inuention of the Art of Printing, which before had ben vtterly vnknowne, and by meanes whereof it came to passe that Doctor Luthers bookes, being dispersed and spread into di∣uers and most large countries and nations, came into very many mens hands, and were euery where read and diligently studied. Here also amongst the afore∣saide meanes, the translation of the Scriptures is not to be passed by, but attentiuely to be considered. For in the yeere, one thousand fiue hundred and fifteene, the olde Testament sawe the light that was to bee wi∣shed for, being published in print in the originall He∣brew tongue by Frauncis Ximenius, being Arch-bi∣shop of Toledo, and a Cardinall: and so likewise was the new Testament printed in the yeere next fol∣lowing. Which bookes opened the eies of many, and mar∣uelously raised their desire, so that being inflamed with a zeale diligently to knowe and search out the heauenly trueth, they might easily discerne, how far the Popes of Rome had departed from the puritie of the Scripture. 2 In time past also, when Christ went about the reformation of the world, hee called not to that ser∣uice the Scribes and Pharisees which were of great authoritie, but hee chose vnto it twelue Disciples, men despised by the world, and esteemed base, which for the most part were fisher-men. So likewise one hundred yeeres agone, Christ ta∣king
in hand the worke of a new reformation, vsed not thereunto any purple-cloathed Praelate, nor Car∣dinall, whose names were most florishing and famous, but he raised vp hereunto for this seruice Martin Lu∣ther a Monke of the order of the Augustinians, Phillip Melanchthon a professor and reader of the Greeke tongue in the Vniuersitie of Wittenberg, and two Priests of small account, to wit, Huldrich Zwinglius, and Iohn Oecolampadius. 3 Moreouer the doctrine of the Gospell breaking out, (at the first publishing of it by the Apostles) with a diuine and most powerfull force, suddenly like the lightning enlightned the vniuersall world, so as e∣uen in the time of Irenaeus reported to haue bin taught by Polycarpus scholler to Iohn the Apostle, Christ came to be famously known by the nations and peo∣ple, both of the East and West parts of the world: euen so, when as one hundred yeeres agone, after that the Idolatry of the Papists running (as if they had beene mad or bewitched after the worship of I∣mages) being discouered, the contrite and wounded hearts of men were led (as by the hand) from their confidence in their owne merits, to the precious ran∣some of the death of Christ, it is incredible to be spo∣ken, with how great celeritie and speede, and with what great successe, the puritie of true Religion pier∣ced into all countries. For it rested not now onely in Cities; neither was it content to remaine amongst the inferiour of the Nobilitie and gentry: but it en∣tred into the Courts euen of Kings and Emperours, and gat their allowance and approbation. May it please you then (for proofe hereof) that we
first viewe the Cities? Amongst these, the first that flourished and were famous for the praise of sinceri∣tie of the Gospell, were these: Strausborough, Breme, Norinberge, Worms, Erford, Hoslaria, and Embden of Frize-land. All these chearfully & with ready mindes receiued, and entertained the trueth comming vnto them, in the very first beginning. These also kindled by & by a feruēt zeale of Religion in other countries. Amongst these were Maydenborow, Hamborow, Lubeck, Brunswick, Wismaria, Rostochium, and almost all the Ci∣ties of the Empire. Nay furthermore in Lifeland, the cities of Riga, Derbatum, Renalia, in Helutia or Switzer∣land, Basile, Scafhusium, Tigrum or Zurich, Berne, and diuers others. All which Cities as they embraced the doctrine of the Gospell with great gladnes & gratu∣lations, so Wolfgongus Capito hath left written a singu∣lar & memorable act, in this respect, of the men of Berne, which is this: Hauing receiued the Gospell, they set their prisoners at libertie, and proclaimed free∣dome, for such as they had banished out of the land, to returne into their Country againe, yeelding this notable reason for their so doing. For said they, if we would haue dismissed & discharged our malefactors and prisoners in the honour of an earthly King, that should haue come vnto vs. How much more now ought we then sith Christ the King of glory is come vnto vs, bringing with him the most glorious bene∣fit of euerlasting redemption? And therefore we most earnestly wish and desire that as much as might be, all men may be made partakers of so great a benefit and deliuerance as is now bestowed vpon vs. In going out from the Cities, let vs view the degree
of Knighthood. In this degree there attained a per∣petuall Crowne of honour that noble Frauncis of Sic∣kengen, Huldrick of Huttn, and Siluester of Schawen∣burg. For when Luther was miserably vexed and per∣secuted by the Pope, they vndertooke the defending and protecting of him with al their force and power. And when Luther was excommunicated, and was thinking to flie into Bohemia for refuge, Schawenber∣gius before mentioned, offered him free accesse vnto him, and promised him a company of a hundred horsemen of Franconia to conduct him safely to him. Of this praise are also pertakers, the Landshadii, Steinacenses, Helmstatenses, Gemingenses, and Mensin∣genses, who euery one of them from the yeare 1521, and 1522, had procured the sinceritie of the Gospell to bee publickly preached in their territories. In whose steps, Iohn of Salhausen of Bohemia, treading did the same, and being accused for it to Lewis King of Hungary and Bohemia, hee defended himselfe with a notable Apology. Now amongst the Princes that receiued the Gos∣pell, the heroicall worthies of the house of Saxonie obtained the principall place, to wit, Frederick the wise, Iohn the sincere, and Iohn Frederick the constant, being Electors: whose most commendable example, euen straightwayes from the beginning followed, Le∣wis Count Palatine the Duke of Bipont, George Mar∣ques of Brandborow, Marques Albertus Duke of Prussia, Ernestus Duke of Brunswick and Luneburg, Frauncis Duke of Luneburg, Phillip Landgraue of Hassia, Wolf∣gangus Prince of Anhalt, and Frederick the second, Duke of Silesia, Lignicum, and Briga.
From thence the fame of the Gospell sounding all abroad, there opned their gates also to the Lord Iesus Christ in their countries, these Princes. Iohn Duke of Cleue, and his successor William (although there fell 1533. out some such causes and times as suffered them not to finish and perfect the reformation which they had begun, so as it had beene to be wished. These princes also embraced the Gospell, Hudrick 1534. Duke of Wirtemberg, with his brother George, Earle of Wirtemberg, and Mnbelgard, and Barinus and Phillip 1537. Dukes of Pomerania, Ioachin the second Elector of 1538. Brandenburg, & his brother Iohn Seuerus, Henry Duke 1539. of Saxonie father of Mourice and Augustus Electors, 1543. Hermannus Arch-bishop of Coullen, Charles Marques of Baden, Iulius Duke of Brunswicke, Gotthardus Duke 1556. 1568. of Curland, William Prince of Orenge, to whom the lowcountrymen are much beholding in that respect. For what should I speake of the Arch-Palatine countrey? wherein wee haue the reformation made by the Electors, that is begun by Frederick the second, 1546. continued by Otto Henricus, and finished & brought to perfection by Frederick the third, to his eternall and greatest honour, and our vnspeakeable benefit and comfort. Neither was Lewis the peaceable Ele∣ctor estranged from fauouring the Gospel, seeing that 1538. his brother Frederick graciously graunted free exer∣cise of the Religion of the Gospell to eight cities ly∣ing in one precinct in the higher country of the Pala∣tinate, which are Amberg, Neufore, Kam, Nafurg, Wei∣den, Nanpurg, Aubac, and Chmnate. Herein also it sec∣meth most worthy to be remembred, that a Prince of the Empire George Earle of Anhalt, a Prince of most 1548.
approued pietie and holinesse, is saide to haue estee∣med the doctrine of the Gospell so precious, that hee doubted not himselfe in his own person, out of a rare and extraordinary zeale to deliuer it to his subiects preaching vnto them. We haue heard also, that the same Prince graed with a mariage-Sermon, the E∣lector Augustus, and his noble wife, being publickely maried according to the accustomed right and man∣ner of the Church. For which cause the Queene of Denmarke ioyfully gratulating the spouse her daughter, saide often, that no greater grace could happen to her in the world. After these Princes followed also Kings, euery of them in their seuerall times and distances of yeares. Amongst these, the first was Frederick King of Den∣marke, who hauing shaken off the yoake of the Pope, embraced the pure doctrine of the word of God. Soone after followed him Gustarus King of Sweden, Mary Queene of Hungary, sister to the Emperour Charles, Margaet of Valoys, Queene of Nauarre, sister to Frauncis King of Fraunce, to whom shee most ear∣nestly cōmended often-times, the cause of such Chri∣stians as being exiled, fled for refuge into Fraunce, yeelding her selfe most gratious vnto them, yea and as if she had borne the kind affection of a mother to∣wards them. Such a one was also Renata, the daugh∣ter of Lewis the twelfth, King of Fraunce, who hauing beene maried to Hercules Duke of Ferrary, enlight∣ned the darkenesse of Italy it selfe with the light of the Gospell. And when shee had returned widow and dowager into Fraunce, in the tempestuous and stormy time of the most foule and shamefull massacre, and
slaughter extreamly raging in Paris, and euery where else in Fraunce, in the yeare 1572. she reached forth a gratious and helpefull hand, for the reliefe of the most afflicted state of many godly persons: and a∣mongst others shee receiued and entertained that most religious and worthy teacher maister Daniel Tos∣sanus, together with his wife and children, and chear∣fully patronized and defended him in the time of extreame danger. Now if wee behold and consider the reformation of the English Churches, here commeth to my mind, and as a most beautifull and comfortable Starre shi∣neth Edward the sixt, the most gratious King of Eng∣land, who being inkindled with an heroicall Spirit and zeale, desired those Churches to bee throughly cleansed from Popish Idolatry. After also, his sister Queene Elizabeth followed his pietie and most reli∣gious example both with like affection and successe. What? did not also Iames Hamelton Viceroy in Scotland, first permit and make free to euery one that would, the reading of the Bible in the English tongue, and the order of prayer. By which worthy act, the true Christian Religion straightwaies tooke so great increase, as that the States in Parliament prouided by publicke lawe in the yeare 1561, that all the people should liue quietly and in peace without reuiling, or iniurying one another for any pretence or excuse of Religion. Moreouer this is also manifest by certaine proofes, that these three Emperours Charles the fift, Ferdinan∣do and Maximillian departed out of this life, resting vpon the same comfort and faith, which Luther ta∣king
out of the Scriptures, preached and published, in that hee shewed and taught that all the hope of e∣uerlasting life consisteth in the death of Christ. After these notable personages of the ciuill state, let vs now come also and remember the teachers of the Church: wherein we may consider that after the Apostles time, God raised vp almost in a continuall succession most worthy teachers, such as these were, Ignatius, Policarpus, Iustinus Martyr, Clement of Alex∣andria, Athenagoras, Origen, Cyprian, Tertullian, Athana∣sius, Epiphanius, Hilarius, Basil, Gregory of Nazianzene, Ierome, Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostome and many o∣thers, by whose worthy seruice & labour, the worke of the Reformation of the world begun by the Apo∣stles, was happily and with great successe proceeded in, and furthered. And euen so to those first goodly and glorious lights of the Church in Doctrine and Diuinitie, Lu∣ther, Melanchton, ZWinglius and Oecolampadius, God added & adioyned other teachers, that were men fa∣mous for their pietie and learning, who receiuing the Gospell from the former, as a lampe and a light deli∣uered vnto them (the fowlest errors of Popery ha∣uing beene discouered) haue brought with them a clearer and greater light of vnderstanding and know∣ledge of the bookes of the Bible. In Helvetia and Switzerland, who is ignorant that there haue beene many, who partly by preaching, and partly by writing, haue serued the Church with great diligence and profit? Amongst whom these men are worthy of immortall praise: Henry Bullinger, Rodolph Gualter, Oswald Myconias, Conrade Pellicane,
Berthall Haller, Gasper Megander, Leo Iuda, Benedict Are∣tius, Iohn Wolfe, Lewis Lauater, Iosias Simler, Bibliander, William Stuckius. Doe we demaund what teachers they haue had in high Germany? Surely in that countrey there hath beene great plenty of notable teachers. Such as were these, Ambrose Blawrer, Iohn Swickius, Martin Bucer, Malthias Tellius, Wolfangus Capito, Caspar Hedio, An∣drew Osiander of Hala in Swevia, Erardus Schnepfius, and Matin Frechtius at Tubinga, Ambrose, Mollerus and Iohn Hesse at Wratislavia or Bresla; Conrade, Somius at Vlms, Wolfangus Musculns at Augusta or Ausborow, Francis Lambert, Andrew Hperias, Iohn Pincer, Denis Melander in Hassia, and in Wittemberg Iasper Cruciger both the father and the sonne; Georg Maior, Iohn Bu∣genhagius, Paul Eber, Iohn Foster, Iohn Auenar, Henry Moller, Frederick Widebrame, and Christopher Pezelius. In Livonia or Lief-land there haue beene worthy Preachers, as Andrew Cnophius and others, and in Borusia, Iohn Poliander and Iohn Brismana; in the lower Saxonie, Vrbanus Regius, Hermane Browne, and Albert Hardenbergius, in Frisia, Micronius, Menso, Altingus, and diuers others. And who is there amongst vs whom the remem∣brance of these famous men doeth not moue and ef∣fect with singular delight, to wit, of William Farell, Pe∣ter Viret, Iohn Caluin, Austin Marlorate, Theodore Beza, Antony Sadeel, and of Phillip Mory of Plessay, and o∣thers, who partly by teaching, and partly by writing, haue mightily ouerthrowen Popery, and aduanced the Gospell of Iesus Christ. Neither hath this fauour of God beene wanting
vnto Spaine. For what men Spaine hath had teachers of the Euangelicall doctrine, the same it hath also most glorious Martyrs, to wit, Frauncis Drianda, Diazius, Doctor Constantine, Confessor to the Emperour Charles the fift. Italy it selfe also hath sent vs ouer from thence most excellent Diuines to the very great benefite of our Churches, Peter Martyr, Ierom Zanchius, & Immanuell Tremellius. These men also in Scotland, haue left vs most ample and large fruites of their seruice; for the Gos∣pell, Iohn Knoxe, Robert Rollock, Iohn Iohnston, and di∣uers others. But in England God hath set out, as vpon a Thea∣ter and stage to be seene by all the world, very many famous and learned men, who haue stoutely defen∣ded and maintained the doctrine of the Gospell a∣gainst the deceitfull impostures of the Antichrist of Rome. And such were these, Thomas Cranmer Arch bishop of Canterbury, Hugh Latimer, Iohn Hooper, Nicholas Ridley, Iohn Rogers, Hugh Philpot, Iohn Iuell, Laurance Humphery, with William Whitaker, Iohn Rainolds, William Perkins, William Fulke, and an infinite number of o∣thers, whom it were too long to rehearse. How should I bee silent of the land of Denmarke which hath had most famous Preachers of the Gos∣pell, to wit, Palladius, Hemingius, Macabaeus, &c. The Hungarians also speake of Michael Starinus as of their glory, who reformed many particular Chur∣ches in it, and set Ministers of the word ouer them, to whom hee himselfe prescribed what order was to bee
held for the making of Sermons profitable and fruit full, and in what maner the Sacraments were to be ad∣ministred. They will recite in like maner Steuen Szegeden, Paul Thurius, Iasper Charles, Peter Melius, Martin Hollopaeus, Mathew Scaricaus, Thomas Fabricius of Tholna, and many others. And that I may mention no more, the Churches of Poland, euen to this day, not without a thankefull remembrance they speake of that worthy noble per∣sonage Iohn Alaskaw, of the Earles of Gorkaw, and the Lords, Oselinians, who in their time were a defence and an ornament to the doctrine of the Gospell. So doe they likewise speake of those notable Di∣uines, Erasmus Glisner, Georg Israell, Iohn Laurence, Bal∣thasar Euchner, Iohn Turnorius, and others who haue fruitfully deliuered the Gospell to the people. 5 Now to extend the comparison begun yet fur∣ther, in the beginning God, who is most and onely wise, spread and propagated the Gospell, by meanes which in appearance, were directly contrary to the furtherance of it: such as was the ouerthrow of Ieru∣salem, and the dispersion of Christs Disciples into di∣uers parts of the world. And the same course hath God obserued euery wherein our time. In the yeare 1522, that noble Gentleman Frauncis Sickingen had gathered so many worthy men into his Castle of Landscale, as might seeme to haue beene suf∣ficient to haue furnished some Vniuersitie, and fa∣mous Schoole. For at one and the same time, hee had with him Iohn Oecolampadius, Martin Bucer, Iohn Schwebelius, Iaspar Aquila. Now, no long time after, when he was besieged by
certaine Princes, he left it to the pleasure of those Diuines, to goe for their best safety and securitie where euery one of them would. By which occasion of that siege & of their disper∣sion, Iohn Schwebelius going to the Count-Palatine Lew∣es Duke of Biont, he laid there the first stone of the Euangelicall reformation. Martin Bucer went to Straws∣borowe, which with what fruit and benifit of the Church he did it, is manifest by the common voice and testimonie of all Germanie. Iohn Oecolampadius tooke his iorney to Basile, to which Citie he so made knowen and apparent his learning and pietie, that he was invited and desired with most earnest request to take paines to read and preach vnto them. Wherevnto after that he had yeel∣ded, in the space of a few yeares, he so aduanced the cause of Religion, that the said Citie greatly reioyced at the sight of a full reformation, procured by him amongst them. Iasper Aquila he went to Thuringia, and there fur∣thered the edification of the Church of Christ, with great zeale, and happy successe. A like occasion al∣most about the same time fel out at Treptqaine (a place in Pomerland) which was this. There florished a cer∣taine Colledge, that was famous by the learning of certaine men, of which Colledge, Iohn Bugenhagius was the Rector. Now it fell out, that Luthers booke of the Babyloni∣call captiuitie being sent from Lipsia, were deliuered there to Bugenhagius to be read ouer, who hauing slightly looked vpon it, is reported to haue said to his fellowes, bretheren, the Sun did neuer see a grea∣ter
Heriticke then Luther. But after a few dayes loo∣king more diligently and attentiuely into the said booke, he chaunged his opinion and testimony of him openly before the same bretheren, and said: that all the world had bin drowed hitherto, in most palpa∣ble errours. Which he aterwards set so clearely be∣fore them, as that they all consented in iudgement with him. Which after that the Bishop of Camintum came to the knowledge of, by and by (as the manner is) he began fiercely to persecute them. Wherefore they began all to fly and prouide for the safety of their life. And Bugenhagius going to Wit∣tenberg, tooke an Ecclesiasticall charge, and afterwards reformed the Churches of Hanborow and Lubeck, and of all the Kingdome of Denmarke. Andrew Cnophius went into Leif land, and there brought the Cittie of Riga to acknowledge and to re∣ceaue the truth of the Gospell, which at the begin∣ning brake out into so great flames, that straightwaies Darbetum and Reualia came thither (as it were) from the brightnesse of it, to kindle their light. The rest of them flying from Treptum, bestowed themselues abroad in the towne of Pomerland, and handled the cause of the Gospell so happily & with so great successe as that by the authoritie and com∣maundement of Barnim and Philip Dukes of Pomera∣nia, the states of the land being assembled together in that towne, by common councell and decree Po∣pish abuses were banished out of all Pomerland. Now let vs view France and namely Meaux in France, there Bishop Bricomet with great earnestnes vndertooke to maintaine the cause of the Gospell.
And hauing called together thether very many lear∣ned men, and amongst them Iohn Faber Stapulensis, a man of eminent and great name, he commanded them publickely to preach the true doctrine of the Gos∣pell. But after when the Bishop being terrified and put in feare, fell away from true religion, all the mi∣nisters also were compelled to forsake the countrye: whereof some went into the Kingdome of Nauarre, and some to Paris: and (althougth priuately and in se∣cret places) they instruct the people by their Sermons. Many of them also in the Citie of Metz, whither they had fled, began the building of that goodly Church, which euen to this day doth continue and flourishe. Others also wēt to other places of that King∣dome, where they made Christ, and the doctrine of the Gospell more famous. And is there any man, who herein may not ac∣knowledge, admire, and publish the wisedome of God? especially, considering that he then sheweth forth his mightie power for the helpe and aduance∣ment of his Church, when we thinke it most of all a∣bandoned and forsaken. The like thing hapned also in Italy, which (for the profession of the Gospell) banished many godly per∣sons from Naples, Luca, Pisa and Locarne. All which persecutions, the wisedome of God directed to that ende, that by the seruice of the same men, which had beene banished from these places, the building vp of the Churches in other countries, might be excellent∣ly raised vp. The same we know to haue beene done at Geneva, Zarick, London in England, and in other pla∣ces.
In like maner, the small Caldian warre being fini∣shed, the brethreen and professors which were dri∣uen out of Bohemia and Morauia, came to Pole-land, where they who had beene refused by King Sigis∣mond, found a very gratious patron of Albert Duke of Borussia. Yet some of these turning backe againe into Polonia, were receiued by diuers noble men in Pole-land. And what came of their returne? In the space of eight yeares, there was so much effected by their in∣dustry and labour, as that Peter Vergerius (hauing ben sometimes Bishop of Iustinopolis, and the Popes legate in Germany) by the writings of our men which hee had vndertaken to confute, was brought to the ac∣knowledging of the truth, euen he confessed that hee found in Pole-land forty Churches established in good order, by those brethren which they neuer thought would come to passe, who had banished them with so great cruelte. Moreouer it cannot be denied, but that the perse∣cution in the Low-countries, furnished the domini∣on of the Palatine Elector, with many teachers, and Preachers of the word, adorned with all kinde of good learning and knowledge; whose godly labours did greatly aduance the worke of reformation begun by Frederick the third Elector. The like also fell out in this countrey. For when as after the blessed decease of that most worthy, pious and vertuous Prince, some alteration in Religion had driuen and dispersed Ministers of the word into o∣ther places, by these ministers in like manner, the do∣ctrine of the truth was propagated and spread into other places.
Furthermore by what meanes thinke we, that the most famous Dukedome of Wirtenberg was brought to the acknowledging of the Gospell? was it not when the Duke Huldrick himselfe was dispossessed and cast out of his Dukedome? for whereas hee liued priuately with Phillip the Landgraue of Hassia, and there heard the teachers of the sincere Religion prea∣ching, & had before that beene present at a collogue and conference at Marpurge, his minde tooke such a tast of true Religion, as that after, hauing receiued his Dukedome, hee procured carefully the same true Religion to be preached vnto his subiects. Neither hath God vsed these meanes onely, for the propagation and aduancement of his word, but also many other courses that haue beene maruellous. For I call Hungary to witnesse, that euen Souldiers and men of Warre haue giuen furtherance to Gods word. For whereas the Dutch Army brought thi∣ther by King Ferdinandus, had in it many Lutheranes, by their meanes that Kingdome better discerned of Popish Idolatry. Italy also may testifie the like of it selfe, when both the Army of Charles the fifth besieged the Pope, and some dissentions began to growe betweene the Pope and the Venetians. To the number of these other meanes, I may also adde diuine and spirituall songs, which hauing beene made by Preachers of the Gospell, and accustomed to be sung by poore Schollers, insinuated and closely conuaied the knowledge of the truth into an infinite number of men in Germany and the Low-countries, and chiefely in Hungary, where for the want of the Art of
Printing, this meanes was deuised, that the songs which had beene endited by the teachers, young boyes and schollers should deuoutely and sweetely sing, not onely at mens doores, but euen at feasts and banquets. Moreouer I thinke that I may truely say, that it hath beene a great meanes to further the knowledge of the trueth, that particular Schooles haue beene founded and erected in many places, and that dispu∣tations haue beene held by the professors of the Gos∣pell with the Papists. Of which sort are the disputa∣tions held at that time at Lipswick in the yeare 1519, 1519. at Zurich and Bresla 1523, at Basile 1524, at Norimberge 1523. 1525, at Bathe in Switherland 1526, at Bern 1528, at 1524. London 1549, and such like. 1525. 6 Another likenes betweene this age and the pri∣matiue 1526. Church may bee in this, that the enemies of 1528. the trueth set vpon the Christians of the primitiue 1549. Church, sometimes with seueritie of edicts and pro∣clamations, after which grieuous punishments, and at the length by open warre: in the very like maner, for the space of these hundred yeares, grieuous Pro∣clamations haue beene often published against true Religion and the professors of it. And when they lit∣tle preuailed, they killed infinite multitudes of men by fire and water, by the sword and by hanging, and many other kinds of punishments: and when nei∣ther these meanes had the like successe which they desired, they came at length to this, that strong Ar∣mies were leuied, and brought into Germany, the Low-countries, and into France, to haue rooted out true Religion, if it had beene possible.
Further also as in that time the heathen Em∣perours (whether they would or no) heard the confessions and Apologies of the Christian faith, which are extant and to be read in Iustin Martyr, Athe∣nagoras, Tertullian, and others: Euen so in this our age, Kings and Kesars, haue of necessitie beene made to take notice and information of the trueth of the Gospell, which in all things they did not approue of. For who is ignorant that the Emperour Charles the fifth was present at the publicke reading of the confession of Ausburge, so named of the Citie where this was done? Likewise to King Ferdinandus, a con∣fession of their faith was both exhibited and read by the brethren and professors in Bohemia and Morauia. We read likewise that Frauncis, the first King of Fraunce, heard with his owne eares the famous con∣fession of the Christians of Merindole. Also Theodore Beza, in the conference at Poessy, the King and the Queene, yea all Fraunce in a manner hearing it, deliuered the Articles of our faith, so soundly and so effectually, as that the Cardinall of Lorraine saide, that hee wished that either Beza had beene dumbe, or that all the States there present had beene deafe that day. 7 Yet will we not stay heere, but obserue another point of comparison: for in the primitiue Church, there were very many Christians who (as the Ecclesi∣asticall History doth witnesse) professed the truth of the Gospell with the losse of their goods, and also of their very life it selfe: So likewise in these hundred yeares last past, God hath set before our eyes notable and famous examples of Christian constancy in an
infinite number of most worthy persons, men and women, rich and poore, learned and vnlearned, no∣ble and vn-noble. The regard of the time will not suffer me heere to enlarge my selfe, yet can I not by any meanes passe by in silence, in Germany the houses and the families of the Electors, to wit, that the house of Brandeburge, Saxony, and the Palatine haue brought forth those he∣roicall persons, to whom you may truely apply the speach which by the Apostle is vttered of Moses, that they esteemed the reproach of Christ to be greater riches, then the treasures of the Egyptians. First let vs goe to the house of Brandburge, and call to minde George the Marquesse of Brandenburge, who being then to King Lewis, the great Prefect and Go∣uernour of his Court, retained with his helpe, and defended with his aide, the Christians in Silesia, Bohe∣mia, and Hungary, being charged and burdned with diuers slaunders. After also, when the Emperour Charles the fift, in the assembly at Ausburge, published a seuere edict and Proclamation, with a most grieuous punishment ad∣ded to it, charging all men to abandon the Religion of the Gospell, the saide Lord Marquesse, had this ho∣nourable report of his constancy, that fearing no∣thing the Emperours indignation, hee boldly saide kneeling before his Maiestie, that he had rather yeeld his head to be smitten and cut off, then to depart the least iot from the truth, which he had once acknow∣ledged and receiued, which when hee once had spo∣ken openly, they say that the Emperour answered, that the cutting off his head was not sought for.
Will yee goe from Brandeburg to Saxonie? There we shall see Duke Henry the progenitour of the two most gratious Electors Mauricius and Augustus wor∣thily shewing how deepe rootes the loue of the Gos∣pell had taken in him. For when his brother George Duke of Saxony (who was a most earnest defender of the Popish Religion) a litle before his death, hauing caused it to be signifi∣ed to him by messengers (sent for that purpose) that hee would make him his heire, vpon condition, that he would forsake the Religion Euangelical reformed; but if he refused to performe the condition, that he would giue all his dominions to King Ferdinandus: Duke Henry of whom I spake, answering presently, saide plainly and expresly to him; this your mes∣sage euidently representeth and bringeth into my minde that which is written in the holy Scriptures, when Sathan promised to Christ, the Kingdomes of the whole world, vpon condition, that falling downe at his feete, hee would worship and adore him. Doe you thinke that I esteeme any worldly riches and be∣nefit more, then I doe the glory of God? Certainely your expectation doeth much deceiue you. With which answere hee dismissed those messengers, ad∣ding to his former speach, this notable sentence, that hee had rather bee poore with Christ, then rich with the Pope. Which memorable act of his religious pietie wan∣ted not his reward from God. For before that the le∣gates and messengers had returned some, Duke Georg his brother dying, without executing that his deter∣mination, altogether against his will, left Duke Henry
his heire and successor. And what should I speake of Iohn Frederick Elector of famous memory? Of whom, the Emperour Ferdinandus himselfe is repor∣ted to haue said to Doctor Nvius chiefe Phisitian of the Elector of Saxony: that Iohn Frederick Flector, was a Prince of a magnanimous and high courage, whose valour and vertue if his Souldiers had followed in the Warre, with like animositie and bouldnesse, hee had neuer beene ouercome. Further hee is reported to haue said, that hee stood by the Emperour Charles, and beheld with how chearefull and gratious a coun∣tenance hee came to the Emperour, presenting him∣selfe, not as a captiue and prisoner, but chearefull as one that should haue led a daunce. And surely that he excelled in the greatnesse of an inuincible minde and courage, he made it manifest in his very imprisonment and captiuitie, to the wonder and admiration of all men. For in the assembly at Ausburge, the Emperour had drawen all the States of the Empire to his purpose, that stricken with feare, they freely professed, that they would receiue whatsoeuer the Generall Coun∣cell that was to be called, should determine of Religi∣on. Then he required and commaunded the Prince being prisoner to doe the like. But he then answered that in all other things he was ready with all submis∣sion to yeeld his seruice and obedience: but in that which concerned Religion and conscience, hee hum∣bly be fought him in his gracious clemency to re∣spect him. So great was the magnanimitie of this Prince E∣lector when he was a prisoner, so great was his zeale
for the true worship of God, when the other States being yet free, and yet affrighted with the feares of daungers, professed that they would willingly obey the decree of the counsell that was to be held: whose iudgement was yet vnknowen what it would bee. Therefore Melanchthon a most religious Diuine no∣tably in verse commended the constancy, of this like∣wise most religious Prince and Elector, saying. He won more praise by constant profession of faith, then if he at home had fought fierce and terrible battels. Furthermore the County Palatine, is able to shew also in this glorious field, and to this day commen∣deth to all posteritie, those most famous Princes, Otto, Henry, and Frederick the third of that name, either of them Electors, and most constant defenders of the trueth. Ottho Henricus desired rather to loose the princi∣palitie of Neuburg, then by forsaking the truth of Re∣ligion to keepe it, and to win the fauour of Caesar and of the Pope: which faithfulnes and constancy in Re∣ligion, God recompenced with a large & ample bles∣sing. For he not onely restored vnto him, the foresaid dominion; but also, Frederick the second being dead, he gloriously aduanced him to the Electorship. Behold also the Count Palatine Frederick the third, him to whom pietie it selfe gaue his Sir-name, so that he was renowned & called Fredericus Pious, and con∣sider with me a little his diuers and great trials which he endured for the cause of Religion. He was constrained, sometimes to auoide the darts of his brother, sometimes to withstand his children, and sometimes to resist his kins-folke, yea at the
length in the assembly at Ausborow he had the Empe∣rour himselfe and the Princes and States of the sacred Empire greatest aduersaries vnto him. Yet surely Caesars Maiestie notably made answere for him to the Electors and Princes that would haue excluded and shut out the saide Frederick Pius, out of the peace of the Empire, saying, I must answere you, as Christ did Salome: you knowe not what you aske. Doe you not know, that he is a Prince of the Empire? will you be at discord among your selues? Notwith∣standing the same Emperour, very seuerely and per∣emptorily commaunded the same Elector Frederick, to change and vtterly forsake his Religion, which was said to be a diuers Religion from that which was said to be allowed at Ausburge, and infected (as they said) with the error of Caluinisme. Then the Elector o∣penly and plainly (as the loue of Religion perswa∣ded him) to this effect declared his minde to the Im∣periall Maiestie, that in the matter of Faith and Reli∣gion, hee did acknowledge one onely Lord, to wit, God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. That such question and businesse concerned not the losse of any temporal estate, or of this present life, but the euerlasting saluation of the soule: which as he had receiued and had it recommended vnto him from Christ his Lord and Sauiour: so he both ought and would keepe it entire and whole without hurt or blemish vnto him, euen with the daunger and losse of this present life. Furthermore he said, that hee was willing and ready to yeelde to any whatsoeuer they were, a iust reason, apologie, and defence of his Cate∣chisme and Faith.
Which magnanimitie and courage of a constant faith, Augustus Duke of Saxony and Elector admi∣ring, friendly and brotherly striking with his open hand the shoulder of this most pious Prince Frederick, said, Frederick, thou doest farre excell vs all in pietie and Religion. Behold a chearefull minde of a Prince in the pro∣fession of the truth, nobly resembling the Emperour Iouinian, who being taken by the Souldiers to receiue the Imperiall dignitie, refused to take it vpon him, except the Army by whom hee was chosen, would cast away their Idols, and embrace the sinceritie of Christian Faith. Our owne Prince also, in like manner a most con∣stant professor of Religion, resolued rather to loose the dignitie to be one of the seauen Electors, then to abandon the truth of the Gospell, if hee could not keepe his Electorship without the losse of true Re∣ligion. Now let vs proceede from Germany to Italy, and bring out before you, two worthy champions for the faith, out of the Kingdome of Naples, to wit, Galeaci∣us Caracciolus Vice-Marques, and the same a sonne of the sister of Pope Paul the fourth; the other Iohn Berniardin Boniface Marques of Oria. Both these were enflamed with so great a zeale of Religion, as that all their worldly dignities neglected, and the honour of their life and state despised, they forsooke their hou∣ses and their countrey, and led the rest of their mor∣tall liues in such a voluntary banishment, as the since∣ritie of Religion laid vpon them. Heere also I could name you many other worthy
and famous personages in Spaine, Italy, Scotland, and Germanie, which some of them secretly, and some of them by open violence suffred death for the professi∣on of the Gospell. But the Martirologies and stories of the Martyrs haue cased mee of that burden of re∣hearsing them, (as being set out purposely to declare and to register the names of these who haue borne witnesse to the truth) and may be repaired and resor∣ted vnto for this matter. Yet cannot I in silence passe by any meanes, that onely in Belgia (containing the 17 prouinces of the Low-countries) whiles Charles the fifth yet liued, were slaine and murdered fiftie thousand Christians, and that the Duke of Alua cruelly boasted, that in the space of six yeares after hee had beene gouernour of that countrey eighteene thousand persons had ben killed by his commaundement, and also from the yeare 1576, to the agreement at Gaunt there had pe∣rished by the tiranny of the Papists thirtie thousand. Yet there was a greater Vintage and Haruest in Fraunce, for it may be proued by arguments worthy to be belieued, that from the yeare 1564, to the yeare 1564. 1586, that is in the space of two and twentie yeares, that one hundred and forty thousand godly persons sealed and signed with their blood the sinceritie of Religion. Which is so reckoned, as that, they are not numbred in this account, who vnder Henry the se∣cond▪ and Frauncis the first, being roasted and burnt, went vp to the fire with so great courage and con∣stancy of minde, and so to the death gaue testimony to the truth, as that in the yeare 1533, the tongues of the Martirs were cut out, that they might not be able to speake vnto the people.
Now in England it is incredible to be spoken, what slaughter and how many dead corpes haue beene made: how many excellent men (amongst whom some were Bishops & Arch-bishops) in the Raigne of Queene Mary, being burnt aliue with fire, without feare endured that shamefull and cruell death with maruellous strength and power of Faith▪ And if wee should also declare the notable and in∣uincible constancy of Rochell in Fraunce, and of May∣denborowe in Germany, heere wee should haue a large field to discourse, to their immortall praise. But wee are to proceed, and make another new comparison betweene the auntienter Apostolick, and latter refor∣mations of the Church. 2 In these times the Christians being miserably af∣flicted, God (appearing and shining through these cloudes vnto them) then at length gloriously lifted vp, and exalted his Church, when it lay cast downe to the lowest, & was euen troden vnderfoote. There∣fore Sulpitius Seuerus was bould to say, writing of the ten yeares persecution vnder the Emperours Dioclesi∣an and Maximinian, wee neuer conquered with grea∣ter glory and triumph, then when wee could not bee conquered with the continuall slaughters and massa∣cres of ten yeares together: In like maner, in these hundred yeares last past, besides and aboue the expe∣ctation, opinion and thoughts of all men, God often∣times mightely deliuered his Church, taking it, as it were out of the very iawes of the enemies. In the yeare 1521, after the departure of Luther, who in the assemblies of the States of the Empire at Wornis had appeared and presented himselfe before
Caesar and the Princes of the Empire, to make an∣swere for his proceedings, there was set and publi∣shed an edict or proclamation of most sharpe seueri∣tie against the professors of the Gospell, whereof the Popes Legat, Cardinall Ierome Alexander is reported to haue saide to Marinus Caracciolus; Oh, my Caracci∣olus, if we haue done nothing else at this diet and as∣sembly, yet this we haue effected (as I am in good hope) that by this edict and mandate of Caesars wee shall shortly see the Germans at warre one with ano∣ther, and tumbling in their owne blood. But what fell out? a little after, there arose an ex∣ceeding great trouble in Spaine: so as the Emperour went thither to pacifie it, and the professors of the Gospell had a litle breathing time, as some milder aire appearing. For the Imperiall edict being mittigated and qualified by the States of the Empire assembled at Norinberg, the true doctrine was seene daily to bee more largely and more couragiously spread and ad∣uanced. In the yeare 1526, and the fourteenth of Ianuary, Charles the fift being Emperour, and Frauncis the first being King of Fraunce, with great coniunction and a∣greement of minde and affections endeauoured and went about it, ioyning their forces together, to pull vp by the rootes the Lutheran Religon (as they call it) but altogether in vaine. For the Pope himselfe brake the bond and league, making the Emperour so much busines in Italy, that hee professed by publicke writing, that the Pope was in all the fault, that he had hitherto with lesse successe suppressed the heresie (as he termed it) of the Lutherans.
Againe in the yeare 1530. did not all men feare and tremble at the publishing of that most cruell edict of the Emperour Charles, wherewith at the Dyet at Aus∣burg, hee thundred against the professors of the Gos∣pell? but behold, God, as from heauen, deliuered them. For the Turke, (as one that had beene drawen thither by the haire of his head) came into Austria: which rumour caused the Emperour not vnwillingly to grant peace to the Protestants, that hee might ob∣taine aide of them against the Turke, the common e∣nemy of all Christendome. So likewise, the league agreed vpon at Smale-cald, being broken, & prosperous successe making all sub∣iect vnto Caesars power, who knoweth not that which hapned. For when it was thought, that the cause of reformation had now beene vtterly ouerthrowen in Germanie, Almightie God fully ouercame and subdu∣ed the Conquerers minde, and so perplexed him, that he not onely no more vrged the Generall Councell (to whose determination the States of the Empire had before promised to yeeld all obedience) but also made an vnnecessary and needles warre with the Pope, and despaired of successe in fighting any more with the Germanes, who yet before, he supposed to haue bin wholly conquered and subdued. Neither was it otherwise with the Heluetians, who being cōstrained to defend with Armes the libertie of the Euangellicall profession, were once or twise ouer∣come by papists: yet notwithstāding the truth trium∣pheth as inuincible their Churches, euen to this day. England also may be a witnesse hereof, wherein men almost despaired of the maintainers of the Gospell,
when as by the raigne of Queene Mary, many goodly lights had beene extinguished, and so many strong buttresses and pillars had beene ouerthrowen & cast downe to the ground. But the Lord, who calleth light out of darkenes, he called that most gratious Queene Elizabeth out of the prison, & placed her in the royall throne of the King∣dome, whereby all the hope of the Papist was disap∣pointed and exposed to shame and ignominie. Likewise Fraunce will testifie this, which was most shamefully defiled and stained with that horrible mas∣sacre and slaughter that was made of true professors in the yeare 1572. For at that time there was celebra∣ted and kept at Rome a solemne thanks-giuing to God for that action performed with so great successe, & so agreeably to their desire, in the rooting out of the Hu∣gonets, (as they called the professors of the trueth of the Gospell.) But within a yeare after, the multitude of profes∣sors appeared in so great number, as a man would haue thought that all those had beene risen from the dead, and restored to life againe. Neither are there wanting like examples in Hun∣gary, Bohemia, Morauia, Silesia, Ausria. For about some thirteene yeares agone, these aduersaries with very great endeauours desired to cut off all meanes of exer∣cising the Religion reformed. But vtterly in vaine, God withstanding them; who sending them his helpe from heauen, brought the matter to that passe, that greater libertie was granted to these countries then they euer enioyed in any time before. Finally, for the last point of this comparison: In the
primitiue Church God by manifest signes and to∣kens shewed the seueritie of his iust iudgement vpon many tirants and persecutors of the Church, by their fearfull ends and tragicall deaths. In like maner Sigismund the Emperour 200. yeares agone hauing burnt at Constance, Iohn Husse, a most pi∣ous and godly Preacher, together with him burnt and consumed all his owne royall estate. For decea∣sing without heire male, Ladislaus his Grand-sonne by his daughter succeeded him, and so hee confined the celebritie and honour of his name in the space of a fewe yeares. So likewise in this last age wee haue receiued by report, and seene with our eyes that ven∣geance hath followed them at their heeles, which bearing impietie and vngodlinesse in their hearts, and shewing it openly by strange crueltie, went about with all their power to assaile and to plucke vp by the rootes the pure doctrine of the Gospell. In the yeare 1546. George Wisehart a Preacher of the Gospell in Scotland (after burnt to ashes by the commaundement of Cardinall Beton) in the midst of the flames of fire prophetically foretold the Cardi∣nall of the death and ouerthrow that hung ouer his head. And that not in vaine, for hee was killed that very yeare, and that so, as in the same place, where the stake and ashes of that constant Martyr had beene seene not long before, in the same place so soone af∣ter, the dead body of that tyrant was to be seene ex∣posed to the hate and scorne of all men. With him reckon also Steuen Gardner, who being Bishop of Winchester, and Cancelor to Queene Mary, emploied his seruice & power very busily to destroy
the Christians. But his punishment followed not long after: for being taken with a sore disease, and despairing of the fauour and mercy of God, he cried out, alasle for me, I haue sinned with Peter, but I haue not wept, nor seriously & truly repented as Peter did. In Fraunce, remember Minerius, making war with the innocent men of Merindoll, and miserably killing and murthering them with more then Scythian and Barbarian cruelty. What? art thou sorry? and doest thou sigh and lament to heare it? stay a while, and thou shalt see and acknowledge the wonderfull iudg∣ment and vengeance of God vpon him. For this ty∣rant Minerius falling into a most grieuous and feare∣full sicknesse, ended his vngodly life, with horrible crying and howling. Kings also furnish vs with some examples of tragi∣call ends. For Fruancis, the first king of Fraunce, in the agony of death, felt how heauily the blood of the Waldnses and Merindolians lay vpon his conscience, wherefore hee gaue commandement and charge to his sonne Henry that hee should put to death Iohn Monke, by whose counsell and perswasion he had be∣gun the persecution: which Monke perceiuing, spee∣dily fled, and so escaped the present danger. Likewise we haue heard that Henry the 2. King of France, hauing often threatned, and said, that with his own eies he would see Burges to be consumed & burnt with fire vpon a wound taken in the eye in his run∣ning at-Tilt, ended his life with very great torments. Neither was the end of Frauncis the second of that name any better, who hauing denied the Christians free exercise of the Religion of the Gospell: (who by
supplication had requested it) hee also by an Apo∣stume risen in his braine, and running at his eare, di∣ed with his eare putrified and rotten. And thou also Charles the ninth, King of Fraunce, goe thou also and defile thy hands with the blood of thy subiects. Thou also didst miserably perish in thine owne blood. And you two tirants (I speake of Henry the third, and the Duke of Guise) doe you also take paines in the hainous crime of the massacre and slaughter at Paris; doe you also kill, murder and de∣stroy: but with what successe, euen, and issue haue you done it? either of you ended your life, with a violent and bloody death, but the reformed Religi∣on you haue not driuen out of Fraunce. But what doe I speake of these things, the Emperour himselfe, Charles the fist, hee confessed that hee had vsed and emploied all his force and power, to establish the au∣thoritie of the Pope, and to maintaine his dignity, but that his endeauour had beene all in vaine, & that his mony and treasure was spent, which losse was tolle∣rable and might be borne, but that which was alto∣gether intollerable, he had lost his honourable name amongst men, and his estimation & dignitie, the losse whereof was not to be recouered by any meanes. Heere it were worth our labour to note & marke the perfidious falling away of Apostatates, and the infirmity of the faithfull. Heere also intestine and in∣ward dissensions and discords were to bee touched, and to be compared with the contentions of the an∣cient and primitiue Church: but the regard of this present time doth not suffer me so to doe. Therefore, let it suffice to haue heard, that Christ
the Lord hath most effectually expressed, and accom∣plished really, and in powerfull act and deede, the name of Iesus and Sauiour, that was giuen him by or∣der from God, in that hee doth so fatherly gather, so wisely gouerne, so mightely preserue, and so iustly protect his Church against all the aduersaries and e∣nemies of it. Now let the Iesuits goe, and vain-gloriously boast of the miracles, which they say, haue beene done in the East and West Indiaes: but wee most worthily publish and magnifie the miracles, iustly to be admi∣red & wondred at, which God hath done in our own dayes, and in the age of our fathers, in Germany, Eng∣land, Spaine, Italy, Fraunce, Hungary, Bohemia, Pole-land, Denmark and Swed land. For these are indeed that which they are said to be, miracles. That God hath wrought so great things by so meane and base instruments. That the doctrine of the Gospell within so fewe yeares, hath like the lightning, enlightned so many countries and Kingdomes. That by meanes altogether contrary to the rea∣son of man, the sinceritie and puritie of the doctrine of the Gospell flourisheth at this day, being propaga∣ted and spread faire and neare. That by how much the greater the crueltie of ty∣rants hath beene in blood sheding, in burning & han∣ging of the godly, so much the further hath the sound of the Gospell bin heard, & passed into more places. That a most puissant and mighty Emperour, going through Germany with such successe of many victo∣ries
as he could haue wished, yet was notable by any meanes to conquer & subdue the Gospell in Germany. That in Fraunce six Kings continually succeeding one another, and employing all their forces, and vsing many and diuers meanes and practises for it, yet haue not beene able to effect the suppression of the refor∣med Churches in Fraunce. That Philip the second, the greatest King that hath beene of Spaine, hath wasted all the treasure which he had gathered in the East, and in the West, for the roo∣ting out of Religion, partly in Fraunce, and partly in England, and chiefely in the Low countries, and that with no other euent and successe, but that these huge masses of treasure being exhausted and lost, and his Kingdome being cast into many great straits and dif∣ficulties of debt, before his death full sore against his will, he heard this message deliuered to him, that the reformed Churches in France, England, and the Low-countris did prosper and flourish, as they had done in any former time. Which things being so, worthily doe we all extoll and magnifie this most gracious goodnes and mercy of our God, who in goodnes add power excelleth all, whereby when we were drowned in the midst of a sea of errors and darkenesse in Popery, hath illuminated and enlightned vs with the most clear & goodly light of the knowledge of himselfe, and of his Gospell. For if in the old Testament the godly so often ce∣lebrated and praised with songs, the redemption of the people of Israel out of Egypt, and from their ene∣mies of Madian, surely we haue far greater cause, why wee should magnifie with all praise and honour our
maruellous deliuerances from the Idolatry of Anti-christ. Moreouer, this historicall commemoration and re∣hearsall of the admirable & wonderfull worke which we haue heard, to haue beene performed by God in his Church, ought to giue encouragement to all the faithfull with greater alacritie and chearfulnesse, and with greater strength and constancy to keepe and re∣taine the truth which they haue once acknowledged: which being grounded and founded stedfastly and se∣curely in the holy Scripture, hath beene againe and newly confirmed in these last hundred yeares by so singular and excellent miracles. And this we ought the rather to doe, because wee knowe that our Sauiour Iesus doth still liue, and wee are certainly perswaded, that as he hath done hither∣to, so likewise alwayes hereafter, hee will gather, go∣uerne, and preserue his Church. Now let vs also remember that it is our part and dutie to worship and honour this Iesus our Sauiour with our mouth, with our hearts, and with all our strength. For he it is (as the Angell expresly testifieth) which will saue and preserue his people. Of which people they onely are to bee accompted, who doe not walke, nor liue according to the flesh, but accor∣ding to the Spirit: whereof, who seeth not this to follow? That he that hath not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his: and that he who is none of Christs, can∣not in any sort enioy the comfort of this name of a Sauiour? Let vs then embrace our most faithfull Sauiour, let vs loue him, let vs feare him, and let vs honour
him: So without all doubt, we shall prooue by expe∣rience, that he wil renew againe hereafter, vnto vs his auncient fauour, and will most mightely protect vs his Christian Church, by his patronage and defence from all our enemies both of soule and body. For this saith Amen, that is, that true and faithfull witnesse, the gates of hell shall not preuaile against my Church. To this mighty and great Sauiour, be thankes, ho∣nour and glory, for all the comfort, helpe, and be∣nefits hitherto bestowed vpon vs, both now, and in all ages, for euer and euer, Amen. THE PRAYER. MOst Gracious God, and mercifull father, we giue thee thankes for all thy benefits, wherewith hitherto, thou hast largely and bountefully blessed vs. O Lord my God, thy thoughts are great and thy workes admirable and won∣derfull, which thou settest before vs, to behold and consider. Nothing can, nor ought to be compared vnto thee. I will de∣clare thy workes, and speake of them, although they exceed all account and number. Wee acknowledge it to proceede from thy grace and fauour, that in all places thou hast mi∣raculously gathered a people that is pleasing and acceptable vnto thee; that thou hast wisely gouerned, and mightily preserued the same. Especially wee praise thee that it hath pleased thee, to call vs in these countries to the Communi∣on of thy Sonne Iesus Christ, and that this day thou hast graunted thy grace to vs sitting by the cratch of thy new
borne Sonne, to heare how sweetly the Angels sung their heaunly hymne and song; and how ioyfully they greeted and congratulated vs, for the exceeding great benefit of thy Sonne sent to take our flesh and nature vpon him. And not onely to heare this, but moreouer also to see how the shep∣heards did adore him; Simeon and Anna blessed him: the wise men that came to him from the East, did honour him with gold, myrrh and frankincense. Blessed bee thy holy name for euermore, for these and all other benefits, which thou doest bestow vpon vp, and wherwith thou doest adorne vs. Gracious God and mercifull Father, we beseech thee al∣so for the time to come, to shew forth thy maruellous workes amongst vs, and alwayes to gather a Church to thy selfe a∣mongst vs, and graciously to preserue this which thou hast already gathered, that the number of them may daily en∣crease, who may truly acknowledge thee and thy Sonne Ie∣sus Christ, and may celebrate and magnifie thee, both in this life, and also in that which is to come for euermore. Furthermore, with earnest prayers wee beseech thee, as thou hast done hitherto, so likewise hereafter graciously and mercifully to turne away from vs, the fury of warre, the scarcitie and dearth of victuals, and the plague of pe∣stilence, and whatsoeuer besides may bee hurtfull to our countries. Driue away also farre from vs the most sauage crueltie of the Pope, and of his adhaerents, hinder and restraine his counsels that they take not effect. Contrariwise we bseech thee to grace and adorne with all maner of blessings, the Emperours Maiesty, the Royall dignitie of the King of great Britaine, as also all other Chri∣stian Kings, the Electors of the Empire and other Princes, especially te most illustrious and gratious Prince Frede∣rick,
Count-Palatine Elector our gratious Lord, toge∣ther with the most illustrious Princesse his wife, and the Princesse daughter of the late Elector: and our young Prin∣ces, and all the noble house of the Counts-Palatines, Prin∣ces Electors, with their Counsellors and Officers, maintaine and preserue them all with thy gracious patronage, prote∣ction and defence. Take care also, we beseech thee, of all Widowes and Or∣phanes, and preserue our bodies with the comfort of health, and crowne our life with Christian vprightnesse and in∣tegritie. Helpe all those which endure diuers afflictions, especial∣ly such as suffer grieuous persecutions for the truths sake. Make them knowe by their experience, that Iesus our Saui∣our is more able to comfort them, then all the world to make them to sorrow. Finally, when the short terme and time of our life shall passe away, refresh and comfort vs before wee depart from hence: and receiuing vs into the armes of thy mercy, tran∣slate vs out of this old world, to that new one, which is not finished nor ended with any course of the Sunne, or of the Moone: but wherein thy selfe art to bee the Sunne, the Moone, and all in all things, these mercies we aske in the name of Iesus Christ, and pray also further as he hath taught vs. Our Fa∣ther, &c. FINIS.
Errata. PAg 3. helpeth, r. fulfileth. p. 4. adorned r. adored. p. 17. Treptquine. r. Trepto. were, r was. p. 20. r. the Smalcal∣dian warre. p. 22. r. with. for which. p. 24. retained for relee∣ued. p. 25. him, r. them ibid. some. r. home. p. 52. l. 2. r. there was set out &c. p. 33. r. in their Churches. p. 39. adde. for and. pag, vltima, daughter read Dowager.
