25104 99846899 11896
SIGILVM REGIS MAGNAE BRITANIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE PRO CONSILIO SVO VIRGINIAE royal seal
A DECLARATION OF THE STATE OF THE Colony and Affaires in VIRGINIA. WITH A RELATION OF THE BARBA∣rous Massacre in the time of peace and League, treacherously executed by the Natiue Infidels vpon the English, the 22 of March last. Together with the names of those that were then massacred; that their lawfull heyres, by this notice giuen, may take order for the inheriting of their lands and estates in VIRGINIA. AND A TREATISE ANNEXED, Written by that learned Mathematician Mr. Henry Briggs, of the Northwest passage to the South Sea through the Continent of Virginia, and by Fretum Hudson. Also a Commemoration of such worthy Benefactors as haue con∣tributed their Christian Charitie towards the aduancement of the Colony. And a Note of the charges of necessary prouisions fit for euery man that intends to goe to VIRGINIA. Published by Authoritie. Imprinted at London by G. Eld,,for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his shop, at the great South doore of Pauls. 1622.
TO THE HONrable COMPANIE OF VIRGINIA. Right Honorable and Worthy: THE fame of our late vn∣happy accident in Virginia, hath spread it selfe, I doubt not, into all parts abroad, and as it is talked of of all men, so no question of ma∣ny, and of most, it cannot but be misreported, some carryed away with ouer-weak lightnesse to beleeue all they heare, how vntrue soeuer; others out of their disaffe∣ction possibly to the Plantation, are desirous to make that, which is ill, worse; and so the truth of the Action, which is only one, is varied and misreported. I haue thought it therefore a part of some acceptable seruice in me towards you,
whose fauors haue preferred me to be a mem∣ber of your Company, to present you with these my poore labours, the Collection of the truth hereof, drawne from the relation of some of those that were beholders of that Tragedie, and who hardly escaped from tasting of the same cup, as also from the Letters sent you by the Gouernour and other Gentlemen of quality, and of the Councell in that Colonie, read openly here in your Courts: That so the world may see that it was not the strength of a professed enemy that brought this slaughter on them, but contriued by the perfidious treachery of a false-hearted people, that know not God nor faith. No generous Spirit will forbeare to goe on for this accident that hath hapned to the Plantation, but proceed rather chearfully in this honorable Enterprize, since the discouery of their bruitish falshood will proue (as shall ap∣peare by this Treatise following) many waies aduantageable to vs, and make this forewar∣ning a forearming for euer to preuent a greater mischiefe. Accept it from me, I most humbly beseech you, as the first fruits of my poore seruice.
Time may happily make me able to yeeld you some other worke whose subiect may bee Ioy, as this is a Theame of Sadnesse: Meane time, I commit You and the Noble Colony to Gods good blessing, as he that shall alwaies be A true Votarie for your happinesse, and seruant to your commands, EDVVARD WATERHOVSE.
Faults in printing are thus to be amended. Page. Lane. Faults. Amend. 10 10. French Vignerous French Vignerous. 24 17. Mastiues to teare them Mastiues to seaze them. ibid. ibid. which take this naked which take these naked 26 12. non s'inga muu non s'inganna. 29 4. with his brothers with his brother. ibid. 10. ambitious quarrels ambitious quarrels. 40 4. Shinhow Swinhow. ibid. 10. Weynoack. Weyanock. 45 5. by Fretum Hudson. and by Fretum Hudson.
THE INCONVENIENCIES THAT HAVE HAPPENED TO SOME PER∣SONS WHICH HAVE TRANSPORTED THEMSELVES from England to Virginia; vvithout prouisions necessary to sustaine themselues, hath greatly hindred the Progresse of that noble Plantation: For preuention of the like disorders heereafter, that no man suffer, either through ignorance or misinformation; it is thought re∣quisite to publish this short declaration: wherein is contained a particular of such neces∣saries, as either priuate families or single persons shall haue cause to furnish themselues with, for their better support at their first landing in Virginia; whereby also greater numbers may receiue in part, directions how to prouide themselues. Apparrell for one man, and so after the rate for more. Apparrell.   li. s. d. One Monmouth Cap 00 01 10 Three falling bands   01 03 Three shirts   07 06 One waste-coate   02 02 One suite of Canuase   07 06 One suite of Frize   10 00 One suite of Cloth   15 00 Three paire of Irish stockins   04   Foure paire of shooes   08 08 One paire of garters   00 10 One doozen of points   00 03 One paire of Canuase sheets.   08 00 Seuen ells of Canuase, to make a bed and boulster, to be filled in Virginia 8. s.   08 00 One Rug for a bed 8. s. which with the bed seruing for two men, halfe is Fiue ells coorse Canuase, to make a bed at Sea for two men, to be filled with straw, iiij. s.   05 00 One coorse Rug at Sea for two men, will cost vj. s. is for one   04 00 00 For a whole yeere for one man, and so for more after the rate. Victuall. Eight bushels of Meale 02 00 00 Two bushels of pease at 3. s.   06 00 Two bushels of Oatemeale 4. s. 6. d.   09 00 One gallon of Aquauitae   02 06 One gallon of Oyle   03 06 Two gallons of Vineger 1. s.   02 00   03 03 00 For one man, but if halfe of your men haue armour it is sufficient so that all haue Peeces and swords. Armes. One Armour compleat, light   17 00 One long Peece, fiue foot or fiue and a halfe, neere Musket bore 01 02   One sword   05   One belt   01   One bandaleere   01 06 Twenty pound of powder   18 00 Sixty pound of shot or lead, Pistoll and Goose shot   05 00   03 09 06 For a family of 6. persons and so after the rate for more. Tooles.   li. s. d. Fiue broad howes at 2. s. a piece   10   Fiue narrow howes at 16. d. a piece   06 08 Two broad Axes at 3. s. 8. d. a piece   07 04 Fiue felling Axes at 18. d. a piece   07 06 Two steele hand sawes at 16. d. a piece   02 08 Two two-hand-sawes at 5. s. a piece   10   One whip-saw, set and filed with box, file, and wrest   10   Two hammers 12. d. a piece   02 00 Three shouels 18. d. a piece   04 06 Two spades at 18. d. a piece   03   Two augers 6. d. a piece   01 00 Sixe chissels 6. d. a piece   03 00 Two percers stocked 4. d. a piece   00 08 Three gimlets 2. d. a piece   00 06 Two hatchets 21. d a piece   03 06 Two froues to cleaue pale 18. d.   03 00 Two hand-bills 20. a piece   03 04 One grindlestone 4. s.   04 00 Nailes of all sorts to the value of 02 00   Two Pickaxes   03             06 02 08         For a family of 6. persons, and so for more or lesse after the rate. Houshold Implements. One Iron Pot 00 07   One kettle   06   One large frying-pan   02 06 One gridiron   01 06 Two skillets   05   One spit   02   Platters, dishes, spoones of wood   04     01 08 00 For Suger, Spice, and fruit, and at Sea for 6. men. 00 12 06 So the full charge of Apparrell, Victuall, Armes, Tooles, and houshold stuffe, and after this rate for each person, will amount vnto about the summe of 12 10   The passage of each man is 06 00   The fraight of these prouisions for a man, will bee about halfe a Tun, which is 01 10   So the whole charge will amount to about 20 00 00 Nets, bookes, lines, and a tent must be added, if the number of people be grea∣ter, as also some kine. And this is the vsuall proportion that the Virginia Company doe bestow vpon their Tenants which they send. Whosoeuer transports himselfe or any other at his owne charge vnto Virginia, shall for each person so transported before Midsummer 1625. haue to him and his heires for euer fifty Acres of Land vpon a first, and fifty Acres vpon a second diuision. Imprinted at London by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1622.
A DECLARATION of the state of the Colonie and Affaires in VIRGINIA. With a Relation of the barbarous Massacre in the time of peace and League, treacherously executed vpon the English by the natiue Infidels, 22 March last. ALthough there haue been many and sundry Treatises writ of Virginia, and the Commodities thereof; whereat malitious men may take occasion to cauill, but godly men will finde good cause to praise the Almighty, whose wonders are seene in the deepe, through the which we haue sailed to the discouery of this good Land: Yet I haue not thought it amisse (since I am to expresse some late Accidents) before-hand to summe vp the benefits of that Countrey; partly because they daily encrease by new Discoueries made, to the glory of our most gratious King, and euer renowned to all posteritie, for the founding and supporting of this most Royall and blessed work of Plantation, to the great honor, wealth
and happinesse of his most famous Kingdomes; and partly, because such is the customary daintinesse of Readers, that they seldome take the paines to gather together all that hath beene written of any subiect, that so they might take the whole businesse into their consideration, (which is the onely way to make a true iudgement,) but vsually content themselues with one or two Bookes set out occasionally, and with refe∣rence to some former Treatises, whereby they gaine but a lame and parcell-knowledge, and so oftentimes both preiudice themselues and the truth. THE Countrey called VIRGINIA (so named by the late Virgin-Queene Elizabeth of blessed me∣mory) being the rightfull inheritance of his Maiesty, as being first discouered at the costs and charges of that most prudent Prince of famous memory, King Henry the Seauenth, his Maiesties great Grand-father; The Patent whereof still extant to be seene, was gran∣ted to Iohn Cabot and diuers other of his subiects, who went thither with sixe Saile of Ships, and discouered as farre as from Cape Florida to New-found-land, all along the Coast, and tooke possession thereof to the Kings vse, about that time when Ferdinando and Isabella discouered the Westerne Indies: (by which title of first discouery the King of Portugal and Spaine hold and enioy their ample and rich Kingdomes in their Indies East & West:) A coast where King Edward the Sixt after planted his fishing to the New-found-land by publike Act in Parliament, and of which Philip A∣madas and Arthur Barlow tooke againe possession to the vse of the late Quene Elizabeth: and after them,
Sir Richard Greenfield, Sir Ralph Lane, and Sir Walter Rawleigh; at what time seuerall Colonies were there placed. And since his Maiesties most happy comming to the Crowne, being an absolute King of three of the most populous Kingdomes (which Charles the Fift was wont to tearme Officina gentium, the shop or forge of men,) finding his Subiects to multiply by the blessed peace they enioy vnder his happy gouern∣ment, did out of his high wisedome and Princely care of the good of his Subiects, grant a most gratious Pa∣tent to diuers Honourable persons, and others of his louing Subiects, authorizing them thereby to goe on in the Plantation of this his lawfull and rightfull King∣dome of VIRGINIA, which by the blessing of Al∣mighty God is growne to good perfection. THis spatious and fruitful Country of VIRGINIA, is (as is generally knowne to all) naturally rich, and exceedingly well watered, very temperate, and healthfull to the Inhabitants, abounding with as many naturall blessings, and replenished with as goodly Woods, and those full of Deere and sundry other beasts for mans sustenance; and the Seas and Riuers thereof (many therein being exceeding fayre and na∣uigable) as full of excellent fish of diuers sorts, and both water & land yeelding as great variety of fowle, as any Country in the world is knowne to afford. The situation whereof being neere the middest of the world, betweene the extremities of heate and colde, seemes to partake of the benefits of both, and therby becometh capable of the richest commodities of most parts of the Earth. From whence ariseth an assurance
that (by the assistance and skill of industry) those rich Furres, Cordage, and other Commodities, which with difficulty and danger are now drawn from Russia, will be had in VIRGINIA and the parts adioyning, with ease and safety. And the Masts, Plancks, and Boards, the Pitch and Tarre, the Pot-ashes and Sope-ashes, the Hempe and Flaxe, which now are fetched from Norway, Denmarke, Poland, and Germany, will there be had in abundance. The Iron, which hath so wasted our English Woods, (that it selfe in short time must decay together with them) is to be had in VIR∣GINIA (where wasting of Woods is an ease and bene∣fit to the Planter) for all good conditions answerable to the best Iron of the world, whereof proofe hath beene made. The Wines, Fruits, and Salt of France and Spaine: the Silkes of Persia and Italy, will be had also in VIRGINIA, in no kinde of worth inferiour, where are whole Woods of many miles together of Mulberry trees of the best kindes, the proper food of the Silke-worme, and a multitude of other naturall commodities. Of Woods, Roots and Berries, for ex∣cellent Dyes; of Plants and other Drugs for Physicall seruice; of sweet Woods, Oyles and Gummes, for pleasure and other vse; of Cotton-wooll, Silke-grasse and Sugar Canes, will there be had in abundance, with many other kindes. And for Corne, Cattell, and Fish, (which are the substance of the food of man) in no place better: the Graine also of our owne Country prospering there very well; but their Maize (being the naturall Graine of VIRGINIA) doth farre exceed in pleasantnesse, strength, fertilitie, and gene∣ralitie of vse, the Wheat of England.
The Cattell which were transported thither (being now growne neere to fifteene hundred) doe become much bigger of body then the breed from whence they came. The Horses also (through the benefit of the Climate, and nature of their feeding) more beau∣tifull and fuller of courage. And such is the extraor∣dinary fertilitie of that soyle, that the Does of their Deere (a kinde differing from ours in England, yet no way inferiour) yeeld two Fawnes at a fall or birth, and sometimes three. And the Fishings along our Coasts are in plenty of Fish equall to those of New-found-land, and in greatnesse and goodnesse much superiour, and twice in the yeare to be taken, in their going and returne, which is not else-where found in such plenty and varietie; So as there went this yeare from diuers parts of this Kingdome, neere thirty Saile thither, who are well returned and richly fished. To conclude (but out of certaine aduertisements so often reiterated from thence, as well as by the con∣stant relations of many hundreds now yearely com∣ming & going) they auow, that it is a Country which nothing but ignorance can thinke ill of, and which no man but of a corrupt minde & ill purpose can defame, which as it paralelleth the most opulent and rich King∣domes of the world, by lying in the same Latitude with them, so doth it promise richer Mynes of the best and most desired mettals with them, when the Colonie shall be of sufficient strength to open and de∣fend them. And for the Passage thither, and Trade there, it is free from all restraint by forren Princes, whereunto most of our other accustomed trades are subiect: there is neyther danger in the way, through
the encountring of the Enemy or Pyrate, nor meeting with Rockes or Sholes (by reason of the fayre and safe passage thorow the maine Ocean) nor tediousnes of iourney, which by reason of better knowledge then in former yeares (the fruit of time and obserua∣tion) is oftner made and in fewer weekes, then for∣merly it was wont to be in moneths; which (with the blessing of God) produced in the last Summer this effect, that in the Fleet of nine Saile of ships, transpor∣ting aboue seauen hundred Passengers out of England and Ireland, for the Plantation, but one person (in whose roome another at Sea was borne) miscarryed by the way. And for them after ariuall, there are con∣uenient lodgings now in building, and carefull atten∣dance in Guests-houses prouiding, till those that ariue can prouide for themselues. 3570 People sent to Virginia in the three last yeares. 42 Saile of ships, 1200 Mariners im∣ployed.In the three last yeares of 1619. 1620. and 1621. there hath beene prouided and sent for VIRGINIA forty two Saile of ships, three thousand fiue hundred and seauenty men and women for Plantation, with re∣quisite prouisions, besides store of Cattell, and in those ships haue beene aboue twelue hundred Mariners im∣ployed:1500 To the Sommer Ilands. 9 ships, and 240 Mariners im∣ployed. There hath also beene sent in those yeares nine ships to the Sommer Ilands with about nine hun∣dred people to inhabite there, in which ships two hun∣dred and forty Mariners were imployed. In which space haue beene granted fifty Patents to particular persons, for Plantation in VIRGINIA, who with their Associates haue vndertaken therein to transport great multitudes of people and cattell thither, which for the most part is since performed, and the residue now in preparing, as by the seuerall Declarations of
each yeare in their particulars, (manifested and appro∣ued in our generall and publike Quarter-Courts) and for the fuller satisfaction of all desirous to vnderstand the particularities of such proceedings, hath beene by printing commended to the vnderstanding of all. The Letters written from the Gouernor and Trea∣surer in VIRGINIA in the beginning of March last, (which came hither in April,) gaue assurance of ouer∣comming and bringing to perfection in this yeare, the Iron-works, Glasse-works, Salt-works, the plentifull sowing of all sorts of English graine with the Plough, hauing now cleared good quantitie of ground; setting of store of Indian Corne or Maize, sufficient for our selues, and for trucke with the Natiues; restraint of the quantity of Tobacco, and amendment of it in the quality, learned by time and experience; The plan∣ting of Vines and Mulberry-trees neere to their hou∣ses, Figg-trees, Pomgranats, Potatoes, and Cotton∣wooll seedes, Pocoon, Indico, Sugar-Canes, Madder, Woade, Hempe, Flaxe, and Silke-grasse; and for the erecting of a fayre Inne in Iames-Citie for the better entertainment of new commers, whereto and to other publike workes, euery old planter there offered free∣ly and liberally to contribute. I write the words of their Letters. And how in a late Discouery made, a few moneths before by some of them to the South∣ward, they had past thorow great Forrests of Pines, fifteene or sixteene miles broad, and aboue threescore miles long, very fit for Mastes for shipping, and for Pitch and Tarre, and of other sorts of woods fit for Pot-ashes and Sope-ashes, and came vnto a most fruitfull Country, blessed with abundance of Corne,
reaped twice a yere (within the limits of VIRGINIA) where also they vnderstand of a Copper-myne, an essay whereof was sent, and vpon tryall here found to be very rich; and met with a great deale of Silk-grasse there growing, which monethly may be cut, of which kindes, and Cotton-wooll, all the Cambaya and Ben∣gala stuffes are made in the East-Indies: and of which kindes of Silke-grasse was heretofore made a peece of Grogeram giuen to Queene Elizabeth.Mr. Hariot in his booke of Virgi∣nia, 1585. And how that in December last they had planted and cultiuated in VIRGINIA Vines of all sorts, (as well those natural∣ly growing, as those other Plants sent them from these parts of Europe) Orenge and Lemon-trees, Figge-trees, Sugar-Canes, Cotton-wooll, Cassaui Rootes, (that make very good bread) Plantanes, Potatoes, and sundry other Indian fruits and plants not formerly seene in VIRGINIA, which at the time of their said Letters beganne to prosper very well: as also their In∣dico-seedes, for the true cure whereof there is lately caused a Treatise to be written. Furthermore, they write that in a Voyage made by Lieutenant Marmaduke Parkinson, and other En∣glish Gentlemen, vp the Riuer of Patomack they saw a China Boxe at one of the Kings houses where they were: Being demanded where he had it, made answer, That it was sent him from a King that dwelt in the West, ouer the great Hils, some tenne dayes iourney, whose Countrey is neare a great Sea, hee hauing that Boxe, from a people as he said, that came thither in ships, that weare cloaths, crooked swords, & somwhat like our men, dwelt in houses, and were called Acanack-China: and he offered our people, that he would send
his Brother along with them to that King, which of∣fer the Gouernor purposed not to refuse; and the rather, by reason of the continual constant relations of all those Sauages in VIRGINIA, of a Sea, and the way to it West, they affirming that the heads of all those seauen goodly Riuers, (the least wherof is greater then the Riuer of Thames, and nauigable aboue an hundred and fifty miles, and not aboue sixe or eight miles one from another) which fall all into one great Bay, haue their rising out of a ridge of hils, that runnes all along South and North: whereby they doubt not but to finde a safe, easie, and good passage to the South Sea, part by water, and part by land, esteeming it not aboue an hundred and fifty miles from the head of the Falls, where wee are now planted; the Discouery whereof will bring forth a most rich trade to Cathay, China, Ia∣pan, and those other of the East Indies, to the inestima∣ble benefit of this Kingdome. But for the further proofe hereof, and of the North-west passage thither by Sea, I referre the Reader to the Treatie annexed at the end of this Booke, written by that learned and famous Mathema∣tician, Mr. Henry Briggs, which I hauing happily at∣tained vnto, haue published for the common good. Moreouer, the Letters of Mr. Iohn Berkley, some∣times of Beuerstone Castle in the County of Glocester, (a Gentleman of an honorable Familie) likewise cer∣tifie, that a more fit place for Iron-workes (whereof he was made Master & ouer-seer) then in VIRGINIA, both for wood, water, mynes, and stone, was not to be found: And that by Whitsontide then next (now past) the Company might relye vpon good quantities
of Iron made by him: which also by Letters from Mr. George Sandis the third of March last, was confir∣med, with this farther description of the place (called The falling Creeke) to be so fitting for that purpose, as if Nature had applyed her selfe to the wish and di∣rection of the Workeman; where also were great stones hardly seene else-where in VIRGINIA, lying on the place, as though they had beene brought thi∣ther to aduance the erection of those Workes. The Letters of the French Vignerous or Vine-men, procured out of France & sent ouer into VIRGINIA, did likewise assertaine, that no Countrey in the world was more proper for Vines, Silke, Rice, Oliues, and other Fruits, then VIRGINIA is: and that it farre excelled their owne Countrey of Languedocke; the Vines of diuers sorts being in abundance naturally ouer all the Countrey: and they hauing planted some cuttings of Vines at Michaelmas last, in their Letters affirme that these bare Grapes already this Spring, to their great wonder, as being a thing they suppose not heard of in any other Countrey. A taste of Wine made of the wilde grape, they last yeare sent, with hope to send a good quantitie this next Vintage; and that the Mulberry-trees where they abode were in wonderfull abundance, and much excelling both in goodnesse and greatnesse those of their owne Coun∣try of Languedocke: and that those Silke-wormes they haue, prosper exceeding well, and some Silke they hope to send this yeare, there wanting nothing to set vp that rich Commodity but store of hands where∣with England doth abound. Of the fruit of which Mulberry-trees (as of a Plum there plentifully grow∣ing)
they would make wholsome drinkes for the Co∣lony and people there. The Letters of Mr. Porey (verified also from the Go∣uernor and Councell) aduertised of a late Discouery by him and others made into the great Bay Northward, (reseruing the sounding of the bottome thereof for a second Voyage,) where hee left setled very happily neare an hundred English, with hope of a good trade for Furres there to be had. From thence was brought by Lieutenant Perkinson, in his voyage, some of that kind of Earth which is called Terra Lemnia (there to be had in great abundance) as good as that of Turkey. BY this (though it be but in part) the Reader may vnderstand the great riches and blessings of this excellent Countrey, which euen ordinary diligence and care must needes strangely improue. But that all men may see the vnpartiall ingenuity of this Dis∣course, we freely confesse, that the Countrey is not so good, as the Natiues are bad, whose barbarous Sa∣uagenesse needs more cultiuation then the ground it selfe, being more ouerspread with inciuilitie and trea∣chery, then that with Bryers. For the land being tilled and vsed well by vs, deceiued not our expectation, but rather exceeded it farre, being so thankfull as to re∣turne an hundred for one. But the Sauages though ne∣uer Nation vsed so kindly vpon so small desert, haue in stead of that Haruest which our paines merited, retur∣ned nothing but Bryers and thornes, pricking euen to death many of their Benefactors: yet doubt wee not, but that as all wickednes is crafty to vndoe it self, so these also, thorow our sides, haue more wounded
themselues then vs, God Almighty making way for seueritie there, where a fayre gentlenesse would not take place. The occasion whereof thus I relate from thence. THE last May there came Letters from Sir Francis Wiat Gouernor in VIRGINIA, which did aduer∣tise that when in Nouember last he ariued in VIRGI∣NIA, and entred vpon his Gouernment, he found the Country setled in a peace (as all men there thought) sure and vnuiolable, not onely because it was solemnly ratified and sworne, and at the request of the Natiue King stamped in Brasse, and fixed to one of his Oakes of note, but as being aduantagious to both parts; to the Sauages as the weaker, vnder which they were safely sheltred and defended; to vs, as being the easiest way then thought to pursue and aduance our proiects of buildings, plantings, and effecting their conuersion by peaceable and fayre meanes. And such was the conceit of firme peace and amitie, as that there was seldome or neuer a sword worne, and a Peece seldo∣mer, except for a Deere or Fowle. By which assurance of securitie, the Plantations of particular Aduenturers and Planters were placed scatteringly and straglingly as a choyce veyne of rich ground inuited them, and the further from neighbors held the better. The hou∣ses generally set open to the Sauages, who were al∣waies friendly entertained at the tables of the English, and commonly lodged in their bed-chambers. The old planters (as they thought now come to reape the benefit of their long trauels) placed with wonderfull content vpon their priuate diuidents, and the planting
of particular Hundreds and Colonies pursued with an hopefull alacrity, all our proiects (saith he) in a faire way, and their familarity with the Natiues, seeming to open a faire gate for their conuersion to Chri∣stianitie. The Country being in this estate, an occasion was ministred of sending to Opachankano the King of these Sauages, about the middle of March last, what time the Messenger returned backe with these words from him, That he held the peace concluded so firme, as the Skie should sooner fall then it dissolue: yea, such was the treacherous dissimulation of that people who then had contriued our destruction, that euen two dayes before the Massacre, some of our men were gui∣ded thorow the woods by them in safety: and one Browne, who then to learne the language liued among the Warrascoyacks (a Prouince of that King) was in friendly manner sent backe by them to Captaine Ha∣mor his Master, and many the like passages, rather in∣creasing our former confidence, then any wise in the world ministring the least suspition of the breach of the peace, or of what instantly ensued; yea, they bor∣rowed our owne Boates to conuey themselues crosse the Riuer (on the bankes of both sides whereof all our Plantations were) to consult of the diuellish murder that ensued, and of our vtter extirpation, which God of his mercy (by the meanes of some of themselues conuerted to Christianitie) preuented: and as well on the Friday morning (the fatal day) the 22 of March, as also in the euening, as in other dayes before, they came vnarmed into our houses, without Bowes or ar∣rowes, or other weapons, with Deere, Turkies, Fish,
Furres, and other prouisions, to sell, and trucke with vs, for glasse, beades, and other trifles: yea in some places, sate downe at Breakfast with our people at their tables, whom immediately with their owne tooles and weapons, eyther laid downe, or standing in their houses, they basely and barbarously murthered, not sparing eyther age or sexe, man, woman or childe; so sodaine in their cruell execution, that few or none discerned the weapon or blow that brought them to destruction. In which manner they also slew many of our people then at their seuerall workes and husban∣dries in the fields, and without their houses, some in planting Corne and Tobacco, some in gardening, some in making Bricke, building, sawing, and other kindes of husbandry, they well knowing in what pla∣ces and quarters each of our men were, in regard of their daily familiarity, and resort to vs for trading and other negotiations, which the more willingly was by vs continued and cherished for the desire we had of ef∣fecting that great master-peece of workes, their con∣uersion. And by this meanes that fatall Friday mor∣ning, there fell vnder the bloudy and barbarous hands of that perfidious and inhumane people, contrary to all lawes of God and men, of Nature & Nations, three hundred forty seuen men, women, and children, most by their owne weapons; and not being content with taking away life alone, they fell after againe vpon the dead, making as well as they could, a fresh murder, defacing, dragging, and mangling the dead carkasses into many pieces, and carrying some parts away in derision, with base and bruitish triumph. Neither yet did these beasts spare those amongst
the rest well knowne vnto them, from whom they had daily receiued many benefits and fauours, but spite∣fully also massacred them, without remorse or pitty, being in this more fell then Lyons and Dragons, which (as Histories record) haue beene so farre from hurting, as they haue both acknowledged, and grate∣fully requited their Benefactors; such is the force of good deeds, though done to cruell beasts, as to make them put off the very nature of beasts, and to put on humanity vpon them. But these miscreants, contra∣riwise in this kinde, put not off onely all humanity, but put on a worse and more then vnnaturall bruitish∣nesse. One instance of it, amongst too many, shall serue for all. That worthy religious Gentleman, Master George Thorpe Esquire, Deputie of the Colledge lands, some∣times one of his Maiesties Pentioners, and in one of the principall places of command in VIRGINIA, did so truly and earnestly affect their conuersion, and was so tender ouer them, that whosoeuer vnder his autho∣rity had giuen them but the least displeasure or discon∣tent, he punished them seuerely. He thought nothing too deare for them, and as being desirous to binde them vnto him by his many courtesies, hee neuer de∣nyed them any thing that they asked him, insomuch that when these Sauages complained vnto him of the fiercenesse of our Mastiues, most implacable and terri∣ble vnto them, (knowing them by instinct it seemes, to be but treacherous and false-hearted friends to vs, bet∣ter then our selues) he to gratifie them in all things, for the winning of them by degrees, caused some of them to be killed in their presence, to the great dis∣pleasure
of the owners, and would haue had all the rest guelt (had he not beene hindered) to make them the gentler and the milder to them. Hee was not onely too kinde and beneficiall to the common sort, but also to their King, to whom hee oft resorted, and gaue many presents which hee knew to be highly pleasing to him. And whereas this king before dwelt onely in a cottage, or rather a denne or hog-stye, made with a few poles and stickes, and couered with mats after their wyld manner, to ciuilize him, he first, built him a fayre house according to the English fashion, in which hee tooke such ioy, especially in his locke and key, which hee so admired, as locking and vnlocking his doore an hundred times aday, hee thought no deuice in all the world was comparable to it. Thus insinuating himselfe to this King for his reli∣gious purposes, he conferred after with him oft, and intimated to him matters of our Religion; and thus far the Pagan confessed, moued by naturall Principles, that our God was a good God, and better much then theirs, in that he had with so many good things aboue them endowed vs. Hee told him, if hee would serue our God, hee should bee partaker of all those good things wee had, and of farre greater then sense or rea∣son euer could imagine. Hee wonne vpon him, as hee thought in many things, so as hee gaue him fayre hea∣ring and good answer, and seemed to be much plea∣sed with his discourse and in his company. And both hee and his people for the daily courtesies this good Gentleman did to one or other of them, did professe such outward loue and respect vnto him, as nothing could seeme more: but all was little regarded after by
this Viperous brood, as the sequell shewed: for they not only wilfully murdered him, but cruelly and felly, out of deuillish malice, did so many barbarous de∣spights and foule scornes after to his dead corpes, as are vnbefitting to be heard by any ciuill eare. One thing I cannot omit, that when this good Gentleman vpon his fatall hower, was warned by his man (who perceiued some treachery intended to them by these hell-hounds) to looke to himselfe, and withall ranne away for feare of the mischiefe he strongly appre∣hended, and so saued his owne life; yet his Master, out of the conscience of his owne good meaning, and faire deserts euer towards them, was so void of all su∣spition, and so full of confidence, that they had sooner killed him, then hee could or would beleeue they meant any ill against him. Thus the sinnes of these wicked Infidels, haue made them vnworthy of enioy∣ing him, and the eternall good that he most zealously alwayes intended to them. And thus these miserable wretches, not hee, hath lost by it, who to the comfort of vs all, hath gayned a Crowne of endlesse blisse, and is assuredly become a glorious Martyr, in which thrice-happy and blessed state we leaue him. But these miscreants, who haue thus despised Gods great mercies so freely offered to them, must needs in time therefore be corrected by his iustice: So as those who by the way of mercies would not be drawne vnto him, shall some of them at length (no doubt) be brought vnto him by his way of iudgements: to which leauing them, I will knit againe together now the thred of my Discourse, and proceed to tell you, That at the time of this Massacre
there were three or foure of our ships in Iames-Riuer, and one in the next Riuer, and daily more to come in, as three did within fourteene dayes after; one of which they endeuored to haue surprised, but in vaine, as had also beene their whole attempt, had any the least fore-knowledge beene in those places where the Mas∣sacre was committed: yet were the hearts of the En∣glish euer stupid, and auerted from beleeuing any thing that might weaken their hopes of speedy win∣ning the Sauages to Ciuilitie and Religion, by kinde vsage and fayre conuersing amongst them. Hee, and the whole Councell write further, That Almighty God (they doubt not) hath his great worke to doe in this Tragedy, and will thereout draw honor and glory to his great Name; safety, and a more flourishing estate to themselues, and the whole Plantation there; and the more speedy conuersion of the Children of those Sauages to himselfe, since hee so miraculously preserued so many of the English (there being, God be praysed, about eleuen parts of twelue still remay∣ning) whose desire to draw those people to Religion by the carelesse neglect of their owne safeties, seemes to haue beene the greatest cause of their own ensuing destruction. Yet it pleased God to vse some of them as instruments to saue many of their liues, whose soules they had formerly saued, as at Iames-Citie, and other places, and the Pinnace trading in Pamounkey Riuer, all whose liues were saued by a conuerted In∣dian, disclosing the plot in the instant (wherof though our sinnes (say they) made vs vnworthy to be instru∣ments of so glorious a conuersion in generall, yet his infinite wisedome can neuerthelesse bring it to passe
with some more of them, and with other Prouinces there in his good time, and by such meanes as wee thinke most vnlikely. For euen in the deliuery of vs that now suruiue, no mans particular carefulnesse sa∣ued any one person, but the meere goodnesse of him∣selfe, freely and miraculously preserued whom it plea∣sed him. The Letters of Mr. George Sandis a worthy Gentle∣man and Treasurer there, likewise haue aduertised (as many others from many particular persons of note and worth) besides the Relations of many returned in the Sea-flower (the ship that brought vs this vnwel∣come newes) haue beene heard at large in the publike Courts, that whilst all their affayres were full of suc∣cesse, and such intercourse of familiaritie, as if the In∣dians and themselues had beene of one Nation, those treacherous Natiues, after fiue yeares peace, by a ge∣nerall combination in one day plotted to subuert their whole Colony, and at one instant of time, though our seuerall Plantations were an hundred and forty miles vp one Riuer on both sides. But before I goe any further, for the better vnder∣standing of all things, you shall know that these wyld naked Natiues liue not in great numbers together, but dispersed, and in small companies; and where most to∣gether, not aboue two hundred, and that very rare, in other places fifty or forty, or thereabouts, and many miles distant from one another, in such places among the Woods where they either found, or might easiliest make some cleared plots of ground, which they im∣ploy wholly in setting of Corne, whereby to sustaine their liues. These small and scattered Companies (as
I haue said) had warning giuen from one another in all their habitations to meete at the day and houre ap∣pointed for our destruction, at all our seuerall Townes and places seated vpon the Riuer; some were directed to goe to one place, some to another, all to be done at the same day and time, which they did accordingly: some entring their Houses vnder colour of trucking, and so taking aduantage, others drawing our men a∣broad vpon faire pretences, and the rest suddenly fal∣ling vpon those that were at their labours. They certifie further, that besides Master George Thorpe, before mentioned, Master Iohn Berkeley, Cap∣taine Nathanael Powel, and his wife, (daughter of Master William Tracy, and great with childe) and Captaine Maycock, all Gentlemen of birth, vertue, and industry, and of the Councell there, suffered vn∣der this their cruelty and treason. That the slaughter had beene vniuersall, if God had not put it into the heart of an Indian belonging to one Perry, to disclose it, who liuing in the house of one Pace, was vrged by another Indian his Brother (who came the night before and lay with him) to kill Pace, (so commanded by their King as he declared) as hee would kill Perry: telling further that by such an houre in the morning a number would come from diuers places to finish the Execution, who failed not at the time: Perries Indian rose out of his bed and reueales it to Pace, that vsed him as a Sonne: And thus the rest of the Colony that had warning giuen them, by this meanes was saued. Such was (God bee thanked for it) the good fruit of an Infidell conuerted to Chri∣stianity; for though three hundred and more of ours
died by many of these Pagan Infidels, yet thousands of ours were saued by the means of one of them alone which was made a Christian; Blessed be God for euer, whose mercy endureth for euer; Blessed bee God whose mercy is aboue his iustice, and farre aboue all his workes: who wrought this deliuerance whereby their soules escaped euen as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler. Pace vpon this discouery, securing his house, before day rowed ouer the Riuer to Iames-City (in that place neere three miles in bredth) and gaue notice thereof to the Gouernor, by which meanes they were preuen∣ted there, and at such other Plantations as was pos∣sible for a timely intelligence to be giuen; for where they saw vs standing vpon our Guard, at the sight of a Peece they all ranne away. In other places that could haue no notice, some Peeces with munition (the vse whereof they know not) were there carried away, and some few Cartell also were destroyed by them. And as Fame diuulgeth (not without pro∣bable grounds) their King hath since caused the most part of the Gunpowder by him surprized, to bee sowne, to draw therefrom the like increase, as of his Maize or Corne, in Haruest next. And that it is since discouered, that the last Summer Opachankano practi∣sed with a King of the Eastern shore (no well-willer of his) to furnish him with store of poison (naturally growing in his country) for our destruction, which he absolutely refused, though he sent him great store of Beades, and other presents to winne him thereunto: which he, with fiue or sixe of his great men, offered to be ready to  against him. That the true cause
of this surprize was most by the instigation of the De∣uill, (enemy to their saluation) and the dayly feare that possest them, that in time we by our growing con∣tinually vpon them, would dispossesse them of this Country, as they had beene formerly of the West Indies by the Spaniard; produced this bloody act. That neuer griefe and shame possessed any people more then themselues, to be thus butchered by so na∣ked and cowardly a people, who dare not stand the presentment of a staffe in manner of a Peece, nor an vncharged Peece in the hands of a woman, from which they flye as so many Hares; much faster then from their tormenting Deuill, whom they worship for feare, though they acknowledge they loue him not. THus haue you seene the particulars of this mas∣sacre, out of Letters from thence written, where∣in treachery and cruelty haue done their worst to vs, or rather to themselues; for whose vnderstanding is so shallow, as not to perceiue that this must needs bee for the good of the Plantation after, and the losse of this blood to make the body more healthfull, as by these reasons may be manifest. First, Because betraying of innocency neuer rests vnpunished: And therefore Agesilaus, when his ene∣mies (vpon whose oath of being faithfull hee rested) had deceiued him, he sent them thankes, for that by their periury, they had made God his friend, and their enemy. Secondly, Because our hands which before were tied with gentlenesse and faire vsage, are now set at liberty by the treacherous violence of the Sauages,
not vntying the Knot, but cutting it: So that we, who hitherto haue had possession of no more ground then their waste, and our purchase at a valuable considera∣tion to their owne contentment, gained; may now by right of Warre, and law of Nations, inuade the Country, and destroy them who sought to destroy vs: whereby wee shall enioy their cultiuated places, turning the laborious Mattocke into the victorious Sword (wherein there is more both ease, benefit, and glory) and possessing the fruits of others labours. Now their cleared grounds in all their villages (which are situate in the fruitfullest places of the land) shall be inhabited by vs, whereas heretofore the grubbing of woods was the greatest labour. Thirdly, Because those commodities which the Indians enioyed as much or rather more then we, shall now also be entirely possessed by vs. The Deere and other beasts will be in safety, and infinitly increase, which heretofore not onely in the generall huntings of the King (whereat foure or fiue hundred Deere were vsually slaine) but by each particular Indian were destroied at all times of the yeare, without any difference of Male, Damme, or Young. The like may be said of our owne Swine and Goats, whereof they haue vsed to kill eight in tenne more then the English haue done. There will be also a great increase of wild Turkies, and other waighty Fowle, for the Indians neuer put difference of destroying the Hen, but kill them whether in season or not, whether in breeding time, or sitting on their egges, or hauing new hatched, it is all one to them: whereby, as also by the orderly vsing of their fishing Weares, no knowne Country in
the world will so plentifully abound in victuall. Fourthly, Because the way of conquering them is much more easie then of ciuilizing them by faire meanes, for they are a rude, barbarous, and naked people, scattered in small companies, which are helps to Victorie, but hinderances to Ciuilitie: Besides that, a conquest may be of many, and at once; but ciuility is in particular, and slow, the effect of long time, and great industry. Moreouer, victorie of them may bee gained many waies; by force, by surprize, by famine in burning their Corne, by destroying and burning their Boats, Canoes, and Houses, by breaking their fishing Weares, by assailing them in their huntings, whereby they get the greatest part of their sustenance in Winter, by pursuing and chasing them with our horses, and blood-Hounds to draw after them, and Mastiues to teare them, which take this naked, tanned, deformed Sauages, for no other then wild beasts, and are so fierce and fell vpon them, that they feare them worse then their old Deuill which they worship, sup∣posing them to be a new and worse kinde of Deuils then their owne. By these and sundry other wayes, as by driuing them (when they flye) vpon their ene∣mies, who are round about them, and by animating and abetting their enemies against them, may their ruine or subiection be soone effected. So the Spaniard made great vse for his owne turne of the quarrels and enmities that were amongst the Indians, as throughly vnderstanding and following that Maxime of the Politician, Diuide & impera, Make diuisions and take Kingdomes: For thus he got two of the greatest Kingdomes of the West Indies, Peru and
Mexico, by the Princes diuisions, and the peoples diffe∣rences. After the death of Guainacapa king of Peru, his sonnes Attabalippa and Gascar falling to war about the kingdom, & each of thē striuing to make the Spaniard to his friend, Francis Pizzarro managing those their diuisions onely to his owne ends, easily stripped them both of that rich Kingdome, and became Master of Peru. And so likwise Ferdinando Cortez vanquished King Motezuma, and gained the Kingdome of Mexico from him by the aid and furtherance of the neighbo∣ring people of the Prouince of Tascala, being deadly enemies to the Mexicans; for which seruice they of Tascala are freed by the Spaniards from all Tributes to this time. In VIRGINIA the many diuers Princes and people there are at this day opposite in infinite fa∣ctions one vnto another, and many of them beare a mortall hatred to these our barbarous Sauages, that haue beene likely as false and perfidious heretofore to them, as vnto vs of late. So as the quarrels, and the causes of them, and the different humours of these people being well vnderstood, it will be an easie mat∣ter to ouerthrow those that now are, or may bee our enemies hereafter, by ayding and setting on their ene∣mies against them. And by these factions and diffe∣rences of petty Princes, the Romans tooke their grea∣test aduantage to ouercome this Iland of Great Bri∣tayne, of which Tacitus fayes, Ita dum singuli pugnant vniuersi vincuntur. And Iustin hath the like saying of the cause of vanquishing the Grecian Cities. Fiftly, Because the Indians, who before were vsed as friends, may now most iustly be compelled to seruitude and drudgery, and supply the roome of men
that labour, whereby euen the meanest of the Planta∣tion may imploy themselues more entirely in their Arts and Occupations, which are more generous, whi∣lest Sauages performe their inferiour workes of dig∣ging in mynes, and the like, of whom also some may be sent for the seruice of the Sommer Ilands. Sixtly, This will for euer hereafter make vs more cautelous and circumspect, as neuer to bee deceiued more by any other treacheries, but will serue for a great instruction to all posteritie there, to teach them that Trust is the mother of Deceipt, and to learne them that of the Italian, Chi non fida, non s'inga muu, Hee that trusts not is not deceiued: and make them know that kindnesses are misspent vpon rude natures, so long as they continue rude; as also, that Sauages and Pa∣gans are aboue all other for matter of Iustice euer to be suspected. Thus vpon this Anvile shall wee now beate out to our selues an armour of proofe, which shall for euer after defend vs from barbarous Incursi∣ons, and from greater dangers that otherwise might happen. And so we may truly say according to the French Prouerb, Aquel{que} chose malheur est bon, Ill lucke is good for something. Lastly, We haue this benefit more to our comfort, because all good men doe now take much more care of vs then before, since the fault is on their sides, not on ours, who haue vsed so fayre a cariage, euen to our owne destruction. Especially his Maiesties most gra∣tious, tender and paternall care is manifest herein, who by his Royall bounty and goodnesse, hath continued his many fauors vnto vs, with a new, large, & Princely supply of Munition and Armes, out of his Maiesties
owne store in the Tower, being gratiously bestowed for the safety and aduancement of the Plantation. As also his Royall fauor is amply extended in a large sup∣ply of men and other necessaries throughout the whole Kingdome, which are very shortly to bee sent to VIRGINIA. Neyther must wee omit the Honourable City of London, who to shew their zeale at this time (as they haue alwayes done vpon all Honourable occasions to their endlesse praise) are now setting forth one hun∣dred persons, at their owne charges, for the aduance∣ment of the Plantations. In the furtherance of which action, as the whole graue Senate of Aldermen haue shewed much piety and wisedome, so in particular, the Right Honourable Sir Edward Barkham Knight, the now Lord Mayor, hath demonstrated a most wor∣thy mind. Besides many worthy Persons of birth and quality, and diuers others at their owne costs are now preparing for VIRGINIA. Neyther is any man to be deiected because of some such disasters as these that may seeme to thwart the businesse. What growing State was there euer in the world which had not the like? Rome grew by opposition, and rose vpon the backe of her enemies. Marke but the Spaniard who is in the same Continent with VIR∣GINIA, and hath now perfected his worke; Marke and tell mee, if hee hath not had more counterbuffes farre then wee, as out of their owne histories at large may be proued. Columbus vpon his returne from the West Indies in∣to Spaine, hauing left his people with the Indian in peace, and promise of fayre vsage towards them, yet
at his comming backe againe, hee found no one man aliue of them, but all by the Natiues treacherously slaine. After this againe, when the Spanish Colony was in∣creased in great numbers, the Indians (from whom the Spaniards for trucking stuffe vsed to haue all their corn) generally conspired together to plant no corne at all, intending therby to farnish them, themselues liuing in the meane time vpon Cassaui (a root to make bread) onely then knowne to themselues: This plot of theirs by the Spaniards ouer-sight (that foolishly depended vpon Strangers for their bread) tooke such effect, and brought them to such misery by the rage of famine, that they spared no vncleane, no loathsome beast, no not the poysonous and hideous Serpents, but eate them vp also, deuouring one death to saue them from another: And by this meanes the whole Colony well-neare surfetted, sickned, and dyed miserably. After againe, vpon fresh and great supplyes new made, an infinite company of them by their inconti∣nency dyed of the Indian disease, that hath now got a French name, which at first (as being a strange and vnknowne malady) was deadly vpon whomsoeuer it lighted. Besides (before they knew the cause and remedy) very many lost diuers parts of their body, feet and hands principally, by a little vermine lesse then a Flea, and skipping like it, called Nigua, which got between the skinne and the flesh before they were aware, and there bred and multiplyed, making swel∣lings and putrefactions, to the decay and losse of their bodily members. What should I tell you that the Plantations diuers
times were neare vndone, by the , factions, and malice of the Commanders one vnto another, Co∣lumbus, to whom they were beholding for all, with his brothers, were sent home from the West Indies into Spaine bound with chaines: and some other great Commanders killed and murthered one another. Piz∣zarro was killed by Almagros sonne, and him Vasco beheaded, which Vasco was taken by Blasco, and this Blasco was likewise taken by Pizzarroes brother. Thus by their owne spightfull and auaritious quarrels did they well-neare shake the mayne pillars of that Plan∣tation. These and many other calamities and mischiefes, too long to relate now, hapned vnto them more then euer did to vs. And at one time their plantation was euen at the last gaspe, all their Colony being resolued desperately to leaue it, had not two ships vnexpected come in with new supplyes: yet wee see for all these miseries, that they haue attained to their ends at last, Honor, power, and wealth; In so much as that Coun∣trey, which (when they were dishartned with disa∣sters) they beganne to be so weary of, that they were about to forsake it all, in short time after (seeing all stormes blowne ouer, and fayre weather shining vpon them) they were so in loue with their great fortunes, that they grew so iealous of them, as made them shut them vp from the sight of any but themselues. And then they petitioned their King, by an inuiolable De∣cree to annexe and vnite the West Indies inseparably for euer to the Crowne of Spaine; which (for their better securitie and satisfaction) was accordingly per∣formed and ratified, as it is to be seene in H Hi∣story
of the West Indies. And whereas before, few could be hired to go to inhabite there, now with great suite they must obtaine it. Thus haue they in time by industry, patience, and constancy effected this great worke of theirs, notwith∣standing to encrease their difficulties also, they were to deale with a most populous & numerous nation, which they ouercame at last: So as Ouiedo in his third Booke of the first Part of his West Indie History saith, that of a million of Indians at least, that were in Hispaniola, there were not (in little more then forty yeares space after the first beginning of the Plantation) fiue hun∣dred of thē & all their children liuing: for the Indians that liued there, after were brought out of the Conti∣nent into that Iland, or out of one Iland to be planted in another. On the other side, the Natiues in VIR∣GINIA are nothing populous, but thin and scattered Nations, as is knowne to all. Here by the way to make a little Digression, since I haue mentioned Ouiedo who liued aboue twenty two yeares in the West Indies, I will acquaint you with his obseruation and iudgement of the nature and disposi∣tion of the Indians there, that you may compare and see in what, and how farre, it agrees with that of the Natiues of VIRGINIA. They are (saith hee) by nature sloathfull and idle, vitious, melancholy, slouenly, of bad conditions, ly∣ers, of small memory, of no constancy or trust. In an∣other place he saith, The Indian is by nature of all peo∣ple the most lying and most inconstant in the world, sottish and sodaine: neuer looking what dangers may happen afterwards, lesse capable then children of sixe
or seauen yeares old, and lesse apt and ingenious. This is the generall disposition of most of them, though there be some (sayes he) that be wise and subtill. And indeede it should seeme so, when they could ouer∣reach and goe beyond the Spaniard so much, to put that tricke of staruing them (as aforesaid) vpon them, to their so great and almost totall destruction. But to come againe to that which I first intended: Since the Spaniard (as we see) in his Plantations hath gone thorow farre more hazards, and greater difficul∣ties then euer wee haue had, we therefore in looking to what is past, vpon great reason ought likewise not to be deterred, but so much the rather inuited to pro∣ceede with constancy and courage. And if besides wee looke (as most men doe) after the riches of a Coun∣trey to inuite vs on, aske those that haue beene there, and haue trauelled farre and neare, and they will tell you, that no Countrey in the world doth naturally abound with more Commodities then VIRGINIA doth. The Clymate is knowne to be more temperate, and the soyle more rich then that of the West Indies is: neyther doth it want mynes of all sorts, no not of the richest, as is knowne to some now liuing, and shall be manifested when fit time shall serue. And yet to thinke that Gold and Siluer mynes are in a Countrey (other∣wise most rich and fruitfull) the greatest wealth of a Plantation, is but a popular error, as is that opinion likewise, That the Gold and Siluer is the greatest wealth of the West Indies now at this present time. True it is indeed, that in the first Conquest the Spa∣niards got great and mighty treasure from the Indi∣ans, which they in long space had heaped vp together,
and in those times the Indians shewed them entyre and plentifull rich mynes, which by length of time (as is well known and published to the world by those that haue beene there) are wasted and exhausted since, so as now the charge of getting those mettals is growne most excessiue, besides the consuming and spoyling many men of their liues, which are depriued of them by the vapors that come out of the Gold and Siluer mynes, which are most pestilent and deadly, as diuers authors auerre. Amongst others, a late Geo∣grapher speaking of the West Indies, and of those mynes there, saith, Odor ex auri & argenti fodinis no∣xius admodum; ne{que} tamen prohibuit aëris corruptissimi violentia Hispanos, ne in alio orbe nouum moriendi lo∣cum quaererent. So as all things considered by these mynes, what by the liues of many men lost in them, and what with the great charge otherwise in getting them, the cleare gaine to the Aduenturers from these mettals (the Kings part defrayed) is but small to them, nothing neere so much I am sure, as is imagined. And were it not for other rich Commodities there that en∣able and enrich the Aduenturers, those of the Con∣tractation house were neuer able to subsist by this. For the greatest part of their gaine and profit I say consists not in these mynes, but in their other Commodities, partly natiue, and partly translated from other parts of the world, and planted in the West Indies: As in their mighty wealth of Sugars (the Sugar Canes be∣ing transported first from the Canaries,) and in Gin∣ger, and some other commodities deriued from the East Indies thither: in their Cochanile, their Indico, their Cotton, their infinite store of Hydes and Skins,
their Quick-siluer, and Allom, Wood, and Brasill-wood, &c. And their many other Dyes, Paints, Peta∣rarana, Tobacco, Gummes, Balmes, Oyles medeci∣nall, and Perfumes, their Sarsaparillia, and many other physicall drugs, (for which, learned Physitians and skilfull Simplers were sent to take a suruey, and make an exquisite draught of all the Plants in colours.) These I say and other the like commodities are the West Indies indeed vnto the Aduenturers, by which they are inabled to inrich themselues, and to sustaine the mighty charge of drawing out the Gold and Siluer▪ to the great and cleare reuenew of their King. I had many things of importance to say more, but I will detain the Reader no longer now. To conclude then, seeing that Virginia is most abundantly fruitfull, and that this Massacre must rather be beneficiall to the Plantation then impaire it, let all men take courage, and put to their helping hands, since now the time is most seasonable and aduantagious for the reaping of those benefits which the Plantation hath long promi∣sed: and for their owne good let them doe it speedily, that so by taking the prioritie of time, they may haue also the prioritie of place, in choosing the best Seats of the Country, which now by vanquishing of the Indians, is like to offer a more ample and faire choice of fruitfull habitations, then hitherto our gentlenesse and faire comportment to the Sauages could attaine vnto. Wherein no doubt but all the fauour that may be, shall be shewed to Aduenturers and Planters. And for old Aduenturers, there is due vnto them and their heyres (according to the Orders of the Company) for each twelue pounds ten shillings formerly paid
into the treasury, one hundred Acres of Land, vpon a first diuision, and as much vpon a second, the first being planted. And whosoeuer transports himselfe or any other, at his charge into VIRGINIA, shall for himselfe and each person so transported, before Mid∣summer, 1625. haue to him and his heyres for euer, fifty Acres of land vpon a first Diuision, and as much more vpon a second: the first fifty being cultiuated or manured, if such person continue there three yeares, eyther at once or seuerall times, or dye after hee bee shipped for that Voyage. Lastly, it is to be wished, that euery good Patriot will take these things seriously into his thoughts, and consider how deeply the prosecution of this noble Enterprise concerneth the honor of his Maiestie and the whole Nation, the propagation of Christian Re∣ligion, the enlargement, strength, and safety of his Maiesties Dominions, the rich augmenting of his Re∣uennues, the imploiment of his Subiects idle at home, the increase of men, Mariners and shipping, and the raising of such necessary commoditie, for the impor∣tation of which from forren Countries fo great and incredible summes are continually issued and expen∣ded. Some may helpe with their purses, some with their persons, some with their fauour, some with their counsell: especially amongst others, let Ministers in their publike and priuate prayers commend these Plantations to the blessing of Almighty God: To whom be all honor and glory, for euer and euer, Amen.
Here following is set downe a true List of the names of all those that were mas∣sacred by the treachery of the Sauages in VIRGINIA, the 22 March last. To the end that their lawfull heyres may take speedy order for the inheriting of their lands and estates there: For which the Honourable Com∣pany of Virginia are ready to doe them all right and fauour. At Captaine Berckleys Plantation seated at the Fal∣ling Creeke, some 66. miles from Iames-Citie in VIRGINIA. IOhn Berkley Esquire. Thomas Brasington. Iohn Sawyer. Roger Dauid. Francis Gowsh. Bartholmew Peram. Giles Peram. Iohn Dowler. Laurence Dowler. Lewis Williams. Richard Boscough. Thomas Holland. Iohn Hunt. Robert Horner Mason. Philip Barnes. William Swandal. Robert Williams, his Wife, and Childe. Giles Bradshawe, his Wife, and Childe. Iohn Howlet, and his sonne. Thomas Wood, and Collins his man. Ioseph Fitch Apothecary to Doctor Pots.
At Master Thomas Sheffeilds Plantation, some three miles from the Falling Creeke. MAster Th: Sheffeild, and Rachel his wife. Iohn Reeue. William Tyler a boy. Samuel Reeue. Iohn Ellen. Robert Tyler a boy. Mathew — Iudeth Howard. Thomas Poole Methusalem — Thomas Taylor. William Tyler. At Henrico Iland about two miles from Sheffeilds Plantation. — Atkins. — Weston. Philip Shatford. William Perigo. Owen Iones, one of Capt. Berkleys people. Slaine of the Colledge People, about two miles from Henrico-Citie. SAmuel Stringer. George Soldan. William Basset. Iohn Perry. Edward Ember. Iarrat Moore. Thomas Xerles. Thomas Freeman. Iohn Allen. Thomas Cooke. Iohn Clements. Iames Faulkoner. Christopher Henley. William Iordan. Robert Dauis. Thomas Hobson. William Baily.
At Apo-mattucke Riuer at Master Abraham Pierce his Plantation some fiue miles off the Colledge People. WIlliam Charte. Io: Waterhowse. Iohn Barker a boy. Robert Yeoman. At Charles-Citie and about the Precincts. of Capt. Smiths Company. ROger Royal. Thomas Iones. Robert Maruel. Edward Heydon. Henry Bushel. At other Plantations next adioyning. RIchard Prat, and his Brother. Henry Milward, his Wife, his Childe, and his Sister. Richard a boy. Goodwife Redhead. At Mr. William Farrars House. MAster Iohn England and his Man. Iohn Bel. Henricke Peterson, and Alice his Wife, and William her sonne. Thomas his Man. Iames Woodshaw. Maidseruāts Mary, and Elizabeth
At Berkley-Hundred some fiue miles from Charles-Citie. CApt. George Thorpe Esq. one of his Ma∣iesties Pentioners. Iohn Rowles. Richard Rowles, his Wife, and Childe. Giles Wilkins. Giles Bradway. Richard Fereby. Thomas Thorpe. Robert Iordan. Edward Painter. At Westouer, about a mile from Berkley-Hundred: And first, at Cap. Fr: Wests Plantation. Iames English. Richard Dash. At Master Iohn Wests Plantation. Christopher Turner. Dauid Owen. At Capt. Nathanael Wests. Michael Aleworth. Iohn Wright. An Lieutenant Gibs his Diuidend. IOhn Paly. Thomas Ratcliffe. Michael Booker. Iohn Higglet. Nathanael Earle. Iohn Gibbes. William Parker. Richard Wainham. Benomy Reyman. Thomas Gay. Iames Vpfall. Daniel — Mr. Dombe∣lowes man.
At Mr. Richard Owens house. RIchard Owen. Stephen Dubo. Francis, an Irishman. Thomas Paine. One old Maid called blinde Margaret. William Reeue. At Master Owen Macars house. OWen Macar. Garret Farrel. Richard Yeaw. One Boy. At Master Macocks Diuidend. CApt. Samuel Macock Esquire. Edward Lister. Thomas Browne. Iohn Downes. At Flowerdieu-Hundred Sir George Yeardleys Plantation. IOhn Philips. Thomas Nuson. Iohn Braford. Robert Taylor. Samuel Iarret. Elizabeth Bennet. At the other side of the Riuer opposite to Flowerdieu-Hundred. MAster Hobson, and his Wife. Richard Storks. Iohn Slaughter. Thomas Philips. Richard Campion. Anne Greene.
At Mr. Swinhowe his House. MIstris Swinhow, & Thomas and George Shinhow her sonnes. Richard Mosse. Iohn Larkin. William Blyth. Thomas Grindal. At Mr. William Bikars house. WIlliam Bykar. Math: Hawthorn and his Wife. Edward Peirce. Nicholas Howsdon. At Weynoack of Sir George Yeardley his people. NAthanael Elie. Iohn Flores. Henry Gape. — Buckingham. William Pusset. William Walker. Iohn Gray. Iames Boate. Iohn Suersby. Thomas Euans. Thomas Ap-Richard. Henry Haynes. Iohn Blewet. Henry Rice. — Hurt. Ionas Alport. Thomas Stephens. Samuel Goodwine. Iohn Snow, and his Boy. Margery Blewet. At Powle-brooke. CApt. Nath▪ Powle, Esq. and his Wife, Daughter to Mr. Tracy. Mistris Bray Adam Rayners Wife. Bbara Burges. William Head. Thomas Woolcher. William Meakins. Robert — Peter Iordan. Nathanael Leydon. Peter Goodale.
At Southampton-Hundred. RObert Goffe, and his Wife, William Larkum. Iohn Dauies. William Mountfort. At Martin Brandons. LIeutenant Sanders. Ensigne Sherley. Iohn Taylor, and his Wife. 2 Boyes. Mathew a Polander. At Captaine Spilmans house. IOhn Basingthwayte. Walter Shawe. At Ensigne Spence his house. WIlliam Richmond Iohn Fowler. Alexander Bale. William Fierfax. The Tinker. Persons slaine at Martins-Hundred some seauen miles from Iames-Citie. LIeutenant Rich: Kean. Master Tho: Boise, & Mistris Boise his wife, & a sucking Childe. 4 of his men. A Maide. 2 Children. Nathanael Iefferies wife. Margaret Dauies. Richard Staples, his wife, and Childe. 2 Maides. 6 Men and Boyes. Walter Dauies, & his brother. Christopher Guillam. Thomas Combar.
3. Seruants. Master Iohn Boise his Wife. A Maide. 4 Men-seruants. Laurence Wats, his Wife. 2 Men-seruants. Timothy Moise, his Man▪ Henry Bromage, his Wife, his Daughter, his Man. Edward How, his Wife, his Childe. A child of Iohn Iacksons. 4 Men-seruants. Iosua Dary, his Wife, A Man. Ralphe Digginson, his Wife. Richard Cholfer. George Iones. Cisly Cooke, his Wife. Dauid Bons, Iohn Bennet. Iohn Mason. William Pawmet. Thomas Bats. Peter Lighborrow. Iames Thorley. Robert Walden. Thomas Tolling. Iohn Butler. Edward Rogers. Maximilian Russel. Henry a Welchman. At Mr. Thomas Peirce his house ouer against Mulberry Iland. MAster Tho: Peirce, his Wife, and Childe. Iohn Hopkins. Iohn Samon. A French boy. At Mr. Edward Bennets Plantation. MAster Th: Brewood his Wife, his Childe, 2 Seruants. Thomas Ferris. George Cole.
Robert Gray. Iohn Griffin. Ensigne Harrison. Iohn Costard. Dauid Barry. Thomas Sheppard. Henry Price. Robert — Edward Iolly. Richard — Alice Iones. Thomas Cooke. Philip Worth. Mathew a maid. Francis Winder. Thomas Couly. Richard Woodward. Humfrey Cropen. Thomas Bacon. Euan Watkins. Richard Lewis. Edward Towse. Remember Michel. — Bullocke. Richard Chandler. Henry Moore. Nicholas Hunt. Iohn Corderoy. Richard Cockwell. Iohn Howard. Mistris Harrison. Mary Dawks Anne English. Rebecca — Master Prowse. Hugh — Iohn — Edward — Mistris Chamberlen. Parnel a maid. Humfrey Sherbrooke. Iohn Wilkins. Iohn Burton. Mr. Iohn Pountis his men. Iohn Scotchmore Edward Turner. Edward Brewster, Lieutenant Peirce his man. Thomas Holland, Capt. Whittakers man. At Master Walters his house. MAster Edw: Walters his Wife, a Childe, a Maid. a Boy. The whole number is 347.
A TREATISE OF THE NORTHWEST Passage to the South Sea, through the Continent of VIRGINIA and by Fretum Hudson. THe noble Plantation of VIRGINIA hath some very excellent Prerogatiues aboue many other famous Kingdomes, namely, the temperature of the ayre, the fruitful∣nesse of the soile, and the commodious∣nesse of situation. The ayre is healthfull and free both from immode∣rate heate, and from extreame cold; so that both the inhabitants and their cattell doe prosper exceedingly in stature and strength, and all Plants brought from any other remote climate, doe there grow and fructi∣fie in as good or better manner, then in the soyle from whence they came. Which though it doe manifestly proue the fruitfulnesse of the soile, yeelding all kinds of graine or plants committed vnto it, wih a rich and plentifull encrease, yet cannot the fatnesse of the earth alone produce such excellent effects, vnlesse the tem∣perature of the Ayre bee likewise so fauourable, that
those tender sprouts which the earth doth abundantly bring forth, may bee cherished with moderate heate and seasonable moisture, and freed both from scorch∣ing drought, and nipping frost. These blessings are so much the more to bee estee∣med, because they are bestowed vpon a place situated so conueniently, and at so good a distance both from Europe, and the West Indies, that for the mutuall com∣merce betwixt these great and most rich parts of the habitable world, there cannot bee deuised any place more conuenient for the succour and refreshing of those that trade from hence thither: whether they be of our owne nation, or of our neighbours and friends; the multitude of great and nauigable Riuers, and of safe and spacious harbours, as it were inuiting all Na∣tions to entertaine mutuall friendship, and to partici∣pate of those blessings which God out of the abun∣dance of his rich Treasures, hath so gratiously bestow∣ed some vpon these parts of Europe, and others no lesse desired vpon those poore people: which might still haue remained in their old barbarous ignorance, with∣out knowledge of their owne misery, or of Gods in∣finite goodnesse and mercy; if it had not pleased God thus gratiously both to draw vs thither with desire of such wealth as those fruitfull Countries afford, and also to grant vs so easie, certaine, and safe a meanes to goe vnto them: which passage is in mine opinion made much more secure and easie by the commodious harbours and refreshing which VIRGINIA doth reach out vnto vs. The coasts of Florida to the West, being not so harborous; and of New England to the East, somewhat more out of the way, amongst so many
Flats and small Ilands not so safe. Neither is the com∣modiousnesse of VIRGINIAS situation onely in re∣spect of this west Atlanticke Ocean, but also in respect of the Indian Ocean, which wee commonly call the South Sea, which lyeth on the West and North west side of VIRGINIA, on the other side of the Mountains beyond our Fals, and openeth a free and faire passage, not onely to China, Iapan, and the Moluccaes; but al∣so to New Spaine, Peru, Chila, and those rich Coun∣tries of Terra Australis, not as yet fully discouered. For the Sea wherein Master Hudson did winter, which was first discouered by him, and is therefore now called Fretum Hudson, doth stretch so farre towards the west, that it lieth as farre westward as the Cape of Florida: So that from the Fals aboue Henrico City, if we shape our iourney towards the Northwest following the Riuers towards the head, we shall vndoubtedly come to the Mountaines, which as they send diuers great Riuers Southward into our Bay of Chesepiock, so like∣wise doe they send others from their further side Northwestward into that Bay where Hudson did win∣ter. For so wee see in our owne Country, from the ridge of Mountaines continued from Derbishire into Scotland, doe issue many great Riuers on both sides into the East Germane Ocean, and into the Westerne Irish Seas: in like sort from the Alpes of Switzerland and the Grizons, do runne the Danubie Eastward into Pontus Euxinus, the Rhene into the North Germane Ocean, the Rhosne west into the Mediterrane Sea, and the Po South into the Adriatike Sea. This Bay where Hudson did winter, strecheth it selfe Southward into 49. degrees, and cannot be in probability so farre di∣stant
from the Fals as 200. Leagues; part of the way lying by the Riuers side towards the mountaines from whence it springeth: and the other part on the other side cannot want Riuers likewise, which will conduct vs all the way, and I hope carry vs and our prouisions a good part of it. Besides that Bay, it is not vnlikely that the Westerne Sea in some other Creeke or Riuer commeth much neerer then that place: For the place where Sir Thomas Button did winter, lying more We∣sterly then Master Hudsons Bay by 190. Leagues in the same Sea, doth extend it selfe very neere as farre to∣wards the west as the Cape of California, which is now found to be an Iland stretching it selfe from 22. de∣grees to 42. and lying almost directly North & South; as may appeare in a Map of that Iland which I haue seene here in London, brought out of Holland; where the Sea vpon the Northwest part may very probably come much nearer then some do imagine: who giuing too much credit to our vsuall Globes and Maps, doe dreame of a large Continent extending it selfe farre Westward to the imagined Straight of Anian, where are seated (as they fable) the large Kingdomes of Ce∣bola and Quiuira, hauing great and populous Cities of ciuill people; whose houses are said to bee fiue sto∣ries high, and to haue some pillars of Turguesses. Which relations are cunningly set downe by some vpon set purpose to put vs out of the right way, and to discourage such as otherwise might bee desirous to search a passage by the way aforesaid into those Seas. Gerardus Mercator, a very industrious and excel∣lent Geographer, was abused by a Map sent vnto him, of foure Euripi meeting about the North Pole; which
now are found to be all turned into a maine icie Sea. One demonstration of the crafty falshood of these v∣suall Maps is this, that Cape Mendocino is set in them West Northwest, distant from the South Cape of Ca∣lifornia, about seuenteene hundred Leagues, whereas Francis Gaule that was imployed in those discoueries by the Viseroy of New Spaine; doth in Hugo Linscotten his booke set downe their distance to bee onely fiue hundred Leagues. Besides this, in the place where Sir Thomas Button did winter in 57. degrees of latitude, the constant great tides euery twelue houres, and the increase of those tides whensoeuer any strong westerne wind did blow, doe strongly perswade vs that the maine Westerne Ocean is not farre from thence; which was much con∣firmed vnto them the Summer following; when say∣ling directly North from that place where they win∣tered, about the Latitude of 60. degrees, they were crossed by a strong Currant running sometimes East∣ward, sometimes Westward: So that if wee finde ei∣ther Hudsons Bay, or any Sea more neere vnto the West, wee may assure our selues that from thence wee may with great ease passe to any part of the East In∣dies: And that as the world is very much beholding to that famous Columbus for that hee first discouered vnto vs the West Indies; and to the Portingall for the finding out the ordinary and as yet the best way that is knowne to the East Indies, by Cape Bona-Speranza. So may they and all the world be in this beholding to vs in opening a new and large passage, both much nea∣rer, safer, and farre more wholesome and tempe∣rate through the Continent of VIRGINIA, and by
Fretum Hudson, to all those rich Countries bordering vpon the South Sea, in the East and West Indies. And this hope that the South Sea may easily from VIRGI∣NIA be discouered ouer Land, is much confirmed by the constant report of the Sauages, not onely of VIR∣GINIA, but also of Florida and Canada; which dwel∣ling so remote one from another, and all agreeing in the report of a large Sea to the Westwards, where they describe great Ships not vnlike to ours, with other circumstances, doe giue vs very great probabi∣lity (if not full assurance) that our endeuours this way shall by Gods blessing haue a prosperous and happy successe, to the encrease of his Kingdome and glory amongst these poore ignorant Heathen people, the publique good of all the Christian world, the neuer∣dying honour of our most gracious Soueraigne, the inestimable benefit of our Nation, and the admirable and speedy increase and aduancement of that most noble and hopefull Plantation of VIRGINIA; for the good successe whereof all good men with me, I doubt not, will poure out their prayers to Almighty GOD. H. B.
A MEMORIALL OF Religious Charitie exercised on Virginia to the glory of God and good example of men, these three last yeares, 1619. 1620. 1621.   r. s̄. d.Anno 1619 MIstris Mary Robinson by her Will gaue towards the building of a Church in VIRGINIA, 200. 0. 0. A Person vnknowne gaue for that Church a Communion-cup with a Co∣uer, and a Plate for the bread of siluer guilt: a silke damaske Carpet, a linnen damaske Table-Cloth, and other Orna∣ments, all valued at 20. 0. 0. A person vnknowne gaue for the vse of the Colledge, a Communion-cup with a Couer, and a Plate for the bread, of Siluer guilt: a crimson veluet Carpet with gold lace and fringe, and a linnen damaske Table-cloath: all valued at— 30. 0. 0.
A person vnknowne sent a Letter, the Copy whereof is registred; directed thus, To Sir Edwin Sandys, the faithfull Trea∣surer of VIRGINIA: and subscribed, Dust and Ashes: And afterwards by an vn∣knowne person sent a box to the house of Sir Edwin Sandys with the same dire∣ction: which being opened in Court, therein was found in gold 550. pounds, to be disposed of for the education of children of the Infidels, in Christian re∣ligion and ciuility. 550. 0. 0. Anno 1620Master Nicholas Farrar of London, deceased, hath by his Will giuen 300 li. to the Colledge in VIRGINIA, to bee paid when there shall be ten of the Infi∣dels children placed in it: and in the meane time 24. pounds by the yeare to bee disbursed vnto three discreete and godly men in the Colonie, which shall honestly bring three of the Infidels chil∣dren in Christian Religion, and some good course to liue by. 300. 0. 0. A person refusing to be named, hath giuen to the benefit of the Plantation 10. 0. 0. Anno 1621The Gentlemen and Mariners that came in the Royall-Iames from the East Indies, beeing at Cape Bona-Speranza, homeward bound, gaue towards the buil∣ding of a Free Schoole in Virginia, to be called the East Indie Schoole, 70. . 6.
Towards the furtherance of the East Indie Schoole, an vnknowne person hath added the summe of 30. 0. 0. A person refusing to be named, hath giuen the summe of 40. shillings per an∣num for euer, for a Sermon, to be prea∣ched before the Virginia Company. 40 s. per an. At the Quarter Court held the 30. of Ianuary 1621. by a person not willing as yet to be knowne, was sent in gold 25 li. to helpe forward the East Indie Schoole▪ 25. 0. 0. At the same Quarter Court a small Bible with a Couer richly wrought, a great Church-Bible, the Booke of Com∣mon Prayer, and other bookes were pre∣sented to be sent to VIRGINIA, in the name of a person who had the yeare be∣fore sent for the vse of the Colledge at Henrico; S. Augustine De ciuitate Dei, Master Perkins his workes, and an exact Map of America: the giuer is not known, but the books are valued at 10. 0. 0. Giuen by Master Thomas Bargraue, a Minister in VIRGINIA deceased, for the vse of the Colledge, a Library valued at 100. marks
There is a Contribution made by the Inhabitants in VIRGINIA for the buil∣ding of a house of entertainment for new commers, at Iames-Citie: amoun∣ting to the value of 1500. 0. 0. The Gentlemen and Mariners that came lately home from the East Indies, in the two Ships called the Hart and Roe-Bucke, being at the Cape of Bona Speran∣za, homeward bound, gaue towards the building of the aforesaid Free-Schoole in VIRGINIA the summe of 66. 13. 4. FINIS.
