25438 S119929 99855134 20607
A CHOICE OF EMBLEMES, AND OTHER DEVISES, For the moste parte gathered out of sundrie writers, Englished and Moralized. AND DIVERS NEWLY DEVISED, by Geffrey Whitney. A worke adorned with varietie of matter, both pleasant and profitable: whe∣rein those that please, maye finde to fit their fancies: Bicause herein, by the office of the eie, and the eare, the minde maye reape dooble delighte throu∣ghe holsome preceptes, shadowed with pleasant deuises: both fit for the vertuous, to their incoraging: and for the wicked, for their admonishing and amendment. To the Reader. Peruse with heede, then frendlie iudge, and blaming rashe refraine: So maist thou reade vnto thy good, and shalt requite my paine. printer's device of Christopher Plantin, featuring a hand holding compasses, emerging from a cloud LABORE ET CONSTANTIA Imprinted at LEYDEN, In the house of Christopher Plantyn, by Francis Raphelengius. M.D.LXXXVI.
blazon or coat of arms of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, within the order of the garter, beneath a chained bear and ragged staff atop a plumed helmet, and flanked by two crowned lions QVI MAL. Y: PENSE HONI SOIT DROIT ET LOYAL.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣RABLE, MY SINGVLER GOOD Lorde and Maister, ROBERT Earle of LEY∣CESTER, Baron of Denbighe, Knight of the moste noble orders of the garter, and of saincte Michaël, Maister of her Maties horse, one of her Highnes moste honorable priuie Counsaile, and Lorde Lieutenant and Captaine Generall of her Maties forces in the lowe countries. A SOVLDIOR of Kinge PHIL∣LIP, of MACEDONIA, (Righte honorable) suffering ship∣wracke,Brusonius lib. 3. and languishinge throughe necessitie and extreme sicknes, A Macedonian mooued with compas∣sion, moste louinglie entertayned, and longe cherished and releeued him. Who being well recouered, promised at his departure if he might come to the presence of his Soueraigne to requite his frendship. At the lengthe cominge to the courte, the souldior made reporte of the shipwracke, but not of the kindnes of the Macedonian: and contrariwise, so incensed the Kinge against his louinge countryman, that he obtained a graunt of all his li∣uinges: But afterwarde his ingratitude and trecherous practise being discouered to this good prince, he reuoked his guifte, and in detestation of his dealinge caused him to bee marked with a hotte iron:Idem. The Emperor CLAVDIVS reduced all those to their former bondage, who neclecting the bountie and loue of their Lordes, in infranchisinge them: requited them in the ende with anie vnkindnes. This foule vice Ingratitude hathe bin common in all ages, and yet so odious to the vertuous and
best disposed, that they haue lefte behinde innumerable exam∣ples to the like effecte, for the rooting out thereof from all socie∣ties. If the former ages who knewe not the liuinge GOD, nor his holie worde, haue bin so carefull herein: Then ought wee, muche more, who knowe not onlie howe odious it is, to man: but howe hatefull it is, cheeflie in the sighte of God. For we maie see in the holie scripture, howe often the children of Israel weare plagued for their vnthankefulnes.Exod. 14, 15, 16, 17. &c. and howe the Lor∣de often complaineth therof, sayinge by the Prophet I say, I haue nourished and exalted them and yet they dispi∣sed mee,Isaie cap. 1. the oxe knoweth his maister, and the asse his cribbe, but Israël knoweth not mee &c. Also by the Prophet Ieremie,Ierem. cap. 8. The Storke, the Turtle, and the swal∣lowe, doe obserue their time: but my people doe not knowe the iudgement of the Lorde. In the newe Testa∣ment also, when Christe had clensed the ten lepers, and but one of them gaue thankes,Luc cap. 17. our sauiour said, Are not ten clen∣sed?Mich. 6. Osee 13. where bee the other nine? &c. By whiche and ma∣nie other like places, it is manifest, howe ingratitude is vile bo∣the in the sighte of GOD and man. Wherefore to cleare my selfe of the suspicion of my guilt herein, whiche your honor maye iustlie conceiue against mee, in deferring so longe before I present some testimonie of my bounden dutie to your good Lordship, (hauing so ofte, and so largelie tasted of your honou∣rable bountie and fauor.) I haue therefore strained that small talent I haue, to pleade my cause in this behalfe to your ho∣nour: Most humblie beseeching the same, to pardon the wan∣tes wherewith this my simple trauaile is blemisshed, throughe my lacke of leasure, and learninge. The first, denieth me to perfecte it, as I purposed: The other, to polishe it as it ought, that shoulde bee presented to so noble a personage. whose heroi∣call vertues so manie graue, and learned men haue eternised to
all posterities. For leauinge your natiue countrie, where so ma∣nie godlie and vertuous are countenanced: So manie learned aduaunced, and so manie studious incoraged by your honour. What other countrie in Christendome, but knoweth that your lordship is a Noble, and moste faithfull counsellor to her excel∣lent Matie, a zelous fauorer of the Gospell, and of the godlie Preachers thereof, a louinge patron of learninge, and a boun∣tifull Mecoenas to all the professors of worthie artes, and sciences: whereof my selfe is a witnes, who haue often harde the same in other countries, to your euerlastinge memorie. Learninge woulde be soone put to silence, without the aide and supporte of such noble Peeres as your Lordship: which was well considered by the Emperors, and Princes manie hun∣dreth yeares since: whereof Artaxerxes the Kinge of Persia hath lefte behinde him this example, who wrat to a ruler of one of his dominions to this effecte. Kinge of Kinges great Artaxerxes to Hiscanus gouernor of Hellesponte gree∣ting.Suidas. The fame of Hippocrates a Phisition is come vnto mee, therfore see thou geue him as muche goulde as he desireth, and all other thinges he wanteth, and send him to me. He shalbee equall with anie Persian in honor, and if there be anie other famous man in Europe, spare no money to make him a frend to my courte. Also Phillip of Macedonia fauored Aristotle, comitting his onlie sonne Alexander the great to his tutorship,Aul. Gell. lib. 9. cap. 3. reioysing that he had a sonne borne in suche a time, as he mighte haue such a famous Philosopher to be his instructor.Aelian. de Var. Hist. lib. 13. ca. 7. The same Alexander so honored the poët Pindarus, that at the destru∣ction of Thebes he gaue chardge that the familie and kinred of Pindarus shoulde bee spared.Plutarchus in Alexand. Hee loued so learninge that he vsed to laie the Jliades of Homer (which he learned of Aristotle)
with his dagger vnder his beddes head. Also hauing learned certaine priuate instructions of his said Scoolemaister, after ha∣uing knowledge that Aristotle had published the same to others, hee was highly offended: and althoughe hee weare busied in the great warres against Darius, yet in the middest of those waigh∣tie affaires, hee wrat vnto Aristotle, blaminge him for partici∣pating to others, that which hee desired to haue proper to him selfe. Sayinge, Howe can I excell others, in any thinges I haue learned of thee: if thou make the same common to all, for I had rather goe before them in learning, then in power and aboundance. Gellius setteth downe the Epistle of the King to Aristotle,Aul. Gell. lib. 20. cap. 4. with the aunsweare there∣vnto, being worthie to bee imprinted in the mindes of the ho∣norable, that they might bee for euer remembred. Scipio Africa∣nus vsed the Poët Ennius as his companion in his greate af∣faires,Plinius lib. 7. cap. 30. Idem, ibid. and to shewe his griefe for the losse of such a one, caused the image of Ennius to bee laide with him in his owne tombe. Augustus countinanced Virgill, and so loued him: that after his death, hee carefullie preserued his workes from the fire to the which they weare adiudged.Horatius. Mecoenas manie waies shewed his noble minde vnto Horace,Mossellanus su∣per Gell. lib. 1. cap. 26. Cicero in orat. pro Archia. and Plutarche was in highe estimation with the Emperor Traian. Yea famous citties and comon wealthes haue imbraced the learned, Smyrna and sixe other citties so loued Homer, that after his deathe, there grewe great controuersie amongst them, which of them should rightlie claime him to bee theirs. Athens honored a longe time Demo∣sthenes: Rome reioysed for Tullie. And of later times Florence boasted of Petrarke,Sabellicus. and Roterodam of Erasmus. with manye other citties that did the like to diuers famous men. And theise againe to requite their honorable regardes, made them famous throughe their worthie workes to all ages, that deathe to the which their bodies by nature weare subiect, coulde not extincte
nor burie their memories: but that the same remaine so longe as the worlde shall indure. And to speake of some of them, Ari∣stotle, greatlie honored Phillip, and was no lesse carefull for the education of Alexander. For when hee came to bee kinge, besi∣des the houlsome preceptes hee prescribed vnto him of regiment, yet hauinge knowledge of his earnest desire, to vnderstand the natures and qualities of all creatures, compyled almoste fiftie bookes, intreatinge of the same: hauing by the commaundement of Alexander out of Greece and all Asia, manie thowsandes of Hunters, Faulkeners, Fowlers, Fishers, Heardmen,Aul. Gell. lib. 13. cap. 7. and suche as kepte bees, birdes, or anie other liuinge thinge: to helpe and aide him, with theire knowledge and experiences, in searchinge the secrettes, natures and qualities of all creatures. Ennius beinge mindfull of the noble inclination of Scipio,Petrus Crinitus de poëtis Latinis. did highlie extoll his worthie actes, registring them in his learned cronicles to all posterities: Ʋirgill to shewe him selfe thankefull to Augustus: spent manie yeares about his famous worke of Aeneiads, to deriue the race of the Emperor from Aeneas,Idem. and the noble Troians.Macrobius. Horace amongst his rare & learned workes stuffed full of wise and graue preceptes, oftentimes enterlaceth the same with the birthe the bountie the learninge, and the noble qualities of Mecoenas, & hathe made him for euer famous, & renowmed. Plutarche besides his priuate bookes he wratte to Traian, of counsell and gouernement:Suidas. Hee framed that excel∣lent worke of liues, and comparisons betwene the Romanes and the Grecians: giuing due commendation aswell to the Ro∣manes, as to his owne countrimen. By which wee maie gather, that learning grounded vppon vertue hath bin alwaise enemie to ingratitude, and cannot lie hid, but is euermore workinge, & bewrayeth it selfe as the smoke bewrayeth the fire, And if anie thinge happen worthie memorie: by the benefit of the learned it is imparted, by their trauailes to future time. If there
chaunce nothinge in theire age famous, yet they set them selues a worke in handlinge suche accidentes, as haue bin done in times paste.Cornel. Nepos. Dares Phrigius beinge a sowldior at the battaile of Troye, made a large discourse thereof, yet like one too much af∣fectioned, can scarce finde an ende of the praises of Hector. Homer finding small matter in his time to handle, attempted the same argument, being lothe that his countrymen shoulde lacke their due commendacion, and therefore almost as farre on the other side, extolleth the valour, and highe prowes, of Achil∣les:Petr. Crinit. and the counsaile, and pollicie, of Vlisses. Lucan seing no∣thing honorable in Nero to intreate of, fled to former times for matter, where he found to set his worthie muse a worke, and wratte in verse (equall with the haughtines of the argument) the battailes and bloodie conflicts, betwene Cesar, and Pompey. Seneca dispairinge of the nature and inclinacion of his vnto∣warde scholler the same Nero: wratte lamentable Tragedies, & bookes of great grauitie and wisedome. Moreouer learninge hath that secret workinge that tyrauntes haue bin mittigated therewith, and haue dissembled their affections for the time. Dionysius the elder desired to heare Plato,Plutarchus. and was contented a while to listen vnto him, after whome his sonne, hauing bothe his name and nature, did seeme outwardlie to loue and reuerence Plato, and sente him great guiftes to Athens, and inuited him to his courte.Suetonius. Petr. Crinit. Nero for a time embraced Lucan and Seneca, al∣thoughe naturallie he was wickedlie inclined: but hee soone did degenerate from their discipline, for there can bee no league be∣tweene vertue and vice, nor perfecte vnion of meere contraries: And although time reuealed the bloodie mindes, of these cruell tirantes towardes those famous men, yet wee can not finde the like outrage, and crueltie done vnto the learned, by those that are honorable vertuous and noble minded: but by suche as bee of cruell vile and base natures, who are alwaies enemies to
vertue, and loue none, nor like anie, but such as are of their owne vglie stampe. For it is a rule that faileth not, that those that are moste honourable, are most vertuous: bicause honour alwaies followeth vertue, as the shaddowe doth the bodie: and it is as vnpossible that a bodie shoulde be without a shaddowe in the sonne, as the right honourable in this life shoulde be voyde of vertue. Thus it is manifest howe learninge hath bin embra∣ced, and had in highe estimation, by great Princes and noble Peeres, and that worthelie: Bicause by the benefit thereof, The actes of mightie Monarches & great Princes, and the matters and thinges of former time worthie memorie, done by sage Go∣uernors, and valiant Captaines. The manners and Lawes of straunge nations, & customes of oulde time. The mutabillitie of worldly felicitie, and howe the wise haue behaued them selues in bothe fortunes: haue bin presented vnto them as in a glasse, for their instruction, from which they might drawe vnderstan∣ding and good counsaile, to instruct and gouerne them selues in all their actions: and finde approoued examples for the whole course of their life, eyther to bee imitated, or eschewed. Of which singuler benefit, wee likewise are pertakers: For hereby, this present time behouldeth the accidentes of former times, as if they had bin done but yesterdaie. and wee maye behoul∣de the natures, & quallities, of our great grandfathers grand∣fathers, as if they yet liued before our eies. And as former ti∣me, and present time, haue reaped thereby, this inestimable Juell; So likewise, future time so long as the worlde shall indu∣re, shall taste of this blessing: For our succession, shall see what we haue seene, and behoulde hereby what famous thinges weare enterprised and done in our daies, as if they weare euen nowe standing at our elbowes. Yet howe greatlie learning hath bin impeached since the firste florishe thereof, when in stead of such louing and bountifull princes and patrons, the worlde broughte
forthe,Bapt. Egnatius de Romanis principi∣bus lib. 1. & Pom∣pon. Laetus in Rom. Histor. compendio. Licinius who tearmed learning a poyson and plague of the common wealthe. And Ʋalentinianus his partner in that opinion, with the cursed crewe of their companions, As Caligula, Nero,Alexandriae Biblio∣theca omnium ce∣lebertima, in qua cccc. millia volu∣mina librorum in∣censa, Frecul. Cron. tom. 1. lib. 7. cap. 9. Sed Plutarchus in Caesare, & Aul. Gel. lib. 6. cap. vlt. & Sabel. Ennead. 6. libro 7. scribunt se∣ptingenta millia in eadem consumpta. Vaticana Romae Bi∣bliotheca, sub Cle∣mente 7. à militi∣bus Germanis & Hispanis cremata. Aeneas Syluius de Europa. Instructiss. Budae Bibliotheca per So∣limannum incensa 1526. Aug. Cur. Athenae deletae, & funditus euersae, per Machometum 8. Turcarum Imp. 1452. idem Curio. Diocletian, with Machomet, Baïazet, and such like monsters of nature, being cruell persecutors, enemies of all hu∣manitie, and distroyers of all discipline: who dispising God and all goodnes, did degenerate so farre from their forfathers, that they delighted whollie to spill the blood of the worthie men, to burne the famous libraries, and to rase and ouerthrowe the vniuersities, and schooles, of all artes and sciences: as in the tragicall Histories of former times is recorded, and can not bee but with great griefe remembred. And althoughe learning hath bin greatlie decaied in these later times, Yet wee must (with thankes vnto God therefore) confesse, That it hath plea∣sed him alwaies, to raise vp some louers and fauorers therof, who haue tendered and embraced the same, and for the pre∣seruinge it to their posterities, haue lefte behinde singuler monu∣ments of their care, & zelous mindes in this behalfe: As Char∣les the great,Bapt. Egnat. de Rom. principibus lib. 3. Kinge of Fraunce, who erected two vniuersities, the one at Paris, the other at Pauia, placing therein many famous men: and Sigismundus Emperor, who highlie extolled the lear∣ned,Idem ibi. and blamed the Princes of Germanie, for their small re∣garde vnto them: And vnderstanding by somme, that althou∣ghe he cherished the learned, yet it was saied they were but pore and base persons, aunswered: I loue them who excell others for vertue, and learninge, out of the which I measure nobilitie. Also Ferdinandus gaue yearelie out of his treasurie, great som∣mes of money to the readers of diuinitie, Phisicke, Rethoricke, and Philosophie, to the great incouraginge of those that weare inclined to good studies:Pontanus de libe∣ralitate. Likewise Alphonsus King of Na∣ples, who vsed to saye, he had neuer greater pleasure, then when he was in the companie of those that weare singuler for know∣ledge,
and learninge: Laurentius Valla & Panormitanus, with diuers other tasted of his goodnes, and found him a rare ex∣ample for princes, for his continual desire to aduance learninge. I mighte heere likewise bringe in diuers other, not inferior to them for their loue to the learned: As Fredericke Duke of Saxon Prince elector, and the Lorde Ernestus his brother, who erected the vniuersitie of Wittenberge, and the said Du∣ke noblie countinaunced and defended Martin Luther, against the furie of Pope Leo the tenthe, and all other his aduersaries. Also Laurentius Medices Duke of Florence honoured Picus Mirandula, and Hermolaus Barbarus:Crinitus lib. 15. cap. 9. Volaterranus in Geog. and Borsus Duke of Ferrara, reioysed in Titus Strozza. with many other Princes, who for their noble inclinations in this behalfe, amongst these mighte iustly haue their places. BVT remembring I write to your good Lordship. I will therefore abridge of purpose, that which might bee more larglie amplified, knowing there needeth no Apologie to bee made vn∣to your honour, in the behalfe of learning: whose noble minde hath bin so addicted to the same these many yeares, that diuers, who are nowe famous men, had bin throughe pouertie, longe since discouraged from their studies: if they had not founde your honour, so prone to bee their patron. But I confesse, I haue thus largelie written therof to this ende, That if anie other happe to looke herevppon, in knowinge your zeale & honourable care of those that loue good letters: They might also knowe thereby, that you haue possession of that grounde from which true nobili∣tie florisheth: And likewise that you followe the good examples of manie Princes, and great personages, who are renowmed the∣refore, beyond anie other their desertes. And likewise, if anie be coulde, in countinancinge the learned, (as there are tootoo manie, whose frendship is (as I may saie) frozen, and starke towarde them.) This mighte a little thawe and mollifie them: and serue
as a spurre to pricke them forwarde, to follow the steppes of your good Lordship. There be three thinges greatlie desired in this life, that is healthe, wealthe, and fame. and some haue made question which of these is the chiefe: the sick, saieth health. the couetous, comendeth wealthe. and bothe these place good name laste of all. But they be bothe partiall iudges; for he that is of sincere and vprighte iudgement, is of contrarie opinion: Bicause that healthe, and wealthe, though they bee ne∣uer so good, and so great, determine with the bodie, and are sub∣iecte vnto time; But honour, fame, renowme, and good re∣porte, doe triumphe ouer deathe, and make men liue for euer: where otherwise the greatest Princes, in shorte time are worne out of memorie, and cleane forgotten. For, what is man in this worlde? without fame to leaue behinde him, but like a bubble of water, that now riseth, & anon is not knowne where it was. Which being wel cōsidered by your honour, you haue made choi∣ce of the best parte, and embraced throughe vertue, that which liueth, and neuer dieth. For vertue (as I said) alwaies goeth before honour, & giueth a perpetuitie of felicitie in this worlde, and in the worlde to come. And althoughe throughe the ini∣quitie of time (as is declared) such excellent learned men as haue bin, are not to bee expected in this oulde age of the worlde, Yet as zelous care, and dewtifull affection as euer was to their Lordes and Patrons, there is no doubte dothe gene∣rallie florishe and is apparante: whereof your honour hath had tryall, by the learned labours of manie famous men. Farre be∣hinde whome, my selfe, (although of all the meanest) yet bein∣ge pricked forwarde by your good Lordshipps bountie, and in∣couraged by your great clemencie, moste humblie presente theise my gatheringes, and gleaninges out of other mens haruestes, vnto your honour: a worke both pleasaunte and pithie, which I haue garnished with manie histories, with the proper applica∣tions
and expositions of those Emblemes that I founde obscu∣re: Offering it vp to your honour to looke vppon at some houres for your recreation. I hope it shalbee the more delight∣full, bicause none to my knowledge, hathe assayed the same be∣fore: &, for that diuers of the inuentiōs are of my owne slender workmanship. But chieflie, bicause vnder pleasaunte deuises, are profitable moralles, and no shaddowes, voide of substance: nor anie conceyte, without some cause worthie consideration: for the wounding of wickednes, and extolling of vertue. which maie serue, as a mirrour: to the lewde for their amendement. & to the godlie, for their better goinge forwarde in their cour∣se, that leades to euerlastinge glorie. Beinge abashed that my habillitie can not affoorde them suche, as are fit to be offred vp to so honorable a suruaighe: yet if it shall like your honour to allowe of anie of them, I shall thinke my pen set to the booke in happie houre; and it shall incourage mee, to assay some matter of more momente, as soone as leasure will further my desire in that behalfe. THE almightie God from whome all honour and true nobillitie doe proceede, who hathe manie yeares, moste lo∣uinglie and liberallie, indued your Lordship with the same, blesse and prolonge your daies here, that wee maie behoulde the consummatiō of happie ould age in your honour: before you shal∣be summoned to the euerlasting honour, which is alwaies perma∣nent without mutabilitie, Amen. At London the XXVIII. of Nouember, Anno M.D.LXXXV. Your Honours humble & faithfull seruant Geffrey Whitney.
TO THE READER. VVHEN I had finished this my collection of Em∣blemes (gentle Reader;) and presented the same in writinge vnto my Lorde, presentlie before his Honour passed the seas into the lowe countries: I was after, earnestlie required by somme that per∣used the same, to haue it imprinted: whose reque∣ste, when I had well considered, althoughe I did perceiue the charge was verie heauie for mee, (waighinge my owne weakenes) I meane my wante of learninge, and iudgement, to set forth any thinge vnto the viewe of this age, wherein so manie wise & learned doe florishe, and must haue the scanninge thereof. Yet knowinge their fauours to bee such vnto mee, as in dewtie I mighte not denie them any thinge I can: I did rather choose to vndergoe any burthen, and almoste fainte in forwardnes to satisfie them, then to shewe anie wante of good will, in denyinge their continuall desires. wherefore, licence beinge ob∣tained for the publishing thereof, I offer it heare (good Reader) to thy viewe, in the same sorte as I presented it before. Onelie this excepte: That I haue now in diuerse places, quoted in the margent some sentēces in Latin, & such verses as I thoughte did beste fit the seuerall matters I wratte of. And also haue written somme of the Emblemes, to certaine of my frendes, to whome either in dutie or frendship, I am diuers waies bounde: which both weare wantinge in my firste edition, and nowe ad∣ded herevnto, for these reasons insuinge. Firste I noted the same in Lat∣tin, to helpe and further some of my acquaintaunce wheare this booke was imprinted, who hauinge no taste in the Englishe tonge, yet weare earnestly addicted to the vnderstandinge hereof: and also, wheare I founde any verse, or sayinge agreable with the matter, I did gather the same of purpose for my owne memorie, not doubtinge but the same may bee also frutefull to others. For my intitulinge them to some of my frendes, I hope it shall not bee misliked, for that the offices of dewtie and frendship are alwaies to bee fauored: and herin as I followe my auctors in Englishinge their de∣uises, So I imitate them, in dedicatinge some, to such persons, as I thin∣ke the Emblemes doe best fitte and pertaine vnto, which order, obser∣ued Reusnerus, Iunius, Sambucus, and others: as by their workes are ap∣parante, Confessinge my faulte to bee chiefly this, in presentinge to fa∣mous and worthie men, meane matter, farre to simple for their deser∣uinges: yet trustinge my good will shalbe waighed as well as the worke, and that a pearle shall not bee looked for in a poore mans purce, I sub∣mit my doings herein to their censures. Furthermore, wheare there are diuers Emblemes written of one mat∣ter, which may bee thoughte superfluous. As against Pride, Enuie, Concupiscence, Drunkennes, Couetousnes, Vsurie, and such like,
againste euery one of them seuerally, sondrie deuises: thereby the sondry inuentions of the auctours may bee decerned, which I haue collected against those vices especially, bycause they are growē so mightie that one bloe will not beate them downe, but newe headdes springe vp like Hy∣dra, that Hercules weare not able to subdue them. But manie droppes pierce the stone, & with manie blowes the oke is ouerthrowen, So with manie reprehencions, wickednes is wounded, and sinne ashamed and giueth place vnto vertue. It resteth now to shewe breeflie what this wor∣de Embleme signifieth, and whereof it commeth, which thoughe it be borrowed of others, & not proper in the Englishe tonge, yet that which it signifieth: Is, and hathe bin alwaies in vse amongst vs, which worde being in Greeke , vel  is as muche to saye in Englishe as To set in, or to put in: properlie ment by suche figures, or workes, as are wroughte in plate, or in stones in the pauementes, or on the wau∣les, or suche like, for the adorning of the place: hauinge some wittie deuise expressed with cunning woorkemanship, somethinge obscure to be perceiued at the first, whereby, when with further consideration it is vnderstood, it maie the greater delighte the behoulder. And al∣thoughe the worde dothe comprehende manie thinges, and diuers mat∣ters maie be therein contained; yet all Emblemes for the most parte, maie be reduced into these three kindes, which is Historicall, Naturall, & Morall. Historicall, as representing the actes of some noble persons, being matter of historie. Naturall, as in expressing the natures of creatures, for ex∣ample, the loue of the yonge Storkes, to the oulde, or of suche like.Pietas Ciconiae erga parentes. Morall, pertaining to vertue and instruction of life, which is the chiefe of the three, and the other two maye bee in some sorte drawen into this head. For, all doe tende vnto discipline, and morall preceptes of liuing. I mighte write more at large hereof, and of the difference of Emblema Symbolum, & Aenigma, hauinge all (as it weare) some affinitie one with the other. But bicause my meaning is to write as briefely as I maie, for the auoiding of tediousnes, I referre them that would further inquire therof, to And. Alciatus, Guiliel. Perrerius, Achilles Bocchius & to diuers others that haue written thereof, wel knowne to the learned. For I purpose at this present, to write onelie of this worde Embleme: Bicause it chief∣lie doth pertaine vnto the matter I haue in hande, whereof I hope this muche, shall giue them some taste that weare ignoraunt of the same. Lastlie if anie deuise herein shall delight thee, and if some other shall not please thee, yet in respect of that which doth like thee, passe ouer the same fauourably to others, with whome perhappes it maie be mo∣re agreable: For what one liketh, an other oftentimes doth not regarde: and what some dothe lothe, some other doth chieflie esteeme: whereof came the Prouerbe, So manie men, so manie mindes. But what? Shoulde I thinke that my simple trauaile herein should scape scot-free from the tonges of the enuious, who are alwaies readie with a preiudicate opi∣nion
to condempne, before they vnderstande the cause. No? thoughe the verse weare (as I maye saye) written by the pen of Apollo him selfe? For in the former times, when the whole worlde was almoste ouersha∣dowed with the mantle of ignoraunce, If then, the learned and excellent worke of Homer,Martialis. could not shielde him from the stinge of Zoilus. If Marcus Varro, was taunted by Remnius Palemon. If Cicero had sixe bookes written againste him,Textor in officin. by Didymus Alexandrinus. And if Vergill weare en∣uied by Carbilius, who wrat a booke de Virgilianis erroribus, which he inti∣tuled Aeneidomastix.Petrus Crinitus de poëtis Latinis. and diuers others whose workes weare most sin∣guler, if they coulde not escape the bites of such Basiliskes broode: Then howe maye I thinke, in this time which is so blessed, generallie with most rare and exquisite perfection in all knowledge, and iudge∣ment: that this slender assaye of my barren muse, should passe the pi∣kes without pusshing at: where thousandes are so quicke sighted, they will at the first, behoulde the least iote, or tittle, that is not rightly placed. And althoughe, perhappes it maie bee embraced a while, for the newnes thereof, yet shortlie it shalbee cast aside as thinges that are vnsauerie & not esteemed. For the nature of man is alwaies delighted in nouelties, & too much corrupte with curiousnes and newfanglenes. The fairest gar∣den, wherein is greate varietie bothe of goodlie coulors, and sweete smelles, can not like all mennes fancies: but some gallant coulours are misliked, and some pleasant smelles not regarded. No cooke, can fitte all mennes tastes, nor anie orator, please all mennes humors: but wheare the tasters are too daintie, his cookerie shalbe controlled: and wheare the auditors are to rashe and careles in regarding, his Rethoricke shalbe condempned: and no worke so absolute perfecte, but some are resolute to reprehende. Yet trustinge the learned, and those that are of good iudgemente (whome I doe chiefelie desire to bee the perusers hereof) with indifferencie will reade, and then fauorablie yeelde their ver∣dicte. I offer this my worke, suche as it is, vnto them; wherein I hope the greater sorte shall finde somethinge to delighte them, and verie fewe of what age, or condition they bee, but may herin see some deuise, auns∣werable to their inclinations; trusting they wil so frendly accept thereof, That I shalbe rather incouraged thereby, to assay some further matter, as soone as I shall haue leasure: then throughe their sinister interpreting of my good will, to discorage mee from the same, and to wishe I had not yet communicated this, vnto all: which I might haue kepte priuate to a fewe. Yet hereby I haue satisfied my frendes requestes, and haue in some parte discharged my dutie vnto them: Therfore if they shalbee well pleased with my paines, I shall the lesse care for anie others cauillinge. Thus wishing thee the fruition of thy good desires, I leaue thee vnto the same. At Leyden in Hollande, the 1111. of Maye. M.D.LXXXVI. G. Whitney.
IN GALFRIDI WHITNEI EMBLEMATA. ILlecebris scripti genus omne EMBLEMATA vincunt, Vtile vbi dulci miscuit EVPHROSYNE. Hoc praestant variis distincta Asarota figuris, Apta tenere oculos, instruere apta animum. SAMBVCVS testis, testis mihi IVNIVS, & qui Omne tulit punctum hoc in genere ALCIATVS. Sed scripti quantum genus omne EMBLEMATA praestant Illecebris, doctâ vermiculata manu; Tantum operis, WHITNAEE, tui concedit honori, Quantum est SAMBVCVS, IVNIVS, ALCIATVS. IANVS DOVSA à Noortwijck. IN GALFRIDI WHITNEI EMBLEMATA, MAGNI ILLIVS OLIM ANGLIAE POETAE GALFRIDI CHAVCERI, cognominis. VNA duos genuit GALFRIDOS ANGLIA, Vates Nomine, PHOEBAEO numine, & arte pares. Vnum, Fama suae patriae indigitauit HOMERVM, Anglicus hic meritò dicitur HESIODVS. Ac veluti dubiis quondam victoria pennis Inter MAEONIDEN HESIODVMq́ue stetit: Sic, quibus exultat modò laeta Britannia alumnis, GALFRIDOS palma est inter, in ambiguo. CHAVCERI versant dudum aurea scripta Britanni: Aurea WHITNAEVS sed sua pressit adhuc, Nunc verò, auspiciis LEYCESTRI, EMBLEMATA lucem Aspiciunt; & dant accipiuntq́ue decus. Qualis gemma micat fuluo redimita metallo Indica, ab artificis vermiculata manu. Perge tuae WHITNEY titulos superaddere famae, Tollens astra super te patriamq́ue tuam. BONAVENTVRA VVLCA∣NIVS Brugensis.
IN EMBLEMATA GALFRIDI WHITNEI. QVALITER insinuant oculis se Emblemata nostris, Quae variè augusta vermiculata domo, Artificiq́ue nitent opere exornata, modò illa, Hac modò perdita mens dum stupet effigie: Sic tu dum GALFRIDE tuo hoc expressa libello Symbola cum variis edis imaginibus; Nos legisse beat veterum dicta aemula dictis, Carminibus variè vermiculata tuis, Et modo priscorum Heroûm immortalia facta, Virtutesq́ue animo commeminisse iuuat. Intrepidus dum CurtI animus, & Horatia corda, Et tibi Fabricij cognita Pyrrhe, fides; Dum fortes Decij, Junij, Curij, atque Metelli, Et Cunctatoris mens benesuada FabI, Ac dum Scipiadae belli duo fulmina, quosque Est alios haud mens enumerare potis Innumeros, per te virtutum hic clara suarum Opponunt nostris lumina luminibus. Quid! quod praecipuum, haec meritò LEYCESTRIVS heros Vindicat auspiciis edita scripta suis. Vt qui hîc cuncta simul laudata Heroïca dona Possidet, in magnis singula principibus Quae miramur. At olim etiam admirabitur aetas Postuma, DVDLAEI illustria facta ducis. Et simul agnoscet felici hunc alite librum Olim per doctorum ora volare hominum. Auguror. hinc etiam quondam tibi fama paratur, Quae WHYTNAEE mori te quoque posse neget. PETRVS COLVIVS Brugensis.
IN GALFRIDI WHITNEI EMBLEMATA, STEPHANI LIMBERTI ANGLI NOR∣DOVICENSIS Scholae Magistri Decastichon. VIRTVTIS formam splendentiaq́ue ora tueri, Si Deus hic nobis, teste Platone, daret: Quantos pectoribus nostris accenderet ignes Cuius vel Phoebo pulchrius ora nitent? Non Veneris, Triuiae nec certet forma Dianae, Nisos haec omnes vincit & Euryalos. Huius at effigiem WHITNAEI Emblemata pingunt, Zeuxide, vel docto dignus Apelle, labor. Consulet ergo boni multum spectabilis Heros Et capiet facili talia dona manu. ARTHVR BOVRCHIER TO THE READER. PERFECTION needes no other foyles, suche helpes comme out of place: For where it selfe, can grace it selfe, there needes no other grace. Why should I then my fruiteles praise on WHITNEYS worke bestowe, Where wisdome, learninge, and deuise, so perfectly doe flowe. Yet gentle Reader by thy leaue, thus muche I mente to wrighte, As one that honours these his giftes, but seekes them not t'indighte. No longe discourse, no tedious tale, I purpos'de am to tell: Lest thou shouldst saye, where is the nutte, you feede me with the shell. Goe forwarde then in happie time, and thou shalt surely finde, With coste, and labour well set out, a banquet for thy minde. A storehouse for thy wise conceiptes, a whetstone for thy witte: Where, eache man maye with daintie choice his fancies finely fitte. Giue WHITNEY then thy good report, since hee deserues the same: Lest that the wise that see thee coye, thy follie iustly blame.
D. O. M. SINCE man is fraile, and all his thoughtes are sinne, And of him selfe he can no good inuent, Then euerie one, before they oughte beginne, Should call on GOD, from whome all grace is sent: So, I beseeche, that he the same will sende, That, to his praise I maie beginne, and ende. Faultes escaped in the Printing, (for the most parte already corrected,) yet in manie leaues ouerpassed as followeth. Pag. Lin. Faulte. Reade. 10 3 listen their listen to their 56 4 the fame the man 77 12 falne, to it falne, it 120 10 watcheman watchemen 130 1 sapientem sapientum 198 1 in margine Chiliad. 61. Chiliad. 1. 202 10 in margine libro 6. de libro de 217 1 in marg. Esaiae 41 Esaiae 40 223 10 which with
Te stante, virebo. woodcut of a spire wrapped in ivy A MIGHTIE Spyre, whose toppe dothe pierce the skie, An iuie greene imbraceth rounde about, And while it standes, the same doth bloome on highe, But when it shrinkes, the iuie standes in dowt: The Piller great, our gratious Princes is: The braunche, the Churche: whoe speakes vnto hir this. I, that of late with stormes was almoste spent, And brused sore with Tirants bluddie bloes, Whome fire, and sworde, with persecution rent, Am nowe sett free, and ouerlooke my foes, And whiles thow raignst, oh most renowmed Queene By thie supporte my blossome shall bee greene.
Quà dij vocant, eundum. woodcut of Mercury or Hermes (in foreground) and another figure (in background) directing a traveller on the road THE trauaylinge man, vncertaine where to goe, When diuers wayes before his face did lie, Mercurius then, the perfect pathe did showe, Which when he tooke, hee neuer went awrie, But to his wishe, his iorneys ende did gaine In happie howre, by his direction plaine. This trauailinge man: doth tell our wandringe state, Before whose face, and eeke on euerye side, By pathes, and wayes, appeare amidd our gate, That if the Lorde bee not our onlie guide: We stumble, fall, and dailie goe astraye, Then happie those, whome God doth shew the waye.
Prouidentia. woodcut of a crocodile and its eggs beside the River Nile SVCHE prouidence hathe nature secret wroughte In creatures wilde, and eeke such knowledge straunge, That man, by them in somme thinges maie be taughte, As some foretell, when weather faire will chaunge, Of heate, of raine, of winde, and tempests rage, Some showe by signes, and with their songs presage. But leauing theise, which almost all doe knowe, The Crocodile, by whome th'Aegyptians watche, Howe farre that yeare shall mightie Nilus flowe, For theire shee likes to laie her egges, and hatche, Suche skill deuine, and science to foretell, Hath Nature lente vnto this Serpent fell.Nic. Reusnerus. Quò sacer excurret Nilus in arua Praescius: alluuie libera ponit Oua: monens moerito nos Crocodilus Quae fata immineant, antè videre. Which showes, They should with due regarde foresee, When anie one doth take in hande a cause, The drifte, and ende, of that they doe decree, And longe thereon to ponder, and to pause, For after witts, are like a shower of rayne Which moistes the soile, when withered is the graine.
Veritas temporis filia. woodcut of a winged male figure of Time freeing a female figure of Truth from the three female Furies, Envy, Strife and Slander THREE furies fell, which turne the worlde to ruthe, Both Enuie, Strife, and Slaunder, heare appeare, In dungeon darke they longe inclosed truthe, But Time at lengthe, did loose his daughter deare, And setts alofte, that sacred ladie brighte, Whoe things longe hidd, reueales, and bringes to lighte. Thoughe strife make fier, thoughe Enuie eate hir harte, The innocent though Slaunder rente, and spoile: Yet Time will comme, and take this ladies parte, And breake her bandes, and bring her foes to foile. Dispaire not then, thoughe truthe be hidden ofte, Bycause at lengthe, shee shall bee sett alofte.
Dissidia inter aequales, pessima. woodcut of a bird or swallow flying over a ruin carrying a grasshopper in its beak THE Swallowe swifte, dothe beare vnto her neste The Grasshopper, that did no daunger feare, For that shee thought, they lou'de togeather beste, Bycause they both, obscru'de one time of yeare, And bothe, did ioye theire iarringe notes to sounde, And neare the house they bothe, theire dwellings founde.Alciatus. Stridula stridentem, vernam verna, hospita laetas Hospitam, & aligeram penniger ales auem? Yet time, and tune, and neighbourhood forgotte, For perfect frende, a tyrant shee became, Which taxeth those, whome God dothe heare allotte Like gifts of grace, to winne a lasting name, Yet Enuie soe theire vertues doth deface, It makes them foes, to them theie should imbrace. Nic. Reusnerus.Formicae grata est formica, Cicada cicadae Et doctis doctus gaudet Apollo choris.
Temeritas. woodcut of a charioteer struggling to control his two horses THE waggoner, behoulde, is hedlonge throwen, And all in vaine doth take the raine in hande, If he be dwrawen by horses fierce vnknowen, Whose stomacks stowte, no taming vnderstande, They praunce, and yerke, and out of order flinge, Till all they breake, and vnto hauocke bringe. That man, whoe hath affections fowle vntam'de, And forwarde runnes neglecting reasons race, Deserues by right, of all men to bee blam'de, And headlonge falles at lengthe to his deface, Then bridle will, and reason make thy guide, So maiste thow stande, when others doune doe slide.
Intestinae simultates. woodcut of two figures setting a house on fire with oil and a torch, while a nearby figure stands over another with a drawn knife WHEN ciuill sworde is drawen out of the sheathe, And bluddie broiles, at home are set a broache, Then furious Mars with sworde doth rage beneathe, And to the Toppe, deuowring flames incroache, None helpes to quenche, but rather blowes the flame, And oile doe adde, and powder to the same. Intestine strife, is fearefull moste of all, This, makes the Sonne, to cut his fathers throate, This, parteth frendes, this, brothers makes to bralle, This, robbes the good, and setts the theeues a floate, This, Rome did feele, this, Germanie did taste, And often times, this noble Lande did waste.
Non tibi, sed Religioni. woodcut of a city crowd bowing before a statue of Isis carried by an ass, with its driver raising a stick or club THE pastors good, that doe gladd tidinges preache, The godlie sorte, with reuerence do imbrace: Though they be men, yet since Godds worde they teache, Wee honor them, and giue them higheste place, Imbassadors of princes of the earthe, Haue royall Seates, thoughe base they are by birthe. Yet, if throwghe pride they doe them selues forgett, And make accompte that honor, to be theires: And doe not marke with in whose place they sett, Let them behowlde the asse, that ISIS beares, Whoe thowghte the men to honor him, did kneele, And staied therfore, till he the staffe did feele. For, as he pass'd with ISIS throughe the streete, And bare on backe, his holie rites about, Th'Aegyptians downe fell prostrate at his feete, Whereat, the Asse grewe arrogante, and stowte, Then saide the guide: oh foole not vnto thee, Theise people bowe, but vnto that they see?
Experientia docet. woodcut of an astronomer handing his instruments to a ploughman, next to a prince on horseback A YOVTHEFVLL Prince, in prime of lustie yeares, Woulde vnderstande what weather shoulde betide, For that hee thoughte, with manie noble Peares To passe the time, on huntinge forth to ride: Th'Astronomer, did wishe hym staie at courte, For present raine, should hinder all their sporte. Which staied the Prince, but raine did none discende, Then, wente hee forth with manie Gallantes braue, But when he thought the clowdes, did droppes portend, Hee roade aside, a plowghmans skill to craue, Whoe, looking straighte vppon the varijng skie: Saide, twentie daies I thinke it will bee drie. Proceedinge then, his iudgement true was founde, Then, (quoth the Prince) weare thou the doctours Roabe, And geeue to him, thy Harrowe on the grownde, And in exchaunge, take thou his Spheare, and Gloabe: And further saied, henceforthe wee will allowe, That learninge shall vnto Experience bowe.
Sirenes. woodcut of Ulysses or Odysseus on a ship tied to the mast, with three sirens in the sea near rocks in the foreground, and a shipwreck in the background Virg. Aeneid. lib. 5. & Oui∣dius lib. 5. Metamorph.WITHE pleasaunte tunes, the SYRENES did allure Vlisses wise, to listen theire songe: But nothinge could his manlie harte procure, Hee sailde awaie, and scap'd their charming stronge, The face, he lik'de: the nether parte, did loathe: For womans shape, and fishes had they bothe.Nic. Reusnerus. Illectos nautas dulci modulamine vocis. Mergebant auida fluctibus Ioniis. Which shewes to vs, when Bewtie seekes to snare The carelesse man, whoe dothe no daunger dreede, That he shoulde flie, and shoulde in time beware, And not on lookes, his fickle fancie feede: Suche Mairemaides liue, that promise onelie ioyes: But hee that yeldes, at lengthe him selffe distroies. Laërtij tetra∣sticon sic per Claud. Mi∣noëm conuer∣sum.Haec Venus ad musas: Venerem exhorrescite Nimphae, In vos armatus aut amor insiliet. Cui contrà musae, verba haec age dicito marti: Aliger huc ad nos non volat ille puer.
Res humanae in summo declinant. woodcut of a ship or galleon running aground and of snow melting under the sun's beams THE gallante Shipp, that cutts the azure surge,Periand. per Auson. Si fortuna iuuat, caueto tolli. Si fortuna tonat, caueto mergi. And hathe both tide, and wisshed windes, at will: Her tackle sure, with shotte her foes to vrge, With Captaines boulde, and marriners of skill, With streamers, flagges, topgallantes, pendantes braue, When Seas do rage, is swallowed in the waue. The snowe, that falles vppon the mountaines greate,Ouidius 4. pont. 3. Tu quoque fac timeas, & quae tibi laeta vidētur, Dum loqueris, fieri tristia posse puta. Though on the Alpes, which seeme the clowdes to reache. Can not indure the force of Phoebus heate, But wastes awaie, Experience doth vs teache: Which warneth all, on Fortunes wheele that clime To beare in minde how they haue but a time. Ouidius 5. Trist. 9.Passibus ambiguis fortuna volubilis errat, Et manet in nullo certa, tenax{que} loco. Sed modò laeta manet, vultus modò sumit acerbos Et tantùm constans in leuitate sua est.
Frustrà. woodcut of a barrel leaking water from holes all over THE Poëttes faine, that DANAVS daughters deare, Inioyned are to fill the fatall tonne: Where, thowghe they toile, yet are they not the neare, But as they powre, the water forthe dothe runne: No paine will serue, to fill it to the toppe, For, still at holes the same doth runne, and droppe. Which reprehendes, three sortes of wretches vaine, The blabbe, th'ingrate, and those that couet still, As first, the blabbe, no secretts can retaine. Th'ingrate, not knowes to vse his frendes good will. The couetous man, thowghe he abounde with store Is not suffis'de, but couetts more and more.
Superbiae vltio. woodcut of Niobe being turned to stone on top of a mountain, and of her children being shot down with arrows by two gods in the sky Fabula Niobes Ouid. 6. Me∣tamorph.OF NIOBE, behoulde the ruthefull plighte, Bicause shee did dispise the powers deuine: Her children all, weare slaine within her sighte, And, while her selfe with tricklinge teares did pine, Shee was transform'de, into a marble stone, Which, yet with teares, dothe seeme to waile, and mone.De numero fi∣liorum, vide Aul. Gellium lib. 20. cap. 6. This tragedie, thoughe Poëtts first did frame, Yet maie it bee, to euerie one applide: That mortall men, shoulde thinke from whence they came, And not presume, nor puffe them vp with pride, Leste that the Lorde, whoe haughty hartes doth hate, Doth throwe them downe, when sure they thinke theyr state. Bapt. Gyral∣dus.Este procul laeti, cernant mea funera tristes; Non similis toto maeror in orbe fuit. Bis septem natos peperi, bis pignora septem: Me miseram! Diuûm sustulit ira mihi. Dirigui demum lacrymis, & marmora manant. Sic mihi mors dolor est; sic mihi vita, dolor. Discite, mortales, quid sit turgescere fastu, Et quid sit magnos posthabuisse Deos.
In vitam humanam. woodcut of Democritus laughing and Heraclitus weeping with books beneath a tree De his, Seneca lib. De Tran∣quillitate vitae.THE wicked worlde, so false and full of crime, Did alwaies mooue HERACLITVS to weepe, The fadinge ioyes, and follies of that time, DEMOCRITVS did driue to laughter deepe, Thus heynous sinne, and follie did procure Theise famous men, suche passions to indure. What if they liu'de, and shoulde behoulde this age Which ouerflowes, with swellinge seas of sinne: Where fooles, by swarmes, doe presse vppon the stage, With hellishe Impes, that like haue neuer binne: I thinke this sighte, shoulde hasten their decaye Then helpe vs God, and Sathans furie staie. Horatius.Damnosa quid non imminuit dies? Aetas parentum peior auis tulit Nos nequiores, mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Ʋoluptas aerumnosa. woodcut of Actaeon, with a stag's head, being attacked by hounds in a wood, overlooked by Diana or Artemis Ouid. lib. 3. Metamorph.ACTAEON heare, vnhappie man behoulde, When in the well, hee sawe Diana brighte, With greedie lookes, hee waxed ouer boulde, That to a stagge hee was transformed righte, Whereat amas'de, hee thought to runne awaie, But straighte his howndes did rente hym, for their praie. Horatius 1. Epist. 12. Sperne voluptates, nocet empta dolore voluptas.By which is ment, That those whoe do pursue Theire fancies fonde, and thinges vnlawfull craue, Like brutishe beastes appeare vnto the viewe, And shall at lenghte, Actaeons guerdon haue: And as his houndes, soe theire affections base, Shall them deuowre, and all their deedes deface. Anulus, in pi∣cta poësi.Cornibus in Ceruum mutatum Actaeona sumptis, Membratim proprij diripuere canes. Plautus in Amphit.Ita dis placitum, voluptati vt moeror comes consequatur.
Quod potes, tenta. woodcut of armed pygmies approaching the sleeping figure of Hercules or Heracles, dressed in a lion-skin and holding a club WHILE, HERCVLES, with mightie clubbe in hande In Lyons skinne did sleepe, and take his ease: About him straighte approch'de the Pigmeis bande, And for to kill this conquerour assaies, But foolishe dwarffes? theire force was all to smalle, For when he wak'de, like gnattes hee crush'd them all.Hi homun∣ciones extre∣mas Aegypti partes inhabi∣tant agricola∣tioni dediti, Subinde cum gruibus bel∣lum gerunt. Plinius lib. 7. cap. 2. & Aul. Gellius lib. 9. cap. 4. This warneth vs, that nothinge paste our strengthe Wee shoulde attempte: nor anie worke pretende, Aboue our power: lest that with shame at lengthe Wee weakelinges prooue, and fainte before the ende. The pore, that striue with mightie, this doth blame: And sottes, that seeke the learned to defame. Propertius.Turpe est quod nequeas capiti submittere pondus, Et pressum inflexo mox dare terga genu.
Ludus, luctus, luxus. woodcut of a scene outside an inn or tavern, with four men seated at a table with drinking vessels and a game of backgammon in the foreground, and two men fighting on the ground in the background Propertius. Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas. Horat. 1 Epist. 19. Ludus enim genuit trepidum certamen, & iram: Ira truces inimicitias, & sunebre bellum.BEHOVLDE the fruites of dronkennesse, and plaie: Here corage, brawles with Cutthroate for a caste, And ofte in fine, if that they lacke to paie, They sweare it out, or blade it at the laste: This, frendshippe breakes: this, makes vs laugh'd to scorne, And beggerie giues, to those that riche are borne. Virgilius.The Lapithans, by drinke weare ouerthrowne, The wisest men, with follie this inflames: What shoulde I speake, of father NOAH aloane,Genes. 9. Or bring in LOTT, or HOLOFERNES names:Genes. 19. Iudic. 13. 1 Machab. 15. This SIMON, and his sonnes, did ouerthrowe, And BENEDAB, made flee before his foe.3 Regum 20. And he that lik'd to spende his time at dice, This lawe in Rome, SEVERVS did prouide: That euerie man, shoulde deeme him as a vice, And of his Landes, an other shoulde bee guide: Like Lawes beside, did diuers more deuise, And wisedome still, againste suche vnthriftes cries. Ouidius.Tunc sumus incauti, studio{que} aperimur ab ipso, Nuda{que} per lusus pectora nostra patent. Ira subit deforme malum, lucri{que} Cupido Iurgia{que}, & rixae, sollicitus{que} dolor, Crimina dicuntur, resonat clamoribus aether, Inuocat iratos & sibi quisque deos.
In auaros. woodcut of a heavily-laden ass eating a thistle Nic. Reusnerus. Frigoris impatiens: patiens operúmque, famisque: Ecce rudes Asinus dat rudis ore sonos.SEPTITIVS ritche, a miser moste of all, Whose liuinges large, and treasure did exceede: Yet to his goodes, he was so much in thrall, That still he vs'd on beetes, and rapes to feede: So of his stoare, the sweete he neuer knewe, And longe did robbe, his bellie of his due. This Caitiffe wretche, with pined corpes lo heare, Compared right vnto the foolishe asse, Whose backe is fraighte with cates, and daintie cheare, But to his share commes neither corne, nor grasse, Yet beares he that, which settes his teeth on edge: And pines him selfe, with thistle and with sedge. Plautus in Aulul.Perditissimus ego sum omnium in terra, Nam quid mihi opus vita est, qui tantum auri Perdidi, quod custodiui sedulò? egomet me fraudaui Animum{que} meum genium{que} meum, &c. Propertius 3.13.At nunc desertis cessant sacraria lucis, Aurum omnes victa iam pietate, colunt. Auro pulsa fides, auro venalia iura, Aurum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor.
Nec verbo, nec facto, quenquam laedendum. woodcut of Nemesis holding a set of reins A HEARE, NEMESIS the Goddesse iuste dothe stande, With bended arme, to measure all our waies, A raine shee houldes, with in the other hande, With biting bitte, where with the lewde shee staies: And pulles them backe, when harme they doe intende, Or when they take in wicked speeche delite, And biddes them still beware for to offende, And square theire deedes, in all thinges vnto righte: But wicked Impes, that lewdlie runne their race, Shee hales them backe, at lengthe to theire deface. Politianus ele∣ganter NEME∣SIM describit in Manto suo sic incipiens.Est dea: quae vacuo sublimis in aëre pendens It nimbo succincta latus: sed candida palam: Sed radiata comam: ac stridentibus insonat alis. Haec spes immodicas premit: haec infesta superbis Imminet: huic celsas hominum contundere mentes, Successus{que} datum: & nimios turbare paratus. Quam veteres NEMESIM &c. & paulò pòst: Improba vota domans: ac summis ima reuoluens Miscet: & alterna nostros vice temperat actus, &c.
Minuit praesentia famam. woodcut of a shepherd and goat on a sunny hilltop, over-looking houses in a snow-covered valley REPORTE, did ringe the snowe did hide the hilles, And valleys lowe, there with alofte did rise: Which newes, with dowte the hartes of manie filles, And Cowardes made, for feare at home to friese: But those that went, the truthe hereof to knowe, When that they came, might safelie passe the snowe. For whie, the Sonne did make the same to waste, And all about, discouered had the grounde: So, thoughe ofte times the simple bee agaste, When that reportes, of this, or that, doe sounde, Yet if they firste, woulde seeke the truthe to knowe, They ofte shoulde finde, the matter nothing soe. Virg. lib. 4. Aeneid. in de∣scrip. famae. Et Ouid. Me∣tam. lib. 12. De domo fa∣mae sic,Mobilitate viget, vires{que} acquirit eundo, Parua metu primo, mox sese attollit in auras, &c. Nocte die{que} patet: tota est ex aere sonanti, Tota fremit, voces{que} refert, iterátque quod audit, &c.
Turpibus exitium. woodcut of a scarab beetle in the centre of a rose THE Scarabee, cannot indure the sente Of fragant rose, moste bewtifull to see: But filthie smelles, hee alwaies doth frequent, And roses sweete, doe make him pine and die: His howse, is donge: and wormes his neighbours are, And for his meate, his mansion is his fare. With theise hee liues, and doth reioice for aie, And buzzeth freshe, when night doth take her place, From theise, he dies, and languisseth awaie: So, whose delites are filthie, vile, and base, Is sicke to heare, when counsaile sweete we giue, And rather likes, with reprobates to liue. Propert. 3, 17.Vos vbi contempti rupistis frena pudoris, Nescitis captae mentis habere modum. Flamma per incensas citius sedetur aristas, Flumina{que} ad fontis sint reditura caput, &c. Quàm possit vestros quisquam reprehendere cursus, Et rapidae stimulos frangere nequitiae.
Nullus dolus contra Casum. woodcut of a fox floating down the River Danube on a piece of ice, past the town and townspeople of Regensburg BEHOWLDE the craftie foxe, Vppon Danubius plaies, What time throwgh froste, both man, and beaste, Thereon did make their waies. At lengthe, with PHOEBVS beames, The froste began to slake: So that the yce with swelling streame, To sundrie peeces brake. Where, on a peece the foxe, Doth to his tackling stande: And in the sighte of Regenspurge, Came driuing by the Lande. At which, the townesmen laugh'de, And saied, this foxe, on Ice: Doth shewe, no subtill crafte will serue, When Chaunce doth throwe the dice. Seneca in Oed.Regitur fatis mortale genus: Nec sibi quisquam spondere potest Firmum, & stabile: per{que} casus Voluitur varios semper nobis Metuenda dies, &c.
Mihi pondera, luxus. woodcut of a bushel of grain, corn or wheat WHEN autumne ripes, the frutefull fieldes of graine, And CERES doth in all her pompe appeare, The heauie eare, doth breake the stalke in twaine, Wherebie wee see, this by experience cleare: Hir owne excesse, did cause her proper spoile, And made her corne, to rotte vppon the soile. Soe worldlie wealthe, and great aboundaunce, marres: The sharpenes of our sences, and our wittes, And oftentimes, our vnderstanding barres, And dulles the same, with manie carefull fittes: Then since Excesse procures our spoile and paine, The meane preferre, before immoderate gaine. Claud. 2.—nec te iucunda fronte fefellit Luxuries praedulce malum, quae dedita semper Corporis arbitriis, hebetat caligine sensus Membra{que} Circaeis effeminat acrius herbis.
Latet anguis in herba. woodcut of a snake or viper wrapped around a strawberry plant OF flattringe speeche, with sugred wordes beware, Suspect the harte, whose face doth fawne, and smile, With trusting theise, the worlde is clog'de with care, And fewe there bee can scape theise vipers vile: With pleasinge speeche they promise, and protest, When hatefull hartes lie hidd within their brest. The faithfull wight, dothe neede no collours braue, But those that truste, in time his truthe shall trie, Where fawning mates, can not theire credit saue, Without a cloake, to flatter, faine, and lye: No foe so fell, nor yet soe harde to scape, As is the foe, that fawnes with freindlie shape. Ouid. 1. Art.Tuta, frequens{que} via est, per amici fallere nomen. Idem 2. Fast.Sic iterum, sic saepe cadunt, vbi vincere apertè Non datur: insidias, arma{que} tecta parant.
Curis tabescimus omnes. woodcut of Pliny the Elder thinking beside, approaching, and falling into the erupting Mount Vesuvius IF griping greifes, haue harbour in thie breste, And pininge cares, laie seige vnto the same, Or straunge conceiptes, doe reaue thee of thie rest, And daie, and nighte, do bringe thee out of frame: Then choose a freinde, and doe his counsaile craue, Least secret sighes, doe bringe vntimelie graue. Veseuus, se∣cundum Ser∣uium Virgil. lib. Georg 1. mons est Ligu∣riae sub Alpi∣bus.Continuall care, did PLINIES harte possesse, To knowe what caus'de VESEVVS hill to flame, And ceased not, now this, nowe that, to gesse: Yet, when hee coulde not comprehende the same, Suche was his fate, pursuing his desier, He headlonge fell into the flaming fier. Non opibus mentes homini, curae{que} leuantur, &c.Tibul. lib. 3. cap. 3. O Curas hominum, ô quantum est in rebus inane.Pers. 1.
Otium sortem exspectat. woodcut of a stopped windmill, with an older man or father looking for wind and a younger man or son sleeping beside it A Windmill faire, that all thinges had to grinde, Which man coulde make, the father lefte his sonne: The corne was broughte, there nothing lack'd, but winde, And Customers, did freshlie to it ronne: The sonne repoas'de his truste vppon the mill, And dailie dream'de on plentie at his will. Ouid. 1. Pont. 6. Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus? Ʋt capiant vitium ni moueantur aquae.Thus he secure, a while his daies did passe, And did not seeke, for other staie at all: And thoughe hee founde, howe coulde the profit was, And that soe small, vnto his share did fall: Yet still he hoap'de, for better lucke at laste, And put his truste, in eache vncertaine blaste. Plaut. Rud. —vigilare decet hominem, Qui vult sua tempori conficere officia. Nam qui dormiunt libenter, sine luero, & cum malo quiescunt.Vnto this foole, they maie compared bee, Which idlie liue, and vainlie hoape for happe: For while they hope, with wante they pine, wee see: And verie fewe, are lul'de on fortunes lappe: While grasse doth growe, the courser faire doth sterue, And fortune field, the wishers turne doth serue.
Dolus in suos. woodcut of a flock of ducks flying down into a net, watched by two men behind a tree WHILE nettes were sette, the simple fowles to take, Whoe kepte theire course alofte, and woulde not lighte, A tamed ducke, her hoame did straighte forsake, And flewe alofte, with other duckes in flighte, They dowtinge not, her traiterous harte at all, Did flie with her, and downe with her did fall. By this is mente, all suche as doe betraie, Theire kindred neare, that doe on them depende, And ofte doe make, the innocent a praie, By subtill sleighte, to them that seeke theire ende Yea vnto those, they shoulde moste frendship showe, They lie in waite, to worke theire ouerthrowe. And. Alciat. De Anate.Perfida cognato se sanguine polluit ales, Officiosa aliis, exitiosa suis.
In Astrologos. woodcut of winged Icarus falling from the sunny sky into the sea HEARE, ICARVS with mountinge vp alofte, Came headlonge downe, and fell into the Sea: His waxed winges, the sonne did make so softe, They melted straighte, and feathers fell awaie: So, whilste he flewe, and of no dowbte did care, He moou'de his armes, but loe, the same were bare. Let suche beware, which paste theire reache doe mounte, Whoe seeke the thinges, to mortall men deny'de, And searche the Heauens, and all the starres accoumpte, And tell therebie, what after shall betyde: With blusshinge nowe, theire weakenesse rightlie weye, Least as they clime, they fall to theire decaye. Martial. 1.Illud quod medium est, atque inter vtrumque, probamus. Ouid. Trist. 2.Dum petit infirmis nimium sublimia pennis Icarus, Icariis nomina fecit aquis. Vitaret caelum Phaëton, si viueret, & quos Optauit stultè tangere, nollet equos.
Amor in filios. woodcut of a ring dove or barbary dove nesting in a tree WHEN Boreas coulde, dothe bare both busshe, and tree, Before the Springe, the Ringdoue makes her neste: And that her yonge both softe, and warme, mighte bee, Shee pulles her plumes, bothe from her backe, and breste: And while shee stryues, her broode for to preserue, Ofte times for coulde, the tender damme doth sterue. MEDEA nowe, and PROGNE, blusshe for shame: By whome, are ment yow dames of cruell kinde, Whose infantes yonge, vnto your endlesse blame, For mothers deare, do tyrauntes of yow finde: Oh serpentes seede, each birde, and sauage brute, Will those condempne, that tender not theire frute.
In victoriam dolo partam. woodcut of Arete, the female personification of virtue, sitting on the tomb of Ajax, tearing out her hair D AIACIS WHAT dolefull dame is this in greate dispaire? This prowes is, whoe mournes on AIAX toombe: What is the cause, shee rentes her goulden haire? Wronge sentence paste by AGAMEMNONS doombe: But howe? declare, VLISSES filed tonge, Allur'de the Iudge, to giue a Iudgement wronge. For when, that dead ACHYLLIS was in graue, For valiante harte, did AIAX winne the fame: Whereby, he claim'de ACHYLLIS armes to haue, VLISSES yet, was honored with the same: His suttle speeche, the iudges did preferre, And AIAX wrong'de, the onelie man of warre. Wherefore, the Knighte impatient of the same, Did loose his wittes, and after wroughte his ende: Loe, heare the cause that moou'de this sacred dame, On AIAX toombe, with griefe her time too spende: Which warneth vs, and those that after liue, To beare them righte, when iudgement they do giue.
Caecum odium. woodcut of an envious man covering his eyes and leading another male figure away from a burning house, while another man tries to extinguish the flames TH'Enuious man, when neighboures howse dothe flame, Whose chiefe delighte, is in an others harme, Doth shutte his eies, and will not see the same, But pulles awaie, his fellowe by the arme: And sayeth, departe, wee care not for this ill, It is not ours, let others care that will. Too manie liue, that euery wheare are founde Whoe daye and nighte doe languishe in dispite, When that they see, an others wealthe abounde: But, those herein that moste of all delighte, Let them repente, for God whoe knowes theire harts, Will them rewarde, accordinge to deserts. Ouid. 2. Meta∣morph. De in∣uidia sic.Vix{que} tenet lacrymas quia nil lacrymabile cernit, &c. Horatius 1. epist. 2.Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. Inuidia Siculi non inuenere tyranni Maius termentum. —
In poenam sectatur & vmbra. woodcut of a man wearing a knap-sack with his sword drawn against his own shadow, cast by the light emerging from a heavenly figure THE wicked wretche, that mischiefe late hath wroughte, By murther, thefte, or other heynous crimes, With troubled minde, hee dowtes hee shalbe caughte, And leaues the waie, and ouer hedges climes: And standes in feare, of euerie busshe, and brake, Yea oftentimes, his shaddowe makes him quake. A conscience cleare, is like a wall of brasse, That dothe not shake, with euerie shotte that hittes: Eauen soe there by, our liues wee quiet passe, When guiltie mindes, are rack'de with fearfull fittes: Then keepe thee pure, and soile thee not with sinne, For after guilte, thine inwarde greifes beginne. Cato.Conscius ipse sibi de se putat omnia dici. Ouid. Fast. 1.Conscia mens vt cuique sua est, ita concipit intra Pectora, pro facto spem{que}, metum{que} suo.
Ei, qui semel sua prodegerit, aliena credi non oportere. woodcut of a swallow flying toward Medea, with a knife or dagger drawn against the child in her arms Ouid. lib. 7. Metamorph.MEDEA loe with infante in her arme, Whoe kil'de her babes, shee shoulde haue loued beste: The swallowe yet, whoe did suspect no harme, Hir Image likes, and hatch'd vppon her breste: And lefte her younge, vnto this tirauntes guide, Whoe, peecemeale did her proper fruicte deuide. Oh foolishe birde, think'ste thow, shee will haue care, Vppon thy yonge? Whoe hathe her owne destroy'de, And maie it bee, that shee thie birdes should spare? Whoe slue her owne, in whome shee shoulde haue ioy'd. Thow arte deceau'de, and arte a warninge good, To put no truste, in them that hate theire blood. Borbonius.MEDEAE statua est: natos cui credis Hirundo? Fer aliò: viden' haec mactet vt ipsa suos?
In momentaneam felicitatem. woodcut of a pine tree enwrapped by a gourd plant Petrus Crini∣tus de hone∣sta disciplina lib. 2. cap. 14.THE fruictfull gourde, was neighboure to the Pine, And lowe at firste, abowt her roote did spread, But yet, with dewes, and siluer droppes in fine, It mounted vp, and almoste towch'de the head: And with her fruicte, and leaues on euerie side, Imbras'de the tree, and did the same deride. To whome, the Pine with longe Experience wise, And ofte had seene, suche peacockes loose theire plumes, Thus aunswere made, thow owght'st not to despise, My stocke at all, oh foole, thow much presumes. In coulde, and heate, here longe hath bene my happe, Yet am I sounde, and full of liuelie sappe. But, when the froste, and coulde, shall thee assaie, Thowghe nowe alofte, thow bragge, and freshlie bloome, Nic. Reusnerus. Coeruleus cucumis, tumidóq. cucurbita vētre, Cruda leuat, stomach perniciosa, sitim.Yet, then thie roote, shall rotte, and fade awaie, And shortlie, none shall knowe where was thy roome: Thy fruicte, and leaues, that nowe so highe aspire The passers by, shall treade within the mire.
Let them that stande, alofte on fortunes wheele, And bragge, and boaste, with puffe of worldlie pride Still beare in minde, howe soone the same maie reele, And alwayes looke, for feare theire footinge slide: And let not will, houlde vp theire heades for fame, When inwarde wantes, maie not supporte the same. Aere quandoque salutem redimendam. woodcut of a beaver hiding from a hunter and hounds THE Beauer slowe, that present daunger feares, And sees a farre, the eager howndes to haste, With grindinge teethe, his stoanes awaie he teares, And throwes them downe, to those that haue him chaste: Which beinge founde, the hunter dothe retire, For that he hath, the fruicte of his desire.Nic. Reusnerus. Mordicus ipse sibi, medicata virilia vellet: Insidias vafer ha effugit arte fiber. Theise, soueraigne are diseases for to heale, And for mannes healthe, from countries farre are broughte, And if herein, the writers doe not faile, This beaste doth knowe, that he therefore is soughte: And afterwarde, if anie doe him course, He shewes his wante, to mooue them to remorse.
Thus, to his paine he doth his life preserue: Which teacheth vs, if foes doe vs pursue, Wee showlde not care, if goodes for life maie serue, Althoughe we giue, our treasure to a iewe: No ritches, maie with life of man compare, They are but drosse, and fortunes brittle ware.Crates Theba∣nus cum the∣saurum spon∣te perderet, Hinc abite, ait, malae diuitiae: satius enim est à me vos de∣mergi quam ego à vobis ipse. Then life redeeme, althoughe with all thow haste, Thoughe thow arte pore, yet seeke, and thow shalte finde, Those ritches pure, that euermore shall laste, Which are the goodes, and treasures, of the minde: Noe man so pore, but god can blesse his daies, Whoe patient IOB, did from the dunghill raise. Ouid. lib. 1. De Remed. amoris.Vt corpus redimas, ferrum patieris & ignes, Arida nec sitiens ora lauabis aqua. Vt valeas animo, quicquam tolerare negabis? At pretium pars haec corpore maius habet. Durum telum necessitas. woodcut of a soldier and a boy next to a bird in a cage and a wall-mounted feeder and water-bowl NECESSITIE doth vrge, the Popiniaye to prate, And birdes, to drawe their bucketts vp, and picke theire meate through, grate: Which warneth them, whoe needes must eyther serue, or pine: With willing harte, no paines to shunne, and freedome to resigne. Terent. in Adel. 4. 7.Placet tibi factum mitio? MI. non si queam Mutare: nunc, cum nequeo, aequo animo fero.
Inimicorum dona, infausta. woodcut of Hector and Ajax exchanging a sword mid-way between two tents IF of thy foe, thow doest a gifte receaue, Esteeme it not, for feare the fates doe lower, And with the gifte, ofte tyme thie life doe reaue, Yea giftes wee reade, haue suche a secret power, That oftentimes, they LYNCEVS eies doe blinde, And he that giues, the taker faste doth binde. To AIAX heare, a sworde did HECTOR sende, A girdle stronge, to him did AIAX yeelde, With HECTORS gifte, did AIAX woorke his ende, And AIAX gifte, hal'de HECTOR throughe the fielde: Of mortall foes, then see noe gifte thow take, Althoughe a while, a truce with them thow make. Lacoon apud Virgilium lib. Aeneid. 2. sic de equo, loquitur Troianis.—aut vlla putatis Dona carere dolis Danaum, &c. Alciar.Sic titulo obsequij, quae mittunt hostibiis hostes Munera, venturi praescia fata ferunt.
Non locus virum, sed vir locum ornat. To the Honorable Sir PHILLIP SIDNEY Knight, Gouernour of the Garrison and towne of Vlissing. woodcut of a figure sitting on a rearing horse THE trampinge steede, that champes the burnish'd bitte, Is mannag'd braue, with ryders for the nones: But, when the foole vppon his backe doth sette, He throwes him downe, and ofte doth bruse his bones, His corage feirce, dothe craue a better guide, And eke such horse, the foole shoulde not bestride. Claud. 4. Honor. Tu ciuem, patrémque geras, tu consule cunctu, Nec tibi, nec tua te moueant, sed publica vota.By which is ment, that men of iudgement graue, Of learning, witte, and eeke of conscience cleare, In highe estate, are fitte theire seates to haue, And to be stall'd, in sacred iustice cheare: Wherein they rule, vnto theire endlesse fame, But fooles are foil'd, and throwne out of the same. Horat. 1. Ser. 6.—magnum hoc ego duco, Quòd placuit tibi, qui turpi secernis honestum.
Mediocribus vtere partis. woodcut of a dog with a bone leaning over a river WHOME fortune heare allottes a meane estate, Yet giues enowghe, eache wante for to suffise: That wauering wighte, that hopes for better fate, And not content, his cawlinge doth despise, Maie vainlie clime, but likelie still to fall, And liue at lengthe, with losse of maine, and all. Hor. 2. Car. 16. Vivitur paruo benè, cui paternum Splendet in mensa tenui salinum: Nec leues somnes timor, aut Cupido Sordidus aufert.And he that poastes, to make awaie his landes, And credittes all, that wandringe heades reporte: Maye Tagus seeke, and Ganges goulden sandes, Yet come at lengthe, with emptie purse to courte: Let suche behoulde, the greedie dogge to moane, By brooke deceau'd, with shaddow of his boane. Non minor est virtus, quàm quaerere parta tueri,Ouid. lib. 2. Art. Casus inest illic, hîc erit artis opus. Seruiet aeternùm, quia paruo nesciat vti.Horatius 1. Epist. 10. Cui non conueniet sua res, vt calceus olim, Si pede maior erit, subuertet: si minor, vrget. Laetus sorte tua viues, sapienter Aristi.
Biuium virtutis & vitij. woodcut of Hercules or Heracles, dressed in a lion-skin and holding a club, standing in a town square between two female figures representing Virtue and Pleasure or Vice WHEN HERCVLES, was dowtfull of his waie, Inclosed rounde, with vertue, and with vice: With reasons firste, did vertue him assaie, The other, did with pleasures him entice: They longe did striue, before he coulde be wonne, Till at the lengthe, ALCIDES thus begonne.Virgil. in Fragm. de littera y. Quisquis enim duros casus virtutis amore Ʋicerit, ille sibi laudémque decúsque parabit. At qui desidiā luxúmque sequetur inertem, Dum fugit opposites incauta mente labores, Turpis, inòpsque simul, miserabile transiget aeuum. Oh pleasure, thoughe thie waie bee smoothe, and faire, And sweete delightes in all thy courtes abounde: Yet can I heare, of none that haue bene there, That after life, with fame haue bene renoum'de: For honor hates, with pleasure to remaine, Then houlde thy peace, thow wastes thie winde in vaine. But heare, I yeelde oh vertue to thie will, And vowe my selfe, all labour to indure, For to ascende the steepe, and craggie hill, The toppe whereof, whoe so attaines, is sure For his rewarde, to haue a crowne of fame: Thus HERCVLES, obey'd this sacred dame.
Poena sequens. woodcut of a man or thief sitting back asleep while being strangled by a sack of meat hanging from his neck WHEN silent nighte, did scepter take in hande, And dim'de the daie, with shade of mantle blacke, What time the theeues, in priuie corners stande, And haue noe dowte, to robbe for what they lacke: A greedie theefe, in shambles broke a shoppe, And fil'de a sacke, with fleshe vp to the toppe. Which done, with speede he lifted vp the sacke, And bothe the endes, abowt his necke he knittes, And ranne awaie, with burden on his backe Till afterwardes, as hee at alehowse sittes: The heauie loade, did weye so harde behinde, That whiles he slept, the weighte did stoppe his winde. Iuuenalis 13. de malis sic ait. Hic sunt qui trepidant, & ad omnia fulgura pallent, Cùm tonat: exanime primo quoque murmure coeli. Senec. Troad. Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, iubet.Which truelie showes, to them that doe offende, Althowghe a while, they scape theire iust desertes, Yet punishment, dothe at theire backes attende, And plagues them hoame, when they haue meriest hartes: And thoughe longe time, they doe escape the pikes, Yet soone, or late, the Lorde in iustice strikes.
Ʋenter, pluma, Ʋenus, laudem fugiunt. woodcut of a female figure fleeing a room in which a man and woman lie in a bed next to a table of food and drink WHY fliest thow hence? and turn'ste awaie thie face? Thow glorie brighte, that men with fame doest crowne: GLO. Bycause, I haue noe likinge of that place, Where slothfull men, doe sleepe in beddes of downe: And fleshlie luste, doth dwell with fowle excesse, This is no howse, for glorie to possesse. But, if thow wilte my presence neuer lacke, SARDANAPAL, and all his pleasures hate, Driue VENVS hence, let BACCHVS further packe, If not, behowlde I flie out of thie gate: Yet, if from theise, thow turne thie face awaie, I will returne, and dwell with thee for aie. Propert. 4. 11.Magnum iter ascendo, sed dat mihi gloria vires: Non iuuat ex facili lecta corona iugo. Ouid. 1. Pont. 6Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus? Vt capiant vitium, ni moueantur aquae?
Mens immota maner. To Sir ROBERT IERMYN Knight. woodcut of a man kneeling in prayer at a low wall facing toward five stars, with a stag drinking from a stream beyond the wall Psalm. 41. Quemadmodum desiderat Ceruus ad fontes aquarū: Ita desiderat ani∣ma mea ad te Deus, &c. BY vertue hidde, behoulde, the Iron harde, The loadestone drawes, to poynte vnto the starre: Whereby, wee knowe the Seaman keepes his carde, And rightlie shapes, his course to countries farre: And on the pole, dothe euer keepe his eie, And withe the same, his compasse makes agree. Virg. in Aetna. Est meritò pietas homini tutissima virtus.Which shewes to vs, our inward vertues shoulde, Still drawe our hartes, althoughe the iron weare: The hauenlie starre, at all times to behoulde, To shape our course, so right while wee bee heare: That Scylla, and Charybdis, wee maie misse, And winne at lengthe, the porte of endlesse blisse. Ouid. 4. Fast.Conscia mens recti famae mendacia ridet. Ouid. de medic. faciei.Sufficit & longum probitas perdurat in aeuum, Per{que} suos annos hinc bene pendet amor.
Desiderium spe vacuum. woodcut of a lion eating a carcass, with dogs in the background G THE Lyon fierce, behoulde doth rente his praie, The dogge lookes backe, in hope to haue a share, And lick'd his lippes, and longe therefore did staie, But all in vaine, the Lion none coulde spare: And yet the sighte, with hope the dogge did feede, As if he had, somme parte there of in deede. This reprehendes, the sonnes, or greedie frendes, That longe do hope, for deathe of aged Sires: And on theire goodes, doe feede before theire endes, For deathe ofte times, doth frustrate theire desires: And takes awaie, the yonge before the oulde, Let greedie heires, this looking glasse behoulde. Ouid. 1. Me∣tamorph.Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos: Victa iacet pietas, &c.
Furor & rabies. woodcut of Agamemnon holding a sword and shield, with a camp of tents and the burning city of Troy in the background THE crewell kinges, that are inflam'de with ire: With fier, and sworde, theire furious mindes suffise: And ofte to showe, what chiefelie they desire, Within theire sheildes, they dreadefull shapes deuise, Some Griphins feirce, some ramping Lions beare, Some Tygers fell, or Dragons like to weare.Scribit Claud. Mi∣nois super Alciarum. Agamemnonē Cly∣peum habuisse, in quo Leo depictus erat, ad retrorem aliis ineutiendum: quod quidem scu∣tum in Olympiae fa∣no per aliquot tem∣pora pependit, cum inscriptione adiecta. All which bewraye, theire inwarde bloodie thoughte, Suche one, behoulde, kinge AGAMEMNON was: Who had in shielde, a ramping Lion wroughte And eke this verse, was grauen in the brasse: Mannes terror this, to feare them that behoulde:Terror hic est homi∣num, quíque hunc ge∣rit, est Agamemnon. Which shielde is borne, by AGAMEMNON boulde. Ouid. 1. Remed.Dum furor in cursu est, currenti cede furori: Difficiles aditus impetus omnis habet.
Ʋarij hominum sensus. To Sir HENRY WOODHOWSE Knight. woodcut of an old woman gathering skulls, and then dropping them, in the background is a horse and a doorway surrounded by piles of skulls AN aged dame, in reuerence of the dead, With care did place, the sculles of men shee founde, Vppon an hill, as in a sacred bed, But as shee toil'de, shee stumbled to the grounde: Whereat, downe fell the heades within her lappe, And here, and there, they ranne abowt the hill: With that, quoth shee, no maruaile is this happe, Since men aliue, in myndes do differ still: And like as theise, in sunder downe do fall, So varried they, in their opinions all. Persius 5.Mille hominum species, & rerum discolor vsus. Velle suum cuique est, nec voto viuitur vno. Mercibus hic Italis, mutat sub sole recenti Rugosum piper, & pallentis grana cumini: Hic satur irriguo mauult turgescere somno: Hic campo indulget, hunc alea decoquit: &c.
Marte & arte. To Sir WILLIAM STANDLEY Knight. woodcut of Ulysses or Odysseus, robed and holding a book, and Diomedes, armed with sword, shield, spear and plumed helmet WHERE courage great, and consaile good doe goe, With lastinge fame, the victorie is wonne: But seperate theise, then feare the ouerthrowe, And strengthe alone, dothe vnto ruine ronne: Then Captaines good, must ioyne theise two, in one: And not presume with this, or that, alone. Andr. Alciat. Ʋiribus hic praestat, hic pollet acumine mētis Nec tam alterius, non egit alter ope.As valiant hartes, and corage highe beseeme, The Captaines boulde, that enterprise for fame: Soe muste they still, of pollicie esteeme, And wisedomes rules, to bringe to passe the same: While Caesar great, subdu'de the countries farre: In gowne at home, did TVLLIE helpe to warre. Hor. 2. Carm. 10. Rebus angustu animosus, atque Fortis appare: sapienter idem Contrahes vento nimium secundo, Turgida vela.VLISSES wise, and DIOMEDES forme, Are heare set downe, for valiant wightes to viewe: The one deuis'de, the other did performe, Whereby, they did the Troiane force subdue: The one, his foes with witte, and counsaile harm'de, The other, still him selfe againste them arm'de.
Labor irritus. woodcut of Ocnus weaving a rope and an ass eating it HEARE, Ocnus still the roape doth turne and winde, Which he did make, of russhes and of grasse: And when with toile, his worke was to his minde He rol'de it vp, and lefte it to the asse: Whoe quickelie spoil'de, that longe with paine was sponne, Which being kept, it might some good haue donne. This Ocnus shewes, a man that workes and toiles, The Asse declares, a wicked wastfull wife: Whoe if shee maie, shee quicklie spendes and spoiles That he with care, was getting all his life, And likewise those, that lewdely doo bestowe Suche thinges, as shoulde vnto good vses goe. Iuuenalis 6.Prodiga non sentit pereuntem femina sensum: At, velut exhausta rediuiuus pullulet arca Nummus, & è pleno semper tollatur aceruo, Non vnquam reputant quanti sua gaudia constent.
In eum qui sibi ipsi damnum apparat. woodcut of a wolf-cub suckling from a goat Nic. Reusnerus. Impastus stabulis saeuit lupus: vbere raptos Dilamátque ferus miseris cum matribus agnos.THE rauening wolfe, by kinde my mortall foe, Yet lo, infors'de, I foster vp her whelpe: Who afterwarde, as it did stronger growe, Thoughe as my owne, I longe the same did helpe: Yet, coulde I not contente it with my teate, But that my selfe, hee rent to be his meate.Claudius Minois è Graeco. Nutritus per me, tandem fera saeuiet in me. Ʋertere naturam gratia nulla potest. And. Alciat. Improbitas nullo flectitur obsequio.No willinge minde, to please him might suffise, No dilligence, to geue the tyraunte sucke, Though whelpishe daies, his nature did disguise, Yet time at lengthe vnto my euell lucke, Bewray'de his harte, a warninge good to those, Whoe in theire howse, doe foster vp theire foes. For, thoughe throughe neede they frendlie seeme a while, Or childishe yeares, do cloke their cancker'd minde, Althoughe some doe, releeue them in exile, And spend theire goodes, in hope to alter kinde: Yet all theire loue, and care to doe them good, Suche will forgett, and seeke to spill theire blood.
Garrulitas. woodcut of a man in sleeping position gesturing with his right arm toward a swallow Ecclesiast. 20. Qui multis vtitur verbis, laedet animam suam. Paradisus poëticus. Ʋer non vna dies, non vna reducit hirundo: Multiplici vigilans prudentia surgit ab vsu.BETIME when sleepe is sweete, the chattringe swallowe cries, And doth awake the wearied wighte, before he would arise: Which carpes the pratinge crewe, whoe like of bablinge beste: Whose tounges doe make him almoste deafe, that faine would take his rest.Horat. 1. Epist. 8. Sed tacitus pasci si posset coruus: haberet Plus dapis, & rixae multo minus, inuidiaeqúe. Quaere adolescens, vtere senex. woodcut of an old man sitting indoors at a table with food and drink, while outdoors a young man digs the ground Ouid. 2. Art. Dum vires anníque sinūt tolerate labores, Iam veniet taecito curua senecta pede.VVHILST youthe doth laste, with liuelie sappe, and strengthe, With sweate of browe, see that for age thou toyle: And when the same, arresteth thee at lengthe, Then take thy rest, let younglinges worke, and moyle: And vse thy goodes, which thou in yowthe haste wonne, To cheare thy harte, whil'st that thy glasse shal ronne.
Ʋitae, aut morti. woodcut of a large flower with spiders and bees on it De littera & spiritu. S. Paulus Cor. 2. cap. 3. Paradisus poëticus. Ʋsus abest manuū? ducens pede stamine texo, Aluus lanigera fertilitate scatet. Non dulcem e quouis apis ingeniosa liquorem Flore: sed è lecto germine, mella legit. WITHIN one flower, two contraries remaine, For proofe behoulde, the spider, and the bee, One poison suckes, the bee doth honie draine: The Scripture soe, hath two effectes we see: Vnto the bad, it is a sworde that slaies, Vnto the good, a shielde in ghostlie fraies. Nil penna, sed vsus. To. Pr. Dr. woodcut of an ostrich with outspread wings Martialis 1. Decipies alios verbis, vultúque benigno Nam mihi iam notus dissimulator eris.THE Hippocrites, that make so great a showe, Of Sanctitie, and of Religion sounde, Are shaddowes meere, and with out substance goe, And beinge tri'de, are but dissemblers founde. Theise are compar'de, vnto the Ostriche faire, Whoe spreades her winges, yet sealdome tries the aire.
Fortissima minimis interdum cedunt. woodcut of a lion lying down before a cockerel, an elephant retreating from a man holding a cloth, a bull retreating from a man holding a cloth, and a stag leaping in the background Aelian. De varia hi∣storia lib 6. cap. 22.THE scarlet cloathe, dothe make the bull to feare. The culler white, the Olephant dothe shunne. The crowinge cocke, the Lion quakes to heare. The smoke of cloathe, dothe make the stagge to runne. All which doe showe, wee no man shoulde dispise, But thinke howe harme, the simplest maie deuise.Ouid. 2. Remed. Amoris. Parua necat morsu spatiosum vipera taurum: A cane non magno saepe tenetur aper. Iniuriis, infirmitas subiecta. woodcut of a gull and a cormorant flying low over the sea, where a large fish or sea-serpent attacks some small fish THE mightie fishe, deuowres the little frie, If in the deepe, they venture for to staie, If vp they swimme, newe foes with watchinge flie, The caruoraunte, and Seamewe, for theire praie: Betweene these two, the frie is still destroi'de, Ah feeble state, on euerie side anoi'de.And. Alciat. Eheu intuta manens vndique debilitas.
In dies meliora. woodcut of a bristle-backed pig or sow with its nose to the ground, while a man points to two distant pillars beyond the ruins of a town and bridge or aqueduct PLVS OLTRE VLTERIVS Nic Reusnerus. Sylva iuuat capras: vnda lutúmque sues.THE greedie Sowe so longe as shee dothe finde, Some scatteringes lefte, of haruest vnder foote She forward goes and neuer lookes behinde, While anie sweete remayneth for to roote, Euen soe wee shoulde, to goodnes euerie daie Still further passe, and not to turne nor staie. Luxuriosorum opes. woodcut of four flying crows or ravens encircling a fig tree ON craggie rockes, and haughtie mountaines toppe, Vntimelie fruicte, one sower figtree growes: Whereof, no good mankinde at all doth croppe, But serues alone, the rauens, and the crowes: So fooles, theire goodes vnto no goodnes vse, But flatterers feede, or waste them on the stewes.
Agentes, & consentientes, pari poena puniendi. woodcut of a trumpeter in livery being led into a city gate from a battlefield, with cavalry in the background A Trompetter, the Captaines captiue leade, Whoe pardon crau'de, and saide, he did no harme: And for his life, with tremblinge longe did pleade, Whereat, quoth they, and hal'de him by the arme: Althoughe, thie hande did neuer strike a stroke, Yet with thie winde, thou others did'st prouoke. In quatuor anni tempora. woodcut of a tree and cornfield with birds flying and resting Nic. Reusnerus de Ficedula. Cùm me ficus alat: cū pascar dulcibus vuis: Cur potius nomen, non dedit vua mihiòBY swallowes note, the Springe wee vnderstande, The Cuckowe comes, ere Sommer doth beginne: The vinefinche showes, that haruest is at hande: The Chaffinche singes, when winter commeth in: Which times they keepe, that man therebie maie knowe, Howe Seasons chaunge, and tymes do come and goe.
Paruam culinam, duobus ganeonibus non sufficere. woodcut of one bird falling from a tree where another is perched Andr. Alciat. Arbustum geminos non alit erithacos.IN smalle, and little thinges, there is no gaine at all, One groaue, maie not two redbreastes serue, but euermore they brall. Cuncta complecti velle, stultum. woodcut of eight boys chasing bubbles in the countryside ET TVTTO ABBRACCIO ETNVLLA STRINGO. THE little boyes, that striue with all theire mighte, To catche the belles, or bubbles, as they fall: In vaine they seeke, for why, they vanishe righte, Yet still they striue, and are deluded all: So, they that like all artes, that can bee thoughte, Doe comprehende not anie, as they oughte.
Alius peccat, alius plectitur. woodcut of a man aiming a stone at a dog while the dog chews another stone on the ground THE angrie dogge doth turne vnto the stone, When it is caste, and bytes the same for ire, And not pursues, the same that hathe it throwne, But with the same, fulfilleth his desire: Euen so, theyr are that doe bothe fighte, and brall, With guiltlesse men, when wrathe dothe them inflame, And mortall foes, they deale not with at all, But let them passe, to theire rebuke, and shame: And in a rage, on innocentes do ronne, And turne from them, that all the wronge haue donne. And. Alciat.Sic plerique sinunt veros elabier hostes, Et quos nulla grauat noxia, dente petunt.
Aethiopem lauare. woodcut of a black or dark-skinned man sitting and being washed by two standing white or light-skinned men Erasmus ex Luciano. Abluis Aethiopem frustrà: qum desinis artē? Haud vnquā efficies nox sit vt atra, dies. Horat. 1. Epist. 10. Naturam expellas furca tamen vsque recurret.LEAVE of with paine, the blackamore to skowre, With washinge ofte, and wipinge more then due: For thou shalt finde, that Nature is of powre, Doe what thou canste, to keepe his former hue: Thoughe with a forke, wee Nature thruste awaie, Shee turnes againe, if wee withdrawe our hande: And thoughe, wee ofte to conquer her assaie, Yet all in vaine, shee turnes if still wee stande: Then euermore, in what thou doest assaie, Let reason rule, and doe the thinges thou maie. Anulus in pict. poësi.— equus{que} Nunquam ex degeneri fiet generosus asello, Et nunquam ex stolido cordatus fiet ab arte.
Non dolo, sed vi. woodcut of an ape pushing a dog's paw into a fireplace, with two men watching Aelian. de var. Hist. lib. 5. ca. 26.THE ape, did reache for Chestnuttes in the fire, But fearinge muche, the burninge of his toes, Perforce was bar'de, longe time from his desire: But at the lengthe, he with a whelpe did close, And thruste his foote, into the Embers quick, And made him, pull the Chestnuttes out perforce: Which shewes, when as ambition fowle doth prick, The hartes of kinges, then there is no remorce, But oftentimes, to aunswere theire desire, The subiectes feele, both famine, sworde, and fire. Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 2.Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui.
Nimium rebus ne fide secundis. woodcut of pine trees breaking under the force of the wind, emanating from a godlike-figure in the clouds THE loftie Pine, that one the mountaine growes, And spreades her armes, with braunches freshe, & greene, The raginge windes, on sodaine ouerthrowes, And makes her stoope, that longe a farre was seene: So they, that truste to muche in fortunes smiles, Thoughe worlde do laughe, and wealthe doe moste abounde, When leste they thinke, are often snar'de with wyles, And from alofte, doo hedlonge fall to grounde: Then put no truste, in anie worldlie thinges, For frowninge fate, throwes downe the mightie kinges. Hor. Carm. 2. Od. 10.Saepius ventis agitatur ingens Pinus, & celsae grauiore casu Decidunt turres, feriúntque summos Fulmina montes. Ouid. 3. Trist. 5.Vt cecidi, cuncti{que} metu fugere ruinam, Versáque amicitiae terga dedere meae.
Silentium. Ad D. T. C. M. woodcut of a renaissance scholar seated in his study, with books open on a table next to him and on a shelf De laude silentij Aul. Gel. lib. 11. cap. 10. idem de va∣niloquio lib. 1. cap. 15.PYTHAGORAS, vnto his schollers gaue, This lesson firste, that silence they should keepe: And this, wee reade Philosophers moste graue, Yea in theire hartes, this Princes printed deepe: VLISSES wordes weare spare, but rightlie plac'd: This, NESTOR lik'de. LYCVRGVS this imbrac'de. Epaminondas cele∣bratur apud Pinda∣rum qui, quanquam multa sciret, pauca tamen loquebatur.This, famous made EPAMINONDAS boulde: By this, great praise did DEMARATVS gaine: This, Athens made to reuerence ZENO oulde: SIMONIDES condemned speaches vaine, Whose sayinge was, my wordes repentance had, But Silence yet, did neuer make mee sad.Locutū fuisse poeni∣tuit, tacuisse verò nunquam. Cato lib. 1. Proximus ille deo, qui scit ratione tacere.And CATO sayeth: That man is next to GOD, Whoe squares his speache, in reasons rightfull frame: For idle wordes, GOD threatneth with his rodde, And sayeth, wee must giue reckoninge for the same:Cor. 1. cap. 15. Corrumpunt mores bo∣nos colloquia praua. Sainct PAVLE likewise, this faulte doth sharplie tutche, And oftentimes, condemneth bablinge mutche. De vaniloquio. Paul. Timoth. 2. cap. 2. Guill. Lill. Est vitae ac pariter ia∣nua lingua necis.One calles the tounge, the gate of life, and deathe, Which wiselie vs'd, extolleth men on earthe: Which lewdlie vs'de, depriueth men of breathe,
And makes them mourne, whoe might haue liu'de in mirthe: For euell wordes, pierce sharper then a sworde, Which ofte wee rue, thoughe they weare spoke in boorde.Pet. 1. cap. 3. Qui enim vult vi∣tam diligere, & dies videre bonos: coër∣ceat linguā à malo. Marc. 7. Nihil est extra ho∣minem introiens in eum, quod possit eū coinquinare, sed quae de homine pro∣cedunt, &c.Not that distroyes, into the mowthe that goes, But that distroyes, that forthe thereof doth comme: For wordes doe wounde, the inwarde man with woes, Then wiselie speake, or better to bee domme The tounge, althowghe it bee a member small, Of man it is the best, or worste of all. Hor. 1. Serm. 4. Fingere qui non visae potest, cōmissa tacere Qui nequit: hic niger est, hunc tu Roman e caueto.The foole, is thought with silence to be wise, But when he prates, him selfe he dothe bewraye: And wise men still, the babler doe dispise, Then keepe a watche when thou haste owght to saie,Ouid. 1. Amor. 2. Quis minor est autem quàm tacuisse labor? What labour lesse, then for to houlde thy peace, Which aged daies, with quiet doth increase.Horat 1. Ep. 18. Nec retinent patulae cō∣missa fideliter aures. Plutarch. in Moral.Th'Aegyptians wise, and other nations farre, Vnto this ende, HARPOCRATES deuis'de, Whose finger, still did seeme his mouthe to barre, To bid them speake, no more then that suffis'de, Which signe thoughe oulde, wee may not yet detest, But marke it well, if wee will liue in reste. Written to the like effecte, vppon Ʋideo, & taceo. Her Maiesties poësie, at the great Lotterie in LONDON, begon M.D.LXVIII. and ended M.D.LXIX. Ouid. 2. Trist. Si quoties peccāt homi∣nes sua fulmina mittaec Iupiter, exiguo tem∣pore inermis erit.I See, and houlde my peace: a Princelie Poësie righte, For euerie faulte, shoulde not prouoke, a Prince, or man of mighte. For if that IOVE shoulde shoote, so ofte as men offende, The Poëttes saie, his thunderboltes shoulde soone bee at an ende. Then happie wee that haue, a Princesse so inclin'de. That when as iustice drawes hir sworde, hath mercie in her minde, And to declare the same, howe prone shee is to saue: Her Maiestie did make her choice, this Poësie for to haue. Ouid. 1. Pont. 3. Cuique dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox.Sed piger ad poenas princeps, ad proemia velox:
Amicitia, etiam post mortem durans. To R. T. and M. C. Esquiers. woodcut of a grape-laden vine wrapped around a bare elm tree A Withered Elme, whose boughes weare bare of leaues And sappe, was sunke with age into the roote: A fruictefull vine, vnto her bodie cleaues, Whose grapes did hange, from toppe vnto the foote: And when the Elme, was rotten, drie, and dead, His braunches still, the vine abowt it spread. Virgil in Moecena∣tis obitum. Et decet, & certè viuā tibi semper amicus, Nec tibi qui móri∣tur, definit esse tuus: Ipse ego quicquid ero, cineres intérq. fauillas, Tunc quoque non po∣tero non memor esse tui.Which showes, wee shoulde be linck'de with such a frende, That might reuiue, and helpe when wee bee oulde: And when wee stoope, and drawe vnto our ende, Our staggering state, to helpe for to vphoulde: Yea, when wee shall be like sencelesse block, That for our sakes, will still imbrace our stock. Ouid. 3. Pont. 2.Ire iubet Pylades charum periturus Orestem: Hic negat, in{que} vicem pugnat vterque mori, Extitit hoc vnum quod non conuenerat illis: Caetera pars concors, & sine lite fuit.
Potentissimus affectus, amor. woodcut of Eros or Cupid holding a whip and reins in a chariot drawn by two lions THE Lions grimme, behoulde, doe not resiste, But yealde them selues, and Cupiddes chariot drawe, And with one hande, he guydes them where he liste, With th'other hande, he keepes them still in awe: Theye couche, and drawe, and do the whippe abide, And laie theire fierce and crewell mindes aside. If Cupid then, bee of such mightie force, That creatures fierce, and brutishe kinde he tames: Oh mightie IOVE, vouchsafe to showe remorse, Helpe feeble man, and pittie tender dames: Let Africke wilde, this tyrauntes force indure, If not alas, howe can poore man bee sure. Ouid. Epist. 9.Quem non mille ferae, quem non Stheneleïus hostie, Non potuit Iuno vincere, vincit amor.
Quae ante pedes. To I. I. Esquier. woodcut of a farmhouse, with an ox or bull and a chicken in the yard, and a chicken on the roof with three broken eggs Ouid. 1. Art. Sic ne perdiderit non cessat perdere lusor, Et reuocat cupidas alea saepe manus.NOT for our selues, alone wee are create, But for our frendes, and for our countries good: And those, that are vnto theire frendes ingrate, And not regarde theire ofspringe, and theire blood, Or hee, that wastes his substance till he begges, Or selles his landes, whiche seru'de his parentes well: Is like the henne, when shee hathe lay'de her egges, That suckes them vp and leaues the emptie shell, Euen so theire spoile, to theire reproche, and shame, Vndoeth theire heire, and quite decayeth theire name. Sen. Hipp. 1.Quisquis secundis rebus exultat nimis, Fluit{que} luxu, semper insolita appetens, Hunc illa magnae dura fortunae comes Subit libido: non placent suetae dapes, Non tecta sani moris, aut vilis cibus: &c.
Mutuum auxilium. To R. COTTON Esquier. woodcut of a blind man with a stick, and a lame man carried on his shoulders pointing the way Quanta sit mutui au∣xilij necessitas, cùm in cōmuni hac vitae hu∣manae societate mul∣tis modis intelligi po∣test: in qua homo hominis ope maximè indiget, adeò vt in prouerbium abierit, homo homini Deus: tum verò in ipsa cor∣poris humani consti∣tutione & fabrica lu∣culentissimè apparet. Neque enim homo subsistere vlla ratione possit, nisi membra corporis mutuum si∣bi auxilium praestent. Quid enim futurum esset, nisi oculi pedes ad ingressum dirige∣rent; nisi rursum pe∣des corpus mouerent; nisi manus ori cibū, os ventriculo at{que} he∣pari, hepar per venas vniuerso corpori ali∣mentum suggereret? Nihil itaque est quod per seipsum, sine al∣terius auxilio, con∣stare, aut vim suam & perpetuitatem con∣seruare possit.THE blynde, did beare the lame vppon his backe, The burthen, did directe the bearors waies: With mutuall helpe, they seru'd eche others lacke, And euery one, their frendly league did praise: The lame lente eies, the blynde did lend his feete, And so they safe, did passe both feelde, and streete. Some lande aboundes, yet hathe the same her wante, Some yeeldes her lacke, and wantes the others store: No man so ritche, but is in some thinge scante, The greate estate, must not dispise the pore: Hee workes, and toyles, and makes his showlders beare, The ritche agayne, giues foode, and clothes, to weare. So without poore, the ritche are like the lame: And without ritche, the poore are like the blynde: Let ritche lend eies, the poore his legges wil frame, Thus shoulde yt bee. For so the Lorde assign'd, Whoe at the firste, for mutuall frendship sake, Not all gaue one, but did this difference make. Whereby, with trade, and intercourse, in space, And borrowinge heare, and lendinge there agayne: Such loue, such truthe, such kyndnes, shoulde take place,
Hor. 2. serm. 2. Nam propriae telluris herum natura neque illum, Nec me, nec quenquam statuit, &c. That frendshipp, with societie should raigne: The prouerbe saieth, one man is deemed none, And life, is deathe, where men doo liue alone. Ausonius in Epig.Non est diues opum, diues: nec pauper inops{que} Infelix: alio nec magis alter eget. Diues eget gemmis; Cereali munere pauper. Sed cùm egeant ambo, pauper egens minus est. In vtrumque paratus. To IOHN PAYTON Esquier. woodcut of two arms holding a sword and a trowel, emerging from a cloud 2 Esd. cap. 4.WHEN SANABAL Hierusalem distrest, With sharpe assaultes, in NEHEMIAS tyme: To warre, and worke, the Iewes them selues addrest, And did repaire theire walles, with stone, and lime: One hande the sworde, against the foe did shake, The other hande, the trowell vp did take. Ouid. 1. Pont. 4. Nescio qua natale solū dulcedine cunctos Ducit, & immemo∣res non sinit esse sui.Of valiant mindes, loe here, a worthie parte, That quailed not, with ruine of theire wall: But Captaines boulde, did prooue the masons arte, Which doth inferre, this lesson vnto all: That to defende, our countrie deare from harme, For warre, or worke, wee eyther hande should arme.
Murus aeneus, sana conscientia. To MILES HOBART Esquier. woodcut of a man sheltering beneath a laurel tree from Jupiter or Zeus, sitting on an eagle inside a cloud, holding a sceptre in one hand and lightning bolts on the other. another large bird with a laurel wreath around its neck swims in a river in the background Nic. Reusnerus. Missa triumphalem nō tangunt fulmina laurū, Cingunt hac vates tempora lata sacri,BOTHE freshe, and greene, the Laurell standeth sounde, Thoughe lightninges flasshe, and thunderboltes do flie: Where, other trees are blasted to the grounde, Yet, not one leafe of it, is withered drie: Euen so, the man that hathe a conscience cleare, When wicked men, doe quake at euerie blaste, Doth constant stande, and dothe no perrilles feare, When tempestes rage, doe make the worlde agaste: Suche men are like vnto the Laurell tree, The others, like the blasted boughes that die. Hor. 1. Carm. 22.Integer vitae, sceleris{que} purus Non eget Maurî iaculis nec arcu, Nec venenatis grauida sagittis, Fusce pharetra. Siue per Syrtes iter aestuosas Siue facturus per inhospitalem Caucasum, vel qua loca fabulosus Lambit Hydaspes.
Sic discerne. To THO. STVTVILE Esquier. woodcut of grain being separated from chaff in a hanging sieve IN fruictefull feilde amid the goodlie croppe, The hurtfull tares, and dernell ofte doe growe, And many times, doe mounte aboue the toppe Of highest corne: But skilfull man doth knowe, When graine is ripe, with siue to purge the seedes, From chaffe, and duste, and all the other weedes. Ouid. 3. Trist. 4. Ʋiue sine inuidia, mol∣lésque inglorius annos Exige, aemiertias & tibi iunge pares.By which is ment, sith wicked men abounde, That harde it is, the good from bad to trie: The prudent sorte, shoulde haue suche iudgement sounde, That still the good they shoulde from bad descrie: And sifte the good, and to discerne their deedes, And weye the bad, noe better then the weedes.
Interiora vide. To GEORGE BROOKE Esquier. woodcut of a man with an drawn sword pulling back a curtain to see through a window into a house, on the ground next to which are a tied bundle and a well THough outwarde thinges, doe trimme, & braue, appeare, And sightes at firste, doe aunswere thie desire, Yet, inwarde partes, if that they shine not cleare, Suspecte the same, and backe in time retire: For inwardlie, such deadlie foes maie lurke, As when wee trust, maie our destruction worke. Though bewtie rare, bee farre and neare renoum'de, Though Natures giftes, and fortunes doe excell: Yet, if the minde, with heinous crimes abounde, And nothing good with in the same doe dwell: Regarde it not, but shonne the outward showe, Vntill, thou doe the inwarde vertues knowe. Plaut. in Amph.Virtus omnia in se habet, omnia adsunt bona, quem Pene'st virtus,
Fortuna virtutem superans. To FR. W. Esquier. woodcut of armoured Brutus committing suicide by impaling himself on his sword, with his shield on the ground next to him Simile de Aiace se∣ipsum interficiente (super cuius tumu∣lum virtus plorans pro falso iudicio) apparet antè, folio tricesimo. Nam cùm Achillis arma per Agamem nonis iudicium, Vlyssi ad∣iudicabantur, Aiax illius iniuriae impa∣tiens, & postea in∣sanus, seipsum in∣terficiebat, sic in∣quiens vt Ouid. ha∣bet 13. Metamorph. Hectora qui solus, qui ferrum, ignémque, Io∣uémque, Sustinuit toties, vnam non sustinet tram: Inuictúmq. virū vicit dolor, arripit ensem: Et meus hic certè est, an & hunc sibi poscit Ʋlysses? Hoc ait, vtēdum est in me mihi, quiq. cruore Saepè Phrygum maduit, domini nunc caedemae∣debit, Ne quisquam Aiacem possit superare, nisi Aiax, Dixit, & in pectus, &c.WHEN BRVTVS knewe, AVGVSTVS parte preuail'de, And sawe his frendes, lie bleedinge on the grounde, Suche deadlie griefe, his noble harte assail'de, That with his sworde, hee did him selfe confounde: But firste, his frendes perswaded him to flee, Whoe aunswer'd thus, my flighte with handes shalbee. And bending then to blade, his bared breste, Hee did pronounce, theise wordes with courage great: Oh Prowes vaine, I longe did loue thee beste, But nowe, I see, thou doest on fortune waite. Wherefore with paine, I nowe doe prooue it true, That fortunes force, maie valiant hartes subdue.
Fides non apparentium. To BARTHRAM CALTHORPE Esquier. woodcut of two fishermen in a small boat drawing in a net THE fissherman, doth caste his nettes in sea, In hope at lengthe, an happie hale to haue, And is content, longe time to pause, and staie, Thoughe, nothinge elles hee see, besides the waue: Yet, onelie trust for thinges vnseene dothe serue, Which feedes him ofte, till he doth almoste sterue. If fisshermen, haue then suche constant hope, For hidden thinges, and such as doe decaie, Let Christians then, the eies of faithe houlde ope, And thinke not longe, for that which lastes for aie, And on GODS worde, theire hope to anchor faste, Whereof eache iote, shalbee fulfil'de at laste. Ouid. Epist. 18.Non boue mactato coelestia numina gaudent, Sed, quae praestanda est & sine teste, fide.
Ʋirtus vnita, valet. Ornatiss. inuenibus nouem fratribus GEORGII BVRGOINE armigeri F. F. woodcut of water in two states. In one, small and large ships or galleons float in the sea. In the other, a farmer, surrounded by cattle, a tree, a plant, and a sheaf or bundle of arrows, uses a spade or hoe to work land irrigated by a channel flowing from a pipe built into a dam THE surging Sea, doth salte, and sweete remaine, And is preseru'de with working, to and froe: And not corruptes, nor suffreth anie staine, Whiles in his boundes, the same doth ebbe, and flowe: But if it waste, and forth by sluses fall, It soone corruptes, and hath no force at all. The arrowes sharpe, that in one sheafe are bounde, Are harde to breake, while they are ioined sure, But seuer them, then feeble are they founde, So where as loue, and concorde, doth indure: A little force, doth mightilie preuaile, Where Princes powers, with hate and discorde quaile.
Gratiam referendam. woodcut of a stork bringing food (a snake or worm) to three chicks in a nest built on a chimney Aelianus lib. 10. cap. 16.SEE heare the storke prouides with tender care, And bringeth meate, vnto her hatched broode: They like againe, for her they doe prepare, When shee is oulde, and can not get her foode:Idem libro 8. cap. 22. vbi de natura Ciconiae mira fabula. Which teacheth bothe, the parente and the childe, Theire duties heare, which eche to other owe: First, fathers must be prouident, and milde, Vnto theire fruicte, till they of age doe growe: And children, muste with dutie still proceede, To reuerence them, and helpe them if they neede. Paradisus poë∣ticus.Defessum fertur portare Ciconia patrem, Hinc illa pietas sancta notatur aue.
Auaritia. woodcut of crowned Tantalus chest-high in water straining his neck to reach the over-hanging, fruit-laden branch of a tree growing on the bank next to him. In the background, many other figures are also in the water, some with arms outstretched Ouid. Metam. lib. 4.HEARE TANTALVS, as Poëttes doe deuine, This guerdon hathe, for his offence in hell: The pleasante fruite, dothe to his lippe decline, A riuer faire vnto his chinne doth swell: Yet, twixt these two, for foode the wretche dothe sterue, For bothe doe flee, when they his neede shoulde serue. The couetous man, this fable reprehendes, For chaunge his name, and TANTALVS hee is, Hee dothe abounde, yet sterues and nothing spendes, But keepes his goulde, as if it weare not his: With slender fare, he doth his hunger feede, And dare not touche his store, when hee doth neede. Horat. serm. 1. Sat. 1.Tantalus à labris sitiens fugientia captat Flumina, quid rides? mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur, congestis vndique saccis Indormis inhians: & tanquam parcere sacris Congeris &c. —
O vita, misero longa. woodcut of Prometheus chained to a rock while an eagle eats his liver De quo, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 6.TO Cawcasus, behoulde PROMETHEVS chain'de, Whose liuer still, a greedie gripe dothe rente: He neuer dies, and yet is alwaies pain'de, With tortures dire, by which the Poëttes ment, That hee, that still amid misfortunes standes, Is sorrowes slaue, and bounde in lastinge bandes. For, when that griefe doth grate vppon our gall, Or surging seas, of sorrowes moste doe swell, That life is deathe, and is no life at all, The liuer rente, it dothe the conscience tell: Which being launch'de, and prick'd, with inward care, Although wee liue, yet still wee dyinge are.Horat. 1. Epist. 1. —hic murus ahae∣neus esto, Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa. Martial. lib. 1.Qualiter in Scythica religatus rupe Prometheus, Assiduam nimio pectore pauit auem, &c.
Concordia. woodcut of two armed soldiers shaking hands, with tents and cavalry in the background And. Alciat. Foederis haec species: id habet concordia signum, Vt quos iungit amor, iungat & ipsa manus.OF kinges, and Princes greate, lo, Concorde ioynes the handes: And knittes theire subiectes hartes in one, and wealthie makes their Landes. It bloodie broiles dothe hate, and Enuie doune dothe thruste, And makes the Souldiour learne to plowghe, and let his armour ruste. Remedium tempestiuum sit. woodcut of a man with a stick raised to strike a snake or serpent emerging tail-first from a crack in a wall Ouid. 2. Pont. 6. Cùm poteram recto transire Ceraunia velo Vt fera vitarem sa∣xa, monendus eram. Nunc mihi naufragio quid prodest dicere facto Qua mea debuerit currere cymba via?THROVGHE rased wall, a serpente backwarde slydes, And yet, before her poisoned head appeare, The prudent man, for safetie that prouides, Doth strike at firste, in dowte of further feare: So all men shoulde, when they to daunger dreede, With all their force, preuent the same with speede.
Serò sapiunt Phryges. woodcut of a man bent over a river between houses, gripping an eel with fig-leaves held in both hands Tibul. 1.9. Ah miser, & si quis primo periuria caelat, Sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus.THE prouerbe saieth, so longe the potte to water goes, That at the lengthe it broke returnes, which is appli'de to those. That longe with wyles, and shiftes, haue cloaked wicked partes, Whoe haue at lengthe bene paied home, and had their iust desertes. Euen as the slymie eele, that ofte did slippe awaie, Yet, with figge leaues at lengthe was catch'de, & made the fisshers praie. Dum viuo, prosum. woodcut of a man gathering fallen branches next to an ancient tree AN aged tree, whose sappe is almoste spente, Yet yeeldes her boughes, to warme vs in the coulde: And while it growes, her offalles still be lente, But being falne,  it turneth into moulde, And doth no good: soe ere to graue wee fall, Wee maie do good, but after none at all.Da tua, dum tua sunt, post mortem tunc tua non sunt.
Noli altum sapere. woodcut of a man aiming a bow and arrow at a flying bird while a snake on the ground prepares to bite his leg WITH, lime, and net, the Mauis, and the larke, The fowler loe, deceaued by his arte: But whilste alofte, he leuel'd at his marke, And did to highe exalte, his hawghtie harte, An adder fell, that in the grasse did lurke, With poisoned stinge, did his destruction worke. Claud. 1. Ruf. —iam non ad culmina rerum, Iniustos creuisse que∣ror: tollantur in altū Vt lapsu maiore ruant, &c.Let mortall men, that are but earthe, and duste, Not looke to highe, with puffe of worldlie pride: But sometime, viewe the place wheretoo they muste, And not delighte, the poorest to deride: Leste when theire mindes, do mounte vnto the skies, Their fall is wrought, by thinges they doe dispise. Cato. Mitte arcana dei Ca∣lúmque inquirere quid sit.Some others are, that fitlie this applie, To those, whoe doe Astronomie professe: Whoe leaue the earthe, and studie on the skie, As if they coulde, all worldlie thinges expresse:& alius sic. Si Christum bene scis, satis est si caetera nescis. Yet, when to knowe the starres they take in hande, Of daungers neare, they doe not vnderstande.
Saepius in auro bibitur venenum. woodcut of the courtesan Lais of Corinth, richly-dressed in renaissance style, outside with two dogs nearby De Laide Aul. Gel. lib 1. cap. 8.HEARE LAIS fine, doth braue it on the stage, With muskecattes sweete, and all shee coulde desire: Her beauties beames, did make the youthe to rage, And inwardlie Corinthus set on fire:Propertius Eleg. 2. Non ita complebant Ephyraeae Laides ades, Ad cuius iacuit Grae∣na tota fores. Bothe Princes, Peeres, with learned men, and graue, With humble sute, did LAIS fauour craue. Horat. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 18. Non cuiuis homini con∣tingit adire Corin∣thum.Not euerie one, mighte to Corinthus goe, The meaninge was, not all mighte LAIS loue: The manchet fine, on highe estates bestowe, The courser cheate, the baser sorte must prooue: Faire HELEN leaue for MENELAVS grace, And CORIDON, let MABLIE still imbrace. Claud. 2. de volupt. Still. sic, Blanda quidem vultu, sed qua non tetrior vlla, Interius fucata genus, & amicta dolosit Illecebris, &c.And thoughe, the poore maie not presume alofte, It is no cause, they therefore shoulde dispaire: For with his choise, doth IRVS ioye as ofte, As dothe the Prince, that hathe a VENVS faire: No highe estate, can giue a quiet life, But GOD it is, that blesseth man, and wife. Then make thy choise, amongste thy equalles still, If thou mislike DIANAS steppes to trace: Thoughe PARIS, had his HELEN at his will, Thinke howe his facte, was ILIONS foule deface. And hee, that moste the house of LAIS hauntes, The more he lookes, the more her face enchauntes.
Praepostera fides. woodcut of a man and woman kissing beside a mill ANELLVS, sendes his corne vnto the mill, Which beinge grounde, he tri'de, it by the waighte: And finding not the measure, to his will, Hee studied longe, to learne, the millers sleighte: For noe complaintes, coulde make him leaue to steale, Or fill the sacke, with fustie mixed meale. Wherefore, to mill he sente his dearest wife, That nighte, and daie, shee mighte the grindinge viewe: Where shee, (kinde harte,) to ende al former strife, Did dubbe her Spouse, one of VVLCANVS crewe: Oh greedie foole Anellus, of thy graine, And of thy wife, too prodigall, and plaine.
Fatuis leuia commitito. woodcut of a man, flanked by a naked child on a hobby-horse and a fool in motley, bowing before a king Com. Gall. Diuersos diuersa iu∣uant: nō omnibus annio Omnia conueniunt, &c.THE little childe, is pleas'de with cockhorse gaie, Althoughe he aske a courser of the beste: The ideot likes, with bables for to plaie, And is disgrac'de, when he is brauelie dreste: A motley coate, a cockescombe, or a bell, Hee better likes, then Iewelles that excell. So fondelinges vaine, that doe for honor sue, And seeke for roomes, that worthie men deserue: The prudent Prince, dothe giue hem ofte their due, Whiche is faire wordes, that right their humors serue: For infantes hande, the rasor is vnfitte, And fooles vnmeete, in wisedomes seate to sitte.
Homines voluptatibus transformantur. woodcut of Circe holding a stick, an ass, a goat, a hog or pig and a dog Virgil. Aeneid. 7. Ouid. Metam. lib. 14.SEE here VLISSES men, transformed straunge to heare: Some had the shape of Goates, and Hogges, some Apes, and Asses weare. Who, when they might haue had their former shape againe, They did refuse, and rather wish'd, still brutishe to remaine. Which showes those foolishe sorte, whome wicked loue dothe thrall, Like brutishe beastes do passe theire time, and haue no sence at all. And thoughe that wisedome woulde, they shoulde againe retire, Yet, they had rather CIRCES serue, and burne in theire desire. Then, loue the onelie crosse, that clogges the worlde with care, Oh stoppe your eares, and shutte your eies, of CIRCES cuppes beware. Horat. 1. Epist. 2.Sirenum voces, & circes pocula nosti: Quae si cum sociis stultus, cupidus{que} bibisset, Sub domina meretrice fuisset turpis, & excors, Vixisset canis immundus, vel amica luto sus.
Iudicium Paridis. woodcut of Paris of Troy, seated, receiving a group of female figures including the goddesses Juno or Hera, Minerva or Pallas Athena, and Venus or Aphrodite TO PARIS, here the Goddesses doe pleade: With kingdomes large, did IVNO make her sute, And PALLAS nexte, with wisedome him assaide, But VENVS faire, did winne the goulden fruite. No princelie giftes, nor wisedome he did wey, For Bewtie, did comaunde him to obey. The worldlie man, whose sighte is alwaies dimme, Whose fancie fonde eache pleasure doth entice, The shaddowes, are like substance vnto him, And toyes more deare, them thinges of greatest price: But yet the wise this iudgement rashe deride, And sentence giue on prudent PALLAS side. Ouid. Epist. 15. De iudicio Pa∣ridis.Regna Iouis coniux; virtutem filia iactat. Et postea ibidem. Dulcè Venus risit, Nec te Pari munera tangunt, Vtraque suspensi plena timoris, ait.
Ridicula ambitio. woodcut of Hanno standing at a door, watching birds fly out a window Aelian. de var. Histor. lib. 14. cap. 30.HEARE HANNO standes, and lookes into the skye, And feedes him selfe, with hope of future praise: Vnto his birdes, he dothe his eare applie, And trustes in tyme, that they his name should raise: For they weare taughte, before they flewe abrode, Longe tyme to saie, that HANNO was a God. But, when the birdes from bondage weare releast, And in the woodes, with other birdes weare ioin'de, Then HANNOS name, theire woonted lesson ceaste, For eache did singe, accordinge to his kinde: Then flee this faulte, Ambition workes our shame, And vertue loue, which dothe extoll our name.
Desidiam abiiciendam. woodcut of two figures sitting under a tree VSE labour still, and leaue thie slouthfull seate, Flee Idlenesse, which beggers state dothe giue: With sweate of browe, see that thou get thy meate, If thou be borne, with labouring hande to liue: And get, to eate. and eate, to liue with praise: Liue not to eate, to liue with wanton ease. By DRACOES lawes, the idle men shoulde die, Sabel. Paul. Thes. 2. ca. 3 Neque gratis pa∣nem manducaui∣mus ab aliquo, sed in labore, & in fatigatione, nocte, & die ope∣rantes &c. & postea: Quoniam si quis non vult operari, nec manducet.The Florentines, made banishement theire paine: In Corinthe, those that idlie they did see, Weare warn'de at firste, the seconde time were slaine: And eke Sainct Paule, the slothfull thus doth threate, Whoe laboreth not, denie him for to eate. Ouid. 1. Remed. Amoris.Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter: In promptu caussa est, desidiosus erat.
Mortui diuitiae. Ad Reuerendum virum Dn. ALEXANDRVM NOWELL Paulinae ecclesiae Londini Decanum, doctrina & exemplo clarum. woodcut of the shirt of Saladin displayed on a spear Horat. 1. Carm. 4. Palleda mors aequo pul∣sat pede pauperum ta∣bernas, Regúmq. turres, &c.THE Princes greate, and Monarches of the earthe, Whoe, while they liu'de, the worlde might not suffice: Yet can they claime, by greatnesse of their birthe, To beare from hence, when nature life denies, Noe more then they, who for releife did pyne, Which is but this, a shrouding sheete of twyne. Propertius 2. 28. Haud vllas portabis opes Acherontis ad vndas: Nudus ab inferna stulte, vehere rate. Victor cum victis pari∣ter-miscebitur vmbris, Consule cum Mario capte lugurtha sedes.Thoughe fewe there bee, while they doe flourishe heere, That doe regarde the place whereto the muste: Yet, thoughe theire pride like Lucifers appeere, They shalbee sure at lengthe to turne to duste: The Prince, the Poore, the Prisoner, and the slaue, They all at lengthe, are summon'de to their graue.
But, hee that printes this deepelie in his minde, Althoughe he set in mightie CAESARS chaire, Within this life, shall contentation finde, When carelesse men, ofte die in great dispaire: Then, let them blusshe that woulde be Christians thought, And faile hereof, Sith Turkes the same haue taught. As SALADINE, that was the Souldaine greate Of Babilon, when deathe did him arreste, His subiectes charg'd, when he shoulde leaue his seate, And life resigne, to tyme, and natures heste: They should prepare, his shyrte vppon a speare, And all about forthwith the same shoulde beare. Vrbs Palaestinae.Throughe ASCHALON, the place where he deceaste, With trumpet Sounde, and Heralte to declare, Theise wordes alowde: The Kinge of all the Easte Great SALADINE, behoulde is stripped bare: Of kingdomes large, and lyes in house of claie, And this is all, he bare with him awaie. Quod in te est, prome. Ad eundem. woodcut of a bird or pelican pecking it's breast to feed the chicks below it in the nest Parad. Poët. Cor Pharius rostro figit pelecanus acuto, Et se pro natis sic ne∣cat ipse suis.THE Pellican, for to reuiue her younge, Doth peirce her brest, and geue them of her bloode: Then searche your breste, and as yow haue with tonge, With penne proceede to doe our countrie good: Your zeale is great, your learning is profounde, Then helpe our wantes, with that you doe abounde.
De paruis, grandis aceruus erit. To my brother M. BR. WHITNEY. woodcut of a bushel of grain, corn or wheat, surrounded by individual ears Ouid. 1. Remed. Amoris. Flumina magna vides paruis de fontibus orta: Plurima collectis multiplicantur aquis. Vt huic vacuo spacio aliquid ad∣iiciam, non facilè occurrit (mi fra∣ter) quod & tibi (iam patrifami∣lias) & huic Sym∣bolo magis con∣ueniat, quàm il∣lud Horatianum ad Iccium.ALTHOVGHE thy store bee small, for to beginne, Yet guide it well, and soone it is increaste, For mightie men, in time theire wealthe did winne, Whoe had at firste, as little as the leste: Where GOD dothe blesse, in time aboundance springes, And heapes are made, of manie little thinges. 1. Epist. 12.Fructibus Agrippae Siculis, quos colligis Icci, Si rectè frueris: non est vt copia maior Ab Ioue donari possit tibi, tolle querelas. Pauper enim non est, cui rerum suppetit vsus.
Ʋita irrequieta. Ad Doctiss. virum W. M. fortunae telo ictum. woodcut of a man carrying a stick and bundle looking back over his shoulder across a river toward a village with a mill and church, while a footless bird with long feathers flies above Iuuen. Sat. 10. Pauca licet portes ar∣genti vascula puri, Nocte iter ingressus gla∣dium, contúmque ti∣mebis, Et motae ad lunam tre∣pidabis arundinis vmbram. Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.THE Apodes, which doe in INDIA breede, Still flie about, and seldome take their ease: They haue no feete, to reste them as wee reade, But with theire flighte, do compasse lande, and seas: Vnto this broode, those that about doe rome, Wee maie compare: that haue no house, nor home. Bothe houses faire, and citties great, they veiwe, But Riuers swifte, theire passage still do let, They ofte looke backe, and doe theire fortune rue, Since that therin, they haue no seate to set: Thus, passe they throughe theire longe vnquiet life, Till deathe dothe come, the ende of worldlie strife. Ouid. 2. Fast.Omne solum forti patria est, vt piscibus aequor, Vt volucri vacuo quicquid in orbe patet.
In eum qui truculentia suorum perierit. Ad affinem suum, R. E. medicum insignem. woodcut of a beached dolphin or sea-monster, with a ship in the sea in the background Aelian. De Ani∣malibus lib. 9. cap. 7. & lib. 12. cap. 12.THE Dolphin swifte, vpon the shore is throwne, Thoughe he was bred, and fostered, in the flood: If NEPTVNE shewe such wronge, vnto his owne, Then, howe maie man in shippes haue hope of good:Alciatus. Nam si nec propriis Ne∣ptunus parcit alumnis, Quis tutos homines natubus esse putat? The raging Sea, our countrie doth declare; The Dolphin fishe, those that exiled are. And thoughe this fishe, was mightie in the sea, Without regarde, yet was hee caste on shore: So famous men, that longe did beare the swaie,De his, Petrarcha lib. vtriusq. for∣tunae in titulo de morientibus ex∣tra patriam, lu∣culenter scribit. Haue bene exil'd, and liu'd in habit pore: This, SOCRATES: and MARCVS TVLLIVS tri'de: DEMOSTHENES, and thousandes moe beside. Ausonius Epigr. 135.Fortuna nunquam sistit in eodem statu, Semper mouetur, variat, & mutat vices, Et summa in imum vertit, ac versa erigit.
Tecum habita. Ad Agnatum suum R. W. Coolensem. woodcut of Jupiter or Zeus enthroned, surrounded by various animals: a stag, a horse, an ox, an ass, an eagle or bird, a lion and a snail A Solemne feaste great IVPITER did make, And warn'd all beastes, and creatures to be there: The presse was muche, eache one his place did take: At lengthe, when all weare in there cheifest cheare: At seconde course, the snaile crepte slowlie in, Whome IOVE did blame, cause hee so slacke had bin. Who aunswered thus, oh kinge behoulde the cause? I beare my house, wherefore my pace is slowe: Which warneth all, in feasting for to pause, And to the same, with pace of snaile to goe: And further telles, no places maie compare, Vnto our homes, where wee commaunders are. Admonet hoc, sectanda gradu conuiuia tardo, Atque domo propria dulcius esse nihil.
Industria naturam corrigit. Ad D. H. Wh. patruelis mei F. woodcut of Mercury or Hermes repairing a lute, and of a robed male figure playing a lute while a female figure dances THE Lute, whose sounde doth most delighte the eare, Was caste aside, and lack'de bothe stringes, and frettes: Whereby, no worthe within it did appeare, MERCVRIVS came, and it in order settes: Which being tun'de, suche Harmonie did lende, That Poëttes write, the trees theire toppes did bende. Euen so, the man on whome dothe Nature froune, Whereby, he liues dispis'd of euerie wighte, Industrie yet, maie bringe him to renoume, And diligence, maie make the crooked righte: Then haue no doubt, for arte maie nature helpe. Thinke howe the beare doth forme her vglye whelpe. Ouid Epist. 12.Si mihi difficilis formam natura negauit; Ingenio formae damna rependo meae.
Infortunia nostra, alienis collata, leuiora. Ad eundem. woodcut of an ass and ape and a mole facing each other Ouid. 9 Metam. Quódque ego, vult ge∣nitor, vult ipsa socér∣que, futurus: At non vult natura, potentior omnibus istu.THE Asse, and Ape complaine, and thought theire fortunes bad: The Asse, for wante of hornes. the Ape, bycause no taile he had. The Mole, then answere made: I haue no eyes to see, Then wherefore can you nature blame, if that you looke on mee. Which biddes vs bee contente, with lot that God doth sende, For if wee others wantes do wey, our happes wee maie commende. Vxoriae virtutes. To my Sister, M. D. COLLEY. woodcut of a woman covering her mouth with her left hand and holding keys in her right hand, with a tortoise at her feet Plautus in Amph. Non ego illam mihi dotem duco esse, quae dos dicitur, Sed pudicitiam & pu∣dorem, & sedatum Cupidinem, Deûm metum, paren∣tum amorem, & co∣gnatum concordiam.THIS representes the vertues of a wife, Her finger, staies her tonge to runne at large. The modest lookes, doe shewe her honest life. The keys, declare shee hathe a care, and chardge, Of husbandes goodes: let him goe where he please. The Tortoyse warnes, at home to spend her daies.
Inuidiae descriptio. Ad Ra. W. woodcut of an old woman, half-naked, with a snake or viper in her mouth, a heart in her right hand, and a walking stick or staff in her left hand Inuidiam Ouid. describit 2. Me∣tamorph.VVHAT hideous hagge with visage sterne appeares? Whose feeble limmes, can scarce the bodie staie: This, Enuie is: leane, pale, and full of yeares, Who with the blisse of other pines awaie. And what declares, her eating vipers broode? That poysoned thoughtes, bee euermore her foode. Lucret. 3. Macerat Inuidia ante oculos illū esse potētem, Illum adspectari, claro qui incedit honore: Ipsi se in tenebris volui, coenóque queruntur.What meanes her eies? so bleared, sore, and redd: Her mourninge still, to see an others gaine. And what is mente by snakes vpon her head? The fruite that springes, of such a venomed braine. But whie, her harte shee rentes within her brest? It shewes her selfe, doth worke her owne vnrest. Whie lookes shee wronge? bicause shee woulde not see, An happie wight, which is to her a hell: What other partes within this furie bee? Her harte, with gall: her tonge, with stinges doth swell. And laste of all, her staffe with prickes aboundes: Which showes her wordes, wherewith the good shee woundes. Ouid. lib. 1. De Arte Amandi.Fertilior seges est alienis semper in agris, Vicinum{que} pecus grandius vher habet.
De Inuido & Auaro, iocosum. woodcut of two men standing next o a chest or coffer, with three eyes on the ground between them Auth. de Gueuara in Epistolis suis.THE Goddes agreed, two men their wishe should haue: And did decree, who firste demaunde did make, Shoulde haue his wishe: and he that last did craue, The others gifte shoulde double to him take. The Couetous wretche, and the Enuious man: Theise weare the two, that of this case did scanne. They longe did striue, who shoulde the firste demaunde: The couetous man refus'de, bicause his mate, Shoulde haue his gifte then doubled out of hande: The thought whereof, vppon his harte did grate Wherefore the Goddes, did plague him for his sinne, And did commaunde, th'Enuious man beginne. Who did not craue, what MIDAS cheife did choose, Because his frende, the fruite thereof should finde: But onelie wish'de, that he one eie might loose, Vnto the ende, to haue the other blinde: Which beinge say'd, he did his wishe obtaine: So but one eye, was lefte vnto them twaine. See heare how vile, theise caytiffes doe appeare, To GOD, and man: but chieflie (as wee see) The Couetous man, who hurteth farre, and neare. Where spytefull men, theire owne tormentors bee. But bothe be bad, and he that is the beste, GOD keepe him thence, where honest men doe reste.
Ad ornatiss. virum Dn. PETRVM WITHIPOLE. Petre, imitare petram. woodcut of a house or citadel built into a rock caught between four winds emerging from the mouths of four boys' heads in the clouds Hadrianus Iu∣nius Harlemen∣sis Medicus cla∣riss. inter Emble∣mata sua, filio suo Petro hoc in∣scripsit.WHAT IVNIVS sent his sonne, lo, here I send to thee? Bycause his name, and Nature both, with thyne doe well agree. Dispise all pleasures vayne, hould vertue by the hand, And as in rage of wyndes, and Seas, the Rocke doth firmely stande. So stand thou allwayes sure, that thou maist liue with fame, Remembring how the Latins sounde a Rocke so like thy name. Ouid. Epist. 15.Permanet in voto mens mea firma suo.
Dum potes, viue. Ad veterem suum amicum Dn. GEORGIVM SALMON, qui maximo vitae periculo Roma euasit. woodcut of a man with a net kneeling by the sea reaching for a cuttlefish. In the background are ships, buildings, cattle and sheep THE Cuttle fishe, that likes the muddie crickes, To which, the sea dothe flowe at euerie tide: For to escape the fishers ginnes, and trickes, Dame nature did this straunge deuise prouide: That when he seeth, his foe to lie in wayte, Hee muddes the streame, and safelie scapes deceyte. Ouid. 3. Art. Amand. Nec quae praeteriit, cur∣su reuocabitur vnda: Nec quae praeteriit hora redire potest. Vtendum est aetate, cito pede labitur aetas, Nec bona tam sequi∣tur, quàm bona prima fuit.Then man: in whome doth sacred reason reste, All waies, and meanes, shoulde vse to saue his life: Not wilfullie, the same for to detest, Nor rashlie runne, when tyrauntes rage with strife: But constant stande, abyding sweete or sower, Vntill the Lorde appoynte an happie hower. Paradisus poët. de Sepia.Obscuri latices me condunt: cernere tectam Atramenta vetant: abdita, tuta nato.
Stultitia sua seipsum saginari. Ad H. S. communem viduarum procum. woodcut of a fox leaping to reach grapes on a vine-frame THE FOXE, that longe for grapes did leape in vayne, With wearie limmes, at lengthe did sad departe: And to him selfe quoth hee, I doe disdayne These grapes I see, bicause their taste is tarte: So thou, that hunt'st for that thou longe hast mist, Still makes thy boast, thou maist if that thou list. Ʋirescit vulnere virtus. woodcut of a man treading down docks or docken leaves THE dockes (thoughe troden) growe, as it is dailie seene: So vertue, thoughe it longe bee hid, with woundinge waxeth greene.
Impar coniugium. To Aphilus. woodcut of a living person being tied to a dead person by two men, while king Mezentius looks on from his throne, with crown and sceptre Virg. 8. Aeneid. Mortua quinetiā iun∣gebat corpora viuis, Cemponens manibusque manus atque oribus ora.THE tyraunt vile MEZENTIVS, put in vre, Amongst the plagues, wherewith hee murthered men: To binde the quicke, and dead, togeather sure, And then, to throwe them both into a denne. Whereas the quicke, should still the dead imbrace, Vntill with pine, hee turn'd into that case. Those wedding webbes, which some doe weaue with ruthe, As when the one, with straunge disease doth pine: Or when as age, bee coupled vnto youthe, And those that hate, inforced are to ioyne, This representes: and doth those parentes showe, Are tyrauntes meere, who ioyne their children soe. Yet manie are, who not the cause regarde, The birthe, the yeares, nor vertues of the minde: For goulde is first, with greedie men prefer'de, And loue is laste, and likinge set behinde: But parentes harde, that matches make for goodes: Can not be free, from guilte of childrens bloodes. Ouid. Epist. 9.Quàm malè inaequales veniunt ad aratra iuuenci, Tam premitur magno coniuge nupta minor.
Frontis nulla fides. Ad Lectiss. iuuenes Dn. Edm. Freake, & Dn. Anth. Alcock. woodcut of a man seated drawing the outline of a figure on a tablet or canvas supported by a standing man. In the background another figure is chased away by a dog, with an ox nearby THE lions roare: the Bores theire tuskes do whet. The Griphins graspe theire tallantes in theire ire: The dogges do barke; the bulles, with hornes doe thret. The Serpentes hisse, with eyes as redde as fire. But man is made, of suche a seemelie shape, That frende, or foe, is not discern'd by face: Then harde it is the wickeds wiles to scape, Since that the bad, doe maske with honest grace. And Hypocrites, haue Godlie wordes at will. And rauening wolues, in skinnes of lambes doe lurke; And CAIN doth seeke, his brother for to kill, And sainctes in shewe, with IVDAS hartes doe worke. Nowe, since the good no cognizance doe beare, To teache vs, whome wee chieflie should imbrace: But that the same the wicked sorte doe weare, And shewe them selues, like them in euerie case.De vera Amicitia Pontius Paulinus, Auson. scribit Epist. 2 Hoc nostra ceruice tu∣gum non saeua resoluit A table lo, herein to you I sende, Whereby you might remember still to write,
His wordes, and deedes, that beares the face of frende, Before you choose, suche one for your delite.Fabula, non terris ab∣sentia longa diremit, Nec perimet; toto licet abstrahar orbe, vel auo: Nunquam animo di∣uisus agam; prius ipsa recedet Corpore vita meo, quā vester pectore vultus. And if at lengthe, yow trye him by his tuche, And finde him hault, whereby you stand in dout, No harte, nor hand, see that you ioyne with suche But at the first, bee bould to rase him out. Yet if by proofe, my wordes, and deedes agree, Then let mee still within your tables bee.Horat. 1. Serm. 3. At pater vt gnati, sic nos debemus amici, Si quod sit vitium non fastidire; &c. Animi scrinium seruitus. Ad ornatum virum, D. ELLISEVM GRYPHITH. woodcut of a bird or nightingale in a cage set on the ground, with ships at sea in the background THE Prouerbe saithe, the bounde muste still obey, And bondage bringes, the freest man in awe: Whoe serues must please, and heare what other saye, And learne to keepeSilentij deus apud Aegyptos. HARPOCRATES his lawe: Then bondage is the Prison of the minde: And makes them mute, where wisedome is by kinde. The Nightingall, that chaunteth all the springe, Whose warblinge notes, throughout the wooddes are harde, Beinge kepte in cage, she ceaseth for to singe, And mournes, bicause her libertie is barde: Oh bondage vile, the worthie mans deface, Bee farre from those, that learning doe imbrace.
In sortis suae contemptores. woodcut of a flambard or flame-bladed sword suspended from a cloud Cicero Tusc. 5. & Valer. Max. & Si∣don. Apollinaris lib. 2. epist. 13. Horat. Serm. 1. Satyra 1. Qui fit Moecenas, vt nemo, quam sibi sortē Seu ratio dederit, seu fors obiecerit, illa Contentus viuat: laudet diuersa sequentes? O fortunati mercato∣res, grauis annis Miles ait, &c.HERE DAMOCLES, desirous for to taste, The princelie fare, of DIONYSIVS kinge, In royall seate, was at the table plaste, Where pages braue, all daintie cates did bringe: His bed of goulde, with curious coueringes spred, And cubbourdes ritche, with plate about his bed. Horat. Carm. 3. Ode 1. Districtus ensis cui su∣per impta Ceruice pendet, non Siculae dapes Dulcem elaborabunt saporem: Non auium, citharae∣que cantus Somnum reducent, &c.No where hee stay'de, but musique sweete did sounde; No where hee went, but hee did odors smell; Nowe in his pompe, when all thinges did abounde, Being ask'd, if that this life did please him well: Hee aunswere made, it was the heauen alone, And that to it, all other liues weare none. Seneca Oed. Act. 3. Qui sceptra duro saeuus imperio reget, Timet timentes: metus in auctorem redit.Then, did the king comaunde a naked sworde, Vnto the roofe, shoulde with a heare bee knit: That right shoulde hange, when hee was plac'd at bourde, Aboue his head, where he did vse to sit: Which when hee sawe, as one distracte with care, Hee had no ioye in mirthe, nor daintie fare.
But did beseech, the Tyraunt for to giue, His former state, and take his pompe againe:Claud. 4. honor. Qui terret, plus iste ti∣met: sors ista tyrannis Conuenit, inuideant cla∣ris fortésque trucident, Munits gladiis viuant, septique venenis Ancipites habeant ar∣tes, trepidiq. minentur. By which, wee learne, that those who meanely liue, Haue ofte more ioye, them those who rule and raigne: But cheifelye, if like him they doe appeare, Who night, and daye, of subiectes stoode in feare.Periander apud Au∣sonium. Multis terribilis caueto multos.Aelianus de tyran∣nis lib. 10. cap. 5. & lib. 6. cap. 13. De Var. Hist. Interdum requiéscendum. Ad Dn. PETRVM COLVIVM Brugensem. woodcut of two female figures, both with helmets, spears and shield. One sits by a barren tree and field, the other stands by a fruitful tree and field CONTINVAL toile, and labour, is not beste: But sometimes cease, and rest thy wearie bones, The daie to worke, the nighte was made to reste, And studentes must haue pastimes for the nones: Sometime the Lute, the Chesse, or Bowe by fittes, For ouermuch, dothe dull the finest wittes. For lacke of reste, the feilde dothe barren growe, The winter coulde, not all the yeare doth raigne: And dailie bent, doth weake the strongest bowe: Yea our delightes still vs'd, wee doe disdaine. Then rest by fittes, amongste your great affaires, But not too muche, leste sloathe dothe set her snares. Lucanus ad Pi∣sonem.—Nec enim facundia semper Adducta cùm fronte placet: nec semper in armis Bellica turba manet: nec tota classicus horror Nocte dièque gemit: nec semper Cnossius arcu Destinat, exempto sed laxat cornua neruo. Et galea miles caput, & latus ense resoluit.
THE SECOND PARTE OF EMBLEMES, AND OTHER DEVISES, gathered, Englished, and moralized, And diuerse newlie deuised, by Geffrey Whitney. depiction of the chained bear and ragged staff emblem of the Dudley family, encircled by the order of the garter HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
IN PRAISE, OF THE TWO NOBLE EARLES, WARWICKE, AND LEYCESTER. TWO Beares there are, the greater, and the lesse, Well knowne to those that trauaile farre, and neare: Without whose sighte, the shipman sailes by gesse, If that the Sonne, or Moone, doe not appeare. They both doe showe, to th'Equinoctiall line, And one, vnto th' ANTIPODES doth shine.Pes, vrsae maio∣ris ad Antipodes lucet. These, haue their lighte from PHOEBVS goulden raies, And all the worlde, by them receyueth good: Without whose helpe, no man mighte passe the seas, But euer stande in daunger of the flood; Oh blessed lightes, the worke of heauenly hande, You, millions saue from ruthe of rocke, and sande. Two noble peeres, who both doe giue the beare, Two famous Earles, whose praises pierce the skye: Who both are plac'd in honours sacred cheare, Whose worthie fame shall liue, and neuer dye: In Englishe courte doe spende their blessed daies: Of publique weale, two greate, and mightie staies. And as those starres by PHOEBVS lighte are seene, So, both these Earles haue honour, mighte, and power: From PHOEBE brighte, our moste renowmed Queene, Whose fame, no time, nor enuie can deuower: And vnder her, they showe to others lighte, And doe reioyce tenne thousand with their sighte. But, since that all that haue bin borne, haue ende, And nothinge can with natures lawes dispence: Vowchsafe oh Lorde, longe time their liues to lende, Before thou call these noble persons hence: Whose fame, while that the Beares in skie shall showe, Within this lande, all future times shall knowe.
In praise of the Righte Honorable my good Lorde, and Maister, the Earle of LEYCESTER. HEE that desires to passe the surging Seas, Bycause they are so wonderfull to see, And without skill, doth venture wheare hee please, While that the waues both caulme, and quiet bee, We are better farre, to keepe him on the lande, Then for to take such enterprise in hande. For, if hee lacke his compasse, and his carde, And arte therfore, to shape his course arighte: Or pylottes good, that daungers may regarde, When surge doth swell, and windes doe showe their mighte, Doth perrill life, throughe wanton wreckles will, And doth to late lamente his lacke of skill. So, hee that shoulde with will, bee stirr'd to wryte, Your noble actes, your giftes and vertues rare: If PALLAS ayde hee lacke, for to indite, Hee should but haste his follie to declare. And wronge your righte, deseruinge VERGILS penne; And HOMERS skill, if they weare here agayne. Then, best for such to take a longer pause, Then to attempte a thinge so farre vnfitte: For, they may knowe to write of such a cause, Beseemeth best, the fine, and rarest witte. Yet those that woulde, I wishe their learninge sutche, That as they shoulde, they mighte your vertues tutche. An other of the same. SINCE fame is wighte of winge, and throughe eche clymate flies, And woorthy actes of noble peeres, doth raise vnto the skies. And since shee hathe extoll'd your praises longe agoe, That other countries farre, and neare, your noble name doe knowe. Althoughe I houlde my peace, throughe wante of learned skill, Yet shall your passinge fame bee knowne, and bee renowmed still. And those that haue desire, vppon your praise to looke, May finde it truly pen'd by fame, within her goulden booke. Where, on the formost fronte of honours hautie stage, Shee placeth you, in equall roome, with anie of your age. Wherfore to fame I yeeld, and cease what I begonne: Bicause, it is in vaine, to set a candell in the Sonne.
Respice, & prospice. woodcut of Janus, with two faces, holding a mirror in his left hand and a sceptre in his right hand THE former parte, nowe paste, of this my booke, The seconde parte in order doth insue: Which, I beginne with IANVS double looke, That as hee sees, the yeares both oulde, and newe, So, with regarde, I may these partes behoulde, Perusinge ofte, the newe, and eeke the oulde. And if, that faulte within vs doe appeare, Within the yeare, that is alreadie donne, As IANVS biddes vs alter with the yeare, And make amendes, within the yeare begonne, Euen so, my selfe suruayghinge what is past; With greater heede, may take in hande the laste. Quid per gemi∣num Ianum si∣gnificatur. Plin. Natur. Hist. lib. 34. cap. 7.This Image had his rites, and temple faire, And call'd the GOD of warre, and peace, bicause In warres, hee warn'de of peace not to dispaire: And warn'de in peace, to practise martiall lawes: And furthermore, his lookes did teache this somme; To beare in minde, time past, and time to comme.
To the honorable Sir PHILIPPE SIDNEY Knight, Gouuernour of the Garrison, and towne of Vlissinge. SINCE best deserte, for valour of the minde, And prowes great, the Romanes did deserue; And sithe, the worlde might not their matches finde, In former times, as aucthors yet reserue: A fewe of them I meane for to recite, That valiaunt mindes maye haue therein delighte. And but to tutche the naked names of some, As Romulus, that first the wall did laye:Romulus. And so, from thence to nearer times to come, To Curtius boulde, that did the gulfe assaye:Marcus Curtius. Or Cocles eeke, who did his foes withstande,Horatius Cocles. Till bridge was broke, and armed swamme to lande. Then Posthumus, I might with these repeate,Aulus Posthumus That did repulse the Latines, from the waules. And Manlius, a man of courage greate,Manlius Capito∣linus. Who did defende the Capitoll from Gaules: And Fabius name, of whome this dothe remaine,Fabij. Three hundreth sixe, weare in one battaile slaine. With these, by righte comes Coriolanus in, Martius Coriola∣nus. Whose cruell minde did make his countrie smarte; Till mothers teares, and wiues, did pittie winne: Fabricius then, whome bribes coulde not peruerte. C. Fabricius. De cuius fide, sic Pyr∣rhus apud Eutropium De bello Terentino. Ille est Fabricius qui difficilius ab hone∣state, quàm Sol à cursu suo auerti posset. And Decij eeke; and Iunij voide of dreede:Decij. Iunij. With Curij; and Metelli, doe succeede.Curij. Metelli. Dentatus nexte, that sixe score battailes foughte,Sicinius Dentatus Who, Romanes call'de ACHILLES, for his force: Vnto his graue no wounde behinde hee broughte, But fortie fiue before, did carue his corse.Aul. Gell. lib. 2. cap. 11. & Plin. lib. 7. cap. 28. Torquatus eeke, his foe that ouercame,Manlius Torqua∣tus. And tooke his chaine; whereby he had his name. With Claudius blinde, and Claudius Caudax nam'de,Appius Claudius Caecus. Appius Claudius Caudax. Two brothers boulde, for valour great renoum'de:
Attilius Calati∣nus. And Calatine, that all SICILIA tam'de, And one the Sea, Hamilcar did confounde:Cornel. Nepos. Luctatius eeke, that Carthage fleete subdu'de, Luctatius Catu∣lus. Whereby, for peace they with submission su'de. Fabius Maximus. Marcus MarcellusAnd Fabius greate, and Marc Marcellus boulde, That at the lengthe did SYRACVSA sacke: Marcus Portius Cato.And eeke the actes of Portius wee behoulde, Whose life thoughe longe, yet Rome to soone did lacke: Cn. Duillius. Liuius Salinator.Duillius yet, and Liuius wee doe knowe, Thoughe they weare turn'd to poulder longe agoe. Claudius Nero. Eutop. de secundo Bello Punico.What shoulde I speake of Claudius Neros harte, When HANIBAL, did royall Rome dismaye: And HASDRVBAL did hast to take his parte, But Claudius, lo, did meete him by the waye, And reau'd his life, and put his hoste to flighte, And threwe his head to HANIBAL his sighte. Scipio Africanus. Then Scipio greate, that CARTHAGE waules did race. A noble prince, the seconde vnto none: Flaminius then, and Fuluius haue their place;Quintius Flami∣nius. Fuluius Nobilior. Aemilius actes, and Gracchus, yet are knowne:Paulus. Aemilius. Sempronius Grac∣chus. With Sylla fierce, and Caius Marius stoute,Cornelius Sylla. Caius Marius pa∣ter. Whose ciuill warres, made Rome tenne yeares in doubte.Appianus De Bello Ciuil. lib. 1. Sertorius, nexte, and eeke Gabinius name,Quintus Sertorius Aulus Gabinius. With Crassus, and Lucullus, highe renoum'de: Licinius Crassus. Lucius Lucullus. And Caesar great, that prince of endelesse fame,Iulius Caesar. Whose actes, all landes, while worlde dothe laste, shall sounde. Augustus great, that happie most did raigne,Octauius Augu∣stus. The scourge to them, that had his vnkle slaine. M. Antonius.Anthonius then, that fortune longe did frende, Yet at the lengthe, the most vnhappie man: Lepidus. And Lepidus, forsaken in the ende, With Brutus boulde, and Cassius, pale and wan:M. Brutus. Cassius. With manie more, whome aucthors doe reporte, Whereof, ensue some tutch'd in larger sorte.
Mutius Scaeuola. Pietas in patriam. woodcut of a hand holding a short sword upright immediately above a smoking fire THIS hande, and sworde, within the furious flame,Cornelius Ne∣pos. Doth shewe his harte, that sought PORSENNAS ende: Whose countries good, and eeke perpetuall fame, Before his life did SCAEVOLA commende: No paine, had power his courage highe to quaile, But bouldlie spake, when fire did him assaile. Which sighte, abash'd the lookers on, but moste Amaz'de the kinge; who pardoned straighte the knight: And ceas'd the siege, and did remooue his hoste, When that hee sawe one man so muche of mighte: Oh noble minde, althoughe thy daies bee paste; Thy fame doth liue, and eeke, for aye shall laste.
Habet & bellum suas leges. woodcut of eight boys with whips beating an old man between a camp with tents and a horseman and a walled town Furius Camillus.CAMILLVS then, that did repulse the Gaules, And vnto Rome her former state did giue: When that her foes made spoile within her waules, Lo here, amongst his actes that still shall liue. I made my choice, of this example rare, That shall for aye his noble minde declare.Verba Camilli apud Plutarchum, Xylandro interprete. Grauis est inquit res bellum, vt quae mul∣tis iniustis multis∣q́ue violentis factis conficiatur. & ta∣men apud bonos vi∣ros, habentur etiam belli quaedam leges, neque tantopere victoria expetenda est, vnt non fugienda sint officia quae per scelus ac malitiam offerūtur, magnum enim imperatorem suae vittutis, nō alie∣nae improbitatis fi∣ducia, conuenit bel∣lum gerere. Wherefore, in briefe then this his woorthie parte, What time he did besiege FALERIA stronge: A scoolemaster, that bare a IVDAS harte, Vnto the place where he was fostred longe, Ofte walk'd abrode with schollers that hee toughte, Whiche cloke hee vs'de, so that no harme was thoughte. At lengthe, with sonnes of all the best, and moste, Of noble peares, that kepte the towne by mighte: Hee made his walke into the Romane hoste, And, when hee came before CAMILLVS sighte, Quoth hee, may Lorde, lo these? thy prisoners bee, Which beinge kepte, FALERIA yeeldes to thee. Whereat, a while this noble captaine stay'd, And pondering well the straungenes of the cause: Vnto his frendes, this in effecte hee say'd. Thoughe warres bee ill, yet good mens warres haue lawes, And it behooues a Generall good to gaine, With valiaunt actes, and not with treacherous traine.
With that, hee caus'de this SINON to bee stripte,Virgil. lib. 2. Aeneid. And whippes, and roddes, vnto the schollers gaue: Whome, backe againe, into the toune they whipte, Which facte, once knowne vnto their fathers graue: With ioyfull hartes, they yeelded vp their Toune: An acte moste rare, and glasse of true renoume. M. Ʋalerius Coruinus. Insperatum auxilium. woodcut of man's head in a plumed helmet with the visor raised, and a black bird or raven perched on it IF LIVIES pen haue written but the truthe,Aul. Gell lib. 9, cap. 11. And diuerse mo, that actes of ould declare. Then knowe, when Gaules did dare the Roman youthe, VALERIVS, lo, a Roman did prepare By dinte of sword, the challenger to trye, Who both in armes incountred by and by.Eutropius rerum Romanarum, lib. 2. And whilst with force, they proou'd their weapons brighte, And made the sparkes to flie out of the steele, A Rauen, straight, vppon VALERIVS lighte, And made his foe a newe incounter feele: Whome hee so sore did damage, and distresse, That at the lengthe, the Roman had successe. For, when his foe his forces at him bente, With winges all spread the rauen dim'd his sighte: At lengthe, his face hee scratch'd, and all to rente, And peck'd his eies, hee coulde not see the lighte, Which shewes, the Lorde in daunger doth preserue, And rauens raise our wordlie wantes to serue.
Regulus Attilius. Hosti etiam seruanda fides. woodcut of Marcus Atilius Regulus, lying bound next to a nail-spiked barrel and lid, guarded by a soldier with a pike, but receiving the beams of the sun with a human face THE Consull boulde ATTILIVS, here regarde, That AFRICKE made to tremble at his name; Who, for his faithe receyued this rewarde, Cornelius Nepos.Two hundreth thousande men, hee ouercame. And three score shippes, and eeke two hundreth townes, Yet flattringe fate, in fine vppon him frownes. For, after by XANTIPPVS ouerthrowne, Eutropius lib. 2. De Bello punico.To CARTHAGE broughte, in dungeon deepe was caste; Yet, with desire for to redeeme their owne, Their messenger they made him, at the laste: And in exchaunge, hee vnto Rome was sente, For prisoners there, and on his worde he wente. Silius Italicus lib. 6. Belli Punici, copio∣sissimè pulcherrimis elegantissimis{que} ver∣sibus hanc histo∣riam narrat.Who promis'd this, hee woulde retourne to bandes, If that hee fail'd of that, they did require: But when hee sawe so manie in their handes, Thoughe Romanes glad, did graunt him his desire: Yet coulde hee not theretoo, in harte agree, Bycause for him, so manie shoulde bee free. Thus, countries loue, was dearer then his life, Who backe retourn'de, to keepe his promise true: Where hee did taste longe time of tormentes rife, But yet, his harte no tortures coulde subdue. Aul. Gellius lib. 6. cap. 4.His mangled eies, the Sonne all daye assailes; And in the ende, was thruste in tonne with nailes.
Marcus Sergius. Fortiter & feliciter. woodcut of a metal forearm holding a lance from which hang four garlands or wreaths MARC SERGIVS nowe, I maye recorde by righte, A Romane boulde, whome foes coulde not dismaye:Plin. Natur. hist. lib. 7. cap. 28. Gainste HANNIBAL hee often shewde his mighte, Whose righte hande loste, his lefte hee did assaye Vntill at lengthe an iron hande hee proou'd: And after that CREMONA siege remoou'd. Then, did defende PLACENTIA in distresse, And wanne twelue houldes, by dinte of sworde in France, What triumphes great? were made for his successe, Vnto what state did fortune him aduance? What speares? what crounes? what garlandes hee possest; The honours due for them, that did the beste.
Cn. Pompeius Magnus. Celsa potestatis species. woodcut of a lion standing rampant, holding a sword in its front paws WHEN POMPEY great, with fortune longe was bleste, And did subdue his foes, by lande, and sea, Primus in Hirca∣num, Rubrum, & Arabicum mare vs∣que peruenit. Cor∣nelius Nepos.And conquestes great obtained in the Easte, And PARTHIANS, and ARABIANS, made obaye, And seas, and Iles, did in subiection bringe, Whose name with feare, did throughe IVDAEA ringe. De cuius maximis victoriis & trium∣pho longè splendi∣dissimo aetatis suae, anno 35. Appia∣nus libro De Bellis Mithridaticis.And had restor'de kinge MASINISSAS righte, And ouercame SERTORIVS with his power: And made the Kinge of PONTVS knowe his mighte. Yet, at the lengthe, hee had his haplesse hower: For ouercome by CAESAR, fled for aide, To AEGYPTE lande; wherein hee was betrai'd. Within whose ringe, this forme aboue was wroughte, Whereby, his force, and noble minde appeares; Which, with his head to CAESAR being broughte, For inwarde griefe, hee wash'd the same with teares, And in a fire with odours, and perfumes: This princes head with mourning hee consumes.
Marcus Scaeua. Audaces fortuna iuuat. woodcut of numerous arrow-shafts embedded in a shield THIS monumente of manhoode, yet remaines,Suetonius. A witnes true, or MARCVS SCAEVAS harte:Valerius Maxi∣mus. Whose valliancie, did purchase him such gaines, That deathe, nor time, can blemishe his deserte. In battaile, boulde: no feare his harte coulde wounde, When sixe-score shaftes within his shielde weare founde, And in that fighte, one of his eies hee loste, His thighe thrust throughe, and wounded sore beside: Such souldiours, had greate CAESAR in his hoste, As by him selfe, and others, is discride. But, those that would more of these Knightes behoulde, Let them peruse the Roman Aucthours oulde.
Inuidia integritatis assecla. woodcut of a palm tree with snakes or serpents and frogs at its base Nic. Reusnerus. Haec ramis tanquam digitis, sublime renitens Ponderibus, superum monstrat ad astra vtā.THE gallant Palme with bodie straighte, and tall, That freshelie showes, with braunches sweete of smell: Yet, at the foote the frogges, and septentes crall, With ercksome noise, and eke with poison fell: Who, as it weare, the tree doe still annoye, And do their worste, the same for to destroye. When noble peeres, and men of highe estate, By iuste deserte, doe liue in honor greate: Yet, Enuie still dothe waite on them as mate, And dothe her worste, to vndermine their seate: And MOMVS broode dothe arme, with all their mighte, To wounde their fame, whose life did geue them lighte.Euseb. apud Stob. Iter facientes per so∣lem, necessariò co∣mitatur vmbra: in∣cedentibus verò per gloriam comes est inuidia.
Ex damno alterius, alterius vtilitas. woodcut of a lion and boar fighting, while above a vulture perches on the branch of a tree THE Lion fierce, and sauage bore contende, The one, his pawes: his tuskes the other tries: And ere the broile, with bloodie blowes had ende; A vulture loe, attendes with watchinge eies: And of their spoile, doth hope to praeie his fill, And ioyes, when they eche others blood doe spill. When men of mighte, with deadlie rancor swell, And mortall hate, twixte mightie Monarches raignes; Some gripes doe watche, that like the matter well, And of their losse, doe raise their priuate gaines: So, SOLIMAN his Empire did increase, When christian kinges exiled loue, and peace.Georgius Sabinus. Sic modò dum faciant discordes proelia reges, Turcius Europa diri∣pit hostis opes. Hic magnus sedet Aeneas secum{que} volutat Euentus belli varios, &c.Virg. Aeneid. 10. Et pendebat adhuc belli fortuna, diu{que} Inter vtrumque volat dubiis victoria pennis.Ouid. Metam. 7.
Ʋigilantia, & custodia. Ad reuerendiss. Dn. D. GVLIELMVM CHATTER∣TONVM Episcopum Cestrensem. woodcut of a round church or temple with a lion sitting at the door and a weather-cock on the roof facing right THE Heraulte, that proclaimes the daie at hande, The Cocke I meane, that wakes vs out of sleepe, On steeple highe, doth like a watchman stande: The gate beneath, a Lion still doth keepe. And why? theise two, did alder time decree, That at the Churche, theire places still should bee. Aug in Epist. 124 Episcopi munere vt in hac vita ni∣hil difficilius, ita apud Deum nihil beatius.That pastors, shoulde like watchman still be preste, To wake the worlde, that sleepeth in his sinne, And rouse them vp, that longe are rock'd in reste, And shewe the daie of Christe, will straighte beginne: And to foretell, and preache, that light deuine, Euen as the Cocke doth singe, ere daie doth shine. Quid per gallum & leonem signi∣ficetur, Claud. Minos super Al∣ciarum Emb. 15. luculēter scribit.The Lion shewes, they shoulde of courage bee, And able to defende, their flocke from foes: If rauening wolfes, to lie in waite they see: They shoulde be stronge, and boulde, with them to close: And so be arm'de with learning, and with life, As they might keepe, their charge, from either strife.
Festina lentè. Ad Amplissimos viros Dn. FRANCISCVM WINDHAM, & Dn. EDWARDVM FLOWERDEWE Iudices integerrimos. woodcut of a crab holding a butterfly by the wings Cicero pro Rabir. Est sapientia iudicis in hoc, vt non so∣lùm quid possit, sed etiam quid debeat ponderet: nec quan∣tum sibi permissum meminerit, sed etiā quatenus commis∣sum sit. Idem 3. Offic. Nec contra Remp. nec contra iusiuran∣dum amici caussa vir bonus faciet: nec si iudex quidem erit de ipso amico. po∣nit enim personam amici, cùm induit iudicis: nam si om∣nia facienda sunt, quae amici velint, non amicitiae tales, sed coniurationes putandae sunt.THIS figure, lo, AVGVSTVS did deuise, A mirror good, for Iudges iuste to see, And alwayes fitte, to bee before their eies, When sentence they, of life, and deathe decree: Then muste they haste, but verie slowe awaie, Like butterflie, whome creepinge crabbe dothe staie. The Prince, or Iudge, maie not with lighte reporte, In doubtfull thinges, giue iudgement touching life: But trie, and learne the truthe in euerie sorte, And mercie ioyne, with iustice bloodie knife: This pleased well AVGVSTVS noble grace, And Iudges all, within this tracke shoulde trace.Claud. Manil. Th. —diis proximus ille est Quem ratio non ira mouet: qui facta re∣pendens Consilio, punire potest mucrone cruento. Senec. Ot. act. 2.Consulere patriae, parcere afflictis, fera Caede abstinere, tempus atque irae dare, Orbi quietem, seculo pacem suo, Haec summa virtus, petitur hac coelum via.
Sine iustitia, confusio. Ad eosdem Iudices. woodcut of a celestial scene, featuring a crescent moon, clouds, winds, shooting starts, and the Greek word for chaos ΧΑΟΣ WHEN Fire, and Aire, and Earthe, and Water, all weare one: Before that worke deuine was wroughte, which nowe wee looke vppon. There was no forme of thinges, but a confused masse:Ouid. in Metam. lib. 1. —quia corpore in vno Frigida pugnabant ca∣lidis: humentia, siccis: Mollia, cum duris: sine pondere, habentia pon∣dus. A lumpe, which CHAOS men did call: wherin no order was, The Coulde, and Heate, did striue: the Heauie thinges, and Lighte. The Harde, and Softe. the Wette, and Drye. for none had shape arighte. But when they weare dispos'd, eache one into his roome: Tibul. 1. 3. Non domus vlla fores habuit, non fixus in agris Qui regeret certis fini∣bus arua lapis: Ipsae mella dabāt quer∣cus, vltróque ferchant Obuia securis vbera la∣ctis oues: Non acies, non ira fuit, non bella, nec enses, Immiti sauus duxerat arte faber, &c.The Fire, had Heate: the Aire, had Lighte: the Earthe, with fruites did bloome. The Sea, had his increase: which thinges, to passe thus broughte: Behoulde, of this vnperfecte masse, the goodly worlde was wroughte. Then all thinges did abounde, that seru'd the vse of man: The Riuers greate, with wyne, and oyle, and milke, and honie, ranne. The Trees did yeeld their fruite: thoughe planting then vnknowne. And CERES still was in her pompe, thoughe seede weare neuer sowne. The season, Sommer was: the Groues weare alwayes greene, And euery banke, did beare the badge, of fragrant FLORA Queene.
This was the goulden worlde, that Poëttes praised moste, No hate, was harbor'd then at home: nor hatch'd, in forren coste. But after, when the earthe, with people did increase: Ambition, straighte began to springe: and pryde, did banishe peace. For, as all tymes doe change: euen so, this age did passe. Ouid. 1. Metam. Iamque nocens ferrum, ferróq. nocentius aurum Prodierat, prodit bel∣lū, quod pugnat vtroq. Sanguineáq. manu cre∣pitantia concutit arma; Ʋiuitur ex rapto, non hospes ab hospite tutus, Non socer à genero: fra∣trum quoque gratia rae∣ra est, &c.Then did the siluer age insue. and then, the age of brasse. The Iron age was laste, a fearefull cursed tyme: Then, armies came of mischiefes in: and fil'd the worlde with cryme. Then rigor, and reuenge, did springe in euell hower: And men of mighte, did manadge all, and poore opprest with power. And hee, that mightie was, his worde, did stand for lawe: And what the poore did ploughe, and sowe: the ritch away did drawe. None mighte their wiues inioye, their daughters, or their goodes, No, not their liues: such tyraunts broode, did seeke to spill their bloodes. Then vertues weare defac'd, and dim'd with vices vile,Isidor. 2. Ethy. Factae sunt leges, vt earum metu coërcea∣tur audacia, tuta{que} fit inter improbos inno∣centia, & in ipsis im∣probis formidato sup∣plicio refraenetur no∣cendi facultas. Then wronge, did maske in cloke of righte: then bad, did good exile. Then falshood, shadowed truthe: and hate, laugh'd loue to skorne: Then pitie, and compassion died: and bloodshed fowle was borne. So that no vertues then, their proper shapes did beare: Nor coulde from vices bee decern'd, so straunge they mixed weare. That nowe, into the worlde, an other CHAOS came: But GOD, that of the former heape: the heauen and earthe did frame. Anselmus de Iustitia. Iustitia est animi li∣bertas, tribuens vni∣cuique suam propriam dignitatem, maiori reuerentiam, pari cō∣cordiam, minori disci∣plinam, Deo obediē∣tiam, sibi sanctimo∣niam, inimico patien∣tiam, egeno operosam mifericordiam.And all thinges plac'd therein, his glorye to declare: Sente IVSTICE downe vnto the earthe: such loue to man hee bare. Who, so suruay'd the world, with such an heauenly vewe: That quickley vertues shee aduanc'd: and vices did subdue. And, of that worlde did make, a paradice, of blisse: By which wee doo inferre: That where this sacred Goddes is. That land doth florishe still, and gladnes, their doth growe: Bicause that all, to God, and Prince, by her their dewties knowe. Imago Iustitiae vide∣tur apud Plutarch. lib. De Iside & Osi∣ride, & apud Gell. lib. 14. cap. 4.And where her presence wantes, there ruine raignes, and wracke: And kingdomes can not longe indure, that doe this ladie lacke. Then happie England most, where IVSTICE is embrac'd: And eeke so many famous men, within her chaire are plac'd. —sed comprime motus,De officio optimi Iu∣dicis, Claudianus ad Honorium sic, Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecisse licebit, Occurrat, mentem{que} domet respectus honesti.
Amicitia fucata vitanda. woodcut of two male figures shaking hands, one wearing a round helmet, the other with the ears and tail of a fox; a third man crouches behind trees in the background Hor. Arte Poët. Nunquam te fallant animi sub vulpe la∣tentes.OF open foes, wee alwaies maie beware, And arme our selues, theire Malice to withstande: Yea, thoughe they smile, yet haue wee still a care, Wee trust them not, althoughe they giue theire hande: Theire Foxes coate, theire fained harte bewraies, Wee neede not doubt, bicause wee knowe theire waies. But those, of whome wee must in daunger bee, Are deadlie foes, that doe in secret lurke, Whoe lie in waite, when that wee can not see, And vnawares, doe our destruction worke: No foe so fell, (as BIAS wise declares) As man to man, when mischeife hee prepares. Bias.Pernicies homini quae maxima? solus homo alter.
Sobriè potandum. woodcut of a dog drinking from the River Nile, watched by a crocodile, and near to a naked man lying on his front on the bank with a bowl held to his mouth De Crocod. Ae∣lian. de Animal. lib. 8. cap. 25. & lib. 9. cap. 3. De praescientia eius, de qua, in prima parte huius libri, fol. 3. idem Ael. lib. 5. cap. 52. & lib. 8. cap. 4.A Thirstie dogge, to NILVS runnes to drinke, A Crocodile, was readie in the flood: Which made the dogge, to lappe harde by the brinke, As one that much in feare of poisoning stood: And sparingly, began to coole his heate, When as hee sawe, this Serpent lye in waite. Contra Ebrieta∣tem.This carefull dogge, condemnes those careles wightes, Althoughe he bee of brutisshe kynde, bycause Those reason lacke, that spend both daies, and nightes, Without regard, in keeping BACCHVS lawes:Paul. Gal. cap. 5 Eph. ca. 5. Pytha. apud Stob. Primum poculū sanitatis est, alte∣rum voluptatis, tertiū contume∣liae, vltimum in∣saniae. And when throughe drinke, on feete they can not stande, Yet as they lye, they haue their boales in hande. Nemes. Eclog. 3. contra potores.Cantharon hic retinet: cornu bibit alter adunco: Concauat ille manus, palmas{que} in pocula vertit: Pronus at ille lacu bibit, & crepitantibus haurit Musta labris, &c.
Insignia poëtarum. Ad Nobiliss. & doctiss. virum Dn. IANVM DOVSAM A NOORTWIICK. woodcut of a shield hanging from a tree with a swan depicted on it, while two swans swim in the background among rushes Ouid. Metam. 2.THE Martiall Captaines ofte, do marche into the fielde, With Egles, or with Griphins fierce, or Dragons, in theire shielde. Nic. Reusnerus. Hunc volucrē Phoebo fertur sacrasse verusta: Quod reserat cantus, Delphice magne, tuos.But Phoebus sacred birde, let Poëttes moste commende. Who, as it were by skill deuine, with songe forshowes his ende. And as his tune delightes: for rarenes of the same. Hor. de arte poët. Natura fieret laudabile carmen, an arte, Quaesitum est. ego nec studiū sine diuite vena, Nec rude quid prosit video ingenium: alte∣rius sic. Altera poscit opem res, & coniurat amice.So they with sweetenes of theire verse, shoulde winne a lasting name. And as his colour white: Sincerenes doth declare. So Poëttes must bee cleane, and pure, and must of crime beware. For which respectes the Swanne, should in theire Ensigne stande. No forren fowle, and once suppos'de kinge of LIGVRIA Lande. Ouid. 3. Art. amandi.Cura ducum fuerant olim, regum{que} poëtae, Praemia{que} antiqui magna tulere chori. Sancta{que} maiestas, & erat venerabile nomen Vatibus, & largae saepè dabantur opes. Ennius emeruit Calabris in montibus ortus, Contiguus poni Scipio magne tibi, Nunc ederae sine honore iacent: operata{que} doctis Cura vigil Musis, nomen inertis habet. Sed famam vigilare iuuat, quis nosset Homerum Ilias aeternum si latuisset opus.
Cùm laruis non luctandum. woodcut of a group of hares or rabbits attacking a dead lion lying on its back WHEN Hectors force, throughe mortall wounde did faile, And life beganne, to dreadefull deathe to yeelde: The Greekes moste gladde, his dyinge corpes assaile, Who late did flee before him in the fielde: Which when he sawe, quothe hee nowe worke your spite, For so, the hares the Lion dead doe byte. Looke here vpon, you that doe wounde the dead, With slaunders vile, and speeches of defame: Or bookes procure, and libelles to be spread, When they bee gone, for to deface theire name: Who while they liu'de, did feare you with theire lookes, And for theire skill, you might not beare their bookes. Nullum cum victis certamen, & aethere cassis.Virg. Aeneid. 11.
Captiuus, ob gulam. woodcut of a mouse with its head trapped in a closed oyster-shell, which lies on a beach or seashore with ships visible in the background THE mouse, that longe did feede on daintie crommes, And safelie search'd the cupborde and the shelfe: At lengthe for chaunge, vnto an Oyster commes, Where of his deathe, he guiltie was him selfe:Felo de se. The Oyster gap'd, the Mouse put in his head, Where he was catch'd, and crush'd till he was dead. Isidorus lib. 1. de summo bono. Gulae saturitas nimia aciē men∣tis obtundit in∣geniumq́ue euer∣tere facit.The Gluttons fatte, that daintie fare deuoure, And seeke about, to satisfie theire taste: And what they like, into theire bellies poure, This iustlie blames, for surfettes come in haste: And biddes them feare, their sweete, and dulcet meates, For oftentimes, the same are deadlie baites. Lucanus 4.— O prodiga rerum Luxuries nunquam paruo contenta paratu, Et quaesitorum terra pelagóque ciborum Ambitiosa fames, & lautae gloria mensae.
Constanter. woodcut of a flooded town, with only the rooftops and the points of spires and towers above water; some ships and boats are afloat and one boat is beached on the land Cicer. 2. Offic. Praeclara est in omni vita aequa∣bilitas, idemq́ue vultus, eadem∣q́ue frons.THE raging Sea, that roares, with fearefull sounde, And threatneth all the worlde to ouerflowe: The shore sometimes, his billowes doth rebounde, Though ofte it winnes, and giues the earthe a blowe Sometimes, where shippes did saile: it makes a lande. Sometimes againe they saile: where townes did stande. So, if the Lorde did not his rage restraine, And set his boundes, so that it can not passe: The worlde shoulde faile, and man coulde not remaine, But all that is, shoulde soone be turn'd to was: By raging Sea, is ment our ghostlie foe, By earthe, mans soule: he seekes to ouerthrowe. Bern. in Epist. Perseuerantia est finis virtutum, & virtus sine qua nemo videbit deum.And as the surge doth worke doth daie, and nighte, And shakes the shore, and ragged rockes doth rente: So Sathan stirres, with all his maine, and mighte, Continuall siege, our soules to circumuente. Then watche, and praie, for feare wee sleepe in sinne, For cease our crime: and hee can nothing winne.
Dicta septem sapientum. To Sir HVGHE CHOLMELEY Knight. woodcut depicting the emblems of the seven sages or sophoi of ancient Greece, as defined by Andrea Alciato or Alciati. These are: a scales or balance (for Cleobulus); a mirror or looking glass (for Chilon); a herb (for Periander); a turbaned figure on an ass (for Bias); a flower (for Pittacus); an overturned statue (for Solon); and a bird or foul walking across a net to a crate or cage CLEOBV CILON PERIANDI BIAS PITAC SOLON THALES THE sages seuen, whose fame made Grecia glad, For wisedome greate, amongst theire sainges wise: Eache one of them, a goulden sentence had, And Alciat, did the pictures thus deuise, For to obserue the vse of Emblems righte, Which represent the meaning to our sighte. Keepe still the meane, did CLEOBÛLVS teache: For measure, lo, the ballance loyn'd thereto. And Knowe thy selfe, did CHILON alwaies preache: The glasse behoulde, that thou the same maiste doe. Restraine thy wrathe, dothe PERIANDER tell: And shewes an hearbe, that choller dothe expell. Nothinge too mutche, did PITTACVS commende, TheretoSemen quod dí∣citur gith, quod pharmacopolae vo∣cant Nigellam Ro∣manam. a flower, whereof too muche destroyes. And SOLON sai'd, Remember still thy ende, Before the which, none can haue perfect ioyes: A piller form'd, declininge downe he showes, Which telles that deathe, the strongest ouerthrowes. Plutarch. de lib. educand. Cùm reliqua omnia tempore diminuan∣tur, sapientia sola se∣nectute augescit.Of wicked men the number dothe exceede: This BIA'S vs'd: and cause for foule defame, SARDINIA moste is stained, as we reade, On asses backe, behoulde one of the same. And THALES, laste of all the Sages, say'd: Flee sewertiship, for feare thou be betray'd. Bernard. Sapìentiae otia ne∣gotia sunt: & quo otiosior est sapien∣tia, eo exercitatior in suo genere.And vnderneathe, a birde vpon the net, That dothe not feare, the craftie foulers call, Hereby wee ofte, doe paie an others debte, And free our frendes, and bringe our selues in thrall: Which sayinges wise, whoe keepe them in their brestes, By proofe shall finde, they harbour happie guestes.
Scripta manent. To Sir ARTHVRE MANWARINGE Knight. woodcut of a city falling into ruin, with walls collapsing, and books on a table and on the ground IF mightie TROIE, with gates of steele, and brasse, Bee worne awaie, with tracte of stealinge time: If CARTHAGE, raste: if THEBES be growne with grasse.Propertius. Et Thebae steterant, al∣taq́ue Troia fuit. If BABEL stoope: that to the cloudes did clime: If ATHENS, and NVMANTIA suffered spoile:Demosth. in Arg. lib. 1. Clarissimae olim vr∣bes, nunc nihil sunt, Quae maximè nunc superbiunt, eandem aliquando fortunam experientur. If AEGYPT spires, be euened with the soile. Then, what maye laste, which time dothe not impeache, Since that wee see, theise monumentes are gone: Nothinge at all, but time doth ouer reache, It eates the steele, and weares the marble stone: But writinges laste, thoughe yt doe what it can, And are preseru'd, euen since the worlde began.Virg. in Moecenatis obitu. Marmora Maeonij vincunt monumenta libelli: Ʋuiitur ingenio, ce∣tera mortis erunt. & And so they shall, while that they same dothe laste, Which haue declar'd, and shall to future age: What thinges before three thousande yeares haue paste, What martiall knightes, haue march'd vppon this stage: Whose actes, in bookes if writers did not saue, Their fame had ceaste, and gone with them to graue.Ouid. 1. Amor. 10. Scindētur vestes, gem∣mae frangētur & aurū. Carmina quam tri∣buent, fama perennis erit. Of SAMSONS strengthe, of worthie IOSVAS might. Of DAVIDS actes, of ALEXANDERS force. Of CAESAR greate; and SCIPIO noble knight, Howe shoulde we speake, but bookes thereof discourse: Then fauour them, that learne within their youthe: But Ioue them beste, that learne, and write the truthe.
De morte, & amore: Iocosum. To EDWARD DYER Esquier. woodcut of Eros or Cupid and Mors or Thanatos shooting arrows from behind clouds in the sky, with an elderly man and woman walking arm-in-arm, and a young man lying dead on the ground Ioachim. Belleius. Mutarunt arma inter se Mors atque Cupido Hic falcem gestat, gestat at illa facem. Afficit haec animum, corpus sed conficit ille: Sic moritur iuuenis, sic moribundus amat.WHILE furious Mors, from place, to place did flie, And here, and there, her fatall dartes did throwe: At lengthe shee mette, with Cupid passing by, Who likewise had, bene busie with his bowe: Within one Inne, they bothe togeather stay'd, And for one nighte, awaie theire shooting lay'd. The morrowe next, they bothe awaie doe haste, And eache by chaunce, the others quiuer takes: The frozen dartes, on Cupiddes backe weare plac'd, The fierie dartes, the leane virago shakes: Whereby ensued, suche alteration straunge, As all the worlde, did wonder at the chaunge. For gallant youthes, whome Cupid thoughte to wounde, Of loue, and life, did make an ende at once. And aged men, whome deathe woulde bringe to grounde: Beganne againe to loue, with sighes, and grones; Thus natures lawes, this chaunce infringed soe: That age did loue, and youthe to graue did goe. Till at the laste, as Cupid drewe his bowe, Before he shotte: a younglinge thus did crye, Oh Venus sonne, thy dartes thou doste not knowe, They pierce too deepe: for all thou hittes, doe die: Oh spare our age, who honored thee of oulde, Theise dartes are bone, take thou the dartes of goulde.
Which beinge saide, a while did Cupid staye, And sawe, how youthe was almoste cleane extinct: And age did doate, with garlandes freshe, and gaye, And heades all balde, weare newe in wedlocke linckt: Wherefore he shewed, this error vnto Mors, Who miscontent, did chaunge againe perforce. Yet so, as bothe some dartes awaie conuay'd, Which weare not theirs: yet vnto neither knowne, Some bonie dartes, in Cupiddes quiuer stay'd, Some goulden dartes, had Mors amongst her owne. Then, when wee see, vntimelie deathe appeare: Or wanton age: it was this chaunce you heare. Prudentes vino abstinent. woodcut of a grape-laden vine wrapped around an olive tree Max. lib. 6. Mulier quae vini vsum immodera∣tè appetit, & vir∣tutibus ianuam claudit, & deli∣ctis aperit.LOE here the vine dothe claspe, to prudent Pallas tree, The league is nought, for virgines wise, doe Bacchus frendship flee. Alciat. Quid me vexatis rami? Sum Palladis arbor, Auferte hinc botros, virgo fugit Bromium. Englished so. Why vexe yee mee yee boughes? since I am Pallas tree: Remoue awaie your clusters hence, the virgin wine doth flee.
In colores. To EDWARDE PASTON Esquier. woodcut of a dyer lowering cloth on the end of a pole into a steaming bath of liquid Ouid de Trist. Infoelix habitum tem∣poris huius habe Nec te purpureo velent vaccinia succo: Non est conueniens luctibus ille color.Alciat. Nos sperare docet viri∣dis. spes dicitur esse in viridi quoties irrita retro cadit.THE dier, loe, in smoke, and heate doth toile, Mennes fickle mindes to please, with sundrie hues: And though hee learne newe collours still to boile, Yet varijng men, woulde faine some newer choose: And seeke for that, which arte can not deuise, When that the ould, mighte verie well suffise. And some of them, here brieflie to recite, And to declare, with whome they best agree: For mourners, blacke. for the religious, white. Which is a signe, of conscience pure, and free. The greene, agrees with them in hope that liue: And eeke to youthe, this colour wee do giue. The yelowe next, vnto the couetous wighte. And vnto those, whome ielousie doth fret. The man refus'd, in Taunye doth delite. The collour Redde, let martiall captaines get. And little boies, whome shamefastnes did grace, The Romaines deck'd, in Scarlet like their face. The marriners, the Blewe becometh well. Bicause it showes the colour of the sea: And Prophettes, that of thinges deuine foretell, The men content, like Violet arraie. And laste, the poore and meaner sorte prouide, The medley, graye, and russet, neuer dy'de.
Loe here, a fewe of colours plaine expreste, And eeke the men, with whome they best agree: Yet euerie one, doth thinke his hewe the beste, And what one likes, an other lothes to see: For Nature thoughe ten thousande colours haue, Yet vnto man, more varrijng mindes she gaue. Nowe straungers, who their countries still commende, And make vs muse, with colours they recite: Maye thinke our lande, small choise of hues doth lende. Bycause so fewe, of manie I doe write. Yet let them knowe, my Aucthor these presentes, Inoughe for those, whome reason still contentes. But saye wee lacke, their herbes, their wormes, their flies, And want the meanes: their gallant hues to frame. Yet Englande, hath her store of orient dies, And eeke therein, a DYER most of fame, Who, alwaies hathe so fine, and freshe, a hewe, That in their landes, the like is not to vewe. In studiosum captum amore. woodcut of an old man sitting on a throne, surrounded by Eros or Cupid, Minerva or Pallas Athena, and two young women A Reuerend sage, of wisedome most profounde, Beganne to doate, and laye awaye his bookes: For CVPID then, his tender harte did wounde, That onlie nowe, he lik'de his ladies lookes? Oh VENVS staie? since once the price was thine, Thou ought'st not still, at PALLAS thus repine. Propert. 2.Omnes humanos sanat medicina dolores: Solus amor morbi non amat artificem.
Abstinentia. Ad ampliss. virum Dn. CAROLVM CALTHORPE Regiae Matis procuratorem in Hibernia, Dn. mihi omnibus modis colendissimum. woodcut of a pitcher, jug, or ewer, and a basin or bowl of water with a towel, sitting on top of a marble tomb WHO so are plac'd, in sacred Iustice roome, And haue in charge, her statutes to obserue: Augusto super Psal. 37 Apud iustum Iudi∣cem sola conscientia propria timenda est.Let them with care, behoulde this garnish'd toome, That suche a one, at lengthe they maie deserue: Of marble harde, suppose the same to bee, August. De comm. vit. Cler. Non vos iudicetis maleuolos esse, quā∣do alterius crimen iudicatis: magis quippe nocētes estis, si fratres vestros, quos iudicando cor∣rigere potestis, ta∣cēdo petire permit∣tatis.An Ewer eeke, vppon one corner standes, At th' other ende, a bason wee maie see: With Towell faire, to wipe theire washed handes: Th'effecte whereof, let Iudges printe in minde, That they maie leaue a lasting name behinde. The marble showes: they must bee firme, and sure, And not be pierc'd, nor mooued from the truthe: The reste declare: they must bee cleane, and pure; Stobaeus ex Plutar∣chi Serm. 44. retulit imagines iudicum apud Thebas esse, sine manibus, at summ in sicis ima∣ginem clausis ocu∣lis: Eò quòd iustitia nec muneribus ca∣pi, nec hominum vultu flecti debeat.And not inclin'd to rigor, or to ruthe. But, when a cause before them shalbee harde, With conscience cleare, let them the same decide: No Ritche, or Poore, or frend, or foe, regarde. For feare, they doe throughe theire affections slide: But let them washe, theire handes from euerie crime, That GOD maye blesse, and here prolonge theire time. Auson. de viro bo∣no Edyll, 18.Non priùs in dulcem declinat lumina somnum, Omnia quàm longi reputauerit acta diei; Quae praetergressus? quid gestum in tempore? quid non? Cur isti facto decus abfuit, aut ratio illi? Quid mihi praeteritum: cur haec sententia sedit, Quam melius mutare fuit? miseratus egentem, Cur aliquom fracta persensi mente dolorem? Quid volui, quod nolle bonum foret? vtile honesto Cur malus antetuli? num dicto, aut denique vultu Perstrictus quisquam? cur me natura, magis quàm Disciplina trahit? sic dicta & facta per omnia Ingrediens, ortóque à vespere cuncta reuoluens, Offensus prauis, dat palmam, & praemia rectis.
Constantia comes victoriae. To MILES CORBET Esquier. woodcut of a large ship or galleon under full sail being blown by a strong wind over rough water THE shippe, that longe vppon the sea dothe saile, And here, and there, with varrijng windes is toste: On rockes, and sandes, in daunger ofte to quaile. Yet at the lengthe, obtaines the wished coaste: Which beinge wonne, the trompetts ratlinge blaste, Dothe teare the skie, for ioye of perills paste. Boni gubernato∣ris est, ventorū se flatibus accom∣modare: viri au∣tem sapiētis, ani∣mi affectibus. Arist. apud Stob.Thoughe master reste, thoughe Pilotte take his ease, Yet nighte, and day, the ship her course dothe keepe: So, whilst that man dothe saile theise worldlie seas, His voyage shortes: althoughe he wake, or sleepe. And if he keepe his course directe, he winnes That wished porte, where lastinge ioye beginnes. Demetrius Phaler. Tardè aggredere, quod aggressurus sis perseueranter prosequere. Nam vt inquit Greg. lib. 1. Mor. Incassum bonum agitur, si ante vitae ter∣minum deseratur: Quia frustra velociter currit, qui prius, quàm ad metas venerit, deficit.
Ex Bello, pax. To HVGHE CHOLMELEY Esquier. woodcut of a helmet, with visor down, sitting upright on the ground, surrounded by bees THE helmet stronge, that did the head defende, Beholde, for hyue, the bees in quiet seru'd: And when that warres, with bloodie bloes, had ende. They, hony wroughte, where souldiour was preseru'd: Which doth declare, the blessed fruites of peace, How sweete shee is, when mortall warres doe cease. De falce ex ense, Martialis.Pax me certa ducis placidos curuauit in vsus: Agricolae nunc sum, militis ante fui. Calumniam contra calumniatorem virtus repellit. woodcut of an arrow striking a wall, with another lying against the wall WHO so with force against the marble wall, Or piller stronge, doth shoote, to pierce the same: It not preuailes, for doune the arrowes fall, Or backe rebounde, to him from whence they came: So slaunders foule, and wordes like arrowes keene, Not vertue hurtes, but turnes her foes to teene.
Sic spectanda fides. To GEORGE MANWARINGE Esquier. woodcut of a hand with a ring emerging from a cloud, resting a French coin (with three fleurs-de-lis on a shield under a crown) on a tile or square ✚ HENVS DEI GRATIA FRĀCOR REX Claud. 2. Stil. de fide. Haec & amicitias, longo post tempore firmat, Mansuróque adamante ligat, nec mobile mutat Ingenium, paruae stre∣pitu nec vincula noxa Dissolui patitur, necfa∣stidire priorem Allicitur veniento nouo, &c.THE touche doth trye, the fine, and purest goulde: And not the sound, or els the goodly showe. So, if mennes wayes, and vertues, wee behoulde, The worthy men, wee by their workes, shall knowe. But gallant lookes, and outward showes beguile, And ofte are clokes to cogitacions vile. Illicitum non sperandum. woodcut of a conversation between the female figures of Nemesis, standing and holding a set of reins, and Hope, sitting on a barrel and holding a bow Alciatus. Spes, simul & Nemesis, nostris altaribus ad sunt: Scilicet vt speres non nisi quod liceat.HERE NEMESIS, and Hope: our deedes doe rightlie trie. Which warnes vs, not to hope for that, which iustice doth denie.
Feriunt summos fulmina montes. To I. T. Esquier. woodcut of a large dog pulling a cart while a child threatens it with a stick and two small dogs bark and snap at it; another small dog sits in the lap of a sleeping woman Gregor. in mor. Cùm quis positus in prosperitate diligitur, incer∣tum est, vtrum prosperitas an persona diligatur. Amissio autē foe∣licitatis interro∣gat vim dilectio∣nis: nec prosperi∣tas quidem ami∣cum indicat, nec aduersitas inimi∣cum celat.THE bandogge, fitte to matche the bull, or beare, With burthens greate; is loden euery daye: Or drawes the carte, and forc'd the yoke to weare: Where littell dogges doe passe their time in playe: And ofte, are bould to barke, and eeke to bite, When as before, they trembled at his sighte. Yet, when in bondes they see his thrauled state, Eache bragginge curre, beginnes to square, and brall: The freër sorte, doe wonder at his fate, And thinke them beste, that are of stature small: For they maie sleepe vppon their mistris bedde, And on their lappes, with daynties still bee fedde. Eras. in Epist. Nihil aduersum, nisi quod nobis obstat ad aeter∣nam foelicitatem properantibus: nihil prosperum, nisi quod deo conducit.The loftie pine, with axe is ouerthrowne, And is prepar'd, to serue the shipmans turne: When bushes stande, till stormes bee ouerblowne. And lightninges flashe, the mountaine toppes doth burne. All which doe shewe: that pompe, and worldlie power, Makes monarches, markes: when varrijnge fate doth lower. Ouid. 2. Art. Amandi.Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis, Nec facile est aequa commoda mente pati.
Perfidus familiaris. To G. B. Esquier. woodcut of Brasidas dressed in armour, pierced by a arrow which has passed through his shield Lacedaemoniorum dux apud Plutar∣chum.WHILE throughe his foes, did boulde BRASIDAS thruste, And thought with force, their courage to confounde: Throughe targat faire, wherein he put his truste, His manlie corpes receau'd a mortall wounde. Beinge ask'd the cause, before he yeelded ghoste: Quoth hee, my shielde, wherein I trusted moste. Euen so it happes, wee ofte our bayne doe brue, When ere wee trie, wee trust the gallante showe: When frendes suppoas'd, do prooue them selues vntrue, When SINON false, in DAMONS shape dothe goe: Then gulfes of griefe, doe swallowe vp our mirthe, And thoughtes ofte times, doe shrow'd vs in the earthe.Sape sub agnina latet hirtus pelle Lycaon: Súbque Catone pio, perfidus ille Nero. All is not goulde that glittereth to the eye: Some poison stronge, a sugred taste doth keepe; The crabbe ofte times, is beautifull to see. The Adder fell, within the flowers doth creepe: The brauest tombe, hath stinking bones within: So fawninge mates, haue alwaies faithlesse bin. Yet, to preuent such harmes before they fall, Thinke howe thy frende, maie liue to bee thy foe: Then, when your loue exceedeth moste of all,
Looke that thy tonge, doe not at randonne goe: For feare thy speeche, doe turne vnto thy smarte, If that thy mate, doe beare a IVDAS harte. Plaut. Capt. Fac fidelis sis fideli: caue fluxam fidem geras.But, if thou doe inioye a faithfull frende, See that with care, thou keepe him as thy life: And if perhappes he doe, that maye offende, Yet waye thy frende: and shunne the cause of strife, Remembringe still, there is no greater crosse; Then of a frende, for, to sustaine the losse.Cato. Damnaris nunquā post longum tempus amicū, Mutauit mores, sed pi∣gnora prima memento. Yet, if this knotte of frendship be to knitte, And SCIPIO yet, this LELIVS can not finde? Content thy selfe, till some occasion fitte, Allot thee one, according to thy minde: Then trie, and truste: so maiste thou liue in rest, But chieflie see, thou truste thy selfe the beste? In copia minor error. woodcut of a fox looking up at an ape in a tree, behind which is a man THE ape in tree, beganne at foxe beneath to raile: And said, hee was a shamelesse beast to weare so great a taile. Then aunswere made the foxe, I maye thee more deride, Bicause thou haste no taile at all, thy shamelesse partes to hide. Which shewes the bitter fruite, that doth of mocking springe: For scorners ofte, such mares doe meete, that worse then serpentes stinge.
Ʋindice fato. To G. B. sen. Esquier. woodcut of a hand with a ring emerging from a cloud, losing hold of a quill pen Valens Impera∣tor, Arrianae se∣ctae fautor, tan∣dem per Gothos victus, in do∣muncula qua ab∣sconditus erat, combustus anno Domini 380. Sabel. & Sex. Aur.WHEN sentence wronge, of will, and rigor vile, Was fram'd, to please the Emperor VALENS minde: Which shoulde condemne Sainct BASIL to exile: And nothinge lack'd, but that it was not sign'd: Th'Emperor thoughte to take no longer pause, But tooke his penne, for to confirme the cause. But all in vayne, the quill would take no inke, Yet still herein, he lewdlie did persiste: Vntill his hande beganne to shake, and shrinke, Whereby, the penne did fall out of his fiste: Wherefore for feare, he rente the writte in twaine, Then feare the Lorde, and rashe attemptes refraine.
Homo homini lupus. woodcut of Arion and his lyre being thrown from a small ship by three men, while a dolphin or sea-serpent waits to receive him; in the background Arion rides the dolphin while playing the lyre Sicut Rex in imagi∣ne sua honoratur: sic Deus in homine diligitur, & oditur. Non potest homi∣nem odire, qui deū amat. nec potest deū amare qui ho∣minem odit. Chrys. super Matth 22.NO mortall foe so full of poysoned spite, As man, to man, when mischiefe he pretendes: The monsters huge, as diuers aucthors write, Yea Lions wilde, and fishes weare his frendes: And when their deathe, by frendes suppos'd was sought, They kindnesse shew'd, and them from daunger brought.Mira fabula de An∣drode & Leone. Aul. Gel. li. 5. ca. 14. Idem de Arione lib. 16. cap. 19.ARION lo, who gained store of goulde, In countries farre: with harpe, and pleasant voice: Did shipping take, and to CORINTHVS woulde, And to his wishe, of pilottes made his choise: Who rob'd the man, and threwe him to the sea, A Dolphin, lo, did beare him safe awaie. Parad. poëticus.Quis nescit vastas olim delphina per vndas, Lesbida cum sacro vate tulisse lyram?
In curiosos. woodcut of a man at a doorway pointing at an ape, whose foot is trapped under a pile of wood; a hatchet or axe and a hammer or mallet lie nearby Horat. Epist. lib. 2. cap. 1. —Quod medicorum est Promittunt medici, tractant fabrilia fabri.LET maidens sowe; let schollers: plie the schooles. Giue PALINVRE: his compasse, and his carde. Let MARS, haue armes: let VVLCANE, vse his tooles. Giue CORYDON, the ploughe, and harrowe harde. Giue PAN, the pipe: giue bilbowe blade, to swashe. Let Grimme haue coales: and lobbe his whippe to lashe. Let none presume an others arte to vse, But trie the trade, to which he hath bene kept: But those that like a skill vnknowne to choose, Let them behoulde: while that the workeman slept, The toying ape, was tempringe with his blockes, Vntill his foote was crush'd within the stockes. Propert. 2. 1.Nauita de ventis; de tauris narrat arator; Enumerat miles vulnera; pastor oues.
in iuuentam. woodcut of Dionysus or Bacchus holding grapes and Phoebus Apollo holding a lyre, standing facing each other on a tomb TWO sonnes of IOVE that best of man deserue, APOLLO great, and BACCHVS, this impartes: With diet good, the one doth healthe preserue, With pleasante wine, the other cheares our hartes. And theise, the worlde immortall Goddes would haue, Bicause longe life, with sweete delighte, they gaue. But if theise are so soueraigne vnto man, That here, with ioye they doe increase his daies, And freshe doe make the carefull colour wanne: And keepe him longe from sicknes, and disease: I graunte, they ought to be renowmed more, Then all the Goddes, the Poëttes did adore. Alciat. ad eos∣dem sic.Tu vino curas, tu victu dilue morbos, Vt lento accedat curua senecta pede.
Fel in melle. woodcut of Eros or Cupid surrounded by bees from two hives, watched by Venus or Aphrodite seated on the ground LO CVPID here, the honie hyes to taste, On whome, the bees did straight extende their power: For whilst at will he did their labours waste, He founde that sweete, was sauced with the sower: And till that time hee thought no little thinges, Weare of suche force: or armed so with stinges. The hyues weare plac'd accordinge to his minde, The weather warme, the honie did abounde. And CVPID iudg'd the bees of harmelesse kinde, But whilste he tri'de his naked corpes they wounde: And then to late his rashe attempte hee ru'de, When after sweete, so tarte a taste insu'de.Paradis. poëticus. Melle gerunt perfusa, gerunt perfusa veneno, Et sua spicula apes, & sua spicula amor. So ofte it happes, when wee our fancies feede, And only ioye in outwarde gallant showes. The inwarde man, if that wee doe not heede, Wee ofte, doe plucke a nettle for a rose: No baite so sweete as beautie, to the eie, Yet ofte, it hathe worse poyson then the bee.
Ferè simile ex Theocito. To LAVRA. woodcut of Eros or Cupid running to Venus or Aphrodite away from bees flying from the hollow of a tree WHILST CVPID had desire to taste the honie sweete, And thrust his hand into the tree, a bee with him did meete. The boye no harme did doubt, vntill he felt the stinge: But after to his mother ranne, and ofte his handes did wringe. And cry'd to her for helpe, and toulde what hap befell: Howe that a little beast with pricke, did make his finger swell. Then VENVS smiling say'd, if that a little bee? Doe hurte so sore: thinke howe thou hurt'st? that art a childe to see. For where the bee can pierce no further then the skinne: Thy dartes do giue so great a wounde, they pierce the harte within. Cùm quo conuenit aliud ex Anacreonte. As VENVS sonne within the roses play'd, An angrie bee that crept therein vnseene, The wanton wagge with poysoned stinge assay'd: Whereat, aloude he cri'de, throughe smarte, and teene. And sought about, his mother for to finde: To whome, with griefe he vttered all his minde. And say'd, behoulde, a little creature wilde, Whome husbandmen (I heare) doe call a bee, Hath prick'd mee sore alas: whereat shee smil'de, And say'd: my childe, if this be griefe to thee, Remember then, althoughe thou little arte? What greeuous wounde, thou makest with thy darte.
Amor sui. To D. E. woodcut of Narcissus knelt over a stream staring at his reflection, while a figure in the distance has its arm raised Ouid. Metam. lib. 3.NARCISSVS lou'de, and liked so his shape, He died at lengthe with gazinge there vppon: Which shewes selfe loue, from which there fewe can scape, A plague too rife: bewitcheth manie a one.Anulus in pict. poës. Narcissus liquidis for∣mā speculatus in vndis, Contemnent alios, arsit amore sui, &c. The ritche, the pore, the learned, and the sotte, Offende therein: and yet they see it not.Terent. And. 2. & 4. Verum illud verbū est, vulgo quod dici solet Omnes sibi malle me∣lius esse, quàm alteri. This, makes vs iudge too well of our desertes, When others smile, our ignorance to see: And whie? Bicause selfe loue doth wounde our hartes, And makes vs thinke, our deedes alone to bee. Whiche secrete sore, lies hidden from our eyes, And yet the same, an other plainlie sees.Suum euique pul∣chrum est. ad huc neminem cognoui poëtam, qui sibi nō optimus videretur, sic res habet, me de∣lectant mea, te tua. Cicer. 5. Tuscul. What follie more, what dotage like to this? And doe we so our owne deuise esteeme? Or can we see so soone an others misse? And not our owne? Oh blindnes most extreme. Affect not then, but trye, and prooue thy deedes, For of selfe loue, reproche, and shame proceedes.
Nusquam tuta fides. woodcut of an elephant standing beside a tree, behind which stands a man with an axe Aelian. de Animal. lib. 13. cap. 8. scribit quod Elephāti sunt, altitudinis 9. cu∣bitorum, latitud. 5. & lib. 17. ca. 7. quod viuunt ad aetatem 200. Annorum & nonnulli ad 300. & multa mira de illis, lib. 10. cap. 15.NO state so sure, no seate within this life But that maie fall, thoughe longe the same haue stoode: Here fauninge foes, here fained frendes are rife: With pickthankes, blabbes, and subtill Sinons broode, Who when wee truste, they worke our ouerthrowe, And vndermine the grounde, wheron wee goe. Cato lib. 1. Fistula dulce canit vo∣luerem dum decipit au∣ceps.The Olephant so huge, and stronge to see, No perill fear'd: but thought a sleepe to gaine But foes before had vndermin'de the tree, And downe he falles, and so by them was slaine: First trye, then truste: like goulde, the copper showes: And NERO ofte, in NVMAS clothinge goes.Numa Pompilius Roman. Rex 2. Silius 13.Foedera mortales ne saeuo rumpite ferro, Sed castam seruate fidem: fulgentibus ostro Haec potior regnis, &c.
Quod non capit Christus, rapit fiscus. woodcut of a king with crown and sceptre squeezing a sponge onto the ground, while in the background three figures hang from a scaffold, and many people stand at the base of a ladder leaning against the scaffold WHERE couetousnes the scepter doth supporte, There, greedie gripes the Kinge dothe ofte extoll: Bicause, he knowes they, doe but make a sporte, His subiectes poore, to shaue, to pill, and poll? And when he sees, that they are fatte, and full? He cuttes them of, that he maye haue theire wolle? Vnto a sponge, theise are resembled righte: Which drie at firste, when it with water swelles, The hande that late did wette it, being lighte: The same againe, the moisture quite expelles. And to the flood, from whence it latelie came, It runnes againe, with wringinge of the same. Petrus Arbiter.Orbem iam totum victor Romanus habebat, Quà mare, quà terrae, quà sidus currit vtrumque, Nec satiatus erat, grauidis freta pulsa carinis, Iam peragrabantur, si quis sinus abditus vltra, Si qua foret tellus, quae fuluum mitteret aurum, &c.
Paupertatem summis ingeniis obesse ne prouehantur. Ad Doctiss. virum Dn. W. MALIM. woodcut of a man with his left leg and winged left arm raised toward a godlike figure in the heavens, while his right arm is held down by a large stone tied to its wrist ONE hande with winges, woulde flie vnto the starres, And raise mee vp to winne immortall fame: But my desire, necessitie still barres, And in the duste doth burie vp my name: That hande woulde flie, th'other still is bounde, With heauie stone, which houldes it to the grounde. My wishe, and will, are still to mounte alofte. My wante, and woe, denie me my desire: I shewe theire state, whose witte, and learninge, ofte Excell, and woulde to highe estate aspire: But pouertie, with heauie clogge of care, Still pulles them downe, when they ascending are. Inuenalis.Haud facilè emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat Res. angusta domi, &c.
Pro bono, malum. woodcut of a stag in the woods being shot with an arrow by a hunter with two dogs, while two more archers walk in the background Duodecem haec se∣quentia, ob elegan∣tiam, & venusta∣rem: è G. Faerni, se∣lectis fabulis sum∣pta. THE stagge, that hardly skap'd the hunters in the chase, At lengthe, by shadowe of a tree, founde refuge for a space. And when the eger houndes had lefte their wished praye, Behoulde, with biting of the boughes, him selfe hee did bewraye. Throughe which, the hunter straight did pierce him to the harte: Whereat, (quoth hee) this wounde I haue, is iustly my deserte. For where I good did finde, I ought not ill requite: But lo, these boughes that sau'd my life, I did vnkindly bite. Wherefore, althoughe the tree could not reuenge her wronge: Yet nowe by fates, my fall is wrought, who mighte haue liued longe. In pace de bello. woodcut of a boar and a fox looking round a tree at each other THE bore did whette his tuskes, the foxe demaunded why: Since that he had no foes at hande, that should their sharpnes try.
To which, he answere made, when foes doe me beset, They all aduantage gladlie take, and giue no leaue to whet. Which teacheth vs, in peace, our force for warres to frame: Whereby, we either shall subdue, or loose the field with fame. Aliena pericula, cautiones nostrae. woodcut of a lion sitting beside a large pile of game including a stag, a fox sitting beside a small pile looking up at the lion, and an ass lying behind them dead THE lyon, asse, and foxe, goe forthe to hunte for pray: Which done: the lyon bad the asse, the spoile in partes to lay. Then he with greate regarde, three partes alike did share: Wherat, the lyon in a rage, the asse in peeces tare. The foxe he charged then, for to performe the same: Who, all the beste, vppon one heape, did for the lyon frame: And littell of the worste, did for him selfe reserue: Then beinge ask'd, what taughte him so vnequally to carue? This spectacle (quoth hee) which I behoulde with care: Which showes, those happie that can bee by others harmes beware.
Indulgentia parentum, filiorum pernicies. woodcut of a prisoner biting off the nose of an old woman, surrounded by soldiers with pikes and one on horseback; a crucifixion cross lies on the ground nearby A Theefe, condemn'd to dye, to execution lead: His wofull mother did beholde, for sorowe almoste dead. And whilst she kiss'd her sonne, whome she did tender deare: The towarde childe did kisse with teeth? and off her nose did teare? Whereat, the standers by exclaymed at his acte: Then quoth the theefe, my masters marke, I will defend the facte. My mother, in my youthe, did with my faults dispence: And euermore did like me best, when I did most offence. So that, she was the cause that made me doe amisse: For if shee had correction vs'de, I had not come to this. Wherefore, I did reuenge my wronge, in what I mighte: In hope my facte shall mothers warne, that doe behould this sighte. For if the Children steale, and come vnto the rope: It often is the parentes faulte, for giuing them such scope.
Dolor è medicina. woodcut of a woman sitting on a chair in an empty house, while a man leaves through the doorway carrying objects A Purblinde dame agreed with one to helpe her sight; Who, daylie when he home retorn'd, did steale what so he might. At lengthe when all was gone, the pacient gan to see: And then, the false Phisition ask'd the price, they did agree. Whereat quoth she, alas, no remedie I finde: Bycause my sences either faile, or ells my eies bee blinde. For, where my house before was garnish'd euerie nooke: I, nowe can see no goodes at all, though rounde about I looke. Dura vsu molliora. woodcut of a fox cowering before a lion WHEN first the foxe, the lyon did behoulde, Hee quak'd for feare, and almost dead did fall: The second time, he waxed somewhat boulde; But at the third, hee had no feare at all. Which shewes, that artes at first moste harde to see, With triall oft, both playne, and easie bee.
In eos, qui, proximioribus spretis, remotiora sequuntur. woodcut of an astronomer falling into a hole while he looks toward the stars; a Ptolemaic sphere lies nearby TH'ASTRONOMER, by night beheld the starres to shine: And what should chaunce an other yeare, began for to deuine. But while too longe in skyes, the curious foole did dwell, As hee was marchinge through the shade, he slipt into a'well. Then crying out for helpe, had frendes at hand, by chaunce; And nowe his perill being past; they thus at him doe glaunce. What foolishe art is this? (quoth they) thou hould'st so deare That doth forshowe the perilles farre: but not the daungers neare. Morus in Epig.Saturnus procul est, iámque olim caecus, vt aiunt, Nec propè discernens à puero lapidem: Luna verecundis formosa incedit ocellis, Nec nisi virgineum virgo videre potest: Iupiter Europam, Martem Venus, & Venerem Mars, Daphnen Sol, Hersen Mercurius recolit: Hinc factum, Astrologe, est, tua cùm capit vxor amantes, Sidera significent vt nihil inde tibi.
Post fata: vxor morosa, etiam discors. woodcut of four men reasoning with another man beside a strong river COLASMVS wife, in raging flood was drown'd? Who longe did seeke her corpes, against the streame: His neigbours thought his sences weare not sound? And did deride his madnes most extreme: Who call'd aloude, thy wife beneath did fall? Then dounwarde seeke, or seeke thou not at all. To whome, quoth he, the place belowe I see, Yet in her life, gainst reason she did striue: And contrarie to euerie one, woulde bee; Wherefore, I knowe this way she needes must driue? Then leaue, quoth they, and let her still be drown'd, For such a wife is better loste then founde?
Dum aetatis ver agitur: consule brumae. woodcut of a grasshopper and a group of ants at the foot of a bare tree IN winter coulde, when tree, and bushe, was bare, And frost had nip'd the rootes of tender grasse: The antes, with ioye did feede vpon their fare, Which they had stor'de, while sommers season was: To whome, for foode the grashopper did crie, And said she staru'd, if they did helpe denie. Whereat, an ante, with longe experience wise? And frost, and snowe, had manie winters scene: Inquired, what in sommer was her guise. Quoth she, I songe, and hop't in meadowes greene: Then quoth the ante, content thee with thy chaunce, For to thy songe, nowe art thou light to daunce?
Bilingues cauendi. woodcut of a man and a satyr at a dining table A A Satyre, and his hoste, in mid of winters rage, At night, did hye them to the fire, the could for to asswage. The man with could that quak'd, vpon his handes did blowe: Which thinge the Satyre marked well; and crau'd the cause to knowe. Who answere made, herewith my fingers I doe heate: At lengthe when supper time was come, and bothe sat downe to eate; He likewise blewe his brothe, he tooke out of the potte: Being likewise asked why: (quoth hee) bicause it is to whotte. To which the Satyre spake, and blow'st thou whotte, and coulde? Hereafter, with such double mouthes, I will no frendship houlde. Which warneth all, to shonne a double tonged mate: And let them neither suppe, nor dine, nor come within thy gate.
Ars deluditur arte. woodcut of a fox lying in a hollow cave beneath a tree, and a lion standing outside with its tongue extended THE sickly foxe, within her hole was hid, Where, to the mouthe, the lion straight did hye; And did demaunde most frendly, how shee did, And saide, his tonge woulde helpe her, by and by? Bicause there was such vertue hid therein, That all he heal'd, if he did licke their skinne. Then quoth the foxe, my Lorde? I doe not doubt, But that your tonge is soueraigne, as I heare: But yet, it hath such neighbours round about? It can not helpe, I iudge, while they be neare. Wherefore, I wishe you woulde them banishe all? Or ells, I thinke your pacients wilbee small.
In eos qui multa promittunt, & nihil praestant. woodcut of a mother sitting on a bed scolding a child lying there, while a wolf looks round the outside corner of the house In malis promis∣sis rescinde fidē, in turpi voto mu∣ta decretū, quod incautè vouisti, non facias: im∣pia est promissio, quae scelere ad-impletur Isid. 2. Solilo.THE crying babe, the mother sharply threates, Except he ceas'd, he shoulde to wolfe bee throwne: Which being hard, the wolfe at windowe waites, And made account that child should bee his owne: Till at the lengthe, agayne he hard her say Feare not sweete babe, thou shalt not bee his pray. For, if he come in hope to sucke thy blood, Wee wil him kill, before he shall departe: With that the wolfe retorned to the wood, And did exclayme thus wise with heauie hart: Oh Iupiter? what people now doe liue, That promise much, and yet will nothing giue.
Pietas filiorum in parentes. woodcut of Aeneas carrying his father Anchises on his shoulders away from the burning city of Troy AENEAS beares his father, out of Troye, When that the Greekes, the same did spoile, and sacke: His father might of suche a sonne haue ioye, Who throughe his foes, did beare him on his backe: No fier, nor sworde, his valiaunt harte coulde feare, To flee awaye, without his father deare.Foelix proles, quae efficit vt ge∣nuisse iuuet, & generare libeat. Max. lib. 4. Which showes, that sonnes must carefull bee, and kinde, For to releeue their parentes in distresse: And duringe life, that dutie shoulde them binde, To reuerence them, that God their daies maie blesse: And reprehendes tenne thowsande to their shame, Who ofte dispise the stocke whereof they came. Ouid. 4. Fast.Hinc satus Aeneas: pietas spectata per ignes: Sacra patrem{que} humeris: altera sacra, tulit.
Aliquid mali propter vicinum malum. To my Father M. GEFFREY WHITNEY. woodcut of two pots floating in a river Virgilius. Mantua vae miserae ni∣mium vicina Cremonae. Et Angel. Politianus in Manto sua.TWO pottes, within a runninge streame weare toste, The one of yearth, the other, was of brasse: The brasen potte, who wish'd the other loste, Did bid it staie, and neare her side to passe. Whereby they might, togeather ioyned sure: Without all doubt, the force of flood indure.Tu tamen ô, misera ni∣mium vicina Cremonae, Quid fles amissum: quid fles mea Mantua campum Pascentem niueos her∣boso flumine cycnos &c. Et etiam apud Plau∣tum, pauper Euclio recusat affinitatem cum diuite Megado∣ra, facetissime.The earthen potte, then thus did answeare make, This neighborhood doth put me much in feare? I rather choose, my chaunce farre of to take, Then to thy side, for to be ioyned neare, For if wee hitte, my parte shalbe the wurste, And thou shalt scape, when I am all to burste.Ecclesiast. 13. Et ditiorie ne so∣cius fueris: Quid communicabit ca∣cabus ad ollā? quan∣do enim se collise∣rint, confringetur, Diues iniustè egat, & fremet: pauper autē laesus, tacebit. &c. The running streame, this worldlie sea dothe shewe; The pottes, present the mightie, and the pore: Whoe here, a time are tossed too, and froe, But if the meane, dwell nighe the mighties dore, He maie be hurte, but cannot hurte againe, Then like, to like: or beste alone remaine.Ouid. 3. Trist. 4. Viue fine inuidre, mol∣lesq́ue ìnglorius annos Exige, amitius & tibi iunge pares.
Post amara dulcia. To M. THOMAS MYNORS. woodcut of a man reaching toward a thorny rose bush Claud. in nuptiis honorij. Non quisquam fruitur veris odoribus, Hyblaeos latebris nec spoliat fauos, Si fronti caueat, si ti∣meat rubos. Armat spina rosas, mellategunt apes.SHARPE prickes preserue the Rose, on euerie parte, That who in haste to pull the same intendes, Is like to pricke his fingers, till they smarte? But being gotte, it makes him straight amendes It is so freshe, and pleasant to the smell, Thoughe he was prick'd, he thinkes he ventur'd well. And he that faine woulde get the gallant rose, And will not reache, for feare his fingers bleede; A nettle, is more fitter for his nose? Or hemblocke meete his appetite to feede? None merites sweete, who tasted not the sower,Dulcia non meruit qui non gustauitamara. Who feares to climbe, deserues no fruicte, nor flower. Which showes, we shoulde not fainte for anie paine, For to atchieue the fruictes of our desire: But still proceede, and hope at lengthe to gaine, The thinges wee wishe, and craue with hartes entire: Which all our toile, and labour, shal requite, For after paine, comes pleasure, and delighte. When winter endes, comes in the pleasant springe. When nighte is done, the gladsome daye appeares. When greifes be gone, then ioye doth make vs singe, When stormes be paste, the varijng weather cleares. So after paines, our pleasures make vs glad, But without sower, the sweete is hardlie had.
Ʋeritas inuicta To my vncle GEFFREY CARTWRIGHTE. woodcut of a winged, transfigured book being drawn into the cloudy heavens by a hand, away from a horned, devilish figure holding the book down by a chain, with two other demonic figures watching; in the book is written the Latin for "and thy faithfulness reacheth unto the clouds" (Psalm 36.5) ET VS¦QVE NUBES VERI¦TAS TVA THOVGHE Sathan striue, with all his maine, and mighte, To hide the truthe, and dimme the lawe deuine: Yet to his worde, the Lorde doth giue such lighte, That to the East, and West, the same doth shine: And those, that are so happie for to looke, Saluation finde, within that blessed booke. Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? woodcut of a hand emerging from a cloud with a viper or snake hanging off one finger by its mouth, over a smoking fire De Vipera Ae∣lian. lib. 15. ca. 16 & Plin. De nature. hist. lib. 8. ca. 39. & lib. 10. cap. 62. Act. 28.HIS seruauntes GOD preserues, thoughe they in danger fall: Euen as from vipers deadlieTremellius. bite, he kept th'Appostle Paule.
Cum tempore mutamur. Ad Dn. IOHANNEM CROXTON. woodcut of an old man supported by two crutches and a baby in a cradle Ouid. 6. Fast. Tempora labuntur ta∣citísq. senescimus annis. Et fugiunt fraeno non remorante dies.TIMES change, and wee doe alter in the same, And in one staye, there nothing still maye bee: What Monarches greate, that wanne the chiefest fame, But stealinge time, their birthe, and deathe, did see: Firste NESTOR suck'd, and HOMER first was taughte, Bothe famous once, yet both to dust are broughte. Wee first are younge, and then to age wee yeelde, Then flit awaye, as we had not bene borne: No wight so stronge, but time doth winne the feelde, Yea wonders once, are out of memorie worne: This Aegypte spires, and Babell, sawe in fine, When they did mounte, and when they did decline. Claud. de Senec. Veronensi.Foelix qui propriis aeuum transegit in auris, Ipsa domus puerum quem videt ipsa senem; Qui baculo nitens, in qua reptauit arena, Vnius numerat saecula longa casae: Illum non vario traxit fortuna tumultu, Nec bibit ignotas mobilis hospes aquas.Et paulò pòst. Ingentem meminit par∣uo qui gramine quercū. Aequaeuúmque videt consenuisse nemus.
Ouid. 2. Art.Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere foras. To M. MATTHEW PATTENSON. woodcut of Homer and the nine Muses outside a closed door with two female figures looking down from upstairs windows Ouid. 3. Amor. 7. Ingenium quondā fut∣rat preceosius auro. At nunc barbaria est grandis, habere nihil.SOMETIME was witte esteem'de, of greater price then goulde: But wisedome pore, maie nowe goe begge? and starue without for coulde. Yea, thoughe that Homer come, with all the Muses guarde, Yet if he nothinge bringe? must faste, and stande within the yarde? Ingenium superat vires. woodcut of a crossbow with a winding mechanism to draw back the string Ouid. 2. Pont. Adde quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes, Emmollit mores, nec finit esse feros.MANS wisedome great, doth farre surpasse his strengthe, For proofe, behoulde, no man could bende the bowe: But yet, his witte deuised at the lengthe, To winde the stringe so farre as it shoulde goe: Then wisedome chiefe, and strengthe, must come behinde, But bothe be good, and giftes from God assignde.
Malè parta malè dilabuntur. In foeneratores. woodcut of an ape throwing coins from an upstairs window of a house; more treasure on a table can be seen through the doorway Si necessariis con∣tenti essemus, mini∣mè vsurariorum ge∣nus pessimum inue∣niretur Plutarch. de vsur. vit.AN vserer, whose Idol was his goulde, Within his house, a peeuishe ape retain'd: A seruaunt fitte, for suche a miser oulde, Of whome both mockes, and apishe mowes, he gain'd. Thus, euerie daie he made his master sporte, And to his clogge, was chained in the courte. Auaritia omnia in se vitia habet. Aul. Gell. lib. 11. cap. 2. Et idem lib. 3. cap. 1.At lengthe it hap'd? while greedie graundsir din'de? The ape got loose, and founde a windowe ope: Where in he leap'de, and all about did finde, The GOD, wherein the Miser put his hope? Which soone he broch'd, and forthe with speede did flinge. And did delighte on stones to heare it ringe? The sighte, righte well the passers by did please, Who did reioyce to finde these goulden crommes: That all their life, their pouertie did ease. Of goodes ill got, loe heere the fruicte that commes. Looke herevppon, you that haue MIDAS minte, And bee posseste with hartes as harde as flinte. Shut windowes close, leste apes doe enter in, And doe disperse your goulde, you doe adore. But woulde you learne to keepe, that you do winne? Then get it well, and hourde it not in store. If not: no boultes, nor brasen barres will serue, For GOD will waste your stocke, and make your sterue.
Ferè simile praecedenti, ex Alciato. woodcut of a bird or kite perched on a rock looking at another bird or kite sitting in a tree with vomit or its intestines falling from its beak THE greedie kyte, so full his gorge had cloy'de, He coulde not brooke his late deuoured praie: Wherefore with griefe, vnto his damme hee cry'de, My bowelles lo, alas doe waste awaie. With that quoth shee, why doste thou make thy mone, This losse thou haste is nothinge of thy owne.Cato De re Rust Peior ciuis existi∣matur foenerator, quàm fur. De malè quasitù non gaudet tertius haeres.By which is mente, that they who liue by spoile, By rapine, thefte, or gripinge goodes by mighte, If that with losse they suffer anie foile, They loose but that, wherein they had no righte? Hereof, at firste the prouerbe oulde did growe: That goodes ill got, awaie as ill will goe.
Ʋsus libri, non lectio prudentes facit. Ad D. A. P. woodcut of two scholars, one wearing glasses or spectacles, in a study or library full of books on shelves and lecterns THE volumes great, who so doth still peruse, And dailie turnes, and gazeth on the same, If that the fruicte thereof, he do not vse, He reapes but toile, and neuer gaineth fame: Firste reade, then marke, then practise that is good, For without vse, we drinke but LETHE flood. Of practise longe, experience doth proceede; And wisedome then, doth euermore ensue: Then printe in minde, what wee in printe do reade, Els loose wee time, and bookes in vaine do vewe: Wee maie not haste, our talent to bestowe, Nor hide it vp, whereby no good shall growe. Lectio multorum voluminum, & omnis generis auctorum, habet aliquid vagum & instabile: certismelius fertè, certis, ingenia immorari ingeniis immorari & innutriri oportet, si ve∣lis aliquid trahere, quod in animo fideliter sedeat. Senec. 1. Epist. 2.
Studiis inuigilandum. Ad iuuentutem Scholae Aldelemensis in Anglia. woodcut of a table with lion- or griffin-feet in a bare room with two round windows; against the table is a shield with an emblem of a tied bushel of corn or wheat, and on the table are an hourglass, a lit candle and a book, on which is written the Latin for "God is opposed to evil" DEVS OP MA Ouid. 3. Art. Nec qua praeterut cur∣su, reuocabitur vnda: Nec quae praeteriit hora, redire potest. Ʋtendū est aetate, cito pede labitur atas, Nec bona tam sequi∣tur quàm bona prima fuit.WHILES prime of youthe, is freshe within his flower, Take houlde of time: for it doth haste awaye. Watche, write, and reade, and spende no idle hower, Inritche your mindes with some thinge, euerie daye: For losse of time, all other losse exceedes, And euermore it late repentaunce breedes. The idle sorte, that ignoraunce doe taste, Are not esteem'd, when they in yeares doe growe: The studious, are with vnderstanding grac'd, And still prefer'd, thoughe first their caulinge lowe. Then haue regarde, to banishe idle fittes, And in your youthe, with skill adorne your wittes. Studia, quae sunt in adolescentia, tan∣quam in herbis si∣gnificant, quae vir∣tutis maturitas, & quantae, fruges in∣dustriae sint futurae Cicero pro Coelio.Whereby, in time such hap maye you aduaunce, As bothe your Towne, and countrie, you maye frende: For, what I woulde vnto my selfe shoulde chaunce: To you I wishe, wheare I my prime did spende. Wherefore behoulde this candle, booke, and glasse: To vse your time, and knowe how time dothe passe.
Praecocia non diuturna. Doctissimo viro D. STEPHANO LIMBERTO Nordouicensis Scholae Magistro. woodcut of an old man in robes holding a fruit next to flowers including a thistle, and a naked child in a fruit-laden tree THE fruicte that soonest ripes, doth soonest fade awaie. And that which slowlie hath his time, will not so soone decaie. Our writing in the duste, can not indure a blaste: But that, which is in marble wroughte, from age, to age, doth laste. Euen so it is of wittes, some quicke, to put in vre: Some dull to learne, but oftentimes the slowe are sounde, and sure. And thoughe the apte, and prompte: soone learne, and soone forget. Yet ofte the dull doe beare in minde, what first therein was set. Hereof the prouerbe comes: Soone ripe, soone rotten turnes: And greenest wood, though kindlinge longe, yet whottest most it burnes.Omnis profectus ex lectione & medita∣tione procedit. quae enim nescimus, le∣ctione diseimus, quae didicimus, medita∣tione conseruamus. Isid. lib. 3. De sum∣mo bono. Virg. Eclog. 2.O formose puer, nimium ne crede colori. Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.
In foecunditatem, sibiipsi damnòsam. woodcut of a nut-laden tree and two men with sticks raised toward it IF sence I had, my owne estate to knowe; Before all trees, my selfe hath cause to crie: In euerie hedge, and common waye, I growe, Where, I am made a praye, to passers by: And when, they see my nuttes are ripe, and broune, My bowghes are broke, my leaues are beaten doune. Alciatus Quid sterils posset con∣tingere turpius? theu, Infelix, fructus in mea damna fere.Thus euerie yeare, when I doe yeelde increase, My proper fruicte, my ruine doth procure: If fruictlesse I, then had I growen in peace, Oh barrennes, of all most happie, sure Which wordes with griefe, did AGRIPPINA grone, And mothers more, whose children made them mone.Sueton. in vita Neronis. Locus è nuce Ouidiana.Certè ego si nunquam peperissem, tutior essem: Ista Clytemnestra digna querela fuit.
Otiosi semper egentes. woodcut of a sunken figure of Idleness sitting ahead of a healthy figure of Labour (with a cornucopia in its right hand and corn or wheat in its left hand and forming a crown in its hair), both riding in a chariot drawn by ants HERE, Idlenes doth weepe amid her wantes, Neare famished: whome, labour whippes for Ire: Here, labour sittes in chariot drawen with antes: And dothe abounde with all he can desire. The grashopper, the toyling ante derides, In Sommers heate, cause she for coulde prouides. But when the coulde of winter did increase, Out of her hill, the ante did looke for newes: Whereas she harde the grashopper to cease, And all her songes, shee nowe with sighing rues: But all to late, for now for foode she staru'd, Whereas the ante had store, she had preseru'd. All which doe warne, while that our Sommer lastes, Which is our youthe: with freshe, and liuelie strengthe. Wee muste prouide, for winters bitter blastes. Which is our age: that claimes his righte at lengthe. Wherefore in youthe, let vs prouide for age; For ere wee thinke he stealeth on the stage.
Semper praesto esse infortunia. woodcut of three female figures in renaissance dress seated round a circular table with three dice THREE carelesse dames, amongste their wanton toies, Did throwe the dice, who firste of them shoulde die: And shee that loste, did laughe with inwarde ioyes, For that, shee thoughte her terme shoulde longer bee: But loe, a tyle vppon her head did fall, That deathe, with speede, this dame from dice did call. Cuiuis potest ac∣cidere, quod cui∣quam potest. Se∣nec. de tranquil. animi.Euen so, it falles, while carelesse times wee spende: That euell happes, vnlooked for doe comme. But if wee hope, that GOD some good wil sende, In earnest praier, then must wee not bee domme: For blessinges good, come seild before our praier, But euell thinges doe come before we feare. Ouid. 4. Pont. 3.Ludit in humanis diuina potentia rebus, Et certam praesens vix habet hora fidem.
Ʋnica semper auis. To my countrimen of the Namptwiche in Chesshire. woodcut of a phoenix surrounded by flames emerging from a pile of feathers Paradis. poët. Solus in Eois ales re∣parabilis oris, Igne suo vitam dum rapit, igne capit.THE Phoenix rare, with fethers freshe of hewe, ARABIAS righte, and sacred to the Sonne: Whome, other birdes with wonder seeme to vewe, Dothe liue vntill a thousande yeares bee ronne: Then makes a pile: which, when with Sonne it burnes, Shee flies therein, and so to ashes turnes.Mart. lib. 5. Epigt. 7. Qualiter Assyrios re∣nouant incendia nidos: Ʋna decem queties secula vixit auis. Quae quidem auis, iuxta Plinium, Na∣tural. histor. lib. 10. cap. 2. viuit ad sex∣centos sexaginta an∣nos. quo loco & alia quaedam prodi∣giosa commemo∣rantur. quae, quo∣niam ad Emblema∣tis sententiam nihil attinent, cui libebir, legenda relinquo. & apud Aelian. De Anim. lib. 6. cap. 58.Whereof, behoulde, an other Phoenix rare, With speede dothe rise most beautifull and faire: And thoughe for truthe, this manie doe declare, Yet thereunto, I meane not for to sweare: Althoughe I knowe that Aucthors witnes true, What here I write, bothe of the oulde, and newe. Which when I wayed, the newe, and eke the oulde, I thought vppon your towne destroyed with fire: And did in minde, the newe NAMPWICHE behoulde, A spectacle for anie mans desire: Whose buildinges braue, where cinders weare but late, Did represente (me thought) the Phoenix fate. Ouid. Met. lib. 15. Ʋna est quae reparet séq, ipsa reseminet ales, Assyrij Phoenica vo∣cāt, nec fruge, necherbis, Sed Thuris lachrymis & succo viuit amorat, &c.And as the oulde, was manie hundreth yeares, A towne of fame, before it felt that crosse: Euen so (I hope) this WICHE, that nowe appeares, A Phoenix age shall laste, and knowe no losse: Which GOD vouchsafe, who make you thankfull, all: That see this rise, and sawe the other fall.
Hor. lib. 1 Ep. 11.Caelum, non animum. To R. P. woodcut of a leopard wrestling a lion; in the background figures (some in turbans) walk along a river-bank WHY fleest thou throughe the worlde? in hope to alter kinde: No forren soile, hath anie force to change the inward minde. Thou doste but alter aire, thou alterest not thy thoughte: No distance farre can wipe awaye, what Nature first hath wroughte. The foole, that farre is sente some wisedome to attaine: Returnes an Ideot, as he wente, and bringes the foole againe. Propertius 3, 7. Natura sequitur se∣ina quisque sua.Where rancor firste hathe roote, it growes, liue where wee shall: And where as malice is by kinde, no absence helpes at all. The catte, in countries kepte, where are no myse for praye, Yet, being broughte where they doe breede, her selfe shee doth bewraye. The beastes of crewell kinde, where hate, by nature growes, Thoughe parted longe, yet when they meete, become most deadlie foes, Which prooues, no trauaile farre, no coaste, nor countrie straunge: Hath anie force to alter kinde, or Natures worke to chaunge. Propert. 2, 30.Quo fugis ah demens? nulla est fuga: tu licet vsque Ad Tanaim fugias, vsque sequetur amor.
Auri sacra fames quid non? woodcut of a shipwrecked figure, with a large bundle strapped to his back, swimming near an inhabited coastline Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1. Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos, Per mare pauperiens fugiens per saxa per ignes.DESIRE to haue, dothe make vs muche indure, In trauaile, toile, and labour voide of reste: The marchant man is caried with this lure, Throughe scorching heate, to regions of the Easte: Oh thirste of goulde, what not? but thou canst do: And make mens hartes for to consent thereto. The trauailer poore, when shippe doth suffer wracke, Who hopes to swimme vnto the wished lande, Dothe venture life, with fardle on his backe, That if he scape, the same in steede maye stande. Thus, hope of life, and loue vnto his goods, Houldes vp his chinne, with burthen in the floods.
Ʋerbum emissum non est reuocabile. woodcut of a man with a bag grasping with both hands for a bird which is just out of reach Praui sicut in sensu leues, ita sunt in lo∣cutione praecipites: Quia quod leuis cō∣scientia concipit, le∣uior protinus lingua prodit. Greg. Ho∣mil. 5.WHO lookes, maye leape: and saue his shinnes from knockes. Who tries, maye truste: els flattringe frendes shall finde. He saues the steede, that keepes him vnder lockes. Who speakes with heede, maye bouldlie speake his minde. But hee, whose tonge before his witte, doth runne, Ofte speakes to soone, and greeues when he hathe done. Horat. Epist. 18. Et semel emissum volat irreuocabile verbum.A worde once spoke, it can retourne no more, But flies awaie, and ofte thy bale doth breede: A wise man then, settes hatche before the dore, And while he maye, doth square his speeche with heede. The birde in hande, wee maye at will restraine, But beinge flowen, wee call her backe in vaine.Et si vtile est subitò saepe dicere, tamen illud vtilius, sumpto spacio ad cogitan∣dum paratius, atque accuratius dicere. Cicero 2. De Orator.
In occasionem. To my Kinsman M. GEFFREY WHITNEY. woodcut of a naked female figure with winged feet, hair long on top and short at the back, a long scarf, and an open razor in her right hand; she is standing on a wheel floating in the sea near two ships Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 11. ad Bullatium. Tu quamcumque Deus tibi fortunauerit horā, Grata sume mana: nec dulcia differ in annum.WHAT creature thou? Occasion I doe showe. On whirling wheele declare why doste thou stande? Bicause, I still am tossed too, and froe. Why doest thou houlde a rasor in thy hande? That men maie knowe I cut on euerie side, And when I come, I armies can deuide. But wherefore hast thou winges vppon thy feete? To showe, how lighte I flie with little winde. What meanes longe lockes before? that suche as meete, Maye houlde at firste, when they occasion finde. Thy head behinde all balde, what telles it more? That none shoulde houlde, that let me slippe before. Why doest thou stande within an open place? That I maye warne all people not to staye, But at the firste, occasion to imbrace, And when shee comes, to meete her by the waye. Lysippus so did thinke it best to bee, Who did deuise mine image, as you see.
Potentia amoris. woodcut of Eros or Cupid sitting on a rock, with a fish in his left hand and a flower in his right, instead of a bow and arrow Palladius Soranus. Omnia vincit amor, superum rex mugit in aruis, Palluit & Titan, omnia vincit amor. Omnia vincit amor, fle∣xit Proserpina ditem, Martē blanda Ʋenus, omnia vincit amor. Omnit vincit amor, barbam Polyphemus adornat, Pan se vidit aquis, omnia vincit amor. Omnia vincit amor, feruet Neptunus in vndis, Neuit & Alcides, omnia vincit amor. Omnia vincit amor, Salomō, & Scipio victi, Ilion euersum est, omnia vincit amor. Omnia vincit amor cae∣los, & Tartara, & vrbes, Et memora, & pis∣ces, omnia vincit amor. HERE, naked loue doth sit, with smilinge cheare, No bended bowe, nor quiuer he doth beare: One hande, a fishe: the other houldes a flower: Of Sea, and Lande, to shewe that he hath power. Pulchritudo vincit. To the fairest. woodcut of a female figure lying by a stream, being crowned by a cherub; a fish, a hare, a lion, a horse and a bird are also pictured WHEN creatures firste weare form'd, they had by natures lawes, The bulles, their hornes: the horses, hoofes: the lions, teeth, and pawes. To hares, shee swiftenes gaue: to fishes, finnes assign'de: To birdes, their winges: so no defence was lefte for woman kinde. But, to supplie that wante, shee gaue her suche a face: Which makes the boulde, the fierce, the swifte, to stoope, and pleade for grace.
Qui me alit me extinguit. woodcut of a burning torch pointing downward, with the motto "that which nourishes me destroys me" written in latin on a banner QVI ME ALIT ME EXTINGVIT EVEN as the waxe dothe feede, and quenche the flame, So, loue giues life; and loue, dispaire doth giue: The godlie loue, doth louers croune with fame: The wicked loue, in shame dothe make them liue. Then leaue to loue, or loue as reason will, For, louers lewde doe vainlie languishe still. Scribit in marmore laesus. woodcut of a stonemason cutting words into a marble tablet or slab TROIA MIHI LICET TAMEN IN marble harde our harmes wee alwayes graue, Bicause, wee still will beare the same in minde: In duste wee write the benifittes wee haue, Where they are soone defaced with the winde. So, wronges wee houlde, and neuer will forgiue, And soone forget, that still with vs shoulde liue.
Nec sibi, nec alteri. To Aphilus. woodcut of a dog lying in a manger snarling at an ox nearby A, SNARLINGE curre, did in the manger lie, Who rather steru'd? then made the haye, his meate, Yet shew'd his fanges, and offred for to flie Vppon the oxe, who hungred for to eate. And there throughe spite, did keepe the oxe from foode: Vntill for wante, hee faynted as hee stoode. Inuidus alienas ia∣cturas, suos quaestus existimat. Chrys. super Math. Ho∣mil. 41.The couetous man enuious, here behoulde, Who hath inowghe, yet vse thereof doth lacke: And doth enuie his needie neighbour, shoulde But get a groate, if he coulde houlde it backe? Who, thoughe they doe possesse the diuill, and all? Yet are they like the dogge, in oxes stall?
Scripta non temerè edenda. Ad doctiss. virum D. ST. BVLLVM. woodcut of Quintilian seated at a table with pen and ink reaching to restrain a younger man from passing a manuscript to an angelic figure with a trumpet Quinctilij Vat. cen∣sura de scriptis edē∣dis Horat. Art. poët.LO, here QVINCTILIVS sittes, a graue and reuerende fire: And pulles a younglinge by the arme, that did for fame desire. For, hee with pace of snayle, proceeded to his pen; Lest haste shoulde make him wishe (too late) it weare to write againe. And therfore still with care, woulde euerie thinge amende: Yea, ofte eche worde, and line suruaye, before hee made an ende. And, yf he any sawe, whose care to wryte was small: To him, like wordes to these hee vs'd, which hee did meane to all. My sonne, what worke thou writes, correcte, reforme, amende, But if thou like thy first assaye, then not QVINCTILIVS frende?Quid. 3. Fast. Differ, habent parua commoda magna mora. The fruicte at firste is sower, till time giue pleasante taste: And verie rare is that attempte, that is not harm'd with haste. Perfection comes in time, and forme and fashion giues: And euer rashenes, yeeldes repente, and most dispised liues.Senec. Agam. Proinde quicquid est, da spartum & tempus tibi: Quod ratio nequit, sa∣pe sanauit mora. Then, alter ofte, and chaunge, peruse, and reade, and marke: The man that softlie settes his steppes, goes safest in the darke. But if that thirst of fame, doe pricke thee forthe too faste: Thou shalt (when it is all to late) repente therefore at laste.
Orphei Musica. Ad eundem. woodcut of Orpheus with a lyre, seated and surrounded by animals: a unicorn, lions, a goat, an antelope, an ape, a stork, a drinking dog or fox, a stag, and a bird or parrot LO, ORPHEVS with his harpe, that sauage kinde did tame: The Lions fierce, and Leopardes wilde, and birdes about him came. For, with his musicke sweete, their natures hee subdu'de: But if wee thinke his playe so wroughte, our selues wee doe delude. For why? besides his skill, hee learned was, and wise: And coulde with sweetenes of his tonge, all sortes of men suffice. And those that weare most rude, and knewe no good at all: And weare of fierce, and cruell mindes, the worlde did brutishe call. Yet with persuasions sounde, hee made their hartes relente, That meeke, and milde they did become, and followed where he wente.Horat Art. poët. Syluestres homines sa∣cer interprésq. deorum, Caedibus & foedo victu deterruit Orpheus; Dictus ob hoc lenire ti∣gres, rapidosq. leones. Lo these, the Lions fierce, these, Beares, and Tigers weare: The trees, and rockes, that lefte their roomes, his musicke for to heare. But, you are happie most, who in suche place doe staye: You neede not THRACIA seeke, to heare some impe of ORPHEVS playe. Since, that so neare your home, Apollos darlinge dwelles;E. P. Esquier. Who LINVS, & AMPHION staynes, and ORPHEVS farre excelles.Propert. lib. 2. de Lino. Tum ego sim Inachio notier arte Lino. De Amphione Ho∣rat. in Art. poët. Dictus & Amphion Thebanae conditor vrbis Saxa mouere sone te∣studinis, & prece blāda Ducere quò vellet, &c. For, hartes like marble harde, his harmonie dothe pierce: And makes them yeelding passions feele, that are by nature fierce. But, if his musicke faile: his curtesie is suche, That none so rude, and base of minde, but hee reclaimes them muche. Nowe since you, by deserte, for both, commended are: I choose you, for a Iudge herein, if truthe I doe declare. And if you finde I doe, then ofte therefore reioyce: And thinke, I woulde suche neighbour haue, if I might make my choice.
In statuam Bacchi. woodcut of Dionysus or Bacchus sitting playing a drum or tabor next to grape-vines and a cup Ouid. 3. Met.THE timelie birthe that SEMELE did beare, See heere, in time howe monstêrous he grewe: With drinkinge muche, and dailie bellie cheare, His eies weare dimme, and fierie was his hue: His cuppe, still full: his head, with grapes was croun'de; Thus time he spent with pipe, and tabret sounde.Anac. apud Diog. Vitis tres vuas fert, primam vo∣luptatis, secūdam ebrietatis, ter∣tiam moeroris. Chrys. Hom. 46. Ebrietas, tempe∣stas est tam in animo, quàm in corpore.Which carpes all those, that loue to much the canne, And dothe describe theire personage, and theire guise: For like a beaste, this doth transforme a man, And makes him speake that moste in secret lies; Then, shunne the sorte that bragge of drinking muche, Seeke other frendes, and ioyne not handes with suche. Iohan. Samb. in Epigr.Iunge tibi socios pulchrae virtutis amore, Nam Venere & Baccho iuncta repentè cadunt. Propertius.Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas, Vino saepè suum nescit amica virum?
Caecus amor prolis. woodcut of a large ape sitting, holding a small ape in its arms In bello ferrum auto praestat; in vita autem eruditio di∣uitiis. Socrat. apud Stob.WITH kindenes, lo, the Ape doth kill her whelpe, Throughe clasping harde, and lulling in her armes. Euen so, the babes, whose nature, Arte shoulde helpe: The parents fonde doe hazarde them with harmes, And worke their spoile, and bringe them vnto naughte, When foolishe loue forbiddes them to bee taughte. Nic. Reusnerus.Admirata putat formosum Simia foetum: Nempe solet pulchrum cuique placere suum. Maturandum. woodcut of an echeneis, fish, or snake wrapped around a downward-pointing arrow Gellius lib. 10. ca. 11. Maturè, inquit, est quod neque citius est, neque serius, sed medium quiddam, & temperatum est: nam & in frugibus & in pomis, matura dicuntur, quae neq. cruda & immitia, neque caduca & ni∣mium cocta, sed tempore suo tempe∣ratè adulta. Aelian. de Animal. lib. 2. ca. 17. & Plin. lib. 9. cap. 25. & lib. 32. cap. 1. vbi multa mirabilia de Echeneide pisce scri∣bit. & quaedam no∣tatu digna quae sua memoria acciderūt.ABOVTE the arrowe swifte, ECHENEIS slowe doth foulde: Which, biddes vs in our actions haste, no more then reason woulde.
In sinu alere serpentem. Ad Doctiss. V. D. FRANCISCVM RAPHELENGIVM in obsidione Antwerpiana periclitantem. woodcut of the cloaked figure of Sinon looking down on a renaissance city surrounded by the tents, cannons, and soldiers of a siege force THOVGHE, cittie stronge the cannons shotte dispise, And deadlie foes, beseege the same in vaine: Yet, in the walles if pining famine rise, Or else some impe of SINON, there remaine. What can preuaile your bulwarkes? and your towers, When, all your force, your inwarde foe deuoures. In desciscentes. woodcut of a female figure raising her arms in annoyance as a goat kicks and breaks a pot, spilling its contents WHEN that with milke, the goate had fil'd the pot, Shee brake the same, that all about it ranne. Wherat, the maide her pacience quite forgot, And in a rage, the brutishe beaste did banne? Which toye, thoughe shorte, yet sharply reprehendes Beginnings good, that haue vnhappie endes.
Stultorum quantò status sublimior, tantò manifestior turpitudo. woodcut of a group of men looking up at an ape climbing a tree, and of an ape on the ground holding a playing card, the ace of clubs PROMOOTE the foole, his folly doth appeare, And is a shame to them, that make him clime: Whose faultes, before coulde not bee seene so cleare, For lowe estate did shadowe euery crime: But set him vp, his folly soone is harde, Then keepe him doune, let wise men bee prefer'de. Bis dat qui citò dat. woodcut of a wealthy man with a sword standing, handing something to a poor man sitting on the ground DOE not thine almes deferre, when neede doth bid thee haste: For why, one gifte is double thought, that in due time is plaste. Or so. WHEN to the pore thou giu'st, make speede the same to doe: Bycause one gifte in time bestowed, is worthe some other two.
Spes vana. woodcut of a lure, birds wings on a frame hanging from a rope Ouid. Epist. 16. Fallitur augurio spo bona sape suo.THE eager haulke, with sodaine sighte of lure Doth stoope, in hope to haue her wished praye: So, manie men do stoope to sightes vnsure: And curteous speeche, dothe keepe them at the baye. Let suche beware, lest frendlie lookes be like, The lure, to which the soaring haulke did strike? Audi, tace, fuge. To my Nephew RO. BORRON. woodcut of three figures near a fallen column: a man with very large ears; a man in robes; and a man jumping away from a snake HEARE much; but little speake; and flee from that is naught: Which lessons, by these formes in briefe, to euery one are taught.
Importunitas euitanda. woodcut of a man breaking his sword on an anvil, with hammer and tongs nearby WHO that with force, his burnish'd blade doth trie On anuill harde, to prooue if it be sure: Doth Hazarde muche, it shoulde in peeces flie, Aduentring that, which else mighte well indure: For, there with strengthe he strikes vppon the stithe, That men maye knowe, his youthfull armes haue pithe. Which warneth those, that louinge frendes inioye, With care, to keepe, and frendlie them to treate, And not to trye them still, with euerie toye, Nor presse them doune, when causes be too greate, Nor in requests importunate to bee: For ouermuche, dothe tier the courser free?
Strenuorum immortale nomen. To the honorable Gentleman, Sir WILLIAM RVSSELL Knight. woodcut of Thetis standing ankle-deep in the sea next to the tomb of Achilles with three laurel branches on top and a palm tree reaching over it; a dolphin or sea-serpent is in the sea Alij in Rhetaeo littore: sed aliter Claud. Min. su∣per Alciatū, Em∣blem. 48. & Em∣blem. 135. & Plin. Natural. Histor. libro 5. cap. 30.ACHILLES tombe vpon SIGAEA A shore, This representes: where THETIS ofte was seene: And for his losse, did seeme for to deplore, With gallant flower the same was alwaies greene: And at the toppe, a palme did freshelie bloome; Whose braunches sweete did ouerspread the toombe. Which shewes, thoughe deathe the valiaunt ouerthrowe, Yet after fate, their fame remaines behinde: And triumphes still, and dothe no conquest knowe, But is the badge of euerie noble minde: And when in graue their corpes inclosed lye, Their famous actes doe pierce the azure skye. Sen. Her. Fur. Oet. act. 5.Nunquam Stygias fertur ad vmbras Inclyta virtus: viuite fortes Nec Lethaeos saeua per amnes Vos fata trahent: sed cum summas Exiget auras consumpta dies, Iter ad fuperos gloria pandet.
Ʋel post mortem formidolosi. To the honorable Sir IOHN NORRIS Knight, Lord president of Munster in Irelande, and Colonell Generall of the Englishe Infanterie, in the lowe countries. woodcut of two armed men beating drums, and one blowing a bugle or horn; in the background are tents and soldiers or pike-men A Secret cause, that none can comprehende, In natures workes is often to bee seene; As, deathe can not the ancient discorde ende, That raigneth still, the wolfe, and sheepe betweene:Plin. De Nat. Hist. lib. 17. cap. 4. The like, beside in many thinges are knowne, The cause reueal'd, to none, but GOD alone, For, as the wolfe, the sillye sheepe did feare, And made him still to tremble, at his barke: So beinge dead, which is moste straunge to heare, This feare remaynes, as learned men did marke; For with their skinnes, if that two drommes bee bounde, That, clad with sheepe, doth iarre: and hathe no sounde.Claud. Min. super Alciatum, Emb. 117. And, if that stringes bee of their intrailes wroughte, And ioyned both, to make a siluer sounde: No cunninge eare can tune them as they oughte, But one is harde, the other still is droun'de: Or discordes foule, the harmonie doe marre; And nothinge can appease this inward warre. So, ZISCA thoughte when deathe did shorte his daies, As with his voice, hee erste did daunte his foes;
That after deathe hee shoulde newe terror raise, And make them flee, as when they felte his bloes.Aeneas Sisuius 3. Comment. De rebus gestis Alphons. Wherefore, hee charg'd that they his skinne shoulde frame, To fitte a dromme, and marche forth with the same. So, HECTORS sighte greate feare in Greekes did worke, When hee was showed on horsebacke, beeinge dead: HVNIADES, the terrour of the Turke,Coelius Curio. Thoughe layed in graue, yet at his name they fled: And cryinge babes, they ceased with the same, The like in FRANCE, sometime did TALBOTS name.Forres, & magna∣nimi habendi sunt, non qui faciunt, sed qui propulsant iniuriam Cic. 1. offic. Ʋictoria cruenta. To Sir WILLIAM STANDLEY Knight. woodcut of an elephant lying on top of a serpent or lizard; in the background are a figure standing and another impaled on an upright sword with blood flowing from the wound THE Olephante with stinge of serpent fell, That still about his legges, with winding cralles: Throughe poison stronge, his bodie so did swell, That doune he sinkes, and on the serpente falles: Which creature huge, did fall vppon him soe, That by his deathe, he also kill'd his foe.Non est tanti gau∣ch) excelsa tenere, quanti meeroris est, de excelsis corruere: nee tanta gloria se∣qui potest victo∣riam, quanta igno∣minin potest sequi reinam. Awb, Those sharpe conflictes, those broiles and battailes maine, That are atchieude, with spoile on either parte: Where streames of blood the hilles, and valleys staine, And what is wonne, the price is deathe, and smarte: This dothe importe: But those are captaines good, That winne the fielde, with sheddinge leaste of blood.
Pennae gloria perennis. To EDWARDE DIER Esquier. woodcut of a figure of winged Fame, carrying a pen with leaves and blowing a trumpet; it flies in the clouds over three spires or pyramids, and a winding city wall The Erle of Surrey, that wrat the booke of Songes and So∣netres.WHEN frowning fatall dame, that stoppes our course in fine, The thred of noble SVRREYS life, made hast for to vntwine. APOLLO chang'd his cheare, and lay'd awaie his lute, And PALLAS, and the Muses sad, did weare a mourninge sute. And then, the goulden pen, in case of sables cladde, Was lock'd in chiste of Ebonie, and to Parnassus had. But, as all times do chaunge, so passions haue their space; And cloudie skies at lengthe are clear'd, with Phoebus chearefull face. For, when that barren verse made Muses voide of mirthe: Sir Philip Sidney Knighte.Behoulde, LVSINA sweetelie sounge, of SIDNEYS ioyfull birthe. Whome mightie IOVE did blesse, with graces from aboue: On whome, did fortune frendlie smile, and nature most did loue. And then, behoulde, the pen, was by MERCVRIVS sente, Wherewith, hee also gaue to him, the gifte for to inuente. That, when hee first began, his vayne in verse to showe. More sweete then honie, was the stile, that from his penne did flowe. Wherewith, in youthe hee vs'd to bannishe idle fittes; That nowe, his workes of endlesse fame, delighte the worthie wittes.
No haulting verse hee writes, but matcheth former times, NoHorat. lib. 2. Epist. 1. ad Au∣gustum. Cherillus, he can abide, nor Poëttes patched rimes. What volumes hath hee writte, that rest among his frendes, Which needes no other praise at all, eche worke it selfe comendes. So, that hee famous liues, at home, and farre, and neare; For those that liue in other landes, of SIDNEYS giftes doe heare. And suche as Muses serue, in darkenes meere doe dwell; If that they haue not seene his workes, they doe so farre excell. Wherefore, for to extoll his name in what I might, This Embleme lo, I did present, vnto this woorthie Knight. Who, did the same refuse, as not his proper due: And at the first, his sentence was, it did belonge to you. Wherefore, lo, fame with trompe, that mountes vnto the skye: And, farre aboue the highest spire, from pole, to pole dothe flye. Heere houereth at your will, with pen adorn'd with baies: Which for you bothe, shee hath prepar'd, vnto your endlesse praise. The laurell leafe for you, for him, the goulden pen; The honours that the Muses giue, vnto the rarest men. Wherefore, proceede I praye, vnto your lasting fame; For writinges last when wee bee gonne, and doe preserue our name. And whilst wee tarrye heere, no treasure can procure, The palme that waites vpon the pen, which euer doth indure. Homerus vixit, post Roman conditam, sed natus ante, Aul. Gell. lib. 17. cap. 21.Two thousand yeares, and more, HOMERVS wrat his booke; And yet, the same doth still remayne, and keepes his former looke. Sed Plinius secūdus, qui ante Gellium, tempore Vespasiani Imperatotis vixit: De Homeri aetate, lib. 7. ca. 16. Natur. Histor. sic scribit: Iam verò antè annos propè mille, vates ille Homerus non cessauit, &c. Et Cornelius Nepos primo Chro∣nicorum antè Ro∣mam, Homerum vixisse scribit.Wheare Aegypte spires bee gonne, and ROME doth ruine feele, Yet, both begonne since he was borne, thus time doth turne the wheele. Yea, thoughe some Monarche greate some worke should take in hand, Of marble, or of Adamant, that manie worldes shoulde stande, Yet, should one only man, with labour of the braine, Bequeathe the world a monument, that longer shoulde remaine. And when that marble waules, with force of time should waste; It should indure from age, to age, and yet no age should taste. Oh happie you therfore, who spend your blessed daies In seruing GOD, your Prince, your lande, vnto your endlesse praise. And daily doe proceede, with trauaile of the minde, To make you famous heere, and eeke, to leaue a fame behinde.De Pyramidum ae∣tate, incertum, Plin. Natural hist. lib. 36. cap. 12. tamen quas∣dam post Homerum conditas, probabile. De his, Herodotus. Which is the cheefest thinge, the greatest Prince can haue, For, fame doth triumphe ouer deathe, when corpes are clos'd in graue. Euen so, your worthie workes, when you in peace shall sleepe, Shall make reporte of your desertes, and DIERS name shall keepe. Whome, I doe reuerence still, as one of PALLAS peares: And praye the Lorde, with ioyfull dayes for to prolonge your yeares.
Animus, non res. To EDWARD PASTON Esquier. woodcut of Alexander the Great dressed as a king with crown and sceptre opening the door of large barrel in which sits Diogenes with a book, and next to which Codrus sits using a stool as a table IN christall towers, and turrets richlie sette With glittering gemmes, that shine against the sonne: In regall roomes of Iasper, and of Iette, Contente of minde, not alwaies likes to wonne: But oftentimes, it pleaseth her to staye In simple cotes, dos'de in with walles of claye. Erasm. Chiliad. 1. Centuria 8. de Dio∣gene, & quid per vitam doliatem: significatur.DIOGENES, within a tonne did dwell, No choice of place, nor store of pelfe he had; And all his goodes, coulde BIAS beare right well, And CODRVS had small cates, his harte to gladde: Iuuenalis: Tota domus Codrirheda componitur vna.His meate was rootes: his table, was a stoole, Yet these for witte, did set the worlde to scoole? Horat. lib. 1. epist. 2. Qui cupit, aut metuit, iuuat illum sic domus, aut res; Vt lippum picta tabulae, fomenta podagram; Auriculas eithara col∣lecta sorde dolenteis.Who couettes still, or hee that liues in feare, As much delighte is wealthe vnto his minde, As musicke is to him, that can not heare, Or pleasante showes, and pictures, to the blinde: Then sweete content, ofte likes the meane estate, Which is exempte, and free, from feare, and hate. Quis diues? qui nil cupiat. quis pauper? auarus. Biantis dictum per Ausonium.What man is ritche? not he that doth abounde. What man is pore? not hee that hath no store. But he is ritche, that makes content his grounde. And he is pore, that couettes more and more. Which proues: the man was ritcher in the tonne, Then was the Kinge, that manie landes had wonne.
Claud. 1. Ruf. Contentus honesto Fabritius paruo sperne∣bat munera regum: Sudabatq́ue graui con∣sul Serranus aratro: Et casa pugnaces Curios angusta tinebat.If then, content the chiefest riches bee, And greedie gripes, that doe abounde be pore, Since that, inoughe allotted is to thee, Embrace content, then CAESAR hath no more. Giue MIDAS, goulde: and let him pine with shame. Vse you, your goodes, to liue, and die, with fame. Quae sequimur fugimus. To THOMAS WILBRAHAM Esquier. woodcut of the bearded figure of Time, supported by clouds, holding a scythe over a man and woman walking away from a coffer or chest sitting next to steps of a large house or villa WEE flee, from that wee seeke; & followe, that wee leaue: And, whilst wee thinke our webbe to skante, & larger still would weaue, Lo, Time dothe cut vs of, amid our carke: and care. Which warneth all, that haue enoughe, and not contented are. For to inioye their goodes, their howses, and their landes: Bicause the Lorde vnto that end, commits them to their handes. Yet, those whose greedie mindes: enoughe, doe thinke too small: Whilst that with care they seeke for more, oft times are reu'd of all, Wherefore all such (I wishe) that spare, where is no neede: To vse their goodes whilst that they may, for time apace doth speede. And since, by proofe I knowe, you hourde not vp your store; Whose gate, is open to your frende: and purce, vnto the pore: And spend vnto your praise, what GOD dothe largely lende:Plautat Rud. Bonus quod benefit, haud perit, I chiefly made my choice of this, which I to you commende. In hope, all those that see your name, aboue the head: Will at your lampe, their owne come light, within your steppes to tread. Whose daily studie is, your countrie to adorne: And for to keepe a worthie house, in place where you weare borne.
Patria cuique chara. To RICHARDE COTTON Esquier. woodcut of a swarm of bees returning to a hive THE bees at lengthe retourne into their hiue, When they haue suck'd the sweete of FLORAS bloomes; And with one minde their worke they doe contriue, And laden come with honie to their roomes: A worke of arte; and yet no arte of man, Can worke, this worke; these little creatures can. Aelian. de ani∣mal. lib. 1. ca. 59. & 60. Et lib. 5. cap. 11. Et Plin. Natural. hist. lib. 11. cap. 5. & 16.The maister bee, within the midst dothe liue, In fairest roome, and most of stature is; And euerie one to him dothe reuerence giue, And in the hiue with him doe liue in blisse: Hee hath no stinge, yet none can doe him harme, For with their strengthe, the rest about him swarme. Lo, natures force within these creatures small, Some, all the daye the honie home doe beare. And some, farre off on flowers freshe doe fall, Yet all at nighte vnto their home repaire: And euerie one, her proper hiue doth knowe, Althoughe there stande a thousande on a rowe.
Plin. Natural. Hist. li. 11. cap. 5.A Comon-wealthe, by this, is right expreste: Bothe him, that rules, and those, that doe obaye: Or suche, as are the heads aboue the rest, Whome here, the Lorde in highe estate dothe staye: By whose supporte, the meaner sorte doe liue, And vnto them all reuerence dulie giue. Which when I waied: I call'd vnto my minde Your CVMBERMAIRE, that fame so farre commendes: A stately seate, whose like is harde to finde, Where mightie IOVE the horne of plentie lendes: With fishe, and foule, and cattaile sondrie flockes, Where christall springes doe gushe out of the rockes. There, fertile fieldes; there, meadowes large extende: There, store of grayne: with water, and with wood. And, in this place, your goulden time you spende, Vnto your praise, and to your countries good: This is the hiue; your tennaunts, are the bees: And in the same, haue places by degrees. And as the bees, that farre and neare doe straye, And yet come home, when honie they haue founde: So, thoughe some men doe linger longe awaye, Yet loue they best their natiue countries grounde. And from the same, the more they absent bee, With more desire, they wishe the same to see.Ouid. 1. Pont. 4. Rursus amor pa∣triae ratione va∣lentior omni, &c. Primus gradus pietatis est iste, vt quos auctores tibi voluit esse deus, honores obsequns, absti∣neas cōtumelūs, nec vultu laeden∣da est pietas pa∣rentum. Amb.Euen so my selfe; throughe absence manie a yeare, A straunger meere, where I did spend my prime. Nowe, parentes loue dothe hale mee by the eare, And sayeth, come home, deferre no longer time: Wherefore, when happe, some goulden honie bringes? I will retorne, and rest my wearie winges. Quid. 1. Pont. 4. Quid melius Roma? Scythico quid frigore peius? Huc tamen ex illa barbarus vrbe fugit.
Erasmus Chi∣liad. 2. Centur. 4. Adag. 25.Aureae compedes. To G. M. Esquier. woodcut of a man in renaissance dress sitting with his legs in stocks Diogenes dicebat Aristippum (philo∣sophum aulicum) aureis teneri compe∣dibus ne posset ex∣ire. Tertullianus lib. De habitu muliebri cap. 4. Apud Barba∣ros quosdam (quia vernaculum est au∣rum) auro vinctos in ergastulis habent. idem narrat in lib. De cultu feminar. Plutarchus scribit autem in Erotico apud Aethiopas hoc in vsu esse. De quo etiam Aul. Gell. lib. 11. cap. 18.IT better is (wee say) a cotage poore to houlde, Then for to lye in prison stronge, with fetters made of goulde. Which shewes, that bondage is the prison of the minde: And libertie the happie life, that is to man assign'de, And thoughe that some preferre their bondage, for their gaines: And richely are adorn'd in silkes, and preste with massie chaines. Yet manie others liue, that are accompted wise: Who libertie doe chiefely choose, thoughe clad in gounes of frise, And waighe not POMPEYS porte, nor yet LVCVLLVS fare: So that they may adorne their mindes, they well contented are. Yea, rather doe accepte his dwelling in the tonne, And for to liue with CODRVS cates: a roote, and barly bonne. Erasmus Chiliad. 1. Centuria 6. Adag. 76 de Codro.Where freedome they inioye, and vncontrolled liue: Then with the chiefest fare of all, attendance for to geue. And, if I should bee ask'd, which life doth please mee beste: I like the goulden libertie, let goulden bondage reste.
Auxilio diuino. To RICHARD DRAKE Esquier, in praise of Sir FRANCIS DRAKE Knight. woodcut of a ship or galleon balanced on top of a globe, which is encircled by a girdle or rein held at one end by a hand emerging from a cloud THROVGHE scorchinge heate, throughe coulde, in stormes, and tempests force, By ragged rocks, by shelfes, & sandes: this Knighte did keepe his course. By gapinge gulses hee pass'd, by monsters of the flood; By pirattes, theeues, and cruell foes, that long'd to spill his blood. That wonder greate to scape: but, GOD was on his side, And throughe them all, in spite of all, his shaken shippe did guide. And, to requite his paines: By helpe of power deuine. His happe, at lengthe did aunswere hope, to finde the goulden mine. Let GRAECIA then forbeare, to praise her IASON boulde? Who throughe the watchfull dragons pass'd, to win the fleece of goulde. Since by MEDEAS helpe, they weare inchaunted all,Ouid. Met. lib. 7. And IASON without perrilles, pass'de: the conqueste therfore small? But, hee, of whome I write, this noble minded DRAKE, Did bringe away his goulden fleece, when thousand eies did wake. Wherefore, yee woorthie wightes, that seeke for forreine landes: Yf that you can, come alwaise home, by GANGES goulden sandes. And you, that liue at home, and can not brooke the flood, Geue praise to them, that passe the waues, to doe their countrie good. Before which sorte, as chiefe: in tempeste, and in calme, Sir FRANCIS DRAKE, by due deserte, may weare the goulden palme.
Auaritia huius saeculi. To ARTHVRE BOVRCHIER Esquier. woodcut of two hatch doors in a large double door; a richly-dressed man is being led through one and a poorly-dressed man is being led through another WITH double dore this Pallace loe, doth ope; The one, vnto the gallant roomes doth shewe, Whereas the ritche with goulden giftes haue scope; The other, to an emptie benche doth goe, And there, the pore haue leaue for to resorte, But not presume vnto the other porte. For, alwaies that is shutte vnto the pore, But ope to them, that haue the mines of goulde: Then, thoughe the worlde of Poëttes haue no store, No maruaile tho, sith bountie is so coulde;Ouid. 2. Art. Carmina laudantur: sed munera magna petun∣tur, Dummodo sit diues barbarus, ille placet. For, if there did MECOENAS giftes abounde, Newe HORACE soone, & VIRGIL should be founde. Martial. lib. 8. Epig. 55. ad Flac∣cum.Ingenium sacri miraris abesse Maronis, Nec quenquam tanta bella sonare tuba: Sint Maecenates, non deerunt Flacce, Marones; Virgilium{que} tibi vel tua rura dabunt.
Pulchritudo sine fructu. To ARTHVRE STARKEY Esquier. woodcut of a cypress tree THE Cipresse tree is pleasinge to the sighte, Straighte, tall, and greene, and sweete vnto the smell: Yet, yeeldes no fruicte vnto the trauaylinge wighte, But naughte, and bad, experience dothe vs tell: Where, other trees that make not suche a showe, Yeelde pleasante fruicte, and plentifullie growe. This gallante tree that good, and fruictfull seemes, In couerte sorte, a kinde of men doth checke: Whose curtesie, no man but much esteemes, Who promise muche, and faune about our necke: But if wee trie, their deedes wee barren finde, Or yeelde but fruicte, like to the Cipresse kinde. Alciatus.Pulchra coma est, pulchro digestae{que} ordine frondes; Sed fructus nullos haec coma pulchra gerit.
Tempore cuncta mitiora. IANO DOVSAE, nobiliss. viri, Dn. IANI DOVSAE à Noortwijck, F. woodcut of a woman holding grapes standing beside a man pulling grapes from a vine on a wall-frame and stamping them under his foot; on the wall are drawn a face an X a G the alchemical symbol for mercury, and a crescent moon; in the background a still figure sits against a clockwork mechanism THE grapes not ripe, the trauailinge man doth waste, And vnder foote doth treade, as sower, and naughte: Which, being ripe, had sweete, and pleasaunte taste Whereby, wee maie this lesson true be taughte. Howe simple men, doe simplie iudge of thinges. And doe not waighe that time perfection bringes. For in this worlde, the thinges most faire, and rare, Are harde at firste, and seeme both harshe, and sower: But yet in time, they sweete and easie are, Then staie for time, which giues both fruite and flower: And vse our time, and let vs still suppose No greater losse, then time that wee doe lose. Ouid. 1. Remed.Nam mora dat vires, teneras mora percoquit vuas, Et validas segetes, quod fuit herba facit.
Imparilitas. To M. WILLIAM HAREBROWNE, at Constantinople. woodcut of a bird or falcon flying over four ducks or geese pecking at the ground THE faulcon mountes alofte vnto the skie, And ouer hilles, and dales, dothe make her flighte; The duckes, and geese, about the house doe flie, And in eche diche, and muddie lake doe lighte, They seeke their foode in puddles, and in pittes, While that alofte, the princelie faulcon sittes. Suche difference is in men, as maye appeare; Some, throughe the worlde doe passe by lande, and sea: And by deserte are famous farre, and neare, So, all their life at home, some others staie: And nothinge can to trauaile them prouoke, Beyonde the smell of natiue countries smoke. Alciatus.In sublime volans tenuem secat aëra falco: Sed pascuntur humi graculus, anser, anat.
Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 19.Tunc tua res agitur, paries cùm proximus ardet. To M. THOMAS WHETELEY. woodcut of a man seated at a chess-board while another man gets up and gestures at a house on fire AWAKE from sleepe secure, when perrill doth appeare: No wisedome then to take our ease, and not the worst to feare. Still ARCHIMEDES wroughte, when foes had wonne theSyracusa. towne, And woulde not leaue his worke in hande, till he was beaten downe.Plutarch. in vita Marcelli. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 37. No suretie is within, when roofe alofte doth flame: It is a madnes then to staye, till wee haue donne our game. Vegetius. Nunquam impera∣tot ita paci credat, vt non se praeparet bello Et Bern. in Nat. Dom. Ser. 6. Ex consideratione remedij, periculi aestimatur quantitas.Yea, those that helpe deferre, when neighbours house doth burne: Are like with griefe, to see their owne, with speede to cinders turne. Then, cut of all delaies when daungers are begonne, For if beginnings wee withstande, the conquest sooner wonne. Ouid. 4. Pont. 11.Temporis officium est solatia dicere certi, Dum dolor in cursu est, dum petit aeger opem.
Ex morbo medicina. To W. RO. woodcut of Opimius asleep in bed with a doctor or physician standing nearby, a man reaching toward a closed chest or coffer with a bunch of keys, and another man dropping coins on a table beside an open coffer or chest Horat. Serm. lib. 1. Satyra 3. Demosth. apud Volat. Qui animum curat, seipsum curat: qui corpus, non se sed sua curat: qui pe∣cuniam, non se, nec sua curat, sed valdè aliena curat. Plut. de Polit. Maiori odio diui∣tem populus perse∣qui solet, nihil per benignitatē & gra∣tiam depromentem quàm inopem, qui bona subripiat pub∣lica. hoc enim ne∣cessitate domina sti∣mulante, illud ma∣lignitate, atq. con∣temptu fieri arbi∣tratur. Gregor. in Homil. Res suas, cum mo∣reretur, diues secum tolleret, si ad peten∣tis vocem, cùm vi∣ueret, tulisset: nam terrena omnia, quae seruando amitti∣mus, largiendo ser∣uamus. WHEN that OPIMIVS ritche, had scraped manie a pounde; And fil'd his baggs, & cofers full, that wealthe did most abounde. Yet liu'd hee still in awe, as if it weare offence To ope his purce, for any neede; hee spared so his pence. At lengthe, this greedie carle the Lythergie posseste: That vnneth hee could stere a foote, with sleepe so sore oppreste. And languishinge therein, not like for to escape: His heire, was ioyfull of that sighte, who for his goodes did gape. But, when that nothinge coulde OPIMIVS sleepinge let, The quicke Phisition did commaunde, that tables shoulde bee set About the misers bed, and budgettes forthe to bringe, And poure the goulde vppon the bourde, that hee mighte heare it ringe. And bad the heire to tell, and all the standers bye: With that, hee to the sicke man call'de, what meane you thus to lye? And will not haue regarde your treasure to preserue: Behoulde your heire, and all the reste, howe largely nowe they carue? With that, hee started vp; halfe dead, and halfe a liue; And staringe on his heapes of goulde, longe time for life did striue. So that, when nothinge coulde his drousie eies awake, Such vertue, had the sighte of goulde, that sleepe did him forsake. Which showés, when dreadfull deathe presentes the lastinge sleepe: They hardly can departe in peace, whose goulde is rooted deepe. Auson. Epig. 55.Effigiem Rex Croese tuā ditissime Regum Vidit apud Manes, Diogenes Cynicus. Cōstitit vt{que} procul solito maiore cachinno Concussus, dixit. quid tibi diuitiae Nunc prosunt Regum Rex ô ditissime, cùm sis Sicut ego solus, me quoque pauperior? Nā quaecunq. habui, mecū fero, cùm nihil ipse Ex tantis tecum Croese feras opibus.
Fraus meretur fraudem. woodcut of a lion asleep in a cave with a fox at the entrance Horat. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1.THE Lion oulde that coulde not get his praye, By swifte pursute, as he had done of late: Did faigne him sicke, and in his denne did staye, And praede on those, that came to see his state: At lengthe, the foxe his dutie to declare, Came to the dore, to knowe howe he did fare. Who answered, sicke, my oulde beloued frende? Come in, and see, and feele my pulses beate: To whome, quoth he, I dare not now intende, Bicause, these steppes some secret mischiefe threate: For, all I see haue gone into thy denne, But none I finde, that haue retorn'd againe.
Zelotypia. woodcut of Cephalus shooting Procris through trees with a bow and arrow, while a small dog runs nearby A Sicknes sore, that dothe in secret wounde, And gripes the harte, thoughe outward nothing showe; The force whereof, the paciente doth confounde, That oftentimes, dispaire therof doth growe: And Ielousie, this sicknes hathe to name, An hellishe paine, that firste from PLVTO came. Which passion straunge, is alwaies beauties foe, And moste of all, the married sorte enuies: Oh happie they, that liue in wedlocke soe, That in their brestes this furie neuer rise: For, when it once doth harbour in the harte, It soiournes still, and doth too late departe. Ouid. Metam. lib. 7.Lo PROCRIS heare, when wounded therwithall, Did breede her bane, who mighte haue bath'de in blisse: This corsie sharpe so fedde vppon her gall, That all to late shee mourn'd, for her amisse: For, whilst shee watch'd her husbandes waies to knowe, Shee vnawares, was praeye vnto his bowe.Similem de vxo∣re Cyanippi, scri∣bit Plutarchus in Moral.
Medici Jcon. Ad ornatiss. viros D. IOANNEM IAMES, & LANCE∣LOTTVM BROWNE Medicos celeberrimos. woodcut of bearded Asclepius or Aesculapius, crowned with laurels and holding a sceptre and knotted or ragged staff, seated on a throne surrounded by a dog, a cockerel, and a serpent or snake THIS portrature, dothe AESCVLAPIVS tell. The laurell crowne, the fame of phisike showes. The bearde, declares his longe experience well: And grauitie therewith that alwaie goes. The scepter, tells he ruleth like a kinge Amongst the sicke; commaunding euerie thinge.Ouid. 3. Pont. 4. Ad medicam du∣bius confugit aeger opem. The knotted staffe, declares the crabbed skill Moste harde t'attaine; that doth supporte his state: His sittinge, shewes he must be setled still, With constant minde, and rashe proceedinge hate: The Dragon, tells he doth our age renewe, And soone decerne, to giue the sicke his dewe.Hier. in Epist. Corporis debilitas nimia, etiam a nimi vites frangit, mentis quoque ingenium marcescere facit: quicquid cum mo∣do, & temperamen∣to fit, salubre. sit. The cocke, dothe teache his watchinge, and his care, To visite ofte his pacientes, in their paine: The couchinge dogge, dothe laste of all declare, That faithfulnes, and loue, shoulde still remaine: Within their brestes, that Phisike doe professe. Which partes, they all shoulde in their deedes expresse.
Inanis impetus. Clariss. omni{que} doctrinae & virtutis laude ornatissimo viro D. IVSTO LIPSIO. woodcut of a crouching dog barking at the moon with a face behind stars and clouds BY shininge lighte, of wannishe CYNTHIAS raies, The dogge behouldes his shaddowe to appeare: Wherefore, in vaine aloude he barkes, and baies, And alwaies thoughte, an other dogge was there: But yet the Moone, who did not heare his queste, Hir woonted course, did keepe vnto the weste.Ouid. 1. Remed. Ingenium liuor magni detrectat Homeri; Quisquis es, ex illo Zoile nomen habes. This reprehendes, those fooles which baule, and barke, At learned men, that shine aboue the reste: With due regarde, that they their deedes should marke, And reuerence them, that are with wisedome bleste: But if they striue, in vaine their winde they spende, For woorthie men, the Lorde doth still defende. Martial. lib. 5. ad Regulum.Esse quid hoc dicam, viuis quod fama negatur, Et sua quod rarus tempora lector amat? Hi sunt inuidiae nimirum Regule mores; Praeferat antiquos semper vt illa nouis.
In diuitem, indoctum. woodcut of Phrixus riding the ram with a golden fleece through the sea ON goulden fleece, did Phryxus passe the waue, And landed safe, within the wished baie: By which is ment, the fooles that riches haue, Supported are, and borne throughe Lande, and Sea: And those enrich'de by wife, or seruauntes goodds, Are borne by them like Phryxus through the floodds. An other of the like argument. To M. I. E. Plaut. in poen. Pulcrtun ornatum tur∣pes mores peius coeno collinunt. Lepidi mores turpem ornatum sacile factis comprobant.A Leaden sworde, within a goulden sheathe, Is like a foole of natures finest moulde: To whome, shee did her rarest giftes bequethe. Or like a sheepe, within a fleece of goulde. Or like a clothe, whome colours braue adorne, When as the grounde, is patched, rente, and torne. Bern. in Epist. Decor, qui cum veste induitur, & cum veste depo∣nitur: vestimenti est, non vestiti.For, if the minde the chiefest treasures lacke, Thoughe nature bothe, and fortune, bee our frende; Thoughe goulde wee weare, and purple on our backe, Yet are wee poore, and none will vs comende But onlie fooles; and flatterers, for theire gaine: For other men, will ride vs with disdaine.
Interminabilis humanae vitae labor. To M. IOHN GOSTLINGE. woodcut of Sisyphus pushing a rock up a hill Ouid. Metam. lib. 4.LOE SISYPHVS, that roles the restlesse stone To toppe of hill, with endlesse toile, and paine: Which beinge there, it tumbleth doune alone, And then, the wretche must force it vp againe: And as it falles, he makes it still ascende; And yet, no toile can bringe this worke to ende. Plat. de prosper. Hanc rationem deus sequitur in bonis vi∣ris, quàm in discipu∣lis suis praeceptores: qui plus laboris ab his exigunt, in qui∣bus certior spes est.This SISYPHVS: presenteth Adams race. The restlesse stone: their trauaile, and their toile: The hill, dothe shewe the daye, and eeke the space, Wherein they still doe labour, worke, and moile. And thoughe till nighte they striue the hill to clime, Yet vp againe, the morning nexte betime. Aul. Gell. lib. 11. ca. 2. Vita humana propriè vti ferrum est: Ferrum si exerceas, conteritur: si non exer∣ceas, tamen rubigo interficit. Item homines exercendo videmus conteri. Si nihil exerceas, inertia atque torpedo plus detrimenti facit, quàm exercitatio.
Qui se exaltat, humiliabitur.Luc. cap. 18. woodcut of a pot or cauldron boiling over a fire THE boylinge brothe, aboue the brinke dothe swell, And comes to naughte, with falling in the fire: So reaching heads that thinke them neuer well, Doe headlonge fall, for pride hathe ofte that hire: And where before their frendes they did dispise, Nowe beinge falne, none helpe them for to rise. Sol non occidat super iracundiam vestram.Ephes. cap. 4. woodcut of two men embracing with laurel branches in their hands with two swords lying on the ground nearby; in the background are the sun and a palm tree CASTE swordes awaye, take laurell in your handes, Let not the Sonne goe downe vppon your ire. Let hartes relente, and breake oulde rancors bandes, And frendshippes force subdue your rashe desire. Let desperate wightes, and ruffians, thirst for blood; Winne foes, with loue; and thinke your conquest good.Roman. 12.
Omnis caro foenum.Esaiae 4 To M. ELCOCKE Preacher. woodcut of a bundle of grass hanging from a forked stick Quis est, quamuis sit adolescens qui exploratum habeat se ad vesperum esse victurum?ALL fleshe, is grasse; and withereth like the haie: To daie, man laughes, to morrowe, lies in claie. Then, let him marke the frailtie of his kinde, For here his tearme is like a puffe of winde, Like bubbles smalle, that on the waters rise: Or like the flowers, whome FLORA freshlie dies.Sensim sine sensu aetas senescit, nec subitò frangitur, sed diuturnitate extin∣guitur. Cicer. Phi∣lip. 11. Yet, in one daie their glorie all is gone: So, worldlie pompe, which here we gaze vppon. Which warneth all, that here their pageantes plaie, Howe, well to liue: but not how longe to waie. Horat. 1. Epist. 4Inter spem curam{que}, timores inter & iras, Omnem crede diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Grata superueniet, quae non sperabitur, hora.
Peruersa iudicia. woodcut of Midas, with sceptre, crown and ass's ears, lying on the ground close to Pan, playing pipes or bagpipes, and Phoebus Apollo, with a quiver or arrows on his back, playing a lute Ouid. Metam. lib. 11.PRESVMPTVOVS PAN, did striue APOLLOS skill to passe: But MIDAS gaue the palme to PAN: wherefore the eares of asse APOLLO gaue the Iudge: which doth all Iudges teache; To iudge with knowledge, and aduise, in matters paste their reache? Mulier vmbra viri. woodcut of a man running toward his shadow, and another man running away from his shadow OVR shadowe flies, if wee the same pursue: But if wee flie, it followeth at the heele. So, he throughe loue that moste dothe serue, and sue, Is furthest off his mistresse harte is steele. But if hee flie, and turne awaie his face; Shee followeth straight, and grones to him for grace.
In amore tormentum. woodcut of flies flying into the flame of a candle set on a table or pedestal; in the background a female figure leans over a fire and another female figure tastes food while kneeling beside a different fire COSI DE BEN AMAR PORTO TORMENTO EVEN as the gnattes, that flie into the blaze, Doe burne their winges and fall into the fire: So, those too muche on gallant showes that gaze, Are captiues caught, and burne in their desire: And suche as once doe feele this inwarde warre, Thoughe they bee cur'de, yet still appeares the scarre. For wanton LOVE althoughe hee promise ioies, Yet hee that yeeldes in hope to finde it true, His pleasures shalbee mated with annoyes; And sweetes suppos'de, bee mix'd, with bitter rue: Bicause, his dartes not all alike, doe wounde: For so the frendes of coye ASPASIA founde. They lou'd, shee loth'de: they crau'd, shee still deni'de. They sigh'd, shee songe: they spake, shee stopt her eare. They walk'd, shee satte: they set, awaye shee hi'de. Lo this their bale, which was her blisse, you heare. O loue, a plague, thoughe grac'd with gallant glosse, For in thy seates a snake is in the mosse. Then stoppe your eares, and like VLISSES waulke, The SYREENES tunes, the carelesse often heares: De malignitate Crocutae ferae Ael. lib. 7. cap. 22. & Plin. lib. 8. cap. 30.CROCVTA killes when shee doth frendly taulke: The Crocodile, hathe treason in her teares. In gallant fruicte, the core is ofte decay'd; Yea poison ofte in cuppe of goulde assay'd.
Then, in your waies let reason strike the stroke, ASPASIA shonne, althoughe her face doe shine: But, if you like of HYMENAEVS yoke, PENELOPE preferre, thoughe spinninge twine, Yet if you like, how most to liue in rest, HIPPOLYTVS his life, suppose the best. Vincit qui patitur. woodcut of an oak tree breaking beneath the force of a wind produced by a godlike head in the clouds THE mightie oke, that shrinkes not with a blaste, But stiflie standes, when Boreas moste doth blowe, With rage thereof, is broken downe at laste, When bending reedes, that couche in tempestes Iowe With yeelding still, doe safe, and sounde appeare: And looke alofte, when that the cloudes be cleare. Erasm. in Epist. Verè magni ani∣mi est, quasdam iniurias neglige∣re, nec ad quo∣rundam conuitia aures, vel lin∣guam habere.When Enuie, Hate, Contempte, and Slaunder, rage: Which are the stormes, and tempestes, of this life; With patience then, wee must the combat wage, And not with force resist their deadlie strife: But suffer still, and then wee shall in fine, Our foes subdue, when they with shame shall pine.
Aculei irriti. woodcut of a lily flower surrounded by thorn branches WHERE as the good, do liue amongst the bad: And vertue growes, where seede of vices springes. The wicked sorte to wounde the good, are glad: And vices thrust at vertue, all their stinges: The like, where witte, and learning doe remaine, Where follie rules, and ignoraunce doth raigne. Yet as wee see, the lillie freshlie bloomes, Though thornes, and briers, enclose it round aboute: So with the good, thoughe wicked haue their roomes, They are preseru'd, in spite of all their route: And learning liues, and vertue still doth shine, When follie dies, and ignoraunce doth pine.
Neglecta virescunt. To M. RAWLINS Preacher. woodcut of ivy growing on a wall near a seated figure wearing a helmet and holding a scroll and a spear THE Iuie greene that dothe dispised growe, And none doth plante, or trimme the same at all, Althoughe a while it spreades it selfe belowe, In time it mountes, with creepinge vp the wall. So, thoughe the worlde the vertuous men dispise, Yet vp alofte in spite of them they rise. Impunitas ferociae parens. To M. STEEVENSON Preacher. woodcut of sixteen mice running or dancing around two cats, each trapped in a cage WHEN worthie men, for life, and learninge greate, Who with their lookes, the wicked did appall, If frouninge fates, with persecution threate; Or take them hence, or shut them vp in thrall: The wicked sorte reioice, and plaie their partes, Thoughe longe before, they clok'd their fained hartes.
Nemo potest duobus dominis seruire. To M. KNEWSTVB Preacher.Luc. 16. woodcut of a man struggling or bowed beneath the weight of a globe carried on his shoulder toward the sea; behind him two tablets lie on the ground ASIA EUROP AFRICA HERE, man who first should heauenlie thinges attaine, And then, to world his sences should incline: First, vndergoes the worlde with might, and maine, And then, at foote doth drawe the lawes deuine. Thus GOD hee beares, and Mammon in his minde: But Mammon first, and GOD doth come behinde.Matth. 6. Non potestis deo seruire & Mam∣monae. Oh worldlinges fonde, that ioyne these two so ill, The league is nought, throwe doune the world which speede: Take vp the lawe, according to his will. First seeke for heauen, and then for wordly neede.Primum quaerite regnum dei, &c. Ibidem. But those that first their wordlie wishe doe serue, Their gaine, is losse, and seeke their soules to sterue.
Sic probantur. To M. ANDREWES Preacher.Matth. 24. woodcut of three prisoners facing a fire, threatened by two men holding swords and two dogs; above them an arm in the sky holds out a laurel wreath THROVGHE tormentes straunge, and persecutions dire, The Christians passe, with pacience in their paine: And ende their course, sometime with sworde, and fire, And constant stand, and like to lambes are slaine. Bycause, when all their martirdome is past, They hope to gaine a glorious croune at last. Noli tuba canere Eleemosynam.Matth. cap. 6. woodcut of a man blowing a trumpet while putting a coin in the alms-bowl of a beggar lying beneath a tree WHEN that thou giu'st thy almes vnto the pore, In secret giue, for GOD thy giftes doth see: And openlie, will thee rewarde therfore. But, if with trompe thy almes must publish'd bee, Thou giu'st in vaine: sith thou therby dost showe, Thy chiefe desire is, that the world maie knowe.
Superest quod suprà est. woodcut of a man facing the Hebrew tetragrammaton or name of God in the clouds, with his back turned from and his heel spurning a globe lying on the ground יהוה ASI EUROPA AFRICA Peregrinus Chri∣stianus loquitur.ADVE deceiptfull worlde, thy pleasures I detest: Nowe, others with thy showes delude; my hope in heauen doth rest. Inlarged as followeth. Iacob. 1. Ecclesiast. 14. Isaiae 40.EVEN as a flower, or like vnto the grasse, Which now dothe stande, and straight with sithe dothe fall; So is our state: now here, now hence wee passe: For, time attendes with shredding sithe for all. And deathe at lengthe, both oulde, and yonge, doth strike: And into dust dothe turne vs all alike. Yet, if wee marke how swifte our race dothe ronne, And waighe the cause, why wee created bee: Then shall wee know, when that this life is donne, Wee shall bee sure our countrie right to see. 2 Corinth: 5.For, here wee are but straungers, that must flitte: The nearer home, the nearer to the pitte. O happie they, that pondering this arighte, Before that here their pilgrimage bee past, Resigne this worlde: and marche with all their mighte Within that pathe, that leades where ioyes shall last.Via veritas vita. Ioan. 14. Matth. 6. And whilst they maye, there, treasure vp their store, Where, without rust, it lastes for euermore.
Apocal. 6. Apocal. 21.This worlde must chaunge: That worlde, shall still indure. Here, pleasures fade: There, shall they endlesse bee. Here, man doth sinne: And there, hee shalbee pure Here, deathe hee tastes: And there, shall neuer die.1 Corinth. 15. Apocal. 21. 1 Corinth. 2. Here, deathe hee griefe: And there shall ioyes possesse, As none hath seene, nor anie harte can gesse. Amico ficto nulla fit iniuria. woodcut of two men in renaissance dress, one striking the other on the head with a sword or stick SINCE fauninge lookes, and sugred speache preuaile, Take heede betime: and linke thee not with theise. The gallant clokes, doe hollowe hartes conceile, And goodlie showes, are mistes before our eies: But whome thou find'st with guile, disguised so: No wronge thou doest, to vse him as thy foe. Ferè simile, in Hypocritas. A Face deform'de, a visor faire dothe hide, That none can see his vglie shape within; To Ipocrites, the same maie bee applide, With outward showes, who all their credit winne: Yet giue no heate, but like a painted fire; And, all their zeale, is: as the times require.
Sic aetas fugit. To M. IAMES IONSON. woodcut of three bare-backed horses running toward a standard or flag held up by a staff with a fleur-de-lis at the top; on each of the rear two horses sits a naked figure with a whip raised overhead Two horses free, a thirde doe swiftlie chace, The one, is white, the other, blacke of hewe: None, bridles haue for to restraine their pace, And thus, they bothe, the other still pursue: And, neuer cease continuall course to make, Vntill at lengthe, the first, they ouertake. This for most horse, that ronnes so fast awaye, It is our time; while heere, our race wee ronne: The blacke, and white, presenteth nighte, and daye: Who after hast, vntill the goale bee wonne; And leaue vs not, but followe from our birthe, Vntill wee yeelde, and turne againe to earthe.Psalm. 89. Ouid. 1. Amor. 8.Labitur occultè, fallit{que} volatilis aetas, Et celer admissis labitur annus equis.
Philipp. 4.Soli Deo gloria. To M. HOWLTE Preacher. woodcut of a man cutting a tree with an axe HERE, man with axe doth cut the boughe in twaine, And without him, the axe, coulde nothing doe: Within the toole, there doth no force remaine; But man it is, that mighte doth put thereto: Like to this axe, is man, in all his deeds; Who hath no strength, but what from GOD proceedes. Then, let him not make vaunt of his desert, Nor bragge thereof, when hee good deedes hath donne: For, it is GOD that worketh in his harte, And with his grace, to good, doth make him ronne: And of himselfe, hee weake theretoo, doth liue; And GOD giues power, to whome all glorie giue.Iud. Epist.
Dominus viuit & videt. woodcut of Adam kneeling behind a tree, naked, hiding from the question "Where are you?" written in Latin in the heavens VBI ES Genes. 3.BEHINDE a figtree great, him selfe did ADAM hide: And thought from GOD hee there might lurke, & should not bee espide. Oh foole, no corners seeke, thoughe thou a sinner bee; For none but GOD can thee forgiue, who all thy waies doth see. Ex maximo minimum. woodcut of a human skull and a bone lying on the ground WHERE liuely once, GODS image was expreste, Wherin, sometime was sacred reason plac'de, The head, I meane, that is so ritchly bleste, With sighte, with smell, with hearinge, and with taste. Lo, nowe a skull, both rotten, bare, and drye, A relike meete in charnell house to lye,Nic. Reasnerus. Ʋt rosa mane viget, se∣ro mox vespere languet: Sic modo qui fuimus, cras leuis vmbra sumus.
CONCLVSIO OPERIS Ad Illustrissimum Heroëm D. Robertum Dudlaeum, Comitem Leicestriae, Baronem de Denbighe, &c. Dominum meum vnicè colendum. Tempus omnia terminat. woodcut of an oak tree fallen into a river, beside which two others stand; in the background the sun is setting THE longest daye, in time resignes to nighte. The greatest oke, in time to duste doth turne. The Rauen dies, the Egle failes of flighte. The Phoenix rare, in time her selfe doth burne. The princelie stagge at lengthe his race doth ronne. And all must ende, that euer was begonne. Euen so, I, here doe ende this simple booke, And offer it vnto your Lorshippes sighte: Which, if you shall receiue with pleasinge looke, I shall reioyce, and thinke my labour lighte. And pray the Lorde your honour to preserue, Our noble Queene, and countrie long to serue. FINIS.
