4137.7 23480061 26702
A brief ANSWER to a late Treatise OF THE SABBATH DAY. Digested Dialogue-wise between two Divines, A. and B. A. BRother▪ you are happily mett? B. And you Brother also. A. I would I might spend an houre or two with you in private conference, in a point wherein I have of late been not a little perplexed. B. Why, what is the matter, Brother? A. Have you not seene a late Treatise of the Sabbath Day, pu∣bished by an eminent Antistes in this Church? B. Yes: I have both seene, and perused it. A. I pray you what thinke you of it? B. I thinke it is a very dangerous Booke. A. What meane you by that? B. I  to the Author, if it were well examined before . A. How so, I pray you?
B. Because it overthrowes the doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land in the point of the Sabbath. A. Pardon mee; that seemes to mee impossible. B. VVhy? A. Because hee sayth expresly in the very title page of his booke, that it contayneth A Defence of the Orthodox all Doctrine of the Church of England, against Sabbatarian novelty. And there∣fore I am confident, hee will looke to make that good. B. But be not too confident, you know the Proverbe, Fronti rara fides. The fowlest causes may have the fairest pretences. A. That is true you say. But yet I cannot be perswaded, that so great a Personage, would so farre overshoot, as to give that advan∣tage to those, whom hee makes his adversaries. Nay you know his Booke is dedicated to the Archbishop of Canterbury; by whose direction, and that according to his sacred Majesties command, hee was set upon this worke, both for the preventing of mischief, (as him∣self sayth in his Epistle dedicatory to the sayd Archbishop) and to settle the Kings good subjects, who have long time been distracted about Sabbatarian questions. Now if hee mayntaine not, but (as you say) overthrow the doctrine of the Church of England, hee will have small thanks from his sacred Majestie for his paines, who is the Defender of the Faith of the Church of England, and hath often solemnely protested, and that in his publike Declara∣tion about the dissol∣ving of the Parliament. And, Decla∣ration before the 39 Ar∣ticles. Declarations in print, that hee will never suffer therein the least innovation. And what thanks then can hee expect from the Archbishop, trow you? And in stead of preventing, hee will pull on greater mischiefs; and in stead of setling the Kings good subjects, hee will fill their minds with greater distractions. And therefore, Brother, in so saying, you lay a heavy charge upon him. Its dangerous so to charge a person of that dignity, and esteeme in the world. Take heed therefore what you say. You know also that hee is a great Scholar, deeply learned, a reverend Father of the Church so as his judgment is ta∣ken almost for an Oracle. And you know also what is sayd in a late Booke, allowed by authority, that the holy Fathers in God theCommunion Booke Ca∣tech expoun∣ded by Beve. Bishops, are to be guides in Divinity unto the whole Clergy of inferior order, so as all Priests are to submit unto their Godly iudgements in all matters pertayning unto Religion. And the reason is given, be∣cause the Fathers of the Church now and alwayes, doe in the greatPag. 20.
mystery of Godlinesse comprehend many things, which the common people doe not, yea also some things, which Ministers of the inferior order doe not apprehend. So as it is expected of those holy Prelates, that wee must lay our hand on our mouth, when they speake, and be altogether regulated by their profound Dictates. B. I remember well the booke. And I cannot but wonder, that those passages were not expunged, with many others, when the booke was called in, and then the second time published. You know wee live in a learned age, and wee deny the Popes infallibi∣lity, or that it can convey it self, as from the head, and so confine it self within the veines of the bodie of the Prelacy; or that a Rotchet can conferre this grace ex opere operato. And beleeve mee, Brother, when wee see such a Papall spirit begin to perke up in this our Church, is it not high time, trow you, to looke about us? Shall wee stumble at noone day, and in this Meridian of the Gospell close up our eyes, and become the sworne vasalls of blind obedience? No, no. In this case therefore were Goliah himself the Champion, I would, by Gods grace try a fall with him. A. Brother, such a resolution had need have a good ground to stand upon. And being a matter of such moment, it requires our best zeale and strength, especially to vindicate the doctrine of our reverend Mother the Church of England, which wee have sucked from her purer breasts. Nor onely so, but to vindicate her name from reproach. For if it be so, as you have sayd, that the doctrine of our Church is by that booke overthrowne: then consequently (as I conceive) shee must deeply suffer, and be wounded through the sides of those, whom hee so often in his booke brandeth with the odious name of Novell Sabbatarians. B. Brother, you conceite a right. For in truth, all those calum∣nious and odious termes, which hee gives to those, whose opinions (except Brabournes onely) hee impugneth in his Treatise; as, ve∣nimous serpents, noysome Tares, pestilent weeds, and uncleane beasts (termes to be abhorred of all true Christians) and in a word, Novell Sabbatarians: they all result upon our deare Mother, the Church of England. For who are the most of those, or rather all, whom hee thus stigmatizeth? Are they not, or were they not in their time, the true bred children of the Church of England, all un∣animously professing and maintayning her Orthodox doctrines?
Can therefore the mother be free, when her pious sonnes are so tra∣duced and reproached, and that for defending those very doctrines, which by her meanes they sucked from the breasts of both the Te∣staments? A. That must needs follow, I confesse. Now then I pray you, satisfy my earnest desire in this, by declaring how hee overthrowes the doctrine of the Church of England in this point of the Sab∣bath. B. I will make it most cleare unto you. Now the doctrine of the Church of England concerning the Sabbath, is most clearely and fully set forth in the Booke of Homilies; which Booke the 35 Article (to which all wee Ministers doe subscribe) doth com∣mend, as contayning a Godly and whole some doctrine, and necessary for these times; and therefore judged to be read in Churches by the Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be understan∣ded of the people. Now the Homilie of the time and place of prayer, part. 1. sheweth, that our Lords Day is grounded upon the fourth Commandement in the Decalogue; in these words: Whatsoever is found in the Commandement, appertaining to the Law of nature, as a thing most Godly, most just, and needfull for the setting forth of Gods glory, it ought to be retained and kept of all good Christian people. And therefore by this Commandement, wee ought to have a time, as one day in the weeke, wherein wee ought to rest, yea from our lawfull and needfull workes. For like as it appeareth by this Com∣mandement, that no man in the six dayes ought to be slothfull or idle, but diligently to labour in that state, wherein God hath set him: even so God hath given expresse charge to all men, that upon the Sabbath Day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all weekly and worke day labour, to the intent, that like as God himself wrought six dayes, and rested the seventh, and blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it to quietnes, and rest from labour: Even so Gods obedient people should use the Sunday holily, and rest from their com∣mon and dayly businesse, and also give themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and service. So that God doth not onely command the observation of this holy day, but also by his owne example doth stirre and provoke us to the diligent keeping of the same. Good naturall children will not onely become obedient to the Com∣mandement of their Parents, but also have a diligent eye to their
doeings, and gladlie follow the same. So if wee will be the children of our heavenly Father, wee must be carefull to keep the Christian Sab∣bath Day, which is the Sunday, not onely for that it is Gods ex∣presse Commandement, but also to declare our selves to be loving chil∣dren, in following the example of our gratious Lord and Father. So the Homily. And againe, as followeth: Thus it may plainlie appeare, that Gods will and Commandement was to have a solemne time, and standing day in the weeke, wherein the people should come together, and have in remembrance his won∣derfull benefits, and to render him thanks for them, as appertaineth to loving, kind, and obedient people. This example and Commande∣ment of God, the Godly Christian people began to follow immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ, &c. So the Homily, and much more. VVhence wee plainely observe these conclusions: 1. That all Christians ought and are bound in conscience of the fourth Commandement to keep the Lords Day holily. 2. That by the force of the fourth Commandement, one day in 7. is perpe∣tually to be kept holy. 3. That the keeping of the Lords Day is grounded upon, and commanded in the fourth Commandement, and so is not of humane institution. 4. That the Lords Day is and may be called our Christian Sabbath day, therefore it is not Iewish to call it so. 5. That this day is wholly to be spent in holy rest, and dueties of sanctification, and therefore no part of it to be spent in vaine pleasures, and profane pastimes. Now the Author of the Treatise doth overthrow all these conclusions, as is to be seene throughout his booke. A. I pray you shew some instances hereof. B. Pag. 23. his words are, This position (to wit, that the fourth Commandement is properly and perpetually morall, and is for quality and obligation, equall to the other nine Commandements,) (which for many yeares hath raigned in Pamphlets, Pulpits, and Conventicles, and is entertained as an Oracle by all such as either openly professe, or doe leane towards the Disciplinarian Faction) is destitute of truth. These are his words. VVhich comparing with the words of the Homily of our Church already cited, are found quite contrary. For the Homily sayth, that the fourth Commandement is a Law of nature, and ought to be retained and kept of all good Christians; in as much as it commands one day of the weeke for rest; and God hath
given an expresse charge to all men, that the Sabbath Day, which is our Sunday, should be spent wholly in heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and service. So as this man doth most unjustly condemne all those Godly Preachers, that have for so many yeares maintayned the expresse doctrine of our Church in their writings and Sermons; and so hee flatly condemneth our Church, and her doctrine of the Sabbath; wherein shee is more cleare and sound, then any Chur∣ches in the world. And long may this doctrine still florish amongst us, maugre all the malicious opposers thereof, who are so bold as to affirme, that it is destitute of truth. A. I assure you, I begin now to suspect the man; that hee hath not dealt uprightly in the cause. B. Nay it is past all suspition; for his words are so expresse, that they can admit of no favorable interpretation, but that they con∣demne the cleare Doctrine of our Church, touching the perpetuall morality of the fourth Commandement, for one day in the weeke, and so our Lords Day, or Sunday, the first day of the weeke, our Christian Sabbath day, which God hath given expresse charge to all men to keep holy. A. I confesse the words of the Homily are most cleare, with∣out all ambiguity, or obscurity. But yet the Author seemes to ac∣knowledge some morality naturall to be in the fourth Commande∣ment. For pag. 135. hee sayth, Our resting from labour in respect of the generall, is grounded upon the Law of nature, or the equity of the fourth Commandement. B. This is nothing to the purpose, to acquit him from being an adversary to the expresse doctrine of our Church. Dolosus versatur in universalibus (it was the speech of King Iames.) The naturall morality of the fourth Commandement, is not in generall, to im∣ply some individuum vagum, some certaine uncertaine indefinite time for Gods worship: For the Commandement is expresse for a certaine day in the weeke, for the Sabbath day; Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it. It sayth not, Remember to set apart and allow some time for the service of God; but it determines the time, and day; least otherwise being left undetermined, man should forget God and himself, and allow no time or day at all for Gods service; or if hee did, God should be beholden to him for it. But it is a Law of nature, that every Lord and Master should have the
power in himself, to appoint, not onely the kind of service, but the time when it should be performed of his servants. As AlexanderAlex. d'Ales P. 3. q. 32. m. ar. d'Ales sayth, upon the fourth Commandement, The time of this rest it is not in mans power to determine, but Gods. Againe, the adversary acknowledgeth an equity in the fourth Commandement. VVhat equity, if as it bound the ancient people of God to one day in the weeke, it doe not also bind the Christian people to keep one day in the wee nd if it be the equity of the fourth Commande∣ment, to prescribe one day in seaven: then they are very unjust, that deny the keeping of the Lords day to be grounded upon the equity of the fourth Commandement. It were well, if they would stand to equity. But this doth our adversary fly from: For hee sayth in the next words, The particular forme, and circumstances of resting,Ibid. are prescribed unto us by the precepts of the Church. Our spirituall actions, according to that which is maine and substantiall in them, are taught by the Euangelicall Law. Their modification and limita∣tion, in respect of rituall and externall forme; and in regard of place, duration, gesture, habit; and other externall circumstances, are pre∣scribed by the Law of the Church. So hee. Thus you see, how hee limits the prescription of circumstances, (which comprehend time, place, persons) and namely, Duration, when, and how long God shall be served, unto the prescription of the Law of the Church: which hee expresseth more fully, pag. 270. saying, It was in the free election of the Church, to appoint what day, or dayes, or times, shee thought good, or found convenient for Religious dueties; for the Euangelicall Law hath not determined any certaine day, or time; and those actions or circumstances, which are not determined by Divine precept, are permitted to the liberty and authority of the Church, to be determined and appointed. So hee. But cleare it is, that the Church of England disclameth all such power, but ascribes all authority of prescribing a time and day of holy rest unto the Lord of the Sabbath, who hath expressed his will and pleasure herein in his Law of the fourth Commandement; as our Homily sayth. A. But the Homily seemes to favour his opinion, saying, that Godly Christian people began to chuse them a standing day of the weeke, &c. And therefore it seemes to be at the Churches choyce.
B. Our choyce doth not necessarily imply a power of institu∣tion. Wee are sayd to chuse life, and truth, before death and errour: are wee therefore the authors of them? Againe, our choyce herein is according to Gods Commandement. Thirdly, the Homily sayth expresly, that those Godly Christian people, did in their choyce follow the example and Commandement of God. Now what example had they, but Christs rising and resting on that day, after the example of Gods resting the seventh day? And for Com∣mandement, they had both the fourth Commandement, and an Apostolicall precept, 1. Cor. 16. and that place in the Revelation, appropriating this day as holy to the Lord, and so ratified by God himself. And who were they which taught those Godly Christian people, to keepe this day? viz. the Apostles. And therefore wee must put a vast difference betweene the unerring Apostles, and the succeeding Churches, so as the Homily is cleare against him. A. But see, this seemes to me the maine knott of the whole controversy, namely about the designation of the particular and speciall time, consecrated to Gods worship, whither it be compre∣hended and prescribed in the fourth Commandement, or depends upon the determination of the Church. The Adversary confesseth a naturall equity in the fourth Commandement, that some time is to be set apart for the service of God, but indeputate, and left at large to the liberty of the Church to determine and limit the speciall time, when, and how long; what portion and proportion is to be al∣lowed. Now although you have a little touched upon this point already: yet considering it is the maine hindge of the whole matter in question, and the maine ground, whereon the whole waight of the controversy relyeth: I pray you a little more fully to elucidate this point, and the rather (not onely for the settling of my judge∣ment) but for the clearing of our Homily from all false interpreta∣tions, which the Adversary might make for the eluding of those things, which you have observed out of it. B. Your motion is very opportune, and no lesse important. For the Adversary doth the more easily play fast and loose in the myst of his generalities, while, though hee cannot, or dare not for shame utterly deny the morality of the fourth Commandement, (which all Divines doe hold) yet hee denies any particular, spe∣ciall, determinate time to be commanded or limited therein; but
will have that wholly put and placed in the power of the Church. It will be requisite therefore to stoppe this hole, that hee may not have the least evasion, but by the cords of strong reasons, be bound and forced to confesse, that either the fourth Commandement doth prescribe and determine a sett, certain, fixed proportion of time. consecrated by God himself unto his solemne and sacred worship: or els, that it commaunds to us Christians no certain time or day at all, and so the morality of it (if ever it had any) is quite abolished, and no other Law or Commandement now binds us, but the pre∣cept or practise of the Church. This is the very summe and upshot of the matter. A. Sir, I conceive and apprehend it to be so. B. Now I shall proove, and make it evident, that the fourth Commandement either prescribes a certain proportion of time, and a fixed day consecrate to God, and in that very respect is perpetual∣ly morall, binding us Christians to the same proportion: or els, if it determine no sett proportion of time, but leaves it at large to the Church to proportionate, whither longer, or shorter; then there remaines no such obligatory equity in the fourth Commandement, as to bind the Church to appoint and allow such or such a propor∣tion of time; but that if this time, which the Church appointeth, be either one day in 20, or 40, or 100, or one day in the yeare, or so, or but one peece of a day in such a revolution of time, and not one whole or intyre day, much lesse one whole day in every seven; the Church in this sinneth not, as being not guilty of the breach of the fourth Commandement, which bindeth us Christians to no certain proportion of time, as the Adversary himself would have it, but in this respect is now abrogated. His words are: Pag. 90. The fourth Com∣mandement, in respect of any one definite and speciall day of every weeke, was not simplie and perpetuallie morall, but positive and tempo∣rary onely. Which assertion of his, as it is directly, and in terminis, contrary to the doctrine of our Homily fore-alledged, which sayth: By this Commandement (the fourth) wee ought to have a time, as one day in the weeke, &c. and this appartaineth to the Law of na∣ture, as a thing most Godly, most just and needfull for the setting forth of Gods glorie, and therefore ought to be retained and kept of all good Christian people. So the Homily. No, sayth D. Whi one day in the weeke was but positive and temporary onely; and there∣fore
not appartaining to the Law of nature, as a thing most Godly, most just, and needfull for the setting forth of Gods glory, and so ought not in that respect to be retained and kept of all good Chri∣stian people. But wee will not presse him downe with the bare au∣thority of our Church, without showing the grounds and reasons, whereupon it is grounded. Now first observe wee the words of the Commandement, Re∣member the Sabbath day, to keep it holy: which words (sayth the learnest Zanchie) are the very morall substance of the fourth Com∣mandement. The Lord sayth not, Remember to sanctify some convenient, and sufficient time, as the Church shall thinke fit. The Commandement prescribeth a certain and sett time, yea a day, the Sabbath day, one day in the weeke, which is the Sabbath day. Againe it teacheth us what day in the weeke the Sabbath day is, to wit, the Sabbath day of the Lord thy God: that day in the weeke, wherein the Lord our God resteth, must be our Sabbath day. So that as the Commandement prescribes unto us a weekely Sabbath day to be sanctified: so Gods Precedent and example points out unto us, what or which day in the weeke wee must rest on, to sanctify it. And this is not onely the naturall equity (which the ad∣versary in generall confesseth) but the very naturall Law and sub∣stance of the fourth Commandement, to prescribe a set solemne day in the weeke to be sanctified, and not to leave it in the power of man, or of the Church to appoint what time they please. The reasons are these: 1. because the Commandement expresly limi∣teth one set day in the weeke, being the Sabbath day of the Lord our God, as hath bene sayd. Now the Commandement prescribing a set and fixed day in the weeke: what humain power shall dare to alter it into an indefinite time (call it what you will, convenient, or sufficient) to be appointed at the pleasure of man? This is with the Papists to commit high sacriledge, in altering the property of Gods Commandements. For upon this ground, of a generall equity, they have bene bold to suppresse the second Commandement, saying, it is comprised in the first. As they have robd the people of the cup in the Sacrament, saying, the blood is contained in the body, under the formes of bread. So our adversary, imagining a generall (I wot not what) equity in the fourth Commandement, of some certain uncertain time for Gods publicke worship, doth thereby destroy
the very property of the Commandement, which expresly prescri∣beth the Sabbath day in every weeke. A second reason, why it is not left in the power of the Church to prescribe what time men please, is, because as it is Gods prero∣gative, as a Maister, to appoint his owne worship and service, so the time, wherein hee will be served. This God himself comman∣deth in the fourth Commandement. Now as the King will not take it well, that any meddle with his prerogative, and arrogate that to himself, which is the Kings right: so God is justly offended, when men presume to assume to themselves that power, which is proper and peculiar to God alone. If any will take upon him to coyne money, by counterfeting the Kings stampe and name: his act is treason: how then shall they escape, if presume to coyne what time they please for Gods solemne worship, though they set the counterfeit stampe of God upon it. Now the Sabbath day is of the Lords owne making and stamping, and therefore called the Lords day. A third reason, why it is not left in mans power to institute the solemne day of Gods worship, his Sabbath day, or to appoint him what proportion of time they please, is, because an indefinite time must either bind to all moments of time, as a debt, when the day of payment is not expresly dated, is liable to payment every moment; or els it binds to no time at all. For if the Law of God bind us not to an expresse determinate time, or day, consecrate to his ser∣vice: then the not allowing of him a set time, or day, is no sinne at all. For what Gods Law commaunds not, therein man is not bound. And where no Law is of a set time or day, there is no transgression, if a set time, or day be not observed. So as, by this reason, if the Law of the fourth Commandement prescribe no set sacred time, or day for Rest and sanctification, it is a meere nullity. For, to say there is a naturall equity in it for some sufficient and convenient time, and yet no man can define what this sufficient and convenient time is, nay all the wits and heads in the world put to∣gether, are not able to determine it: is, as to say, there is a world in the moone, consisting of Land and Sea, and inhabitants, because there are some black spots in it; which yet is not a more lunaticke opinion, then that is presumptuous and absurd. Hath not the pro∣fane world found by wofull experience, & that of late dayes, within
these two yeares last past, wherein men have taken a liberty to pro∣fane and pollute, but a part of the Lords day: that this is a most horrible sinne? And a sinne it cannot be, but as a breach of one of Gods holy Commandements. For where there is no Law, there is no transgression. The profanation (I say) of the Lords day is clearely shewed to be an horrible presumptuous sinne, and in spe∣ciall a bold breach of the fourth Commandement, by those many markable judgements of God, which have fearefully fallen upon fearelesse Sabbath breakers, and that (I say) within these two yeares last past, the like whereof cannot be paralleld in all the Histories of all the Centuries since the Apostles times. Which alone (if men were not altogether possessed with the spirit of stupidity, and of a croced conscience) were sufficient to teach their dull wits, that the fourth Commandement is still in force, commaunding the Sabbath day to be sanctified, the profanation whereof wee see so terribly punished by divine revenge. A point also, which our Homily hath noted, which were sufficient to admonish the adversary of his pre∣sumptuous oppositions thereunto. A. Sir, you have abundantly satisfied me in this point, and I sup∣pose every rationall man, and true bred-sonne of the Church of Eng∣land. And surely I wonder so learned a man should commit so fowle an errour, as not to search better into the Doctrine of our Church, so clearely expressed in the Homily. B. You need not wonder at it; wee have all knowne him to doe as great a matter as that. For was not his hand to the Approbation of a Booke in print (though afterwards called in by Soveraigne Authority) which contaynes and maintayns many sundry Tenents, both Pelagian and Popish, flatt against the cleare Doctrines of our Church; and whereby hee hath as yet made no publike recan∣tation, to remoove the scandall from the Church of England, and to satisfy so high an offence given? Yea in stead of Recantation, I my self have heard him in open Court speake against both Iustifi∣cation; that a man might be justified to day, and damned to mor∣row; and against Election of some to eternall life; and against theIn the High Commission, at the Cen∣sure of Th. Brabourne. sanctification of the Sabbath, saying, I say, there is no sanctification of the Sabbath, but Rest, Rest onely. And therefore cease to won∣der, that this man should be so feareles, either privily to undermine, or apertly to oppugne the expresse doctrines of our Church.
A. Yet I cannot but wonder, how hee dare be so bold, and upon what grounds hee should thus impune beare himself. B. The grounds I examine not, as pertayning to those that are more judicious, and in highest place over the Church, but the fact cannot be dissembled. A. But perhaps hee will say, this is your private interpretation of the Homily; and of a sort of factions Sabbatarian Novellists. But what instances can you bring of any, that were eminent in this Church for learning and parts, and not any way inclined to the Disciplinarian Faction, that concurre with you in the same judge∣ment and understanding of the doctrine of our Church, layd downe in the Homily? B. First, the words of the Homily (as you have heard, and as every one may plainely see) are so expresse, cleare, and full, that they cannot possibly admit of the least ambiguity. And for instan∣ces, I could give many. I will content my self with two witnesses, enough to establish the matter. VVhat say you to the learned Hoo∣ker, and to the learned Dr. Andrewes? were these any way inclined unto the Disciplinarian Faction? or were they novell Sabbata∣rians? A. No surely; I thinke D. VVh. himself will not say so of them, but will admit them for very competent witnesses in this cause, as without all exception. B. First then for Mr. Hooker: Hee in his fift booke of Eccle∣siasticall Policy, Sect. 70. hath these words: If it be demanded, whether wee observe these times (to wit, holy dayes) as being thereun∣to bound by force of Divine Law, or els by the onely positive Ordi∣nances of the Church: I answer to this, that the very Law of nature it self, which all men confesse to be Gods Law, requireth in generall no lesse the sanctification of times, then of places, persons, and things unto Gods honor. For which cause it hath pleased him heretofore as of the rest, so of time likewise to exact some parts by way of perpe∣tuall homage, never to be dispensed withall, nor remitted; againe, to require some other parts of time, with as strict exaction, but for lesse continuance, and of the rest which were left arbitrary, to accept what the Church shall in due consideration consecrate voluntarily unto like Religious uses. Of the first kind amongst the Iewes, was the Sabbath day: Of the second, those Feasts which are appointed to the Law of
Moses; the Feast of Dedication invented by the Church, standeth in the number of the last kind. The Morall Law requiring therefore a seventh part throughout the age of the whole world to be that way imployed, although with us the day be changed, in regard of a new revolution begun by our Saviour Christ, yet the same proportion of time continueth, which was before, because in reference to the benefit of Creation, and now much more, of Renovation thereunto added by him, which was Prince of the world to come, wee are bound to account the sanctification of one day in seven, a duety which Gods immutable Law doth exact for ever. So hee there. VVhere you see, how in terminis hee agreeth and jumpeth with the expresse doctrine of our Church in the Homily, touching the perpetuall morality of the fourth Commandement, Wee are bound (sayth hee) to account the sanctification of one day in seven (which before hee sayth is now the Lords day) a duety which Gods immutable Law doth exact for ever. The second instance is the late Reverend and learned B. of VVinkc. who in his speech in the Starre-chamber, (which withB. Andrewes speech in Starte∣chamber against Mr. Traske. other of his workes hath been by the great diligence and care of the now Archbishop of Cant. published in print) confuting Trasks opinion about the Iewes Sabbath, hath these words: It hath ever been the Churches doctrine, that Christ made an end of all Sabbaths, by his Sabbath in the grave. That Sabbath, was the last of them. And that the Lords day presently came in place of it: Dominicus, &c. The Lords day was, by the Resurrection of Christ, declared to be theDominicus dies, Christi resurrectione declaratus est Christianis, & ex illo coepit habere festivitatem suam. Aug. p. 119. c. 13 Christians day; and from that very time (of Christs Resurrection) it began to be celebrated, as the Christian mans Festivall. For the Sabbath had reference to the old Creation; but in Christ, wee are a new creature, a new creation by him, and to have a new Sabbath. And a little after: The Apostles, they kept their meetings on that day. On that day they were  (that is) held their synaxes, their solemne assemblies: to preach, to pray, to break bread, or celebrate the Lords Supper, , the Lords Supper on the Lords day: For, these two onely (the Day and the Supper) have the Epithet of , Dominicum, in the Scriptures; to shew Dominicum is alike to be taken in both. This, for the practise then: If you will have it in Precept; The Thus D. Andr. is point blanck against Apostle gives it (and in the same word still) that against  (the first day of the weeke) the day of their assembly, every one should lay apart, what
God should moove him to offer to the Collection for the Saincts, andD. Wh. who pag. 270. (quoted be∣fore) saith, that the Eu∣angelicall Law hath not determi∣ned any cer∣tain day or time. Yet lo here a cer∣tain day de∣termined by the Euange∣licall Law, delivered by the Apostle. then offer it; which was soever in use. That, the day of oblations. So have you it in practise and in precept, both, &c. And after: A thing so notorious, so well knowne, even to the heathen themselves, as it was (in the Acts of the Martyrs) ever an usuall question of theirs (even of Course) in their examining, What? Dominicum Servasti? Hold you the Sunday? and their answer knowne; they all averre it, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum. I am a Christian, I cannot intermit it. And besides others hee cites Athanasius, who shewes the abolishing of the Iewes day, and the succeeding of the Lords day, in place of it, and that so full, as no man can wish more. Last of all, hee both quotes, and commends the Councell of Laodicea, for that Canon 29. That Christen men may not Iudaize, or grow Iewes; that is, not make the Sabbath or Saturday, their day of rest; but that they are to worke on that day, giving their honour of celebration to the Lords day. So hee. I will adde onely a brief note of the same Author in one of his Sermons; on thoseSerm. 1. of the gunpow∣der treason, on Psa. 118 23. 24. words: This is the day, which the Lord hath made: The day of Christs Resurrection, made by God, Dies Dominicus; and to it, doe all the Fathers apply this verse. So hee. I might here also adde what is sayd in that Booke, which is intituled, A Patterne of cate∣cheticall Doctrine, and printed at London 1630. which though itA Patterne of Cateche∣ticall Do∣ctrine. And, the whole Decalogue succinctly & judiciously expounded. have not Dr. Andrewes name prefixt unto it; yet it is well knowne, it was his worke, (even ex ungne Leonem) being his Catecheticall exercise in Cambridge, as I have been credibly informed, and whereof I have the Manuscript by mee, which I keep as an Antiqui∣ty. I know the booke will not very well relish with our adversaries palate. For there (pag. 233.) are these passages. Quest. But is not the Sabbath a ceremony, and so abrogated by Christ? Answ. Doe as Christ did in the cause of divorce; looke whither it were so from the beginning; Now the beginning of the Sabbath was in Paradise be∣fore there was any sinne, and so before there needed any Saviour, and so before there was any Ceremony, or figure of a Saviour. Object. And if they say it prefigured the rest that wee shall have from our sinnes in Christ. Answ. Wee grant it (as comming in afterwards Deuter. 5. 15. as it is in my Manuscript) and therefore the day is changed, but yet no Ceremony prooved. 1. From the Law. 1. By the distinction between the Law and a Ceremony, Deut. 4. 13. 14. the
Law came immediatly from God: the Ceremonies were instituted by Moses. 2. It were not wise to set a Ceremony in the midst of morall PreceptsSo there should be confusion. Manuscr.. 3. This is a principle, that the Decalogue is the Law of Nature revived, and the Law of Nature is the image of God; now in God there can be no Ceremony, but all must be eternall: and so in this Image, which is the Law of Nature, and so in the Decalogue. Second∣ly from the Gospell, Eph. 2. 4. all Ceremonies were ended in Christ; but so was not the Sabbath; for Mat. 24. 20. Christ biddeth them pray, that their visitation be not on the Sabbath day: so that there must needs be a Sabbath after Christs death. 3. Those which were Ceremonies were abrogated, and not changed: but those which were not Ceremonies were changed: as the Ministry from the Levites, to be chosen throughout the world: the seats changed: so here the day changed from the day of Iewes, to the Lords day. Rev. 1. 10. So there. And my Manuscript addeth, And yet a Sabbath, Act. 1. 12. So that this lasteth as long, as the Church militant. So there. Now from the premisses in this instance, wee observe, what was the judgement of that learned Prelate, and how consonant to the do∣ctrine of our Church in the Homily, touching the Sabbath. Hee shewes plainely, that the Lords day comming in place of the old Sabbath day, and so becomming our Sabbath day, is by necessary consequence grounded upon the fourth Commandement, the Law whereof is perpetually, because naturally morall. So as hence I might frame this argument: That day, which comes in place of the old Sabbath day, is commanded in the fourth Commandement: But the Lords day is come in place of the old Sabbath: Therefore it is commanded in the fourth Commandement. The Minor is cleare in D. Andr. and so from all the Fathers universally. The Major is no lesse true; for if the fourth Commandement command the Sabbath day to be kept perpetually in all ages (as sayth our Homily) and that Sabbath day of the Iewes is now abolished, and an other day, the Lords day is now come in place of the old, and is the Christians Sabbath day: then of necessity, doth the fourth Com∣mandement command us Christians to keep the Lords day, as our new Sabbath day. For instance: One is made a present heire, yea and Lord of such an inheritance: hee enjoyeth it for his life; but when hee dyes, his next heire succeeds him in the full title. So here. If they object, But Quo jure, by what right doth the Lords
day take the place of the Sabbath day? I answer with D. Andrewes, and all the Fathers, out of the Psalme, God made it so: And Christs Resurrection declared it to be so: and the Apostles observed it so; yea and commanded it so too. A. I remember the Treatiser confesseth, that the ApostlesPag. 211. & 189. themselves at sometimes observed this day; as Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2. B. At sometimes onely? what? no oftener, then hee finds ex∣presly mentioned? This is like him in Oxford, who in his Sermon sayd, that the Iewes kept the Sabbath, but once in 40 yeares, du∣ring their abode in the wildernesse. This hee gathered, because hee found it but once mentioned. But hee might have found it twice, if hee had looked well. So as this is a most beggerly kind of rea∣soning. And how injurious an imputation is it to the Apostles, to say, that they kept the Lords day sometimes, when as they taught and commanded others to observe it weekly; as hath been noted; did Christian people immediately after Christs Ascension observe this weekely day: and did not the Apostles themselves? This is too grosly repugnant both to good reason, to our Homily, and to the witnesses produced. A. These two witnesses and instances I perceive come full home to the Homily. Onely one thing I observe, that D. Andrewes calls the Lords day our new Sabbath. This is a very rare thing, and that which the adversary in his booke doth much except against, not☜ enduring that the Lords day should be called the Sabbath day. And I remember one passage in it, wherein hee quarrells H. B. for say∣ing, that the ancient Fathers did ever usually call it the Sabbath day. Wherein hee sayth hee hath wronged and wrested S. Augu∣stine in those places by him alledged. B. Concerning that, I have spoken with H. B. and hee sayth, hee will answer, and make good what hee hath sayd against his ad∣versary. And hee told me, that howsoever indeed those words, ever usually, might give advantage to the adversary to carpe, yet being rightly understood, they may passe currant enough. For by, ever usually, hee meant, that all the ancient Fathers, although they alwayes distinguish between the Lords day, and the Iewes Sabbath day, yet they ever tooke and observed the Lords day in stead of the old Sabbath day; and ever used it for the rest-day or Sabbath day
of Christians; Rest-day, and Sabbath-day being all one. And H. B. told me, that if D. Wh. tooke advantage of that, hee could as easi∣lyPag. 207. take advantage of that speech of his, where hee saith, This name (Sabbath) is not given it (the Lords day) in holy Scripture, or by any of the Godly Fathers of the Church. Now (saith H. B.) was not S. Augustine a Godly Father? And hee, not onely in those places, quarrelled by D. W. and which H. B. will more fully cleare from his cavills, but more plainely, and without all ambiguity, in his 251. Sermon de Tempore, speaking of the Lords day, hee hath these very words: Ac ideo &c. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 251. De eo quod scrip∣tum est va∣cate, & vi∣dete quo∣niam ego sum Deus. Ac ideo san∣cti Doctores Ecclesiae de∣creverunt omnem glo∣riam Iudaici Sabbatismi in illam (Do∣minicam) transferre, ut quod ipsi in figura, nos celebraremus in veritate & observe∣mus ergo diem Domi∣nicam fra∣tres, & san∣ctificemus illam, sicut antiquis praeceptum est de Sabbato, dicente Legislatore, A vespere usque ad vesperam celebrabitis Sabbata vestra. Videamus e otium nostrum vanum sit, sed a vespera diei Sabbati, usque ad vesperam diei Dominici sequestrati à rurali opere, & ab omni negotio, soli Divino cultui vacemus. Sic quoque sanctificamus ritè Sabbatum Domini, dicente Domino, Omne opus non facietis in eo. And therefore the holy Doctours of the Church have decreed to transferre all the glory of the Iudaicall Sabbath, or Sabbatisme, unto the Lords day, that what they observed in a figure, wee might celebrate in truth. Let us therefore Brethren observe the Lords day, and sanctify it, like as it was commanded them of old, concerning the Sabbath, the Lawgiver saying, From evening to evening yee shall celebrate your Sabbaths. Let us take heed that our Rest be not vaine, but from the evening of the Saturday unto the eve∣ning of the Lords day, being sequestred from rurall worke, and from all businesse, we may be vacant onely for the worship of God. Thus also we duely sanctify the Sabbath of the Lord, as the Lord saith, Yee shall doe no worke therein. So hee. And a little before in the same Ser∣mon: Dominicum ergo diem, &c. Therefore the Apostles, and Apo∣stolicall men, established the Lords day to be therefore observed with a Religious solemnity, because in it our Redeemer arose from the dead. And which is therefore called the Lords day, that in it wee abstai∣ning from terrene works, or the allurements of the world, might onely attend to Gods worship, &c. So Augustine. And you see he speakes this, not as his owne particular opinion, but as it was the Tenet of the whole Catholike Church. So as the whole ancient Catholike Church did not onely observe, but call the Lords day the Sabbath of the Lord, which they kept in place of the old Sabbath day. Thus did H. B. informe me. And I remember Hilary calls it so, saying;
Though in the seventh day of the weeke, both the name and obser∣vance[Hilar in Psalm. ex∣planato Pro∣logus] Cum in septimo die Sabbati sit & nomen, & observan∣tia constitu∣ta: tamen nos in octava die, quae & ipsa prima est, perfecti Sabbatum festivitate laetamur. of the Sabbath be established: yet wee on the eigth day, which also is the first, doe injoy the festivity of the perfect Sab∣bath. Lo here this Father also calls the Lords day the day of our perfect Sabbath. But this suffice. A. It is a very pregnant place for his purpose, and sufficient to answer fully all the cavills, which are brought to the contrary; so as if H. B. doe but alledge this one place, it will cleare all the other. But Sir, here is a huge clamour, especially of late dayes, raised against the name of Sabbath applyed to the Lords day. I pray you, may it not be called the Sabbath day? And what doth our Church hold concerning this? B. That the Lords day may be called the Sabbath day, I make no question. And that for many reasons: 1. Because it is our Rest∣day: 2. The Apostle calls our rest a Sabbatisme. 3. The very name of Lords day imports so much, as being the Lords holy day, asHeb. 4 see Zanchy de hominis creatione. lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 36. Esa. 58. 13. and that day whereon the Lord rested from his worke of Redemption; and so sanctified by him, and to him. A. D. Wh. denies, that Christ upon the day of his Resurrection rested from the worke of Redemption. B. I conferred with H. B. about this, because it much con∣cernes him to quitt this question, seeing on Christs resting on that day, hee grounds the Sabbatisme of it, as agreeable to the fourth Commandement. And in my judgement, if hee can evince and cleare it, it will proove unanswerable. And hee tells me, that hee hath in two severall Treatises in Latin against Theo. Brab. fully cleared it, and remooved all objections and cavillations, that either Th. Br. or F. VVh. have or can bring to the contrary. And hee pur∣poseth to doe the like to D. VVh. And hee made it very cleare to me, that Christs Rest from the worke of Redemption from sinne on the Crosse, and from death in the grave (which was a branch of that worke) began not, till his Resurrection. As for his Ascen∣sion, that was into the place of rest; but his Resurrection was into the state of rest. As for D. VVh. his objection, with Th. Brab. that Christ laboured on that day: H. B. shewes it to be absurd and ridi∣culous, seeing Christ arose with a body glorifyed and impassible, so as his actions that day could not be called a labour, that thereby the new Sabbath should be broken. But you aske me, what our
Church holdeth concerning this, that the Lords day is called the Sabbath day. In brief, I have observed, that in the Homilies it is no lesse then ten severall times called expresly the Sabbath day;☞ 8. times in the Homily fore-cited, and twice in the third Homily of Rebellion. Also Canon 70. in the Articles of the two last Trien∣niall visitations of London. In K. Iames his Proclamation May 7. 1603 twice. In an exhortation at a generall Fast set forth by him in the first yeare of his Raigne. In Archbishop Bancrofts visitation Articles for Canterbury, Art. 75. 76. I might compile a whole vo∣lume of instances in this kind. Yea there seldome comes forth a Brief, but it calls it the Sabbath day. But least neither the Church of England in her publike doctrine, nor the pious workes of her grave and learned sons, may perhaps satisfy the Adversaries impor∣tunity: yet I hope the writings of his more pious, and no lesse lear∣ned brother D. Iohn VVhite, (and those also both republished, and vindicated by Fr. VVhite, from the Iesuites calumnies, white dyed black &c.) will a little qualify him. How D. Iohn VVhite doth not onely call the Lords day the Sabbath day, as once Sect. 38. 1.The way to the true Church. and twice Sect. 43. digress. 46. 6. but hee also condemnes all pro∣fane sports and recreations on that day, and among the rest daun∣cing for one. And for this hee alledgeth the example of the Pa∣pists, as the most notorious Sabbath-breakers in this kind. A. Doth hee so, Sir; This seemes strange to me, that so great a Clerke, as Fr. VVhite, should so farre forget himself, as not to re∣member what his brother hath write. Surely if it be so, it will be a cooling card, and no small disgrace to his Lo; when so worthy and reverend a Brother shall be brought as a witnesse against him. But I pray you for my better satisfaction, relate to me the very passages and words of D. Iohn VVhite. B. I will. In Digress. 46. the title whereofis, Naming certainIbid. Sect 43. Digress. 46. n. 6. points of the Popish Religion, which directly tend to the mainte∣nance of open sinne, and liberty of life. Now among many fowle and profane practises (as hee calls them) this hee notes for one, namely the profanation of the Sabbath, in these words: That they hold it lawfull on the Sabbath day, to follow suits, travell, hunt, DANCE, keep faires, and such like. This is it that hath made Pa∣pists the most notorious Sabbath-breakers that live. So hee. AndIbid Sect. 38. n. 1. Sect. 38. n. 1. hee sayth: Let it be observed, if all disorders be not
most in those parts among us, where the people is most Pope-ho∣ly, &c. And for mine owne part, having spent much of my time among them, this I have found, that in all excesse of sinne, Papists have bene the ringleaders, in riotous companies, in drunken mee∣tings, in seditious assemblies and practises, in profaning the Sab∣bath in quarrells and brawles, in stage-playes, Greenes, Ales, and all heathenish customes, &c. Thus this reverend Divine, Candore no∣tabilis ipso, whom all the Iesuiticall smoke out of the bottomlesse pit cannot besweere or besumdge, or dye blacke with all their black-mouthed obloquies. A. Surely these are very pregnant passages. And it makes me tremble to thinke, and amazeth me, how one White is so contrary to another; as also, how the Libertinisme dispensed now a dayes on the Sabbath, tendeth to bring us Protestants to be like to the Papists in their profane times, in taking up their heathenish savage, and barbarous maners and customes. B. Wee have all of us cause to lament what wee see, and to feare yet more sinfull mischiefs to follow, if they be not prevented. A. I begin to blame my owne negligence, I did not thinke that our Church, and the Archbishops and Bishops themselves, and K. Iames and others had so familiarly used to call the Lords day the Sabbath day. And it seemeth, that D. Wh. hath not well read over out owne Church Records, how skillfull soever he professe himself to be in Antiquity, tanquam in aliena republica, ; or as the Lamiae, who abroad carryed their eyes in their heads, but at home closed them up in a box. Otherwise, I suppose he would not so frequently brand all those for novell Sabbatarians, who call the Lords day the Sabbath day. B. VVhat is his reason, I know not. Let him looke to it. Me thinks the very reading of the fourth Commandement every Lords day, might stop his mouth; saving that hee hath found out many in∣ventions to elude the nature and property of this Commandement, as pag. 158. 159. &c. which I hope H. B. will meet withall. A. I shall be glad to see it. And yet I somewhat correct my former conceit of D. VVh. For I find, hee hath read the Homily and Injunction, as pag. 224. B. Indeed I thanke you for minding me of it. I remember hePag. 224. quotes the Homily in one place of his Booke (and that is all as
farre as I have observed) where hee hath picked out one little peece, to maintayne his Christian Libertinisme in point of labour on the Lords day. But it is altogether perverted by him for works of great necessity, as scathfire, invasion of enemyes, &c. God al∣lowes on the Sabbath. And the Injunction of Queene Eliz. 20. hee there also no lesse perverteth, while hee confounds the Lords day with other holy dayes, which the Injunction doth clearely di∣stinguish for that liberty, which it dispenseth with, touching worke in harvest time is not spoken of the Lords day, or Holy day, as it is there called, and set alone by it self, but of holy and festivall dayes onely, of humain institution. A. And I thanke you for this observation. And falling here upon worke on the Lords day, I am occasiotied to aske your judgement of those passages of his, touching Recreations on that day, in which argument hee hath spent many leaves. B. But without any good fruit. And as his discourses here∣upon are large, so they require a large confutation, which I hope H. B. will performe. For the present, a little to satisfy your re∣quest, thus much: Hee distinguisheth Recreations into two sorts: 1. Honest and lawfull. 2. Vitious and unlawfull. For his defini∣tions, or descriptions of them, I passe them by, as requiring a larger answer. In summe, I note his pitifull enterfeerings by equivoca∣tions, contradictions, and the artifice of his purest naturall wit, in spinning a curious web of so fine a thred, as wherewith though he may thinke to cover himself, yet it is pervious and penetrable to eve∣ry eye. Hee sayth, All kinds of Recreation, which are of evill qua∣lity,Pag. 229. in respect of their object; or which are attended with evill and vi∣cious circumstances, are unlawfull, and to be refrayned upon all dayes, and at all seasons. But if they be used upon the Lords day, or on other Festivall dayes, they are sacrilegious, because they rob God of his honour, to whose worship and service the holy day is devoted: and they defile the soules of men, for the cleansing and edifying whereof the holy day is deputed. And pag. 259. hee relates out of ancient Imperiall Edicts, that all obscene, lascivious, and voluptuous pastime▪ are prohibited, &c. And yet pag. 266. hee hath these words: This seemeth to me to have been a prime motive to our Religious Gover∣nors, of allowing the people of the Land some Recreations (not prohi∣bited by our Lawes) upon the holy dayes. For if they should (upon
Puritan principles) restrain them wholly from all repast▪ the Holy∣day would be more unwelcome to them, then the plough-day: and be∣sides, it might ingender in peoples mindes a distast of their present Religion, and manner of serving God. So hee. VVhere I note sundry poore and pitifull shifts and shulings. For first, pag. 258. hee sayth, Also our most gracious and Religious Soveraigne is the Lords Vicegerent, to restraine the abuse, and scandalous profanation of the Lords day: And hee is a noble Successor of those glorious Prin∣ces, which in ancient times, by their Royall and Imperiall Edicts and Constitutions, prohibited on this day, All obscene, lascivious, and voluptuous pastimes, &c. If then I might be so bold, I would aske him, what hee thinkes of promiscuous meetings of wanton youth in their May-games, setting up of May-poles, dancing about them, dancing the Morice, and leading the ringdance, and the like: unto which D. VVh. in the former passage, 266. doth not obscure∣ly point as it were with the finger. Are not these obscene, or lasci∣vious and voluptuous pastimes? And if so, are they not prohibited by Royall and Imperiall Edicts and Constitutions of those glorious ancient Princes, whereof our most Gratious and Religious Sove∣raigne, the Lords Vicegerent, for restraining the abuse and scanda∣lous profanation of the Lords day, is a noble Successor? Lo then, what a monstrous Contradiction is here. A. But doe ancient Emperours in their Imperiall Edicts prohi∣bite such Recreations on the Lords day? B. I will give you one instance, in stead of many. Carolus M.Caroli M. Leges Eccle∣siast. lib. 6. cap. 202. Placuit, It is our pleasure, that all the faithfull doe reverently observe the Lords day, in which the Lord rose againe. For if Pagans, for the memory and reverence of their gods, doe celebrate certain dayes, and the Iewes doe carnally observe the Sabbath: how much more ought this day to be honorably celebrated of Christians, that on this Holy∣day they attend not upon vaine fables, or idle chat, or songs, or dances, or scoffings, standing in the Crosse-wayes, or streets, as they usually doe; but that they have recourse to the Priests, or some wise, and good man, that they may profit by their preaching and good discourses, such as concerne the soule. In like sort also les shepheards, or keepers of cattell, by going and returning into the feilds, and home againe, doe so, that all may know such to be true, and devout Christians. So hee. And his Sonne, Ludovicus Pius, in his Additionalls, repeating the
selfsame Constitution of his Father verbatim, doth add these words:Ludovic. Pius ibid. Additio c. 9. Proinde, &c. Therefore it is necessary, that first Preists, Kings and Princes, and all the faithfull, doe most devoutly give all due ob∣servance, and reverence to this day. So hee. A. A most noble instance, and home. For I perceive this Im∣periall Decree condemnes all dauncing, especially on the Lords day. But let me not interrupt you. B. To proceed then upon the former passages: Secondly, I note how poorely hee playes the Divine, or Doctor, by giving in∣dulgence of more liberty to such as have queasy stomaks, and can∣not digest those wholesome meates, which Gods word, and all sound Divines and Doctours doe prescribe. This is just, as if a sick Patient should refuse some bitter pills or potions, which are for his health, complayning hee cannot indure the bitternesse of them: and then forsooth his palate must be pleased with some delicious thing, which corrupts the stomacke, and feedeth the disease. Or as if a wanton boy must be permitted so many houres play every day, because hee hath learned one lesson, and complaynes the taske is too hard to learne more. Or as if a Servant, being set about his Maisters businesse, though it be otherwise easie and tolerable, yet complaynes it is too hard a taske, and therefore hee must have li∣berty to take his pleasure one part of the day. And surely this fol∣lowes by good reason, from the greater to the lesse, from Gods day to mans day, and from Gods service to mans service. Give man a power thus to dispense with a part of the Lords day, which is an incrochment upon the fourth Commandement, according to the doctrine of our Church: and why may not man assume to himself a power (as the Pope doth) to dispense with servants, or children, by allowing them sometime, wherein they shall be free from the controll of their Maisters and Parents? Thirdly, I note what a great blemish hee fastens upon our Reli∣gion, as if it were either too rigorous, or too licentious. Too rigo∣rous, by laying no other burthen upon them, but that of Christ, which though in its owne nature it be light and easy, yet to the sonnes of Belial it seemes insupportable, and intolerable. As if san∣ctitie, and purity of life were an over rigid precisenesse, and a Puri∣tan principle. Or too licentious, by giving indulgence, and dispen∣sation to loose Libertines, and teaching men to become more filthy
still, and to be as the uncleane Beasts, that chew not the Cudde, or as the sow that is washed, to returne to their wallowing in their profuse and profane sports and pastimes, when no sooner they are out of the Church, but they runne to their excesse of riot. And here I cannot but record an excellent passage in Nazianzen, to shame the impudency of these times. This Godly Father, reproo∣ving the loose carriage of Christians in his time, especially on the dayes of solemne and sacred assemblyes, as on the Lords dayes, sayth: Postquam, &c. After they are gone out of the Church, ca∣stingClem. Alex. Poedag. lib. 3 c. 11. nere the end. Hee lived about the yeare of Christ 200. aside all that instruction, they had there learned, they fashion themselves to the vulgar, with whom they converse; or rather laying aside the false and counterfait vizard of gravity, they are discovered to be such, as they were not knowne to be before: and having seemed to give some reverence to Gods word, while it was preached, they leave it: and out of the Church, they fall to delight and sport themselves in an impious maner, and with love songs, with the noise of Minstrells, as piping, clapping the hands, being full of strong drinke, and defiled with all kind of muddy and dorty pleasures. And whilst they chant it over and over, they who celebrated the honour of immortality, by and by fall to a most wicked recantation; Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow wee shall dye. And these are not dead to morrow, but indeed are now dead unto God; burying the dead, that is, themselves, in the grave of death. So hee. Which liberty even the Papists them∣selves, and Bellarmine abundantly, doe with open voyce declame against, and are ashamed of, so farre will they be from being wil∣ling to be drawn to such a Religion, by the motives of such liberty. And herein doth our Treatiser miserably abuse the Scripture, and so turne the Grace of God into wantonnes. For pag. 257. hee sayth, The Law of Christ is sweet and easie, Mat. 11. 30. and, his Commandements are not grievous, 1. Ioh. 5. 3. And what then? Is Christs Law so sweet and easie, as that it gives indulgence to pro∣fane Libertinisme? This is to make the Gospell a sweet fable, as that Atheisticall Pontifician sayd. Or as an other in his Sermon, upon those words of Christ, The sonne of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day: thence inferred, that Christ had given us liberty to play on the Sabbath. And this the Treatiser calleth Pag. 268. Christian li∣berty, and on the contrary, the holy and Religious keeping of the Lords day, a superstitious Iudaicall fancy, and Pag. 249. rigid Ordinances
of our Sunday-Sabbatarians. Whereas the ancient Godly See Aug. de Consensu Euangelist. l. 2▪ c▪ 7. Fathers called the loose profaning of the Lords day by dancing and revel∣ling, a Iewish Sabbatising. A point well to be observed. Fourthly I observe a very improper, and so untrue speech; where☞ hee sayth▪ If they should (upon Paritan Principles) restraine them wholly from all repast. Who (I pray you) doe restraine the people from all repast on the Lords day? Or is profane sport a repast, to feed the humour of the rude vulgar? It seemeth so. And liberty to youth is as their meat and drinke. Fiftly pag. 266. hee sayth: Some Recreations (not prohibited by our lawes) our Religious Governors allow upon Holy-dayes. And pag. 232. Civil recreation, not prohibited in termes, neither yet by any necessary consequence from the law, cannot be simply unlaw∣full. And pag 231. No just law, divine, Ecclesiasticall, or Civil, doth totally prohibite the same. To this I reply, that those sports fore∣specified, are prohibited by law, both divine, Ecclesiasticall, and Ci∣vil. 1. by divine law: as Gloss In∣terlin. Haec sunt opera tenebrarum. Rom. 13. 13. Opera carnis ibi. M. Bucer▪ de Regno Chri∣sti. lib. 2. ca. 10. Scripta An∣glicana. Gal. 5. 21. 1. Pet. 4. 3. In the fourth commandement for as Bucer sayth: writing to K. Edw. 6. His diebus. On these, to wit, Holy-dayes, the works of the flesh are not to be allowed, nor profane businesses, nor licentious sports, nor unseemly drinkings, and other vitious pleasures. Indeed the people are to be allo∣wed honest recreations at fit seasons: but seeing God hath so severely forbidden works profitable for the body, to be done on dayes sanctified to his Name: how much more greivously is hee offended, when thse dayes are profaned with wanton, and for the most part wicked works? Six dayes (sayth hee) thou shalt doe all thy worke; to wit, such as concerneth the sustentation, or els the recreation of this present life: but the seventh day is the Lords Sabbath, on it thou shalt not doe any worke: not any, which the Lord himself hath not commanded to be done on that day: but those which hee hath commanded, they are all most reli∣giously to be observed on the Holy-dayes. And of so weake and slip∣pery faith are we all, as the dayly renewing and confirming of the same is very necessary for us. Whereas most men more greivously offend and provoke Gods Majestie on these dayes, then on other dayes. By all meanes therefore it is the office of your sacred Majestie against this so great dishonor of God, and lawles profanation of his Holy-dayes, to revive the authority, of Gods law, and therein also to follow the exam∣ples of pious Princes, &c. So he.
Secondly: Those foresayd sports are prohibited by Ecclesiasticall lawes, for all Councels doe universally condemne them. To instanceConcil. Me∣diolan. 4. one or two. The Councel of Millan. Nefasesse, &c. It is impious, that sacred dayes instituted for the commemoration of the greatest benefits of God, and to render our best prayses unto him, should be transferred to those things, which most of all abhorre from that service: as leapings, sports, daunces, enterludes or shewes, which being intice∣ments to filthy pleasures, do much delight the Devill, the enemy of mans salvation. And another of Millan: That no sports, or vaine sights,Concil. Me∣diolan. 1. dancings, leaping, be used at all in Cities, suburbs, towne, or any where eis on the Holy-dayes. And yet another Councel at Millan: Quo∣niam,Concil. Me∣diolan. 3. &c. Because it is found by too much experience in this Province, that in these corrupted times and manners, that people for the most part never meet at dauncing, merriments, leapings, and the like, without many, and those most greivous offenses of God, and that both by reason of filthy thoughts and obscene speeches, dishonest actions, corruption of manners, and most pernicious bates to all the lusts of the flesh, perpe∣tually coupled with them, and also of murders, brawles, dissentions, whoredomes, adulteries, and many other evils, the most frequent conse∣quences thereof, wherefore on Holy-dayes we prohibit leapings, sports, dancings, &c. Now these Councels were kept in Italy. Yea a Coun∣celConc. Rom. anno 826. Conc. pars 3. Bin. at Rome, but more ancient: Of Feastings not to be made upon Holy-dayes; and, On Holy-dayes dancing not to be used: There be some, and specially women, which on Holy-dayes by their balling, sin∣ging filthy songs, holding and leading dances, so imitating the guise of Pagans, doe bring it among Christians, such, if they come to the Church, with lesser sins, they returne from it with greater. And if upon admonition they desisted not, Leo 4. denounceth excommunica∣tion against them. Lo here, this Councel at Rome sayth, that dan∣cing on Holy-dayes is a heathen guise, brought in among Christians.Can. Conc. Colon. anno 1563. ex∣plic in De∣oalogum. Shall I add one more. The Councel of Colen: deinde impingunt. Againe, they offend against this Precept, who on Holy-dayes are in∣tent upon sports, pastimes, dice, leaping, dancing the ring, who are vacant for revellings, drinkings, superfluous pompe, who defile the Holy-dayes with wicked talke, and filthy songs: such doth the Coun∣cel of Carthage, and of Toledo, decree to be excommunicate. For holy solemnities and feasts are not therefore instituted, to serve our filthy lusts, or that we should collect together our sins, but that we should alto∣gether
abandon them, and not to celebrate them with corporall refection or recreation, but spirituall rejoycing. And how is it possible, that in dances the sanctification of the Sabbath should be kept, where modesty it self is not secure from snares. So the Councel. But what need we goe further, then our owne Homily forecited, which sayth, that in pride, in excesse, like rats in brawling, fighting, quarrelling, wantonnes, toysh talking, and filthy fleshlines, God is more dishonoured, and the devill better served on the Sunday, or Sabbath day, then upon all the dayes of the weeke besides. Now though moris dances and may∣games, and the like, be not here condemned in terminis, yet by con∣sequence they be: sith they are the inseparable companions, and most pernicious occasions of inflaming the lusts, and of manifold mischeifs; as hath been noted. Therefore by just Ecclesiasticall lawes such sports are prohibited. Thirdly, They are prohibited by just Civil lawes. Besides those instances fore-alleged of the Edicts of Charolus Mag. and Ludovicus Pius his Sonne: we may to the honor of our nation, and the eternall fame of our religious King Charles, produce the first Act of Par∣lament in I. Caroli, the prime gemme in his Royall diadem; and which deserves to be writen in golden Characters. Forasmuch as there is nothing more acceptable to God, then the true and sincere worship and service of Him, according to his holy will, and that the holy keeping of the Lords day is a principall part of the true service of God, which in very many places of this Realme hath been, and now is profaned and neglected by a disorderly sort of people, in exercising and frequenting Beare-baiting, Bull-bai∣ting, Enterludes, common playes, and other unlawfull exercises and pastimes upon the Lords day, &c. That from henceforth, &c. there shall be no Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, common playes, or other un∣lawfull exercises or pastimes within their owne Parishes, Hence it is plaine, that all manner of sports and pastimes are unlaw∣full on the Lords day; for Beare-baiting and Bull-baiting are pro∣hibited, as unlawfull on this day, which els are made lawfull on other dayes. And therefore dancing, Maygames, Morrices, and the
like, how ever men may account them lawfull on other dayes, yet for the very reasons afore-sayd, forasmuch as they are prohibited as unlawfull by Imperiall Edicts of ancient Kings and Emperours, of whom our most gratious and religious soveraigne is by the Treati∣ser acknowledged to be the noble, successour, in restraining the abuse, and scandalous profanation of the Lords day: on this day at least, they are unlawfull. I will add but one instance more, and that is out of Iustinian, where he seth downe this Imperiall Constitution. Die Dominico, &c. On the Lords day, which of the whole week is the first,Iustinian. Cod. 15. tit. 5. all pleasures of sports and pastimes being denyed to the people through all Cities, let the whole minds of Christians be occupied in the service of God: and if any shall on this day be taken up with the madnes of Iewish impiety, or with the errour and franticknes of brutish Paga∣nisme, let him know, that there is a difference to be put between the time of prayers, and the time of pleasures. Yea so religiously was this day observed, as if the Emperours birth-day fell upon it, it must be put of to another day of the weeke; and sayth the Constitution, If the people shll shew lesse reverence towards us then, than they were wont, let no man be offended with it, because men doe give greatest ho∣nor to our clemency, when the worlds obedience is entirely yeilded to the vertues and merits of Almighty God. So there. In fine, in a A necessa∣ry Doctrine for a Chri∣sten man. booke set forth by King Hen. 8. and inscribted to his loving and faithfull subiects, which before had been set forth by the Printed 1537. The Institu∣tion of a Christen man. whole Clergie of the Realme, with the names of 21. Prelates, besides many Doctors, prefixed unto it, & approoved by both the houses of Parlament: are these passages, Vpon the fourth Com∣mandement. Against this Commandement generally doe offend all they, which will not cease from their owne carnall wills & pleasures, that doe not give themselves Intirely and wholly, without any im∣pediment unto all holy works, and that not onely in the house of God, but also in their owne houses; but (as commonly is used) passe the time either in idlenes, in gluttony, in riot, or other vaine, or idle pastime; which is not according to the intent and meaning of this Commande∣ment, but after the usage and custome of the Iews, and doth much of∣fend God, and provoke his indignation & wrath towards us. And it is added in the Clergies Institu∣tion fol. 77. 2. booke, for as S. Austen sayth of the Iewes, they should be better occupied, labouring in their feilds, and to be at the plough, then to be idle at home. And women should better bestow their time in spinning of woll, then upon the Sabbath day to lose their time
in leaping, & dauncing, and other idle wanton, lose time▪ So there. Now tell me Brother, what thinke you of this, that those Prelates and Clergy of England in the very first duskish dawning of the morning, should be so cleare, orthodox, and zealous in the point of the Sabbath, and now in the Meridian of the Gospell so many, with their eyes closed up, doe with both hands fight against this truth? A. I confesse it is to me no small matter of wonder. But Sir now that you have so fully cleared the poynt about Recreation from all the subterfuges of him, that hath so moyled himself to make some thing of nothing, and therein also have vindicated the Lawes both Divine, Ecclesiasticall and Civill, from giving any counte∣nance or connivence to such Recreations: there remaynes yet one thing to be cleared, and that is, about the judgement of the refor∣med Churches beyond the Seas, which the opposite authour plea∣deth to be all for him. B. Its true. And I cannot but smile, when I thinke of it. That they, which make no bones even in open Court to vilifie the prime pillars of those Churches, yea and to nullify the Churches them∣selves, as if they were no true Churches, as having no lawfull Mini∣sters, because no Prelatés to put them in orders: should notwith∣standing daigne to grace them so much, as to call them in, and to account them competent witnesses in the cause. But a bad cause is glad of any Patron, or Advocate to plead for it, though the Client have openly stigmatized him for a . But what stead will the Reformed Divines stand him in? Certainly in the point of Sports and Recreations they will utterly faile him, yea and disclame him too. In the point of the Institution of the Lords day, indeed, and the obligation of it to Christians, a great part is for him, though the better part is for us. This is confessed of us. A. But I pray you, are they against him in the point of Sports and Recreations? I have been credibly informed, that the contrary report hath made a strong impression of perswasion in some gentle and generous breasts, whose credulity subtile insinuations can pre∣vaile so with, as to make them beleeve the Moone is made of green cheese. I pray you therefore cleare this one point, and I will weary you no longer at this time, the night now drawing on apace. B. In a word then. True it is, that many and most of those
Churches, for the vulgar generality, come farre short of the due esteeme of the Lords day in poynt of practise. But yet, for the Mi∣nisters of the 17. Provinces Reformed, and of the neighbouring Churches in Germany, even all those; that were of the Councill of Dort, did unanimously make some Canons and Decrees, joyntly to petition the States Generall of the United Provinces, for the refor∣mation of the manifold profanations of the Lords day. For in the 14. Session are these words: Ne autem, &c. And least the people on the Lords dayes in the afternoone, being taken up with other affayres or exercises, be withdrawne from the afternoon-ser∣mons, the Magistrates are to be supplicated, that they by more severe Edicts prohibit all servile, or dayly works, and especially sports, drinkings, and other profanations of the Sab∣bath, whereby the afternoone time on the Lords dayes, and specially in villages, is usually spent, that so by this meanes also they may be brought to those afternoone Sermons, and so may learne to sanctify the whole Sabbath day. And D. VVallaeus in his Preface before his Treatise of the Sabbath, hath set downe so much of the Synods Petition to the States, as was drawne into forme for this purpose, in these words: Vt gravissimae illae, &c. That these most grievous and manifold profanations of theSess. 177. Sabbath, which are dayly committed by Faires, wakes, ban∣quets of societies, Watchmen, Neighbourhoods, Mariages; by the exercise of Armes, by hunting, fishing, fowling, playing at ball, by Histrionicall acting of Comedies, by dauncings, Port-hale of goods, drinkings; & that many other like things, which in these Countryes doe every where abound, to the great scandall & reproach of the Reformed Religion, and to the great hinderāce of Gods worship, may be most strictly prohibited &c. So the Synod. Thus in one brief view you see the unanimous judge∣ment of the Divines of that Synod, for the due sanctification of the Lords day, or Sabbath day, as they often call it: although the streame of a wicked custome in point of practise hath made an universall inundation in those Provinces, which (I feare) will (in time) drowne them up in their profanenesse. And the Synods
judgement in the poynt of Institution by Divine authority and that from the fourth Commandement, seemes to be no lesse sound and consentient, sith they so often call the Lords day the Sabbath day, and so zealously plead for the due sanctification thereof.  enough of this. A. Sir, I heartily thanke you for this your sweet conference, which I could be content might last yet a whole summers day, but that (as I sayd) the day now bidding us▪ farewell, leaves us to bid one another good night. B. And so good night to you Brother. A. And to you also, good Brother. Deo gratias. Octob. 2. 1635.
