4126.5 S258 22160934 25198
SUTTON'S SYNAGOGVE OR, THE ENGLISH CENTƲRJON: Shewing the vnparrallelled bounty of Protestant piety. BY PERCI. BVRRELL, Preacher at King IAMES his Hospitall in the Charterhouse. Euseb. lib. 8. c. 12. de Prae. Euan. Concurritur ad loca sacra, quae dicuntur Synagogae. PSAL. 112.6. The iust shall be had in euerlasting remembrance. Printed London, by T.C. for Ralph Mabb.
To the most Reuerend Father in God, the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury his Grace, To the Right Honourable, Right Re∣uerend, and Right Worthy Gouernors of King IAMES his Hospitall, my most freely noble, and euer ho∣noured Patrons, Grace and Glory multiplied. MOst Reuerend, and Right Honorable. As Temples are consecrated to the ho∣nour of our great God, so Bookes should bee dedicated to good men, because both haue Altars of intended ser∣uice, and gratitude. To your wisedome did
our Founder commend his state; at your Ho∣nours feet J lay downe these dressings of his memory:Debui quod po∣tu, non potut quod ebu. Aug. ep. 28. Hier. These fruits of a thankfull soule, for my free admission into the Charterhouse, and my freely obtained presentation to a Be∣nefice, may the Fonuders wealth ouershadow his Preachers pouerty. Certes the pious mag∣nificence of famous Sutton, is a great orna∣ment to our deceased King of blessed memo∣ry, a greater to this age, the greatest to Pro∣testant religion. Jf J for his sake may hope for any fauour, Turne in (my Lords) turne in, and let thousands follow, while your Lord∣shipps behold, and dispose That beautifull Chappell, those well furnished Chambers, those tables, those gownes, those bookes, our memorable Founder hath purchased, for such aged men, and hopefull children, whose duty it is to petition the Lord of Lords for the tem∣porall, and eternall happinesse of you our gra∣tious & happy Gouernors, among those knee∣leth, Your Honours most humble, and deuoted Seruant in the Lord, PERCI. BVRRELL.
Suttons Synagogue: OR, The English Centurion. LVKE. 7.5. He hath built vs a Synagogue. ANniuersarie Commemorations of Magnificent Founders, are as wch∣ned Instruments to sound the prayses of the Deceased, and as goodly Monuments to commend nto Posteritie the Gratitude of the Liuing. Exclen  Father;Monumenta memrarm,  is moa. Aug de C. D. li.  c 2. Thse Solemnities are not superstitions Sacrifices, but pious Records: Lctanus Dal. . So that as Toxaris to Menippus con∣cerning the Annuall honours done to Pylades, I may preface to you of this first Stone, or vnpolished Pillar, raysed or intended to our SVTTONS honour. We doe by Statute celebrate the memorie of our vnparallel'd Founder: Not to Canonize him for a Saint, but to in∣uite an imitation of his blessed Magnificence. For asS ptorum an ad San∣ctorum imita∣tionem en∣dun r. Aug. vbi super. St Augustine hath obserued, To commend the Bountie of the Dead, is to spurre vp the Liberalitie of the Sur∣uiuing. Wherefore at length, Awake Organ & Voyce, Old-men and Children, Priest and People, Awake:
Let vs offer the sweet incense of zealous thankes vnto that God who hath appointed his Steward Sutton to be a nursing Father to the aged, whose state, or bodies haue beene maimed by bearing Armes, and as a pru∣dent Mother, to maintaine youth in the acquiring of Arts: To this end are wee assembled this day, to this end hath Sutton raysed this Synagogue; I must haue this day no other Theme, you shal heare no other note, but Sutton hath built vs a Synagogue, He hath built vs a Synagogue. Difficile est abijs diligi, quos dignitate antecesserit. Hier ep. 9.It is a point of high difficulty, and therefore of greater honour, to purchase loue of those who are out∣shined by vs in eminent dignity: yet, this can bounty and gentlenesse effect; for behold, our Centurion, (whose office it was, to bridle the insolencies of the mutinous Iewes, and to ranke them in obedience to the Roman State) euen our Captaine enioyeth fauour, and receiueth honour from a stifenecked, proud, and rebel∣lious nation. The Elders expresse the reason in the for∣mer part of this verse; He loueth our Nation. Loue can command loue, and charity like fire can melt soules frozen in peruersnesse, or like the Adamamant can attract hard, and ferreous spirits: for see, the Reue∣rend Fathers of Israel, tender to the well fare of our Centurions Grome, and those incredulous Iewes, who scorned to petition Iesus for the saluation of their owne soules, are zealous Aduocates for the corporall health of the Centurions Seruant: the strongest mo∣tiue they conceiue for the reparation of the temple of the seruants body, is the commemoration of the Masters piety in erecting a Temple, or building a Synaggue to the honour of God: so my Text. He∣hth built vs a Synagogue.
Herein ob∣serue the 1. Noble Founder. 1. Office, or title, a Centu∣rion, this an honorable title. 2. Worke, a strange work, a Centurion, a Builder. 3. Expedition, Hee hath built. 2. Sacred foundation. 1. Temple, a Synagogue. 2. Templers, a whole Na∣tion, for vs. The founder, Hee. Hee, who? is the man of magnificent piete? a Nehemia with a sword in one hand, and a Synagogue in the other; hee who hath merited the character, ofDicier hic est The man, the founder: He, a Centurion, a Captaine of an hundred, but the chiefest among thousands: Hee, that Ctaine whose honour it was to haue his Garri∣son in Capernm, the metrapolis of Galile, and which is more, the City of the great King:Centurio Ro∣manus, & ipse sructut cetesi tus Chrys st. ser. 102. He, that good Centurion, the ground of whose heart answered the la∣bour of our heauenly husbandman, with the happy en∣crease of an hundred fold; He, he was that Souldier, who did as well follow the Lord of Hoasts, as com∣mand men: He, he who was valiant in the field, and de∣uoute in the Temple.Quis non diligat eum, qui sub palu∣damento mili∣tari, opera agat prophta∣rum? Hiero. Oh let vs admire, honour, and loue that Captaine, who in the habit of a Martiall man, performed more then the office of a Prophet required: Here is a Captaine worthy to lead the whole Christian world, for he loued the people of God, and built a Sy∣nagogue for the God of all people. Altenigina generatione, demesticus operatione princep. mili∣tum, socius Angelorum. Orig. in MathHe, a Roman by generation, by regeneration a Saint; by nation an alien from the Common-wealth of Israel, by faith a Sonne of Abraham, a Captaine ouer men, a Peere of Angels. The lesse his profession did promise,
the greater is the honour of his deuotion: the Souldi∣ers e i to spo en, and ruine Cities; but this Captaine richeth God, and buildeth Synagogues. The Church must bee placed vpon a high Moun∣taine, that all nations may behold her glory and fly vn∣to her, but in his holy march, Captaines must bring vp he Vanitie, miary men must be leaders; nor may this cm st ange,  e the athers, and they will in∣forme u, that a Soer and a Saint may haue but one : so as not Abraham the father of the fahfll, a miliar m? was not Dauid a Souldier, bfo a Prphet or a King? did not hee rayse that Temple in his heart, which was after finished by the  o Solon?Heb. 1., 3, &, 4. hat shall I more say? For the time would faile me,  ll you of Ioshua, of Gidion, and of Sam∣so, of Ahz, and Iehosaphat, who subdued King∣des, waxed th in fight, put to flight the armies of iens, conquered themss, and did not onely eret Altars o, but we euing Temples of the Lord? If you looke into the Gospe,Luke 3.14. you may obserue the Soul∣dier a more atentiue itor of Iohn the Baptist, then he Rbbie; after he ascensio, you may behold a most minent Sa in Ctain Cornelis,Acts 10.2. He was a de∣uout man, and one tha red God withall his house, hee gue much almes to the peopl and prayed God alway: if we  Eccltcall Histories, wee shall finde the b to s, the st n: Iulians thundring gion, Constanti  Great, and the victorious as well as pi∣ Theod  rne, he zeale and faith of our ion  ethe Sne of God with admiration,Math. .0. as St. Austine exoreth, Christ didugst p 4. admire, hat is, comnd the piet of our Captaine: thus we e a di may a Snt. If rsn mght e pmted to discourse of the se∣et one ati  should diuine, hat or∣  rdinall vertue, but a principall, a undamntall grace; therefore Christ entitled a Cap∣taine,
the strong man, in one word, he who was a Lambe for meknsse, was also a Ln for courage: but it may you are tyred with following our Centurion, therefore I shall now intreat him to come home to you with an application. Here we learne, Saints may beare Armes,An obseruati∣on concerning warrs. and they who beare Armes may be Saints: warre is not vnlaw∣full, where the cause of warre is iust: cowardly and cruell is that opinion of Anabaptisticall spirits, which condemneth warre, and damneth the Souldier, for asChristiana dsciplin bella n culpat om. ep. 5, Merllino. St. Agustine, Christian religion doth not prohibit all warres: eleganttyNihi mili∣tants nocet batheus. ep. St. Ierome, The Souldiers belt is no enemy to the sword of the Spirit; the coate of mayle no superdas to the brest-plate of righteous∣nesse; nor the head-piece of steele, any obstacle to the helmet of saluation: heareHc repre∣hendere tit∣dorum est non religiosorum. contra Faust. Mani. c. 74. St. Augustine againe, What is the crime? what is the greatest misery of warre? by an honourable death in the field, to preuent a foule, at best a more painefull death amidst personate mour∣ners in a Chamber? Vpon this ground to censure the military profession, is a character rather of a Coward, then a Saint. Take away the hunger of rapine, the thirst of reuenge, and the boundlesse desire of inlarging do∣minions, A Christian may with as safe a conscience be a Souldier, as a Minister: Thus wee see a Centurion ma be a Saint. Againe, Oh that all Souldiers,The applicati∣on. did march vnder our Centurions colours, for then shall Kingdomes be hap∣py, and Martiall affaires prosper, when deuout men are Souldiers, or Soldiers are deuout men; but alas what hopes of vitor, when, as the Armies encounter an Enemie, so Souldiers warre against God, and the cry∣ing and vnrepented sinnes of the people fight against the Souldi? All histories are plentifull in this point, and St. Ambrose maketh it a rule,Ep. 82. that the sinne of the Souldier, sharpeneth the Sword of the Enemy: there was a time when the euening was a prophet to the fol∣lowing
day, Haralds troopes imployed their last night in reuellings, and lasciuiousnesse, but the companies of William of Normandie, did blesse their designes with prayers and fasting, and so became conquerers, Heze∣kiah, Ahaz, and Iehosaphat, went from the Temple to the field, or rather made the field as a Temple, where∣in they proued triumphant, not so much by fighting against Man, as by humbling their soules before the Lord of hoasts:K. Charles. blessed be our Iehosaphat, who hath commanded fasting and humiliation to bee as the He∣ralds of his no lesse iust, then necessary warres, this point shall end in a short eiaculation, O thou God of battails, arme our forces with truth, meekenesse, and righteousnesse, then shall their hands doe terrible things, and their feet shall tread vpon the necks, of thy Gospels, our gratious Kings, and these Kingdomes Enemies. The Centurion hath put off his Armor, and now beginneth to build, here is the second branch, building, He hath Built. . Chrys. in 1. Cor. 3.Building must accompanie faith, and in this one word of building, we shall finde the seuerall furnitures, roomes, and stoaries of all the duties of Christian reli∣gion, the Apostle is plaine, Let all things be done to edification. Caeleste adi∣ficium dispere gendo con∣struitur. Gr. M. hom. 37.There is an euident difference, betweene celestiall, and terrestiall buildings; terrene houses are raised by collecting, heauenly mansions are framed by distribu∣ting monies, and we may coniecture that our incarnate Messiah, was pleased to bee the putative Sonne of a Carpenter, that as Christ was, so each good Christian should endeauour to be an holy builder.
In goodly buildings we must finde. A foundation, This is Christ, the li∣uing, the life giuing, the chiefe corner∣stone, the foundation of foundations; here the builder vpholdeth the worke, or rather is the basis of his owne stru∣cture: would you see how Christ was squared and adapted for this edifice? obserue those no lesse busie, then cruell labourers, his stony-hearted tormen∣tors; the rods were as the Masons bru∣shes, the crosse the forme whereon they carue, and hew their stones, their hands the mallets, the nailes ye thornes, and speare, the seuerall tooles to polish, and fit this stone for a foundation vnto our heauenly Mansion. The maine Pillar, Hope, the Wals Charity, the Cement the Word preached, the Windows Know∣ledge, the Roofe Faith. For the Furniture, the most conuenient Hangings, are meditations vpon our Sauiours Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and his glorious returne to iudgement: the Chayres and Beds, are Loue; the seuerall vtensiles, or other ornaments, are Meekenesse, Temperance, Pati∣ence, &c. There is a sentence no lesse famous then difficult con∣cerning the materials of this building, 1 Cor. 3.13. the Fathers are diuided in their dispute, whither this place concerne the doctrine of the Preacher, or the conuersation of the Auditor:. St. Chrysostome is firme for the latter, him I follow, while he writeth, that this text doth point at the actions of Christians. now read the words. If any man build vpon this foundation,1 Cor. 3.12, 13. Gold, Siluer, Pretious stones, Wood, Hay, Stuble, euery mans worke shall be made manifest. Gold, Siluer, Pretious stones,] these are solid,Caietane. in 1 Cor. 3. glori∣ous, and high prized vertues. Gold, the loue of God;
Siluer, charity to man; Pretious stones, these are the seuerall acts of piety toward God, and mercy toward man. Wood, Hay, Stuble,] by these are figured, dangerous sinnes; Wood is the wormes nest of corroding enuy, or malice. Hay, is ambition; Stuble, this is the type of obstinate schismaticks;verse 15. now followeth the knot, the maine difficulty: if any mans worke be burnt, he shall suf∣fer losse, but he himselfe shall be Saued; but this sauing is equall with damning, soAmbr. in 1 Cor. 3 Chrysost. in eundem locum St Ambrose, he shall bee saued by fire; his body and his soule shall not bee wasted by the torments of hell; St. Chrysostome proueth, what St. Ambrose affirmeth: That is said sometime, to bee saued, which is not consumed, as gold in the fire, as the liuer in the fable, this this indeed, is the hell of hels, death without death, and torments without consump∣tion: least this might seeme strange, St. Chrysostome re∣inforceth his argument, with an excellent obseruation from Scripture language: It is the elegance of sacred rhetoricke, to giue gentle names to seuere punishments, as hell and the graue, are called the places where all things are forgotten, which at the first view may promise quiet and the obliuion of all calamities: thus the death of the wicked is termed a sleepe, thus it is said of the wicked,Iob 21.33. That the clods of the earth shall bee sweete vnto him; here is most bitter and desperate sweetnesse: the same Father shall conclude. Chrysost. hee that buildeth with Hay or Stuble, shall continue in endlesse torment. Apply. Application. Reie fi∣care, est ti embu. re. Aug.He buildeth most fairly, who liueth most religious∣ly: pluck therefore the hand out of the bosome, worke and build: the best approbation of our faith, ariseth from the operation of the hand; as the curious Arti∣zen, so the religious Christian, must be knowne by his handy worl e; diuinely IrenaeusQud feris lucet, in st, & quod intus est fori luceat. Irenaeus lib. 4. Let your charity burne within, and holinesse shine without; by the for∣mer you shall auoyd hypocrisie, by the latter idleness
You must all bee builders, God is the Master of the worke, all the Sonnes of men, King, Priest, and Peo∣pl, must be labourers. Birds make their nests, basts hae ir ds; let men build houses, let thm ae urasting habiains, Make you friends of the vnrigh∣teous Mammon, that ye may b receiued into euerlating habitations: let vs heare the Sermon f Dauid to his Princes, Set your heart,1. Cron. 22.1 and your sou to seeke the Lord your God, Ari e and build: As liuely s nes, come e n∣to Christ th liuing ston,1 Pet. 2.4.5. that (since you cannot build of yourse ues) you may be built vp as a spiritual house ac∣coptab Go y Ieus Christ. I shal end with te A∣postle,Ephe. 2.2. Te Lord Ieus build vs all together for an ha∣bitation of God through the pirit, We haue aady seene our ounder, as a Captaine, and a Bider; now behold him like a Cherubim, ith winges ouer his hands; this you may finde in his Expedition, he Hath. As the Eagle haeth to the pry, or the greedy Soul∣dier to the poyle, so our Centurion to the most noble acts  piety,Pluimum tu omni re ce∣lerias. Sene. B. ib. 2. sure our leader was one of the R Cres: ad it was his honour, for where the a igious, there Ih his march is most glorious, edition must b commab,ncere, Vo ens & a. mb. . N. . in all cm∣mendable, ations, the reason is euident: Clrity is a faire charter  sincerity, and a quice hand is a pro∣mising signe of a willing heart.  into the family of Abraham, you shall read hartinesse in nimlnes: First Abraham runneth in pern to meet the Angels,Gen. 18.2, 6, & 7. then hee charged Sah o make read quickly, then he runneth againe to the rd, lastly the Sruant is as quicke  th drsse; thus we see, , Wie, Sruant, a in Abrams nt are  in he performance of any seruice vn God: I wil, is but a large comple∣ment, and we know those to bee most slow in perfor∣mance, who are nime in promise; sweet and hono∣rable
is the memory of this Founder, He did not frame a Colledge in the paper modell of a litigious will, but saw a Synagogue raysed at his owne proper charge to the glory of God: so the Eders, he Hath. The innocent Doue hath a nimble wing, so those good soules which are quickned with that Spirit, who once appeared in the forme of a Doue, flee spedily vnto workes of piety; the Sunne cannot so much reioyce to runne his course, as the faithfull to consummate their race of Godlines; the elements, of fire, aire, & water, are actiue and quicke in their motions, so where soeuer the holy fire of zeale, the water of sanctification, or the breath of the Spirit are found, there is a speedy moti∣on: nay euen ye dul & lazy earth is moued with an earth∣quake,Gen. 49.21. Act. 9.36. but no terror can stirre the earthly minded man; the blessing of Nephthali was to haue the swift feete of a Hind, Dorcas was as nimble as the Roe:Vtinam pre∣centa famina∣rum imitaren∣tur viri. Hier. Oh that good men would imitate the speed of this woman: Salomon saith, Be not slacke in thy businesse, I beseech you be not slow in the busines of the Lord:Prou. 10.26. Leuit. 11.41. fr snayles, wormes, and creeping creatures were banihed from the Altar of God, to instruct vs, that slow paced men can be no pleasing sacrifice for our God. To spurre vp our deuotion, let vs consider, that God is pleased to pay magnificently for the expedition of man: Mans expedition, and Gods saluation embrace each other; for no sooner can the deuout soule say, I haue kept the faith,2. Tim. 4.7. but hee may read, Henceforth a crowne of righteousnesse is layd vp for thee; no soo∣ner can our Sauiour proclaime, I haue fulfilled the will of God, but a voyce is heard from heauen, This is my beloued Sonne:Luke 9.35. nor is God more indulgent to the na∣turall Sonne of his bosome, then to the zealous, and his adopted sonnes among the children of men; for ob∣serue,Matth. 19.28 doth Peter come vnto our Sauiour and say, Wee haue left all and followed thee? the blessing is annexed, You shall sit on thrones in the kingdome of heauen: Nay
but impatient incredulity must haue some-what in hand, what would you expect? will you bee content with a thousand for one hundred? this is more then extortion dare challenge, yet the speedy soule shall haue more, euen one hundred for one;Matth. 19.2. one hundred for one, not of corruptible gold, but in the incorruptible treasure of peace of conscience, and the sweet assurance of heauenly happinesse: Remember Zacheus,Luke. 19.9. doth hee come quickly to entertaine the Sonne of God? the se∣quell is, This day is saluation come to his house: excellent∣ly St. Augustine,Quam suaue mihi subito carere pecati sua tatibus. Aug. Confes. Oh What a heauen of ioy is it to be a penitent soule, heartily and spedily to loath the poy∣sonning sweet of bewitching sinnes? oh then all you who haue that good ambition to bee married vnto the Lambe of God, take into your soules, the prayer of the Spouse, Draw vs oh Iesus and we shall run after thee.Cant. 1.4. Apply, When drunken Archias receiued intel∣ligence,Plut. Pelopi∣das. of treason plotted against his Maiesty by Pelo∣pidas, be stmmerd forth this reply, Great matters to morrow, and so became a prophet of his owne ruine: are not most of vs of the Court of Archias? when the conscionable Minister informeth vs of the damnable stratagems of Sathan against our soules, we ordinarily conclude, Great matters to morrow, hereafter may be soone enough. When vnhappy Faelix heard S. Pauls Sermon of temperance and iudgement to come,Act. 24.25. hee trembled indeed, but his conclusion was, Go thy wayes for this time, I will heare thee at some more conuenient leasure, thus while the preacher is in the pulpit, a fit of deuotion may be raised in the soule of the Auditor, but resolutions of holinesse must bee put off to some other time: so that as cheating and bankrupt debtors answer their creditors, so most men reply vnto the Spirit,Matth, 22.5. come to morrow, or some other time: I haue bought a farme, I haue marryed a wife; profit or pleasure must be obserued, God must wayt.Pro. 3.28. Solomon aduiseth not to hold a friend in suspence till to morrow: Oh bee not lesse re∣spectfull
of thy God, then thou wouldst bee of thy friend. That good God who hath promised saluation to him who shall repent at any time, hath bound him∣selfe to no time of ayting for thy repentance. Wee may read of an hereticall brood, which were called Clinici,Centur. their deuotions were like themselues bed∣rid; they would neuer thinke of a new life, before they were in the iawes of death. The whole world is of their faction, for scarse any thinke of being holy, or doing good, vntill there be no hope of being. Delay in matters of greater moment is accounted dangerous: in the assuring of our saluation, by the holinesse of our conuersation, procrastination may proue damnable; the feet and the heart were Gods part of each sacrifice, the heart for sincerity,Leuit. 1.9. and the feet for celerity. If you could consider the greatnesse of your iourney, euen from earth to heauen: and the shortnesse of your life, which is called a vaper,Iames. 4.14. that appeareth  in for a mo∣ment, surely you would gird vp the los of your minde, and runne with faith and patience the race that is set before you.Heb. 12.1. I beseech you mocke not God, cheat not your owne soules, with the hopes of a panegyricall, or commendatory Sermon ouer your heare, or with the legacy of an ambitious doale at your funerall, but while you read this poore meditation, pray that this may be the houre of your conuersion, a liuing sacrifice, or the sacrifice of the liuing is most acceptable vnto the Lord.Ier. 13.17. Oh Ierusalem wash thy heart from iniquity, when shall it once bee? I haue done with the Founder: now let vs suruey, the sacred foundation. The second generall. A Synagogue] The Temper of the Founder is best discouered in the foundation: the ambition of Pompei, and the luxury of Lucullus, were presented to the view of all, by their stately buildings; but our good Centuri∣on will haue no other Monument of his glory, but a
place where the honour of God may dwell, a Syna∣gogue, , is the mother and roote of our Synagogue, and hath two daughters, , & , the former doth commend vnto vs either the assembly of men in the seruice of God,Casaubonus exercit. ad An. Bar. 16. or the vnion of the soule with God by the participation of the blessed Eucharist, thus the visible Church is stiled, ,Basil. M. in Psal. 28. a visible collecti∣on or congregation of men, thus also, , is a con∣iunction of the soule vnto God, as the members are to the head. , the Synagogue was a place conse∣crated for the assembling of men to prayse, and call vp∣on the name of God. There were three especiall places a∣mong the Iews for ye worship of God. 1 The Temple, here were prayers, sacrifices, and sermons. 2 The Synagogue, here were pray∣ers, & sermons, but no sacrifice. 3 The Schooles, here neither pray∣ers, nor sacrifices, but lectures and disputations. The glorious Temple was the Cathedrall or mo∣ther Church, the Synagogue as the Chappell of ease: it is obserued that for one Temple, there were 480 Syna∣gogues in Ierusalem; I guesse one reason may bee, that prayers and sermons were more acceptable then sacri∣fices. The especiall offices performed in the Synagogue, were these. Man was instructed. God was honoured. Instruction of men. Arts and Armes are the equall supporters of great and good Kingdomes, and the one profession cannot be more dangerous, then the other is labourious. Plutarch cannot resolue whether flourishing Rome did owe more to the Forts & Wals of Romulus, or the Schooles
and Temples of Publicola: surely Athens was more famous for being the nursery of good letters, then the Metropolis of all Greece. One speciall act of renowne was performed by Nero,Tacit. he dedicated a schoole as Ta∣citus noteth, hoping thereby to raise a monument of immortall honour to his owne name, and no maruaile, for what tongue of the eloquent can sufficiently ex∣presse the merits of such Heroes who haue beene Foun∣ders of Schooles,2 Reg. 0.20. and Patrons of good letters? beasts may beget beasts, a rurall Pagan may be the father of a man, but to beget, or enlighten a soule, is a worke onely for God,Malms. or a learned professor. Henry Beuclarke was bold to tell William the Conqueror, that a man without learning, was but a silly beast in a rich caparison. The me∣morie of good Hezekiah continued among posterities as a sweet oyntment poured forth, for conueying com∣mune waters into the City of Ierusalem: with what honour shall wee crowne their names, who haue like Caleb blessed this Iland with the vpper springs of sa∣cred knowledge in our Vniuersities,Iudges. 1.15. & with the lower of humane and politer learning, in our free schooles throughout the kingdome? So long as there shall bee one leafe in any Library, so long as a stone shall remaine vpon a stone in our Colledges, so long as there shall be one man vpon the earth, let the memorie of our Founders, be as a banquet among posterities. I am not besides the cushion while in the Synagogue, I honour Arts, for whatsoeuer was in the Schoole, was after a most eminent manner in the Synagogue, but I haue stayed too long among the lower formes: Now wee may heare a diuinity lecture or a sermon. Cices.As the Orator did desire another Crassus to deci∣pher to the life, the excellent worth of Oratorie, so I confesse ingeniously, that I heartily wish some power∣full and eloquent Apollo, would lend mee a tongue to speake the admirable, and soule sauing excellency of learned and deuout sermons.
As euery thing of price, so the knowledge of di∣uine mysteries doth require trauaile. Prayer, meditati∣on, and song studie, are expected in the preacher; me∣mory, deuotion, and attention in the hearer;Hocker. l. 5. Ecc. Pol. it is well obserued by that Oracle of our Church, that we bring not knowledge with vs into the world, and therefore the lesse opportunities or abilities the people haue in themselues, the more they need the helpe, and should be thankfull for the labours of learned ministers. Christ was not onely the word, but a Preacher, nor did hee onely merit the crowne, but direct his Auditors in the way of euerlasting saluation. I may compare good ser∣mons, to Moses and Aaron conducting the Israel of Christians, to the Canaan of heauen, to the keyes of Dauid, to the salt whereby conuersation is seasoned,Mth. .1.14. 1. Cor 1 or to light whereby the soule is guided: the Apostle hath all, It pleased God by preaching to saue them that be∣lieue. God hath giuen the heart, and great is the number of our Synagogues; God hath giuen the word, and greater is the number of Preachers; but where is the armie of conscionable hearers?Chrysost. the obedient sonne doth often visit the house of his father; so the Saint doth frequent the earthly Mansion of his heauenly God:Saluianus. l. 5. Spernitur Dei templum vt conurra tur ad theatrum. but may not the complaint of Saluianus bee re∣uiued? The Temple of God is despised, and the stage more honoured, Churches are empty but Tauerns, and Brothel-houses are throngued. A Recusant can haue no apologie; art thou a sinner? in the Temple thou shalt finde a Sa∣uiour; hast thou a bleeding conscience? here shalt thou finde the Balme of Gilead; art thou a Saint? here shalt thou find God ready to establish thee,Psal 122.1. Oh for the spirit of Dauid, Hee was glad when they said vnto him, they would go vp to the house of God. The way to the Church triumphant in heauen, lyeth through the Church militant on earth. I will conclude this medita∣tion with the word of Iacob which was vsually engra∣uen
vpon the frontispice of ancient Synagogues, The Temple is the house of God, and the gate of heauen, the Righteous will enter in and heare what the Lord will say vnto him, and meditate what he shall say vnto the Lord; and that is the second benefit of the Synagogue, To honour God. In vaine shall the most cloquent Apollos touch the care of man by Sermons, vnlesse the eare of God bee md for a bssing by prayers. Prayers are the Alpha and Omega f all religious exercises: in sermons God vouchsafeth to spa to man, in prayers man is admit∣ted to speake to God; in sermons God descendeth vn∣to man, in prayers man ascendeth vnto God Sermons are the seed from whence god prayers spring, prayers are the deaw which make sermons flourish: where∣fore as the two Tables, and the po of Manna were in the Arke; so the Tables of sermons, and the Manna of prayers, are conserued in our Synagoge: I dare not aduenture vpon the copious diuision of the Apostle, and shew vnto you the difference and the excellencies,1 Tim. 2.1 of prayers, intercession, supplication, and thanksgiuing: onely thus. Prayers 1 Supplicatrie, for blessings to be obtained. 2 Gratulatorie, for blessings receiued. First of Supplication: Supplications are the Iacobs ather, where by the soule mounteth vp to heauen, they are the delight of God, and the happinesse of man: zealously to eseech, is powerfully to command; thus did Iacob wrsle with the Lord, and triumph, nay the king∣dome of heauen inuiteth, and suffereth violence, the pea∣sing violence of importunate, and strong supplications. The omnipotent Maiestie, whose title is inuincible, lo∣ueh t e euer come by an Army of humble suppli∣ance. Would you e vicorious oer your insolent enemies? prayers are the most prosperous Souldiers: While Moyses holdeth vp his hand, the troopes of Ama∣lecke
fall to the ground: let vs therefore furrow our cheekes with an inundation of teares, and beleaguer the Lord of Hoasts with our continuall prayers, let our deuoutest supplications, sharpen the swords of our Souldiers, prosper the designes of our Commanders, beautifie the Crowne of our religious Soueraigne, and continue a roome for euery man of this Iland to sit vn∣der his owne vine: Cry mightily vnto God, and pray instantly for the well faire of Ierusalem. Would you bee blessed with the pardon of your sinnes, with the hidden Manna of a peacefull conscience, with a crowne of eternall glory, or with what euer the magnificent hand of God can conferre? Prayer is the price, and the Temple the house of prayer.Psal. 48.9. We will pray and wayt for the louing kindnesse of our God in the midst of his Tem∣ple. Now of Thanksgiuing: in the Temple euery man speaketh of the praise of God, and no maruaile, for as St. Augustine largely, No penne,Aug. ep. 32. it. ep 77. no tongue can bee better employed, then in expressing, no heart, no soule then in con∣ceiuing, the great debt of our thankefulnesse vnto God: such and so infinite is the bounty of our God, that night and day with bended knees, inflamed hearts, and wel tuned tongues,Arnob. l. 1. we ought to pay the hourely tribute of our de∣uoutest praises: What can God do more, then crowne man with louing kindnesse? what can man do lesse, then exalt God with thankfulnesse? no man so poore but he may, no man so great but hee should offer this cheape, yet pretious incense. To this end Altars, Tem∣ples, Synagogues, Churches are raysed; to this end man and Angels created, that God may receiue the glory of praises: In all things giue thankes, for,1 Thess. .18 there∣fore was our Synagogue builded. Apply. The building is a Synagogue. It is not onely law∣full, but commendable, to call vpon and praise the name of God in our priuate families, and secret closets; but the greatest blessings do accompanie the sacrifices of a
Synagogue, that is a Congregation. The Lord is in his glory when he is inclosed with the greatest multitude of petitioners, Oh that men would praise the Lord in the assembly of the Elders,Psal. 107.32. in the midst of the Synagogue. Againe, each soule should be a liuing, & a holy Tem∣ple: God indeed is the Lord of heauen and earth, and needeth not to borrow a Synagogue or house made with hands,Act. 17.24, 35. his chiefe delight is to keepe his Court with those, the Chappels of whose soules are best adorned with charity and holinesse, Know you not that your bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost?1 Cor. 6.1. It is the scandall of our times, that some Churches haue beene turned into stables, this gangrene is inlarged, and the Temples of our soules are become the Augean stables of all sinnefull filthinesse; the drunkard translateth his temple into a swine-styue, the wanton his into a stew, the couetous his into a denne of theeues, the prophane swearer his into an ordinary or dycing Roome, where you shall heare no other language but h oathes; euery notorious sinner is a sacrilegious potor, or de∣stroyer of this spirituall Synagogue, frad by the founder of heauen and earth. I conclude, Yee are the temple of the liuing God,2 Cor. 6.16. I shall pray that God may please to dwell with you, to walke in you, that hee may be our God, and we his people. Now behold the Templer, for Ʋs. For the hungerpined onely to behold plentifull and delicately furnished tables, or for the extreamely indi∣gent onely to gaze vpon huge masses of treasure, might rather proue a torment, then a comfort: come there∣fore now and let vs behold, the blessed vnion of the Centurions magnificence, and our happinesse. We, we are the heires of this sacred and ample bounty, Hee hath built Ʋs a Synagogue. Ʋs.] The end giueth glory to the action, and brin∣geth happinesse to the agent: lauish expenses cannot entitle a man liberall, nor rash boldnesse stile any man
valiant; for inconsiderate rushing into dangers is a frenzy, and profuse casting away of treasures, is fran∣tique prodigality: that bountie is most honourable, which hath the largest, and most religious obiect. Hee sheweth his bounty to man, and his piety towards God most happily, who doth erect a Synagogue for the people of God. Ʋs hath a foure∣fold relation. 1 Vs Enemies. 2 Vs Captiues. 3 Ʋs Strangers. 4 Ʋs Of the True Church. Ʋs Enemies. Who was not a voluntary vassall, was reputed an enemie to the Roman State, the greater farre the sweet∣nesse of our Centurion, to so peruerse, so Iewish an ad∣uersarie: friendship and kindred make too streight a spheare for charity to moue in;Omnes odit, qui malos odit. Aug. ep. for he sha scarsely af∣fect any, ho embraceth only those to whom he is ob∣liged by merit or by blood: let the memory of this Captaine be as an oyntment powred forth, he knew as well how to ercome in loue, as to conquer with the sword.Math. 5.43. The Iewes esteemed it lawfull policy to hate their Enemies, but our Centurion was not sowred with this leuen of their doctrine, nor infected with their practise; it may be he had obserued, that the cha∣ritable sunne did impart her cherishing beames vnto the good and bad, and that light he would follow; hee is an Angell rather then a man, that can ouercome euill with good; it was an act (I had almost said) able to make, surely to snew a God, To loue an enemie, so the A∣postle of our God of loue,Math. 5.44. Hee loued vs when wee were enemies: mitate the Lord Iesus, Blesse them that curse you, Loue them that hate you, for this is to be a Son of God, and a follower of our Centurion. Vs Captiues. Misery and infamy are linked together in the Cap∣tiues chaine; nor is it so much pittie, as pride or co∣uetousnesse,
that doth continue life vnto the conque∣red; it was the barbarous cstome of the insulting Ro∣mans, to driue those who their sword had subdued, by herds through their City as the sport, and scorne of women and children, then to sell them as beasts, or which was the greater curtesie, because the shorter tragedy, to cast them to the beasts, tumble them into the sea, or set them at liberty by some other death: but it seemeth our Centurion was truly valiant, who neuer knew enemy but in the field, nor vsed other bonds in the City, but loue, nor other prison, but a Synagogue. Proper is the doctrine of St. Augustine, We are all mem∣bers of that large body of mankind, these louely titles of neighbour or brother, are not built so much vpon consangui∣nity, or similitude of shape, as vpon the image of God engrauen in our reasonable soule: Haue pitty vpon those who are in bonds. Be kindly affectionated one towards an other.Rom. 12.10. Ʋs Strangers. True charity scarse knoweth the name of stranger; all are brothers, all children or fellow members in her register:Inuisum ho∣minum genus Tacit. she doth guide the eye, and temper the heart of our Centurion. The Iewes are deseruedly called, a Nation hated by all, because spitefull to al; they esteemed all other people as bastards, and others reputed them as rebels: but see, no peruersenesse of nature, no iealousie of rebellion, no nor that exasperating name of Iew, can abate the edge of truly compassionate loue; Parity in condition should rayse a mutuall tendernesse in affecti∣on, we are all strangers, and without treason it may be printed, Emperors and Kings are but soiourners euen in their owne dominions: Let not our loue bee estranged from them, who are of a strange Nation. entertaine strangers. Hebr. 13.2.Ʋs the people of God. As yet the Iewish Synagogue, was a true Church, and the sonnes of Iacob, the royall Priest-hood; happy therefore that zeale, which did expresse piety toward
God, in magnificent fauours vpon Gods people. Religi∣on hath her name for vniting mens consciences & affe∣ctions; nor can there be a fayrer euidence of true religi∣on, then loue to the Church.Psal. 16.3. All my delight is vpon the Saints, was Dauids note, and his temples could take no rest, vntill a place was found for the habitation of God. Brethren, loue you God? honour his seruants, repaire and beautifie his temples: the farewell of our Centu∣rion, reuiueth that of the Apostle, Doe good to all,Gal. 6.10. but especially to the house, and household of faith: for this is to loue the people of God, and to build a Synagogue. The Roman Captaine is now discharged, and if euer he had a parallell, hee must bee raysed from our English Centurion, from THOMAS SVITON, our magnificent, and sole founder. Thankefully to commend vnto posterity,Comme∣moration. the fa∣mous acts of deceased Worthies, is an office, of as true gratitude, as great and venerable antiquity: Come therefore now, & let vs triumph ouer those commune enemies of eminent goodnesse, Igrance, and Enuy: Were it a point of the same facility, to bury in obliui∣on, as to locke vp in silence, the ineffable magnificence of our SVTTON, the Auditor or Reader should haue had no subiect of his criticks from my tongue or pen. but to forget SVTTON totally, is as impossible as to ex∣presse him fully; you shall therefore censure me, so you will honour him: my neuer yet practised Panygyricall veine, is more poore in relation to his worth, then my eleemosinary state in comparison of his wealth. Taci∣tus shall bee my pleader in his prologue to Agricola,Tacit. Commend and admire others, Pardon me, while I in∣deauour to awake our blessed Founder, and lead him through the fiue roomes of my text; first you shall dis∣couer, Who and what our Founder is. He] The builder of the Synagogue a Centurion, our Founder more, a Mr. of the Ordnance, a Gentleman of
Ancient descent, of liberall education, a man rich in Arts, & famous in Armes; for the former, he was so ad∣uanced in good letters, that he appeared the most com∣pleat man of his times, for discharging the office of a learned, wise, and able Secretary to the most Honour∣able Peeres of this Nation; and what abilitie hee had sucked from the Vniuersity in speculation, he did with credit practise vnder famous Warwicke, and great Leicester. These were the first paths that lead to Sut∣tons greatnesse, and our happinesse: for his other ho∣nours from Armes, if you obserue the time of our Cen∣turions imployment in the field, you may know, there was a time when forraigne religion was the patronesse of domesticke rebellion; when two Northerne and superstitious Earles durst display the Romish ensigne against inuincible Elizabeth: then, then was this fa∣mous sonne of Pallas aduanced to the command of the Ordnance, and gaue a happy probatum of his loyalty, valour, and wisedome; here I suppose hee learned to honour, and resolued to cherish Military men; but you will enquire from what myne his infinite treasures did arise: I can informe you, from prosperous merchan∣dizing, from the great farme of all the mynes about Newcastle, and from the wisedome of his vertuous frgality: of his person I will conclude, in the enco∣mium of Pammachius framed by St. Ierome:Eeemosynis diues humii∣tate submis. Ier ad Pam∣machium de obitu vxer. Sutton was gentyle by birth, high by humility and which is grea∣test honour, Rich by charitable bunty: Now to his building, He built. He was a great and good builder, not so much for his owne priuate, as for the publike; his treasures were not lauished in raysing a Towre to his owne name, or erecting stately Pallaces for his owne pompe and plea∣sure: the sustaining of liuing temples, the endowing of Colledges, the enriching of Corporations, the building Causwayes, and repairing of high-wayes; Aboue all, the foundation of King Iames his Hospitall at his sole
and proper charge, were the happy monuments of his architecture, surely this was to bee a Mogarensis in the best sense, that is to build for euer. Hee did fulfill the letter of the Apostle in building Gold, Siluer,Peruse our Founders Te∣stament. and Pre∣tious stones; for he commanded Plate and Iewels to bee sold, and conuerted into money for the expediting of our Hospitall. I shall not mention thousands conferred vpon friends, and seruants; but these legacies ensuing merit a lasting memory: in the renowned Vniuersity of Camb. to Iesus Colledge 500 Markes, to Magdalen 500 pound, for the redemption of prisoners in London 200 pound, for the encouragement of Merchants 1000 pound to bee lent gratis vnto tenne beginners; nor was his charity confined within these seas, but that Westerne Troy, stout Ostend shall receiue 100 pound for the reliefe of the poore from his fountaine;To trust the Minister is to hnour him. in all these his piety was very laudable, for in many of these acts of bounty, his prime repose was in the conscionable integrety of the Priest, in those places where he sowed his benefits, certes this was to build as high as heauen: now ob∣serue his expedition. He Hath built. Expedition is commendable in laudable enterprizes, and euen in this our Founder had his honour: While his Wife liued, his house was an open Hospitall, and when she expired, he was frugall in his owne family, that he might proue the more magnificent to many. Origen perswadeth that our Sauiours aduise, to leaue all, had not so full an ayme at the effect, as the affection; and herein our Founder merited ample honour, for if any questionod him, where he would employ his great estate, his diuine and constant reply was, that his bread must be cast vpon the waters. i. vpon the watery cheeks of the neglected poore: Moreouer hee procured an Act of Parleament for a Mortmaine, for the establshing of an intended Hospitall in Halling-bury in the County
of Essex; but a more noble Spirit prompting him to restore that Charterhouse to true religion, which was formerly sacrificed to superstition,Suttons case by Sir Ed. he became an hum∣ble sutor to King Iames of blessed memory, to vouch∣safe to be the Royall God-father of this royall founda∣tion; whereunto that learned, letters, and Scholler lo∣uing King,Cooke. Founders wil. did gratiously condescend, and confirmed our Founders bounty vpon vs by his Letters Patent, and the broad Seale, this being done, memorable Sut∣ton chargeth, nay adiureth his Executors and ouer∣seers, as they shall answer before the tribunall of Iesus Christ, that they imploy their best endeauours, in ha∣stening, and reducing into act his intended charity; would you heare more? I haue it from honourable authority, that if the thred of our Founders life had beene continued somewhat longer, his vote and pur∣pose was, to haue beene the good Master, of our great Society. So much for expedition: Now view the Synagogue. Our Foundation may be esteemed rather a glorious Temple them a Synagogue, and rather a City then a Temple; but I will not steppe beyond my bounds: in a Synagogue we found formerly, Instruction, and De∣uotion: for deuotion, those reuerend heires of our Founders magnificence twice euery day visit our Sy∣nagogue, and ascend in soule to heauen by zealous prayers, and vnfained thanksgiuings; such is our strict obseruance of the daily seruice, that wee may seeme neerer vnto the Cathedrall, then the parochiall con∣gregation; on the Lords day, Iesus is faithfully, though plainly preached in our Synagogue. For instruction, here ingenuous children do daily sit at the feet of their learned teachers; but of these heerafter: Wee finde in the sacred Oracles a frequent mention of Masters of Synagogues. The great Master of our Synagogue is fixed vpon the most honoured grandies of our State, and the
most reuerend Prelates of our Church, they who sit at the Helme of our kingdome, are gratiously pleased to steere & guide the goodly Shippe of renowned Suttons charity; and here wee may note the wisedome of our Founder, who made choyse of such honourable and powerfull gouernors, who were able and ready to maintaine his bequest, and honour his foundation: it is the glory of our noble gouernors, and the happinesse of our Society, that no cunning aduocate, no greedy Lord, could vndermine our foundation; and what was nobly begunne, is honourably continued by them, for father∣ly, and mercifull iustice, let no Court, no state compare with our gouernment. All, all deserue our thankes to them, & our hearty prayers for them, the poore sheep∣heard shall, and the religious flocke must importune God for a blessing vpon them,Great Ma∣nours & good manners con∣firmed. by whose wisedome and goodnesse, many blessings are conueyed vnto vs: the Vicegerent of this grand Master, is the right Worshipfull Sir R, D. Knight, whose prouidence hath adorned our Chappell with Organs, and beautifi∣ed the walkes and seuerall roomes of our ample foun∣dation.Relinquet marmoriam. Now obserue the Members of this Synagogue. For Ʋs. Our body hath one Master Seuerall Officers, as Preacher, &c. of whose in∣stitution you may read at large, in Suttons Case,Suttons Case. Publi∣shed by one of our Gouernors, Sir Edward Cooke. Seuerall cohabi∣ting members, Aged men who haue hazarded their blood, or impaired their state by warres, or suffered losse by Sea, fourescore.
Seuerall cohabiting members. Hopefull children carefully instructed in the learned tongues, and humane Arts, lecently cloathed, plentifully dyeted, & connueniently lodged, 40 Besides these, The faithfull prouidence of Sir Rich. Sutton Knight, hath purchased lands from whence twenty foure Academians re∣ceiue annuall pensions in both our renowned Vniuersities. Here is a Protestant.Briefely — very nigh two hundred daily feed vpon our Suttons bounty. I shall conclude with the charge of Darius, Day by Day we haue our portion without faile,Era 6.9. yt we may offer sacrifices of sweet sauour vnto the God of heauen, and pray for the life of our religious Prince and Patrone King Charles: and thus do we pray, O thou King of Kings, cloath all our Soueraignes ene∣mies with shame, but vpon his head let the Crowne flourish; mak his raigne prosperous on earth, and glorious in heauen; make this foundation a ynagogue of deuout men, seruing thee in all peace and holinesse so long as the Sunne and Moone shall endure, through Iesus Christ our Lord, To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, all power, maiesty, mercy, wise∣dome, and blessing be ascribed for euer and for euer, Amen. FINIS.
A Catalogue of the names of the Right Honorable, Right Reuerend, and Right Worthy Gouernors of King James his Hospitoll, founded by Thomas Sutton Esquire. The most Reuerend Father in God, the Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury his Grace, Surui∣uing ouer-seer. The Right Honourable Lord Couentrie, Lord Keeper. Lord Priuy Seale, Earle of Manchester. Lord Steward, Earle of Penbroke. Ld. Chamberlaine, Earle of Mongomery The Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of London. Lord Bishop of Ely. Lord Bishop of Lincolne. The Right Worshipful Sir Edward Coke. Sir Randolph Crew. Sir Robert Heath, his Maiesties Atturny generall. Sir Henry Martine, Deane of the Ar∣ches, and udge of the Admiraltie. Doctor Donne, Deane of Pauls. Sir Richard Sutton, Suruiuing Executor. Sir Robert Dallington, Master. Mr. Thomas Browne Esquier.
