6317 99851878 17171
The Story of David and Berseba. To a pleasant new tune. VVhen David in Ierusalem, as royall King did rule & raigne, Behold what hapned unto him, that afterward procur'd his paine. On the top of  his Princely . Her beauty was  excellent and brighter than the morning Sunne, By which the King incontinent, was to her fauour quickly wonne. She stood within a pleasant Bower, all naked for to wash her there, Her body like a Lilly Flower, was covered with her golden haire. The King was wounded with her love, and what she was he did enquire, He could not his affection move, he had to her such great desire. She is  Wife, quoth they, a Captaine of your Princely Traine, That in your Warres is now away, doth all alone remaine. Then said the King, Bring her to me, for with her love my heart is slaine: The Prince of beauty sure is she, for whom I doe great griefe sustaine. The Servants they did soone prepare, to doe the message of the King, And Berseba the Lady faire, unto the Court did quickly bring. The King rejoyced at her sight, and won her love, and lay her by, Till they in sport had spent the night, and that the Sun was risen high. The King his leave most kindly tooke of the faire Lady at the last: And homeward then she cast her looke, till that three moneths were gone & past. And then in Berseba so faire, she found her former health exilde, By certaine tokens that she saw, the King had gotten her with childe. Then to the King she made her mone, and told him how the case did stand: The King sent for her Husband home, to cloake the matter out of hand. When from the Camp Vriah came, the King receiv'd him courteously, Demanding how all things did frame concerning of the Enemy. Vriah shew'd his Highnesse all the accident of warlike strife. Then said the King, this night you shall kéepe company with your owne wife. The Arke of God (Vriah said) with Iudah's Host, and Israel, Kéepe in the Field, and not a man within the house where they doe dwell. Then should I take my ease, quoth he, in beds of Downe with my faire wife? O King, he said, that must not be, so long as I enjoy my life. Then did the King a Letter frame, to Ioab Generall of the Host, And by Vriah sent the same, but certainely his life it cost.
The second part, To the same tune. ANd when the King for certaine knew Vriah thus had murdered béene, Faire Berseba to Court he drew, and made of her his royall Quéene. Then God that saw his wicked déed, was angry at King Davids sinne: The Prophet Nathan then with spéed, came thus complaining unto him. O David, ponder what I say, a great abuse I shall thée tell: For thou that rul'st in equity, shouldst sée the people ruled wel. Two men within the City dwell, the one is rich, the other poore: The rich in Cattell doth excell, the other nothing hath in store, Saving one silly little Shéepe, which yong he did with money buy: With his owne bread he did it feed, amongst his Children tenderly. The rich man had a stranger came unto his house that lov'd him deare, The poore mans Shéepe therefore he tooke, and thereof made his friend good chéere. Because that he his owne would save, he us'd the man thus cruelly: Then by the Lord the King did sweare, the rich man for that fault should die. Thou art the man, the Prophet said, thy Princely Crowne God gave to thée: Thy Lords wives thou thine owne hast made, and many more of faire beauty. Why hast thou so defilde thy life, and slaine Vriah with the sword, And taken home his wedded Wife, regarding not Gods holy Word? Therefore behold, thus saith the Lord, great warres upon thy house shall be, Because thou hast my Lawes abhord, much ill be sure Jle raise on thee. Ile take thy wives before thy face, and give them to thy neighbours use: And thou thereby shalt have disgrace, for men shall laugh at thine abuse. Then David cryed out pittiously, sore have I sinned against the Lord, Have mercy God therefore on me, let not my prayers be abhor'd. But as the Prophet told to him, so did it after chance indéed. For God did greatly plague his sinne, as in the Bible you may read. The scourge of sinne thus you may sée, for murther and adultery. Lord grant that we may warned be, such crying sinnes to shun and . FINIS. Printed at London for I. Wright, dwelling in Gilt-spurre street, neere New-gate.
