698.5 23208293 26393
Any thing for a quiet life; Or the Married mans bondage to a curst Wife. To the tune of Oh no, no, no, not yet; or Ile neuer loue thee more. ANy thing for a quiet life a Yong man faine would : To serue his Master out his time, and please his Mistris too: His bondage wisht for liberty, that he might haue a wife At his owne will, for to doe still any thing for a quiet life. In haste he chose himselfe then one, and quickly was he wed: But crooked cares of houshold charge, molested much his head. His wedding shooes no sooner off, but his commanding wife Did make him pray, and often say, Any thing for a quiet life. His wife (yong asse) grew wāton sick, within a day or two: And long'd, she knew not well for what, as many women doe. The daintiest things that could be got, he gaue vnto his wife, And for her sake, did vndertake any thing for a quiet life. With Plums, and Peares, & Cherries ripe, of twenty shillings a pound, With Pescods newly from the bloome, if any might be found. All which he must goe seeke forthwith, to please his longing wife: Thus married men doe now and then, to haue a quiet life. Seurn Holydayes in one weeke, she still desired to make, And euery day to lye till noone, for feare her head should ake. For want of sleepe would trouble sore this his yong teeming wife. That would haue dyed, if he denyed any thing for a quiet life. For breakefast in her bed she had a Cawdle of Muskadine: And then with Woodcocks and with Larks, she must rise vp and dine: Where e kind-hearted married man, giues welcome to his wife: For doe but craue, quoth he, and haue, any thing for a quiet life. At last her Child-bed time drew on, where money must be spent: In dainty Lawnes & Cambricks fine, or else no way content. Her house must be as well set out, as any Citie wife: Thus fill'd with care, he must not spare, any thing for a quiet life. Her Nurses weekely charge likewise, with many a Gossips feast: He well perceiu'd, when purse grew light, and emptied was his Chest. The Sugar Plums, & sweet Conserues to please his Child-bed wife: Both night and day, gréeu'd him to say, Any thing for a quiet life.
The second part. To the same tune. THese Christning charges ouer-past, the Churching day came on: Against which time, her Taylor must her garded Gowne bring home. Her Petti-coat of Stammell red, new giuen vnto his wife: Which charges paid, this Yong-man said, any thing for a quiet life. Thus after many a braue Carowse, vpon her Churching day, Her tattling Gossips her perswade, in this her rich array, To take the comforts of the ayre, and pleasures of a wife: While he at home, sayes like a mome, any thing for a quiet life. Unto her Nurse-child then must she, in iollity and ioy, Some ten miles distance for to see, the vsage of her Boy. Well mounted on an ambling Nagge, with some kinde neighbours wife, Whilst hee poore soule must sing in dole, any thing for a quiet life. Not any meeting in seuen miles, where Gallants doe repayre: But she will braue it with the best, and for no charges spare. If fault her Husband finde therewith, she proues a frowning wife, And tyres him so, till he bestow; any thing for a quiet life. His old acquaintance must he not at any time goe see: Except she grant, and giue him leaue, or there in presence be. And then his purse he must yeeld vp to his commanding wife: While he must say, Good woman pay any thing for a quiet life. Thus yeere by yéere, he spent his dayes, in troubles and in cares: A warning fit for him which thus, himselfe to marriage snares. The onely hell vpon this earth, to haue an angry wife: To make vs say both night and day, any thing for a quiet lise. Let Yong-men all take heed by this, how they doe match and marry: He leads a life of libertie, that doth the longest tarry. It is the formost step to woe, to wed vnto a wife, That will haue still, at her owne will, any thing for a quiet life. FINIS. At London printed by G. P.
