8918 33142623 28154
At Whitehall the eleuenth of March, 1628. Lord Keeper. Lord President. Lord Priuy Seale. Lord High Chamberlaine. Erle Marshall. Lord Chamberlaine. Erle of Suffolke. Erle of Dorset. Erle of Carlile. Erle of Banbury. Lord Ʋi. Dorchester. Lord Bishop of London. Lord Bishop of Winton. Master Secretary Coke. WHereas his MAIESTIES Armie (lately discharged at Ports∣mouth) hath continued since the first raysing thereof by the space of forty two moneths; In which time, diuers great payments haue beene made to the Officers thereof, in full satisfaction of their actuall Seruice abroad, and with a great o∣uerplus to the most, as appeareth by sundry accompts lately certified to the Board, in answere to certaine Petitions thereto exhibited; And yet neuerthelesse, there is claimed some arreares of Pay by many, which they demaund for the time of their Souldiers beeing Billeted in the Countrey: His MAIESTIE, out of His Princely desire and care to giue all the sayd Officers full content in their rea∣sonable demands, hath this day, with the Aduice of His Counsell, Ordered, That all the Accompts of moneys payd, or imprested in part of pay, to any of the Officers of his Highnesse sayd Armie, either by Iohn Beare, Esquire, Sir Thomas Loue, Knight, and Captaine Iohn Mason, Treasurers and Pay masters for the Armie, or the deputie Lieutenants, and Collectors of the Loanes in and about the Countreys wherein the said Souldiers were billetted: Also the Accompts of Sir George Chudleigh, and Sir Iames Bagge, Knights, with the Ac∣compts of such moneys as were payd to the sayd Officers in Ireland after their returne from Cadiz, or priuatly issued to any particular persons to and for the vse of any of the sayd Officers out of his Highnesse Receipt of the Exchequer, or other Offices. Moreouer, all summes payd vnto any of the sayd Officers by the late Duke of Buckingham, or any of his Ministers, or that haue been payd by any others not here nominated for that pur∣pose, shall before the last day of Iune next, bee deliuered vp to the hands of the two Auditors of the Imprest, to be by them examined and cast vp, aswell for the dead as for the liuing, that so such remainder of Pay as shall bee found iustly due vpon the foote of euery mans Accompt fairely to be drawne vp, and signed by the Auditor, may be payd vnto themselues, their Executors or Assignes, at such conuenient times as shall bee then appointed by the Lords of his MAIESTIES Priuie Counsell; there being no possible meanes of setting downe dayes of payment of moneys before the summe be knowen, at which time, the dayes of payment shall be expresly and punctually set downe. And it is further ordered, that all such as haue giuen credite to any of the sayd Officers since the time of their imployments in these His MAIESTIES late Seruices, for Meate, Drinke, Apparell, Lodging, or Moneys, shall haue full power by vertue of any the Bills Bonds, or assignements of any the sayd Officers authorizing them in that behalfe, to receiue satisfaction, out of their sayd remainder of Pay, so farre as what shal be found to be due vn∣to them will extend. And in the meane time both Officers their Creditors are prohibited to trouble his MA∣IESTIE, or the Lords of his Highnesse Counsell, or any other, with any further Suits and Petitions, by reason of the premisses; but to attend and expect the finishing of the said Accompts, and the time to bee prefixed for payment. ❧ Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO M.DC.XXVIII.
