A990 11644155 47970
HEAVEN OPENED, OR, A Brief and plain DISCOVERY OF THE RICHES OF Gods Covenant OF GRACE. By R. A. London, Printed Anno Dom. 1665.
To The Reader. Reader. THe Providence of God hath led mee on to the publication of the ensu∣ing Treatise, much beyond my first intentions. There came to my hands A Synopsis of the Covenant of Grace on Gods part, with a Soliloquie annexed (both pen∣ned by the worthy Authour of that form of Mans Cove∣nanting with God, inserted in my Vindiciae Pietatis) attend∣ed with the Authours desires, and of divers other Christians; that this also might bee incor∣porated into the same book.
These desires, neither being able to resist, nor willing to deny, I prepared some meditations to bee premised, with a purpose to have put forth another Edition of that Book with this addition; but finding it to grow into too great a bulk to bee there incerted both this on Gods part, and the former on mans part, come into thy hands in this distinct Trea∣tise; followed with my Prayers, that the good Land, whereof some Clusters are here presented to thee, may be thine Inheritance, See and take. Thine, because the Lords Covenant servant. R. A. July 8. 1665.
The Contents. THe Introduction pag. 1 Chap. 1 God himself granted in the Covenant, p. 3 To bee our Friend. Portion. Sun. Shield. Chap. 2. Christ in the Covenant. 22 As The Light of life. The Lord our righteousness. Our Lord and King. Our head and Husband. Chap. 3. The Spirit in the Covenant. 35 As a Spirit of Wisdome and Revelation. Holiness and Sanctification. Truth and Direction. Comfort and Consolation. Chap. 4 The earth in the Covenant. 51 The good things of the Earth. The evil things of the Earth. 1. The Covenant hath its Cross. 2. By vertue of the Convenant, the Cross is a bles∣sing. The Blessing of the Cross stands, 1. In its being separated from the earth. 2. In its being sanctified to its ends. 3. In its being proportioned to our needs and strength. 4. In the special comforts annexed to it.
Chap. 5. The Angels of light in the Covenant. 74 Chap. 6. The powers of darkness delivered over in the Covenant. 78 Chap. 7. Death in the Covenant p. 84 Chap. 8. The Kingdome in the Covenant. 87 Chap. 9. All the means of salvation in the Covenant. 88 1. External means. 2. Internal means; In special, a new heart, Chap. 10. An heart to know the Lord. 96 Chap. 11. One heart. 114 Chap. 12. An heart of flesh. 141 Chap. 13. An heart to love the Lord. 166 Chap. 14. An heart to fear the Lord. 193 Chap. 15 An Obedient heart. 221 Chap. 16. Perseverance in the Covenant. 249 Chap. 17. A Synopsis of the Covenant of Grace on Gods part, by another hand 262 Chap 18. A Soliloquie representing the Believers Tryumph in Gods Covenant, and the various con∣flicts, and glorious conquests of faith over unbe∣lief. 316 Chap. 19. An exhortation to sinners, with directi∣ons for their entring into Covenant. 342 Chap. 20. A form of words expressing mans cove∣nanting with God. 365 Chap. 21. An Exhortation to the Saints. 369
Heaven Opened, OR, A brief and plain discovery of the Riches of Gods Cove∣nant of GRACE. The Introduction. GOod news from Heaven, the day-spring from on high hath visited this undone world, after a Deluge of sin and misery, behold the bow in the Cloud, the Lord God hath made and established a new Covenant, and this is it that hath cast the first beam on the dark state of lost and fallen man; and hath brought life and immortality to light. This Covenant is the hope of Sinners; The riches of Saints, the Magna Charta of the City of God. The forfeited Lease of eternity renewed; Gods Deed of Gift, wherein hee hath on fair conditions, granted sinners their lives, and settled upon his Saints an everlasting Inheritance. Hear, O yee forlorn Captives; who have sold your selves to eternal bondage, spoiled your selves of all your glory, sealed your selves up under e∣verlasting misery; you are dead in your sins, guil∣ty before God, under wrath, under a curse, bound over to eternal vengeance. But behold there is yet hope in Israel concerning this thing; the Lord
God hath taken compassion upon you, hath open∣ed a way for you to escape out of all this misery, and bondage; Lift up the hands that hang down, comfort the trembling knees; An Ark, an Ark hath God prepared, in which is salvation from the Flood; A Covenant, a new Covenant hath hee made, and established, which (if you lay hold on it) will recover all you have lost, ransome you from death, redeem you from Hell, and ad∣vance you to a more sure and blessed condition, than your original state, from which you have fallen. This is the hope of sinners; This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord. Glorious tydings, good news indeed! but what is this Covenant? or what is there that is given and granted therein? Why, in summe there's all that Heaven and earth can afford; all that can bee needed, or desired, and this by a firm and irre∣vokable Deed, made over, and made sure to all that will sincerely embrace it. Particularly God hath in his Covenant, granted and made over, 1. Himself. 2. His Son. 3. His Spirit. 4. The Earth. 5. The Angels of Light. 6. The Powers of Darkness. 7. Death. 8. The Kingdome. 9. All the means of Salvation.
CHAP. I. God in the Covenant. 1. THe Lord God hath made over himself in this Covenant. That's the great and com∣prehensive promise, Jer. 31.33. I will be their God. I am God, and what I am, 'tis all theirs: my self, my glorious incomprehensible essence, all my glorious attributes, my omnipotence, my omni∣science, my wisdome, my righteousness, my holi∣ness, mine all-sufficiency, my faithfulness, &c. I will make over my self to them to be henceforth and for ever theirs: Their Friend, Portion, Sun, Shield. 1. Their Friend. I was angry, but mine anger is turned away: I was an adversary, I had a con∣troversie with them, but I am reconciled, I have found a ransome, the quarrel is composed, my wrath is appeased, I am friends with them; I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more; I will take away their iniquity, and receive them graciously; I will heal their back-sliding, I will love them freely; for mine anger is turned away from them. Jer. 31.34. Hos. 14.4. Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will towards men. Fury is not now in me: favour, and friendship, love, and good will, is all they may henceforth expect from
me. Sinners, what is there to be feared? what is there dreadful, but an angry provoked God? Thence is sorrow and anguish, thence is famine, and pestilence, and sword; thence is death and hell: he doth not know what the wrath of God means, that doth not see in the bowels of it, all the plagues above ground, and all the vengeance of eternal fire. Whatever terrors, or torments have seized upon thee; upon thy body, upon thy soul; whatever losses, crosses, vexations, afflictions, plague thee on this earth; whatever horrour, and anguish, whatever amazing, confounding torments are like to meet thee, and feed upon thee in the lake be∣neath, thou mayest say of all this, This is the wrath of God. That day the Lord sayes to thee, Fury is not in me; he faith also, Fear shall be no more to thee. That hour the Lord saith I am thy friend, Death and Hell vanish. The day is broken, the shaddows fly away. And this is one thing in∣cluded in that promise [I am their God] I am their friend. 2. Their Portion. Fury cease? Fears vanish? Friendship, favour, life granted? But what shall he have to live upon? Man was never intended to be a self-sufficient; he was created under a neces∣sity of dependance on somthing without him; not onely for the continuation of his being, but of the comfort of his being: he cannot live upon the aire, though he hath scaped the fire: the soul of man is too big for all the world; like Noah's Dove, it can finde no rest below, and where shall it finde it, or on what shall it subsist? Why God will not starve his friends; he that hath saved their lives, will finde them a livelyhood; because there is no other
to be found, he himself will be a livelyhood to them; their portion, their maintenance, and their heritage for ever. As their deliverance is from him, so their dependance shall be on him; he is their substance, and on him is their subsistence; Jer. 10.16. he writes himself the portion of Jacob; and as such his Saints accept him, Psal. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance; he is their bread, and their water, their stock, and their store. The Lord [Gives] portions to his enemies; not onely the young Ravens, but the old Lions, and Tigers, the worst of men do seek their meat from God, Psal. 17.14. they have their portion in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they have their portion: some of them have their portion in the City, others a portion in the Field: to some he gives a portion of gold, to others a por∣tion of worldly glory, to others a portion of plea∣sures; by all these he deals, as the father of the prodigal, he gives them their portion, and sends them away. But whilst he [gives] portions to these, he [is] the portion of his Saints, he makes over and settles himself upon them, as their inheritance for ever: they shall never be in want whilst there is in him to supply them; they shall never be in straits whilst there is in him to relieve them: all their wants be upon me. The Lord is their Portion, and he is a sufficient portion. With thee is the fountain of life, Psal. 36. In thy presence is fulness, Psal. 16. The Lord God is all things to them, enough and to spare: In my Fa∣thers house there is bread enough, and to spare. He that hath all things below God, but not God, hath no∣thing; he that hath nothing besides God, but
hath God, hath all things; enough and to spare: filling up, and running over; there's still more to be had, if more could be held: the soul hath never enough, till it hath more then enough; is never full till it runs over: while it can contain and measure and number all that it has, this is its judgement of all, Pauperis est numerare pecus. In God is enough for filling up and running over; enough there is in him to fill up all their faculties; their understandings; there are infinitely beautiful perfections, where we may gaze and glut our eyes with unspeakable delight; but when we have looked the farthest into them, when the most searching eye, the most greedy thoughts have searched and run their utmost, they come not near the end: they shall look, and look, and see and see, and when they can reach no farther, then they shall admire at those treasures of light and beauty that are still beyond them. Admiration is the under∣standing full, and running over: when its nonplust, and can reach no further, then it wonders at what it perceives still beyond it. The Apostle tells us Eph. 3.18. that the Gospel (which presents God in flesh) hath in it, an height, and depth, and length, and bredth; and I may tell you from him, 'tis an height without top, a depth without bottome, a length without limits, a bredth without bounds; in one word, immensity, unmeasurable, and there∣fore unspeakable, unsearchable glory. Whilst the blind world deride and despise the portion of the Saints, looking on God and all the things of God, as shallow things, that have no depth in them; they will be found by those that search into them, to be deep things that have no bottome in them, 1 Cor. 2.
the deep things of God. All the raptures, and exta∣sies of glorious joyes of the Saints in the other world, are the running over of their eyes upon their hearts, and do break in upon them from their vision of God. There's enough to fill up their wills and affecti∣ons: there's infinite goodness, incomprehensible love, marvellous loving kindness, unspeakable de∣lights, glorious joyes, Psal. 31.19. Oh! how great is the goodness which thou hast laid up for those that fear thee! Oh! how great is the goodness! 'Tis vox admirantis, an admiring word; great beyond expression, great beyond imagination; Eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, neither have entred into the heart of man to conceive the things which God hath prepared for them that love him: and 'tis vox exul∣tantis, of an heart leaping for joy, rejoycing in hope of the glory of God, which is laid up for his Saints. Laid up! where? Why laid up in himself; that's the fountain, that's the treasury; there's love, there's joy, there's satisfaction, our life is hid with Christ in God. Oh love the Lord all ye his Saints. O bless the Lord all ye his Saints. He that is mighty hath done for you great things: since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, oh God besides thee, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him, Isa. 64.4. or as 'tis in the margin, There hath not been heard or seen a God besides thee, which doth so for him that waiteth for him. There's enough to fill up our time; there's ad∣miring work, and praising work for ever: there's matter for love, and joy to live, and feed upon for ever; endless praises, eternal pleasures, ever∣lasting
rejoycings, Isa. 35. Everlasting Joy, Psal. 16. pleasures for evermore. There's enough to reward all our labours, and repay all our expences: there's a full reward; Gen. 15.1. Fear not Abram, I am thy shield, and exceeding great reward. Christian, thou shalt not serve the Lord for nought, he will reward thee, and 'tis little in his eyes, that thou shouldest serve him for corn, and for wine, for sheep and for oxen; yea for the crowns and king∣doms of this world: these shall not be thine hire; the everlasting God will be thy reward, thine ex∣ceeding great reward: exceeding, not thy work on∣ly, but thy very thoughts also: A little is too much for thy earnings, but the whole world is too little for his bounty: less than nothing might satisfie for thy labours, but less than himself will not satisfie for his love: the eternal God will be thy reward. Oh the unsearchable riches of the poorest of Saints! Onimium foelices,—bona si sua nôrint. Poor? what and yet hast a God! In want? what and yet hast all things? Is he a God that is thine, and art thou still in straits? Would a few sheep and oxen, vine∣yards, and olive-yards, make thee a rich man, and can a God leave thee a beggar? Is not a pearl more than pebbles? Milk and wine, than mud and water? Men use to say, Money is all things: meat, and drink, and clothes, and friends, and lands; virtually all things. And is not God more than money? Sure he hath said to his Gold [thou art my god] that cannot say, Let God be mine, and then go thou thy way. Hast thou a God, and yet poor? Nay farther, would the fatness of the earth, and the fulness of heaven, if thou hadst both, be enough for thee? Would corn, and wine, and houses, and
lands, and pleasures here, and eternal life hereafter suffice thee? And is not God alone as much as all this? Dost thou want Star-light when thou hast the Sun? Is the Ocean more full for the Rivers that run into it? Or, would there be any want there, if all these were stopp'd and dry? Can they con∣tribute to it, which have their rise from it? Hath the almighty God a self-sufficiency, and hath he not enough to satisfie a poor worm? Is he blessed in himself, and mayest not thou be blessed in him? He that thinks any thing less then God will suf∣fice, understands not a soul; and he that wants any thing more, understands not God. God alone is as much as God and all the world; and this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, God is their portion. If enough be not yet said, look a while, and consider whence thou art taken up into this bles∣sedness: What hast thou left? What an exchange hast thou made? Thou wert taken with the Pro∣digal from the trough, with the beggar from the dunghil, yea as a brand out of the burning; there thy lot was fallen. Oh where hast thou left the rest of the world? Blessing themselves in vanity, plea∣sing themselves with shaddows, and apparitions, feeding on ashes, warming themselves at their painted fires, sporting themselves with the wind, rejoycing in a thing of nought; their crackling thorns, their glozing pleasures, their drinkings, and dancings, and riotings, their horses, and their dogs, and their hawks, and their harlots; making a shift a while to make merry with these, whilst they are hasting to the pit, To that fire and brimstone which is the portion of their cup.
Consider man, what is the chaffe to the wheat? What is a Comet to the Sun? What is the night to the day? What are bubbles and childrens toyes to e durable riches? What are things that are no, to hm whose name is [I am?] But oh what is death, and wrath, and the curse, which was once all thine heritage; to that life, and love, and peace, and joy and glory, which thou now possessest in that God that is thy portion? What a poor wretch wert thou once, when thou hadst nothing but sin, and shame, and misery, that thou couldst call thine own? these thou mightest call thine; sin was thine, woe was thine, death, and the grave, and the curse, and the pit were thine own; but that was all thou hadst; thy good things thou livedst upon had they been of never so great value, were none of thine; thine house, and thy lands are none of thine: thy gold, and thy silver, and thy substance are none of thine; they are all but borrowed, or committed to thee as a Steward, and all to be gi∣ven up upon demand; and what thou hast spent of them, thou must be brought to a reckoning for; a poor wretch thou wert, and hadst just nothing, all that thou hadst was none of thine. But now God is thine own, all that he is, all that he has is thine; never couldest thou lay such a claim to any thing thou possessedst; to house, or wife, or childe, or body, or soul, as now thou mayest to thy God. God is as surely thine as thou art thy self; as sure as thou art a man, thou hast a God. Come Christian, here's now thy potion, the light of thine eyes, the lifting up of thinehead, the joy of thine heart, the strength of thy bones, thy
stock, thy treasure, thy life, thy health, thy peace, thy rest, thy all; Whom have I in heaven but thee, and in the earth there is none that I desire besides thee. My flesh and mine heart faileth, but God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever. Psal. 73.25,26. Here is thy portion, know it for thy good, take it for thine own; live upon it, and live up to it. 1. Live upon thy portion. Here thou mayest feed, herein thou mayest rejoyce, herein thou mayest bless thy self for ever. Let him that blesseth himself on the earth, bless himself in the God of Truth. Let him that rejoyceth in the earth, rejoyce in the God of truth. Let the strong man live upon his strength, let the wise man live upon his wits, let the rich man live upon his lands, come thou live upon thy God; come enjoy God and thy soul; enjoy God in thy soul, enjoy thy soul in God. Thou hast pos∣session, what should hinder thy fruition? In fruition the Schools tells us there are three things, which go to the making it up; Cognitio, Delectatio, Quietatio. 1. Knowledge; according to the clearness or clou∣diness of our apprehensions of any good, we more or less take the pleasure or comfort of it; and there∣fore the full fruition of God is not till at last, when we shall know as we are known: Here we see but as in a glass, and darkly; we know but in part, and while we know but in part, we love but in part; and joy but in part; the dimness of our sight makes an abatement upon our joy: When the vail shall be taken away, when we shall come to see face to
face, then we shall fully feel what it is to have a God. Christian, know thou the God of thy Fathers; the more thou knowest the more thou hast. The carnal world enjoy not God at all: God is not known in their Tabernacles: In Jewry is God known, his Name is great in Israel: at Salem is his Tabernacle, and his Dwelling in Zion. But what of God in Edom, or Ammon, or Amaleck, or Aegypt, those dark Regions wherein neither Sun nor Star appears? Leave them to their dunghil gods, to the gardens which they have desired, and the Oaks which they have chosen. The Lord is be∣fore thee, know it for thy good. Study thy God Christian, roul over his sweetness in thy minde, as thou dost the sweet morsel in thy mouth; see what he is, and what thou hast laid up in him: read over daylie his glorious names; walk through those chambers of his presence, his glorious Attributes; look into the chamber of his power, and see what thou hast laid up for thee there; go into the cham∣ber of his wisdome, and see what that will afford thee; look into the chambers of his goodness, mercy, faithfulness, holiness, and behold what treasures are laid up for thee in each of these: enter into thy chambers, they are all thine; enter into the cham∣bers, set thine eye be there, let thy meditation be there, let thy soul be there every day; there's thy portion, search it out, and know it for thy good. This is the first thing contained in Fruition, Know∣ledge. 2. Delight. Fruition is the taking the pleasure of what we have; Frui est cum gaudio uti: Au∣gustine. We cannot enjoy what we do not love, and love hath delight. We cannot enjoy that
wherein we do not joy. Delight thy self in the Lord, Psal. 37.4. I sate me down under his shaddow with great delight, Cant. 2.3. If his shaddow be so pleasant, what will his Sun-beams be? Psal. 34.8. O taste and see that the Lord is good. Our senses help our understandings; we cannot by the most rational discourse perceive what the sweetness of honey is, taste it and you shall perceive it. His fruit was sweet unto my taste. Dwell in the light of the Lord, and let thy soul be alwayes ravished with his love. Get out the marrow and the fat∣ness that thy portion yeilds thee. Let fools learn by beholding thy face, how dim their blazes are to the brightness of thy day. Let thy delights in God be pure and unmixed delights. Let thy spirit be so filled with God, and so raised above carnal joyes, and the matters of them, that it be no damp upon thee to have no∣thing but God. Thy wine is the more sprightful when not mixed with water: Live above in that serene Ayre which is not incrassated with earthly exhalations. Sickly bodies, and so sickly souls cannot live in too pure an Ayr. Be so wholly spi∣ritual, that spiritual joyes, spiritual delights may be suited to thee, and sufficient for thee. Do not say I want the joy of the Vintage, and of the Har∣vest; I want the joy of the Bridegroom, and of the Bride; I want the sound of the Milstones, and the light of the Candle, to make my comfort full. Let the joy of the Lord be thy strength, and thy life: Say with the Prophet Habbak. 3.17,18. Although the Fig-tree shall not blossome, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labour of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yeild no meat, the Flock shall be cut
off from the fold, and there shall be no Herd in the stalls; yet will I rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. This is the second thing in Fruition, Delight. 3. Satisfaction. The quiet, or resting of the soul in its portion: Therefore the Schools say, it is onely the ultimus finis, the last end, that is the proper object of fruition. The carnal world, what∣ever they possess, yet they cannot be said properly to enjoy it; though they be their gods that they live upon (their dragg is their god, their yarn is their god, their plough, and their plenty, and their pleasure is their god, they burn incense to them) though they be their gods that they live upon, yet they cannot enjoy them; there is no rest for them in their god, Psal. 25.12,13. What man is he that feareth the Lord, his soul shall dwell at ease: In the Original 'tis, shall lodge in goodness. The soul is never in ease whilest 'tis in want, every want wrings; it can never take up its lodging where it cannot take its rest. His soul shall be at ease, shall lodge, that is, shall take up its rest in the goodness of God: and when we finde rest in our beds, then we enjoy them. Is thy soul lodg'd in God? O enjoy thy lodging: Soul, take thine ease, thou hast goods laid up for many years. Return to thy rest O my soul, for the Lord hath dealt boun∣tifully with thee. As it was said [to] so let it be said [by] the Church and every Saint, This is my rest, here will I dwell for ever. Here thou mayest find rest, when thou hast no other rock to lean upon: thou mayest be at rest in thy God, in thy most restless state; in a weary land, in a barren wilder∣ness, in a tempestuous Ocean: how ever it was in
the vision of the Prophet, yet thou mayest say, if the wind rise, the Lord is in the wind; if after the wind an earthquake, the Lord is in the earthquake; if after the earthquake a fire, the Lord God is in the fire; and where-ever thou findest God, thou mayest find rest. If thou findest God in a wilder∣ness, thou wilt find rest in the wilderness; if thou find God in the earthquake, or the tempest, or the fire, even there also thy soul shall find rest: when thou canst not rest in thy bed, nor in thine house, nor in thy land, thou mayest still rest in thy God. Say Christian, say again, Return to thy rest, oh my soul, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with me. Though my helps fail me, and my friends fail me, and my flesh and my heart fails me, God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever; this is my rest, here will I dwell for ever. To these I might add a fourth thing wherein Fruition stands; The making use of our Portion. He enjoys that uses what he hath; though the Schools distinguish betwixt frui and uti: yet in a sense (especially with a respect to our present estate) the latter may be comprehended under the former. We then enjoy our portion, when we have a pow∣er and heart to make use of it on all occasions. I am thine, soul, come and make use of me as thou wilt: Thou mayest freely, I have nothing, but 'tis for thee; thou mayest freely come to my store, and the oftner the better welcome; have thou not a God lying by thee to no purpose; let not thy God be as others gods, serving only for a shew: Have not a name only that thou hast a God; since he allows thee, having such a friend use him daily, my God shall supply all your wants; never want
whilest thou hast a God, never fear or faint whilest thou hast a God; go to thy treasure and take what-ever thou needest; there's bread, and clothes, and health, and life, and all that thou needest. O Christian, learn the divine skill to make God all things, to make bread of thy God, and water, and health, and friends, and ease; he can supply thee with all these; or, which is better, he can be in∣stead of all these: thy food, thy clothing, thy friend, thy life to thee. All this he hath said to thee in this one word, I am thy God; and hereupon thou mayest say, I have no husband, and yet I am no widow, my maker is mine husband. I have no father nor friend, and yet I am neither fatherless nor friend∣less; my God is both my father and my friend. I have no childe, but is not he better to me than ten children? I have no house, but yet I have an home, I have made the most high mine habitation. I am left alone, but yet I am not alone, my God is good company for me; with him I can walk, with him I can take sweet counsel, finde sweet repose; at my lying down, at my rising up, whilest I am in the house, as I walk by the way, my God is ever with me; with him I travel, I dwell, I lodge, I live, and shall live for ever. 2. Live up to your priviledge. Live according to your rank and quality, according to your riches laid up for you in God. The rich men of this world live like rich men, they sort themselves with persons of their own quality, attend on the Courts of Princes, are employed about the magnalia re∣gum: you may read their estates in the whole way of their life; they wear them on their backs, spread their Tables with them, fill their bellies with
them; they live sumptuously, and fare delicately. Christians, feed not on ashes or husks, you have better meat; you have milk and honey, marrow and fatness, the hidden manna, the bread that comes down from heaven, the water of life; you have blessed priviledges, precious promises, lively hopes, living comforts, glorious joyes, the fountain of life to feed your souls upon; come, eat, O friends; drink, yea drink abundantly, O my belo∣ved; out-fare the rich man, Luke 16. who fared deliciously every day: you have enough to main∣tain it; let every day be a gaudy day, a feast-day with you. Let your clothing be according to your feeding. Be clothed with the Sun; put on the Lord Jesus. The King's Daughter is (and so let all the King's Sons be) all glorious within, let their clothing be of wrought gold: Be clothed with humility, put on love, bowels of compassion, gentleness, meek∣ness; put on the garments of salvation. Let your company and converse be according to your clothing. Live amongst the excellent, amongst the generation of the just: Get you up to the Ge∣neral Assembly and Church of the first-born, to that innumerable company of Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect. Live in the Courts of the great King, behold his face, wait at his Throne, bear his name, shew forth his vertues, set forth his praises, advance his honour, uphold his Inte∣rest; let vile persons, and vile wayes be contemn∣ed in your eyes, be of more raised spirits than to be companions with them, Disce ex hac parte, sanctam superbiam, scito te illis esse meliorem. Regard not their societies, nor their scorns, their Euge's or
their Apage's, their flatteries or their frowns; re∣joyce not with their joyes, fear not their fear, care not their care, feed not on their dainties; get you up from among them, to your Country, to your City, where no unclean thing can enter or annoy. Live by faith, in the power of the Spirit, in the beauty of holiness, in the hope of the Gospel, in the joy of your God, in the magnificence, and yet the humility of the children of the great King. 3. Their Sun. He will discover and make ma∣nifest to them, the riches and glory of their Porti∣on: He hath granted them himself for their por∣tion, and he will reveal and make manifest to them what a portion he is. He will make manifest both their blessedness they shall enjoy in him, and the way to it, and also the dangers that lye in the way; Psal. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun. The Sun is the light of the world, it discovers it self, and all things else: We cannot see the glory of the Sun but by its own light; the Moon, the Stars, the Firmament, and all this lower World, would all disappear, if the Sun withdrew its light; beauty and deformity, safety and danger, the right way and the wrong, are all brought to view by the light of the Sun; the Sun-light makes the day, night is spread over the world when the Sun is set. God is glorious, but who would be ever the wiser did not this glory shine? Psal. 36.9. In thy light we shall see light. Why is the glorious God appre∣hended, understood, admired by so few amongst the sons of men? why, he is out of sight, the Sun is not risen upon them, nor shines unto them: they have Moon-light, or Star-light, some dimmer refle∣ctions of this glory at second hand from the crea∣tures, but they see not the Sun.
What's the reason that truth and falshood, good and evil, substances and shaddows, things perishing, and things permanent, are no better distinguished? VVhat's the reason that men are so mistaken, and misguided in their judgements, in their choice, in their way? That they are at such a loss, such wanderers from their bliss? what's the reason that mens own sparks, the light of their own fires, their candle-light, or torch-light, their fleshly imaginations, their carnal prosperity, their pleasures, their ease, their earthly glory, and their carnal joyes that hence flash up to them, are so ador'd and admir'd by them? Oh, they see not the Sun. God is out of sight, and thence are all their dotages, and foolish mistakes and miscarria∣ges. God will be a Sun to his Saints [their] Sun. [Thy Sun] shall no more go down. They shall have both the propriety and the comfort of this glorious Sun; he will shew them his face, he will cause his glory to appear, he will lead them into himself by his own beams; he will shew them their end, and the means; the goal, and their way to it; he will shew them the good part, and the right path: good and evil, duties and sins, realities and delu∣sions, helps and hindrances, dangers and advanta∣ges, their snares and their succours, will all be dis∣covered to them by the light of the Lord. Hearken thou poor and dark soul, that hast chosen, but thou knowest not what; that art go∣ing, but thou knowest not whither; that art wan∣dring and stumbling on, but thou carest not how; that complainest thou canst not see, thou canst not value, thou canst not be affected with all the glory and joy of the invisible world;
that findest thy husks, and thy trash, to be a great∣er pleasure to thee, than all the riches of immor∣tality; that wouldest fain mind, and chuse, and love, and relish, and seek God, and things above, but thou canst not; thou seest so little of the beau∣ty of them, that they do not entice thine heart after them; and when thou art seeking, thou art at a loss, and in the dark, as to the way that thou shouldest take. Hearken soul, thy God calls to thee, Come unto me, look unto me, and I will be thy Sun. Ile shew thee all that glory, and the right way that will bring thee to it. I promise thee I will, trust me, I will be a light unto thee. 4. Their Shield, Psal. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun and a [Shield.] The gods of the earth are so stiled, Psal. 47.9. The shields of the earth: much more the God of glory. Ephes. 6.16. Faith is called a shield: Above all taking the shield of Faith, it signifies the same, as God is a shield. Faith is to the soul what-ever God is. This is the grace that entitles the soul to God, and applies God to the soul, Gen. 15.1. Fear not Abraham, I am [thy] shield. What's promised to the Father of the faithful, stands sure to all the seed, Rom. 4.16. The state of Christians in this life is a militant state; a state full of hardships and hazards. By reason whereof, as richly as they are provided for, they are subject to fears of being undone, and spoil∣ed of all. They are in fears about things eternal: they have spiritual adversaries, that lye in wait for their souls, that fight against their souls, that are tempting them and enticing them from their God, that watch their opportunities to steal away their God, by stealing away their hearts from him; and
such dangerous attempts of this kind they meet withall, that they often are in great doubt what the issue may be. They are in fears about things temporal; their names are shot at; their liberties are invaded; their estates, with all the comforts of their lives, are in danger to be made a prey: to day they are a praise, to morrow a scorn: to day they are full and abound, but to morrow they may have nothing left: they dye daily; they are killed all the day long. But what-ever their dangers and their fears thereupon are, here's sufficient provision made against all. God is their shield. Christian, thou hast enough, and all that thou hast is in safety. Thou art compassed about with a shield, secur'd on all hands, there's no coming at thee. What-ever assaults are made, thy God is a wall of partition, betwixt thee and harm. They are not shields of brass and iron thou are furnish'd with, the strong God is thy defence. Wherefore dost thou doubt, O thou of little faith? A Chri∣stian and yet afraid? shifting for thy self? ta∣king care for the Asses, and Oxen, and Sheep? vexing, and loading, and losing thy self, in thy cares and fears from day to day? Where is thy God man? Doth not God take care for Oxen, and Asses, and all that thou hast? But oh what meanest thou in this, to be shifting thy self from danger, by shrinking back from thy God? securing thy self from affliction, by taking sanctuary in Iniquity? What art thou doing, but throwing away thy shield, to save thee from harm? making a breach in thy wall, to keep thee in safety? Gen. 17.1, &c. chap. 15.1. Walk before me, and be
thou perfect: follow thou me, stick to me, and then Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield. This now is the first and great promise of the Covenant, [I am thy God] and the second is like unto it. CHAP. II. Christ in the Covenant. 2. GOd hath put Christ into the Covenant, and made over him to his people, Isa. 42.6. I will give thee for a Covenant. He who is promi∣sed, as the chief matter, the Mediator, Surety, Scope of the Covenant, is by a metonymy, called the Covenant. I will give thee for a Covenant; that is, I covenant to give thee to the people. Whatever glory and blessedness there is in the fruition of God; wo is me, there is a great gulfe fixed between me and it, over which there is no passing; there's a partition-wall raised, over which there's no climbing; there's an hand-writing against me, whilst that stands, all that is in God is nothing to me: Were this God mine, I had enough. Let me be put to labour, or suffering, let me dig, or beg, or starve, and die; whether I be rich or poor, have somthing or nothing, be a praise or a reproach, it matters not, so God were mine. But oh how may I obtain? Who shall bring me to God? why the Lord God hath given thee his Son, to undertake for thee; and to be thy way un∣to the Father, Heb. 11.19,20. Jesus Christ, who is the morning star, the Sun of
righteousness; the Image of the Invisible God; the first-born of every creature; by whom are all things, who is before all things, the head of the body the Church; who is the beginning, the first-born from the dead: In whom dwells all fulness, even the ful∣ness of the Godhead bodily; who hath made peace by the blood of his Cross. Col. 1. and chap. 2. Whose Name is Wonderful, Councellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. This Jesus is granted thee in the Covenant, to bring thee to God. To which blessed and glorious purpose he is exhibited, 1. As the Light of Life. 2. As the Lord our Righteousness. 3. As our Lord and King. 4. As our Head and Husband. 1. As the light of Life. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. Luk. 1.32. In him was life, and the life was the light of men, John 1.4. He that followeth me shall have the light of life, John 8.12. there is a light that serves to kill, and destroy, to bring death and condemna∣tion to light: the light of the Law, that killing letter, concerning which the Apostle, Rom. 7.9,10. When the commandment came, sin revived, and I died; the commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death. But Christ brings life and immortality to light; heaven, glory, the invisible God, which are lost, out of reach, and out of ken, are all discovered in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. To give us the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. He is the Image of the Invisible God, the brightness of his Fathers glory, the glass in which by reflection
we see the Sun. John 14.8,9. Shew us the Father, and it suffices us. Why sayes he, Hast thou known me, Philip! and yet sayest, shew us the Father? He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father; and this is the light of life, John 17.3. this is life eternal, that they might know thee the onely true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. 2. As the Lord our righteousness. This is his Name Jer. 23.6. He shall be called the Lord our righteousness. To this end he is given to us, 1. As our propitiatory Sacrifice, 1 John 2. The propitiation for our sins, 1 Cor. 5. Christ our Pass∣over, Rev. 13.8. A lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Our price, our ransome; to satisfie Justice, pacifie wrath, discharge from the Curse; to blot out the hand-writing, break down the wall of partition; to finish the transgression, to make an end of sins, to make reconciliation for iniqui∣ty, to bring in everlasting righteousness, and so to bring us to God. What-ever difficulties there appear in thy way, what-ever doubts arise in thine heart, from thy sins, from thy guilt, from thy po∣verty, from thy impotence; what-ever objections thy fears may hence put in, there's the blood of the Lamb, that will answer all. Christ our Pass∣over is sacrificed for us. 2. As a merciful and faithful high Priest. Heb. 2.17. who hath made an attonement for us in the earth, and appears for us in heaven; who hath made reconciliation for us, and makes intercession for us, Heb. 9.24. to appear in the presence of God for us: we read Exod. 28.12.29. That Aaron as the type of Christ, was to bear the names of the children of Israel, engraven in stones, upon his
shoulders, and upon his breast-plate, when he went into the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord continually. Our Lord is entred into the Heavens, to appear in the presence of God, with our names upon his shoulders, and upon his heart, for a memorial before the Lord; there is not the least of Saints, but there his name is engraven. Here's my ransome Lord, and behold my ransomed ones. Here's my price, and my purchase, my re∣demption and my redeemed. What-ever accu∣sers there be, what-ever charge be laid against them, what-ever guilt lies upon them, here are the shoulders that have born all that was their due, and payd all that they owe; and upon these shoul∣ders, and in this heart thou mayest read all their names; and when thou readest, remember what I have done for them; and acquit, absolve, and let them be accepted before thee for ever. Remem∣ber the tears of these eyes, the stripes on this back, the shame of this face, the groans of this body, the anguish of this soul, the blood of this heart; and when thou remembrest, what-ever name thou findest engraven upon this heart, and upon these shoulders; they are the persons whose all these are; and what-ever these are, what-ever acceptance they have found with thee, what-ever satisfaction thou hast found in them, put it upon their account: never let me be accounted the ac∣cepted, if they be rejected; never let me be accoun∣ted righteous, if they lye under the imputation of wicked. If they be not righteous in my righteous∣ness, I must be guilty under their guilt. What-ever I am, what-ever my satisfaction is, all is theirs: for them they plead, for them they pray;
my tears, stripes, wounds, groans, anguish, soul, blood, they all cry and say, Father forgive them, Father accept them. Of all cryes, there are no such strong cries as the cry of blood, and that whether it be against, or for the guilty; its voice shall be heard on high. Thy brothers blood cryeth unto me from the ground. Gen. 4. and what followed? Wo to those persons against whom blood cryeth: but where blood, such blood cries for them, for pardon, for mercy, blessed are those souls. Christian, this blood is for thee, it speaks better things than the blood of Abel, Heb. 12. it pleads, sues, presses for thy discharge from all that is upon thee. Thou hast many cries against thee; Sathan cries, thy sins cry, thine own heart, thy conscience cries against thee; and thou art amazed at the dreadful noise they make; but behold the blood of the Lamb, the blood of God cries for thee. Thou hast an accuser, but thou hast an acquitter: thou hast adversaries, but thou hast an advocate. An Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righ∣teous, who is the propitiation for thy sins: 1 John 2. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth: who is he that condemneth, it is Christ that died; yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Rom. 8.33,34. Nay farher, thou hast not onely a righteous, but a merciful high Priest; that is provided of a Sacri∣fice, and hath an heart to offer it for thee: thy name is in his heart as well as on his shoulders; in his bowels as well as on his back. He hath blood for thee, precious blood; and he hath bowels for
thee, pitiful bowels. He can have pity and com∣passion on the miserable, Heb. 5.2. if he can finde no other, he can finde arguments enough from thy wo, and thy misery, to draw forth his soul towards thee. He is merciful, and his mercies are tender mercies; he is pittiful, and his compassions are tender compassions: thou art not so tender, of the wife of thy bosome, of the childe of thy bowels; thou art not so tender of thine own flesh, of the apple of thine eye, of thine own soul, as thy Lord is of thee: His spirit is moved for thee, his soul melts over thee, he bleeds in thy wounds, he suffers in thy sorrows, his eye weeps, his heart breaks over thy broken and undone state; fear not his forget∣ting thee, his bowels will remember him of thee. He is a merciful and a [faithful] high Priest. No dignity to which he is exalted above thee, no di∣stance to which he is removed from thee, can make him forget his friends; He is gone into the heavens, and there exalted far above all Principa∣lities and Powers, and set down at the right hand of God. He is gone, but he hath carried thy name with him, as a perpetual memorial for thee. Thou art unfaithful, shame to thee; thou forgettest thy Lord at every turn; every business that comes, every trouble that comes, every pleasure that comes, every companion that comes in, makes thee forget thy Lord; forget his love, forget thy duty; Oh how small a matter will steal thy heart from him, yea stir up tumults and rebellions against him. Thy comforts, thy hopes, thy needs thou hast daily of him, will not all prevail to hold him in re∣membrance with thee. Thou forgettest thy Lord, but he will not forget thee, though thou hast been
unfaithful in many things, yet he is in nothing; 2 Tim. 2.13. Yet he abideth faithful, he cannot deny himself; he should not be true to himself, if he be not faithful to thee; his interest lies in thee; thou art his, his possession, a member of his body, fear not; if he should be unfaithful to thy soul, he is therein unfaithful to his own body. If thy case be such that he can help thee, if there be any thing wherein he can stead thee; if all that he hath, his blood, his righteousness, his interest with the Fa∣ther, will be sufficient for thy help, he hath under∣taken to procure it for thee, and secure it to thee. Faithful is he that hath called you, and will do it. This now is that Jesus that is given unto us; as our propitiatory Sacrifice, as our merciful and faithful high Priest, who suffered on the earth, and is gone into the heavens for us; standing in his red robes, garments rolled in blood, with those glori∣ous whites upon the red; pardon, peace, absolution, acceptance; with the names of his ransomed ones engraven upon his heart, and upon his shoulders: This is that Jesus who is, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 3. As our Lord and King. A King shall reigne in righteousness, in him shall the Gentiles trust. Zach. 9.9. Shout O daughter of Zion, behold [thy] King cometh. Isa. 9.6. The Government shall be on his shoulder. God hath more care of his Saints, than to leave the government of them on their own shoulder. Is not her King in her? He is a King to gather them, a King to govern them, a King to defend and save them; to save them from their temporal enemies, the sons of vi∣olence, the men of this evil world; from their
spiritual enemies, to save them from their sins. Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins, Matth. 1.21. 'Tis a mercy to be under government; under government, and under protection. What would become of us, were there no King in Israel? Where there's no King, all are kings; more kings than men: Sa∣than will be king, every lust will be a lord, as many kings as there are devils and sins. Whither would our unruly hearts carry us? How easily would our wily and potent enemies ruine us? What tyran∣nie would sin exercise within? What cruelty should we suffer from without? Whither should we wander? where should we fix? What peace, what order, what stability? Whence should coun∣sel, and protection, and salvation come, were there no Lord over us? 'Tis a mercy to be under government; but to be under such a government, under a king, and such a King? such a wise and potent King, such a meek and merciful King, such an holy and a righteous King? O what a wonder of mercy! Rejoyce greatly O daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King cometh unto thee, he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an asses colt, &c. Zach. 9.9. [He is just having salvation] as a Priest he hath purchased, as a King he bestows his salvation. He comes not to get, but to give; not to give Lawes only, but to give Gifts unto men; and he gives like a King, Palmes, Crowns, and Thrones; sal∣vation to his people by the remission of their sins. Oh how unthankful, oh how foolish is this rebellious world? Impatient of subjection? shake off the yoke? groan under duty? under discipline? We
will not have this man to rule over us? Who then shall save you? hard to be a Christian? strict laws, severe discipline, no liberty? Is this thy complaint? that is, wo is me, I am so limited, and hedg'd in on all hands, that there's no liberty left me to be miserable; if I will be his, I must be happy. Let fools inherit their own folly, but let Israel rejoyce in him that made him, let the children of Zion be joyful in their King; for the Lord taketh pleasure in his people, he will beautifie the meek with salvation. Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? the Lord of hosts, yea the Lord our righteousness, he is the King of glory. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Law-giver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. Praise ye the Lord. Come all ye Nimrods, ye mighty hunters on the earth: come all ye sons of Anak, ye seed of the Giants; come all ye sons of Belial, ye seed of the Adulterer and of the whore; come all ye Ishmaelites and Ammonites, ye Moabites and Haga∣renes; associate, confederate, take counsel toge∣ther; smite with the tongue, bite with the teeth, push with the horn, kick with the heel; come all ye gates of hell, and powers of darkness; thou dra∣gon with all thy armies, with all thy fiery darts, and instruments of death; come thou king of terrors, with thy fatal dart: the Virgin, the Daughter of Zion hath despised you all, she hath laughed you to scorn: the Daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at you; her King is in the midst of her; the Lord is her King, he will save her. 4. As our head and husband. He that is given to be head over all things [to] the Church, is given to
be the head [of] the Church, Eph. 1.22,23. and of every member in particular, 1 Cor. 11.3. Be∣lievers are all joyned to the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17. United [in] Christ as fellow members; united [unto] Christ as their common head. From which all the body, by joynts, and bands, having nourishment ministred, and knit together, increaseth with the in∣crease of God. Coloss. 2.19. they are married to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one hus∣band. From this Union follows: 1. A Communication of Influences. 2. A Complication of Interests. 1. A Communication of Influences. [Having nourishment ministred] Christ our head, is our fountain of life. Our head is our heart also, out of it are the Issues of life; from him we live, and are nourished and maintained in life. He is our Joseph, all the treasures of the holy Land are with him. In him are hid all the treasures of Wisdome and Knowledge, Coloss. 2.3. It pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell: Coloss. 1.19. He is the onely begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. Here note, 1. What grace there is in Christ. The Schools tell us, that in him there is a three-fold grace. 1. Gratia Unionis. The Grace of Union. The humane Nature of Christ, hath received the high grace or favour, to be personally united to the se∣cond person in the God-head; by vertue of which Union, the fulness of the Godhead is said to dwell in him bodily: Bodily, that is personally, or sub∣stantially; in opposition to the types and shaddows
of the Old Testament, in which God (in a figure) is said to dwell. God is said to dwell in the Ta∣bernacle, in the Ark of the Covenant, in the Temple; but in these he dwelt onely as figures, and shad∣dows of the humane nature of Christ: In Christ he dwells not in a figure, but personally and sub∣stantially. As Christ Coloss. 2.17. is called the Body, in opposition to the types of old, which were but the shaddow; so bodily here notes not a figurative, but a personal inhabitation. Christ is the body, not a shaddow; and God dwells in him bodily, that is substantially, and not in a shad∣dow. 2. Gratia Habitualis. Habitual Grace: All those moral perfections, wherein stands the holi∣ness of his nature. The love and fear of God; his humility, meekness, patience; in summe, his perfect conformity to the Image and whole Will of God. Such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harm∣less, undefiled, separate from sinners. Heb. 7.26. 3. Gratia Capitis; or that honour which is gi∣ven to him to be head of the Church. 2. How Christ is said to be full of grace; there is a twofold fulness of grace. 1. Ex parte ipsius gratiae. In respect of grace it self; thus he is said to be full of grace, that hath all grace, and hath it in the greatest excellency and perfection of it; that doth pertingere ad summum gratiae, Aquin. 2. Ex parte habentis gratiam, in respect of the person that hath it; and thus a person is said to be full of grace, that hath as much grace as he is ca∣pable of. Christ is full of grace in both respects; that grace which is in him is grace in the highest
perfection of it, and as much as his vessel can hold. 3. That this fulness of Christ is ours, and for us; John 1.16. Of his fulness do we receive grace for grace, Coloss. 3.3. Your life is hid with Christ in God. Your life, that is both your spiritual life, grace; and your eternal life, glory; 1 John 5.11. This is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. Our life is said to be in Christ, in three respects. 1. Its hid in Christ, as the effect in the cause. As the life of the branches, is hid in the root, so is the life of a Christian in Christ. He is our root. 2. It is deposited with Christ; it is laid up with him, committed to his trust and custody; with him it is secured and put into safe hands. 3. The dispensation of it is committed to him. from him it is at his pleasure to be derived to us. Of his fulness we receive. The Son hath life in him∣self, and he giveth it to whom, when, and in what measure soever he pleaseth. Christian, art thou nothing in thy self? Thou hast enough in thy Jesus. Art thou dark? He's a Fountain of light? Art thou dead? He's a foun∣tain of life. Art thou poor, and low; weak in knowledge, in faith, in love, in patience, &c? He's a treasure of all grace; and what he is, he is for thee. Is he wise? he is wise for thee: Is he holy? He is holy for thee: Is he meek, merciful, humble, patient? He is so for thee. Is he strong, is he rich, is he full? 'Tis for thy sake: as he was empty for thee, weak for thee, poor for thee; so for thee he is mighty, he is rich, and full. Whilest thou bewailest thine own poverty and weakness,
Oh bless thy self in thy Lord, in his riches, righte∣ousness, and strength. 2. A complication of interests. As the head and body, as the Husband and Wife, so Christ and his Saints are mutually concerned; are rich or poor, must stand and fall, live and die together. As the husband conveyes to the wife, a title to what he hath; as the wife holds of the husband; so is it betwixt Christ and his Church; they have nothing but through him; their whole tenure is in capite: they hold of the Head; they have nothing but through him; and whatsoever is his, is theirs: His God is their God; his Father is their Father; his blood, his bowels, his merits, his spirit, his victo∣ries, all the spoils he hath gotten, all the revenue and income of his life, and death, all is theirs. For them he obey'd, suffered, liv'd, died, rose, as∣cended, is set down in glory, at the right hand of God. He obeyed as their head, died as their head, rose, ascended, reigneth as their head; and hath in their names, taken possession of that inheritance, which he purchased for them. This is that Jesus which is given to us, and thus is he granted and made over to all his Saints in this Covenant of God.
CHAP. III. The Spirit in the Covenant. 3 GOd hath put his Spirit into the Covenant; the Almighty, the Eternal Spirit; the Ho∣ly Spirit, the spirit of Glory and of God. This Holy and eternal Spirit is first poured forth on our head, the Lord Jesus; to annoint him our Redeemer, to furnish and qualifie him for that great undertaking, Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon mee, because hee hath annointed mee to preach good tidings to the meek, &c. Isa. 11.2,3,4. I will put my Spirit into him, the spirit of Wisdome and Ʋnderstanding, and of the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.2. And hee is promised to each member, Ezek. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, To all these hee is granted, 1. As a Spirit of VVisdome and Revelation. 2. As a Spirit of Holiness and Sanctification. 3. As a Spirit of Truth and Direction. 4. As a Spirit of Comfort and Consolation. 1. As a Spirit of Wisdome and Revelation, Ephes. 1.17,18. To enlighten them, to open their blinde eyes, and to shine into their hearts; to give them the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, that they may know what the hope of his calling is, and what the riches of the glory of
his inheritance in the Saints. To counterwork the spirit of this world, whose work is to blinde mens eyes, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4,5,6. This is hee by whom the Father hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous light. 1 Pet. 2.9. the light that the spitit brings in, is a marvellous light, and that in three respects: 1. It is a marvellous thing that ever light should come into such dark souls. That those that were born blinde, and upon whom the god of this world had for many years together been trying his skill, to thicken their darkness, to encrease and seal them up under it; that ever such eyes should bee open∣ed, and the light of life should shine in upon such hearts; this is a marvellous thing. When our Lord Jesus in the dayes of his flesh, opened the eyes of those that had been born blinde, the people ran together, and wondred at the sight. If you should see stones to live, if you should see dead stocks, or dry bones to walk up and down the streers; if you should see Trees, or Houses, or Mountains full of eyes; this were not more full of wonder, than to behold blinde sinners receiving their sight. Thou wert once darkness, art thou now light in the Lord? stand and wonder at thy cure. 2. They are marvelous things, which this light discovers 'Tis a wonder that such eyes should e∣ver see, and they see wonders. The Gospel is a Mystery full of wonders: There are heights and depths, and lengths, and breadths. Wee have seen strange things to day. Strange love, strange grace, wonderful wisdome, wonderful pitty, patience, mercy; wonderful providences, wonderful deli∣verances,
incomprehensible excellencies, unspea∣kable joy and glory; 'tis a wonder there should bee such things every day before our eyes, and yet wee could not see them till now; and 'tis a won∣der, that when wee did not see them before, wee should ever see them now; that those things which wee despised, derided, mocked at, stumbled at, as meer foolishness, and fancy, wee should now see and admire, even to astonishment; that that Jesus, which was to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishness, should bee to the same men, when called, the Wisdome of God, and the Power of God. O the deep things of God! O the unsearchable Riches of Christ! that hee that searcheth all things, reveals unto the Saints! O the hidden treasures they now discover in this deep Mine! To you that beleeve hee is pretious, a Praise, an Honour; all Fair, all Glorious; and you have seen his Glory, as the Glory of the only begotten Sonne of God, full of Grace and Truth. Again, there are marvellous evils, as well as good things, that by this light are brought to light. Sin with all the hidden things of darkness, that lay below in those chambers of death; the secrets of the evill heart of man. Sin appears a wonder to the savingly enlightened soul; Exceeding sin∣ful, a world of wickedness. There's Death, and Hell, and the Devil, in e∣very sin; unkindness, unthankfulness, folly, enmi∣ty, rebellion, spite, and the blackness of darkness. What once appeared as a pleasure, a delight, a beauty; or at least, if an evill, yet but a trifle, a matter of nothing; is become a plague, a terrour,
a burthen, a bondage, bitterness, shame, sorrow; and such an high provocation, that whereas once hee swell'd, and murmur'd, and cryed out of ri∣gour, feverity, cruelty in the least punishment of it; now hee wonders at the clemency, and pati∣ence, and forbearance of God; that such an af∣front and provocation, had not long since turned the whole earth into an Hell. Christian, thou complainest thou canst not see, thou canst not feel, thou canst not mourn, thou canst not break, under all the guilt that lies upon thee; thine heart is hard, thine eyes are dry, not a tear, not a groan, scarce a sigh, will all this e∣vill fetch out from thee. O this blinde and sot∣tish minde! O this dead and senseless heart! what shall I do? what would I not do, to get mee a mel∣ting, mourning, broken spirit? but I cannot, I cannot; I cannot see, I cannot bleed, nor break; O beg the light of this Holy Spirit! and if the sight that that will present thee with, of this wonder∣full evill, do not rend thy heart, and turn thy stomack, and open all thy sluces, and let out thy soul in sighs and groans, in shame and sorrow, thou mayest then well be a wonder to thy self. But be nor discouraged, bee not dismayed; do not say, this Rock will never break, this Iron will never melt; I may go sighing for sighs, mourning after tears, groaning after groans, but all in vain, it will never bee; past feeling, past feeling, sorrow flies still from mee, repentance is hid from mine eyes; do not thus discourage thy self; wait for this spirit, open to it, and thou shalt see flowing in such streames of self-shaming, self-confounding light, as shall flow forth in self-abasing, self-ab∣horring
streames of tears. 3. These marvellous things, are revealed with marvellous clearness. That is, in comparison of what they are to the purblinde world; and in com∣parison of what they themselves once saw. They come to see the glory, and the beauty, and the reality of the wonderful things of God. Wee have seen his glory, saith the Apostle Joh. 1. The kind∣ness of God our Saviour [appeared.] But we all (with open face) behold, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord. 2 Cor, 3.18. Out of Zion hath hee appear∣ed in perfect beauty. It's Prophesied Isa. 53. of the unbeleeving world, that when they should see Christ; they should see no beauty in him. Strange, though hee were all beauty, yet they should see him, and yet see no beauty. That is, they shall see him, and yet not see him. They see not wood for trees. What is thy Beloved more than other beloveds? VVhat is Christ more than an ordinary man? VVhat is the Gospel more than an ordinary Story? VVhat is the Spirit? What is Truth? VVhat is there in this Faith, and Love; in this Holiness and Righteousness, in this Peace of Conscience, and Joy of the Holy Ghost? VVhat substance is there in them? VVhere's the Glory, and wherein is the Excellency of them? Which way came the Spirit of the Lord from mee to thee? Thou shalt know in that day, when thou shalt call to the Mountains to fall on thee, and the Rocks to hide thee, from the face of God and the Lamb. Wee know whom wee have beleeved. Wee know that wee know him. Wee speak that which wee know, and testify what wee have seen. Wee have an Ʋnction from
the Holy one, wee know all things. God hath reveal∣ed them to us by his Spirit, for the spirit searcheth all things even the deep things of God. Now wee have received not the spirit of this world, but the Spi∣rit which is of God, that wee might know the things that are freely given to us of God. VVee have a clear and certain sight. VVee do not see men as Trees walking; with our eyes half open; wee see men as men, Christ as Christ, Truth as Truth, in its naked lustre and evidence. This wee have seen, and do testify, neither deceiving, nor being deceived. VVee thank thee. O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto Babes. And as they see Truth, and Holiness, and Good∣ness, in their wonderful Glory, and Beauty; so also Folly, and Falshood, and Sin, in its wonder∣ful uglness, and deformiy. Sin appears to bee sin, to them, Rom. 7. Folly to bee folly, falshood to bee falshood; they see men as men, Christ as Christ, Truth as Truth, Holiness as Holiness; and they see beasts as beasts, fools as fools, sin as sin, de∣vils as devils, hell as hell: They see all things as they are, temptations as they are, delusions as they are; they see what's under them, the hook under the bait, the sting in the Locust's tail, the warre in the Devils heart, carried on under his fawning face; Wee are not ignorant of his De∣vices. Sinners, cease your wondring at the Saints, let them bee no longer for signs and for wonders in Is∣rael; cease your wondring at the Saints; come and wonder with them. Wonder not that they
say not as you, live not as you, run not with you after the same follies and vanities; Oh! if ye once come to see what they see, you will bee a wonder to your selves. Mock not at their blessedness; Bles∣sed are their eyes, for they see. The blinde envy, but do not disdain the seeing. Say not, these men are in a dream, or drunken, or mad; take heed, blaspheme not the Holy Spirit, call not his light darknes, put not your darkness for light. Would you know, when these men testifie what they have seen and heard? whether they are sober, or beside themselves, Come and see; I say not, stand and see, you cannot see at that distance you stand; come near, come in and you shall see; see your blindness first, if ever you will see the light Oh! bewail your darkness, and seek light, seek and you shall see it. Son of David have Mercy on mee; Why what wilt thou man? Lord that I may receive my sight. Shall that bee thy cry? O pitty thy blinde soul! O pray for eyes. They that see pit∣ty the blinde; Wee have a little Sister that hath no breasts, wee have a poor Brother [yea a world of them] that have no eyes. What shall we do for our poor brethren, in the day that they shall bee spoken for? Oh! bee eyes to thy blinde, bee a light to thy dark souls; let them that dwell in darkness see thy great light. Sinners, those whom you persecute, do thus pitty, do thus pray for you; Lord, that their eyes might bee opened: will you say, Amen, to their prayers? or will you say, Lord regard not their word, wee desire not the knowledge of thy waies? Christians, bee marvels. You that have seen marvellous things, bee marvellous persons, set
the world a wondring for some thing. Let your light shine, let the light which hath shined into your hearts, shine forth in all your paths: let the Spirit of Light within you, bee a Spirit of Glory, resting upon you. Once you were darkness, but now are yee light in the Lord; Walk as Children of the light. Bee yee holy, harmless, the Children of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked Generation, amongst whom yee shine as lights in the World. Beclouded Christian, thou goest on bemoan∣ing and bewailing thy self, complaining that thou art still blinde; the light hath shined into thy dark∣ness, but thy darkness comprehendeth it not; thine eye is yet but tender, at least, and thou canst see but little; but little of Christ, the Sun is but as a sparke to thee; but little of sin, that Mountain, looks yet but as a Mole hill; It is neither clear, nor dark, neither night nor perfect day: thou hope∣edst that long e're this, thy scales would have fal∣len off, the vail would have been removed, but they abide upon thee; thou waitest for light, but behold obscurity! for brightness, but thou walkest in darkness; thou goest on, adding darkness to darkness, the darkness of sorrow, to the dimness of sight. Thou fearest that the Gospel is hid from thee, thou doubtest 'tis still night, because 'tis not yet noon with thee. But hearken, as little as thou seest of Christ, doest thou see so much, that thou prizest, and lovest, and cleavest to him above all? as little as thou seest of sin, doest thou see so much, that thou loathest, and shunnest it a∣bove all things? doest thou walke in that little light thou hast? dost thou love, long, wait, cry, for the light? Send forth thy light and thy truth,
lift up the light of thy countenance; Sun of Righteous∣ness shine upon mee; why are the wheels of thy Cha∣riots so long a coming? when Lord? Make haste my Beloved, O might I once see thy face, as the Sun, looking over the Mountains. Is this thy voice? are these the breathings of thy soul? Bee of good comfort, these are the glimmerings and groanings of that Holy Spirit within thee, which hath already delivered thee from darkness, and will bring thee forth into his marvellous light; thou shalt know, if thou follow on to know the Lord. Arise, shine, thy light is come, the Glo∣ry of the Lord is risen upon thee. Though yet (as to thy sense) it bee neither clear nor dark, nei∣ther night nor perfect day, in the evening there shall bee light. 2 As a Spirit of Holiness and Sanctification; hee is given as an Holy Spirit, and as a Sanctifying Spirit: therefore Sanctification is called the San∣ctification of the Spirit; 2 Thes. 2.13. he comes to change us into his own nature, to make us par∣takers of his holiness; hee is a Refiner's fire, and Fullers sope, Mal. 3.2. to purge, and work, and wash off the filth, and corruption of our natures; What it is said hee shall bee to the Church, Isa. 4.4. A Spirit of Judgement, and a Spirit of Burning, to wash away the filth of the Daughters of Zion, and to purge the blood of Jerusalem, from the midst thereof. [a Spirit of Judgement] that is, in the Rulers of Israel; stirring them up to do Justice, and execute Judgement, that so the guilt of blood may bee taken away, Isa. 32.15,16. and a [Spirit of Burning] that is, in the hearts of the people of Israel, to consume and
destroying the inward lusts of their hearts, that no more such wickedness bee committed amongst them. This hee is to every Saint; A Spirit of Judgement, to give Sentence against their Lusts, to condemn them to the fire; these must bee cast out, to the fire with them; away with them, get yee hence yee Sons of the Bond-woman; you may not bee Heirs with the Sons of the Free-woman. The Spirit of the Lord first discovers and convin∣ces of sin; judges betwixt light and darkness, grace and sin, and then gives sentence, away with these Lusts, they may not bee suffered to live. A Spirit of Burning, to execute the sentence, to consume them in the fire. The Spirit of Sanctifi∣cation is a spirit of Mortification. Rom. 8.13. If yee (through the Spirit) do mortifie the deeds of the body. It is the Spirit that kills, the Flesh profiteth nothing. The Spirit implants the Soul into Christ; gives it an Interest in his death, brings it under the in∣fluence of his death. Christus crucifixus est Christus crucifigens. 'Tis the death of Christ, that is the death of sin; these Theeves are Crucified with him. Rom. 6.6. Our old man is Crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might bee destroyed, that hence∣forth wee should no longer serve sin. Hell knew not what they did, when they Crucified Christ; Death with all its Armies, were put to death with him. The Spirit raises up another party in the soul, a party against a party, an army against an army; brings Grace in to take up arms against sin; Grace doth not onely fight against sinne, but is in the very nature of it the death of sinne, as the Gene∣ration
of a new, is the Corruption of the old form. Humility is pride dead, meekness is sinful passi∣on and frowardnesse dead, patience is impa∣tience slain. The Spirit excites and stirs up the soul against sin, sets it a praying against it; the Spirit of Grace is a Spirit of Supplication, fetches down Hail∣stones and Thunder bolts from Heaven to destroy these Amorites; sets a watch against it, presses the soul to deal wisely with it, to keep it low, by cutting off all provision from the flesh, restraining, and keeping it short of all those fleshly objects, which would keep it in heart, and so it's starved to death. It is true, our greatest wisdome, watch∣fulness, abstinence, self-denial and all external means alone, will fall short of killing one lust, it is the Spirit that killeth, without it, the flesh profiteth nothing: all external attempts for the mortification of the flesh, are but a fleshly mor∣tification; but if yee [through the Spirit] do mortifie; pray in the Spirit, watch in the Spirit, curbe and keep short, and keep under this body, still taking in the assistance of the Spirit, then it shall dye. Christian, thou livest in a weary Land, and thou hast but a weary life of it, bryers and thorns are with thee, the Canaanite is yet in the Land; thou sojournest in Mesech and hast thine habita∣tion in the Tents of Kedar; and thou hast a Me∣sech and Kedar within thee; thou hast Armies within thee of fleshly lusts, which fight against thy soul, thou goest mourning daily, because of the oppressour, those spiritual wickednesses which lie in thine heart, and warre in thy members; thou
often groanest, and cryest out to thy God, liber∣tie libertie, redemption redemption. Oh this proud heart, oh this vain heart! oh this earthliness, oh this fleshliness, this sloathfulness, this enmity, and rebellion against the law of my minde, and my God; when I would do good, evil is present with mee. I cannot, I cannot do the things that I would, I can with no peace serve or enjoy my God and my soul; my duties are either prevented or polluted, my comforts are either wasted or made quite to vanish and disappear; when I would serve my God, I must away to serving my belly, or my back, or my friends; when my soul is a little gotten upon the wing, and soaring in the upper Region, it is presently checked, pulled down again to the earth. O my pinioned imprisoned soul! woe is mee, wretched man that I am, who shall de∣liver mee from the body of this death? Why, yet comfort thine heart, the enemy flyes upon thee as a flood, but the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a stan∣dard against him, thou complainest thy Gold is become drosse, thy wine is mixed with water, yea with mudd and dirt, yet hee will turne his hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy drosse, and take away all thy tinne. Though these bryers and thornes bee set in battel against thee, yea, and a∣gainst him also, yet hee will go through, go through them, hee will burn them together, Isa. 27.4. Thou complainest that thy garments are defiled, thy glory is stained, thy beauty is marred, the I∣mage of thy God is so defaced, that there's but here and there a spot of it left upon thee, thou art black, but not comely, whilst thy Lord sayes, thou art all fair O my Love, thou cryest out, I am all
foul, O my Lord, thou wouldest be holiness to thy Lord, but thou art an offence to him, holi∣ness is still thy love, and thy desire, and thy longing, but it flies from thee; it is rather thy wish then thy hope, thou canst weep [over] but thou canst not weep [out] thy deformity, thine Iniquity is still marked before the Lord. If there bee a little Grace in thee, yet there is such a weak∣ness in its sinews, such a paleness in its face, that it is not like to live, or if it live, Oh! how little hope that ever it should thrive or flourish; Thus thou complainest, thus thou goest mourning and sighing, and sinking, and fainting in thy minde, and now and then venturest out a desponding Prayer. Lord pitty, Lord look upon my sorrow, and my sin, Lord wash mee, Lord help mee. Why, the Lord God hath sent thee his help out of his San∣ctuary, and his strength out of Zion. The eternal spirit is come down on purpose, to give battel to the flesh, to subdue thine inquities, and bring all those that rise up within thee, under thy feet. Thou mistakest thy self, and thine enemies, if thou thinkest they will bee conquered, by one blow of thine arme, this kinde goeth not out so: not by might nor by power, much less▪ by weakness and by flesh, by any weak attempts of thine own; but by my spirit saith the Lord. 'Tis work for a God to relieve and cleanse such an heart, to turn such an Hell into an Heaven; what thou canst not do, being weak through the flesh, behold! hee comes down to do it for thee; thou hast proved thine own weakness, now try everlasting strength; he stands at the door and knocks, hear his voice at the door, wilt thou bee made clean? wilt thou bee made
whole? wilt thou bee delivered? open to him, and with him deliverance comes in, he stands at the poole, stirring the waers, for thee, put in thy Cripple soul, and bee healed of all thy diseases, say to him, Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make mee clean; and thou shalt soon have this answer: I will, bee thou clean. 3. As a Spirit of Truth and Direction. John 16.13. hee shall guide them by his Counsel, he shall lead them in the way that they shall go, Isa. 30.21. They shall hear a word behinde them saying: this is the way, walk yee in it, when they are turning to the right hand or to the left. He shall lead them into all truth, to prevent mistakes, and into all righteousness to prevent miscarriages: nay more, hee shall not bee onely their Starre, but their Strength too; hee shall guide them on, and help them on, they shall bee led by the Spirit, bound in the Spirit, pressed in Spirit; they shall bee excited, assisted, carried on in the power of the Spirit, in the way that they should go: he will cause them to walk in the Statutes of the Lord. Whatsoever thy way wardness and thy wandrings have been; whatever thy feebleness and fickle∣ness bee; whatever false lights, and false-waies are before thee; whatever temptations thou meet∣est with, to turn thee aside out of the right way, whatever doubts hence arise in thine heart; I shall one day or other perish from the way, and bee a lost sheep at last; yet his conduct shall bee prosperous, and the event shall bee sure, hee shall so guide thee by his Counsel, that he shall bring thee to Glory. Hee shall gather his Lambs with his arme, and carry them in his bosome, and gently lead those that are with young.
4. As a Spirit of Comfort and Consolation, hee is so called, John 16.7. The Comforter. If I go not away, [the Comforter] will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto you. He shall come unto them, and abide with them, to supply the absence of their Redeemer, to support them under their affliction, to witness their Adoption, to seal them up, unto the day of Redemption, and to bee the earnest of their Inheritance, Ephes. 1.13,14. John 16.14. Hee shall take of mine, and shew it unto you. [Hee shall take of mine] that is, not only of the Truths, those treasures of Wisdome that are in mee, (though that bee specially intended) but of my Love, my Righteousness, my Holiness, and all those treasures of Grace and Mercy, that are laid up in mee; whatever there is in mee, that may stand you in any stead, yeild you any relief, or support; the Comforter which I will send you, shall bring it down to you: hee shall take my Blood, and the Pardons it hath purchased for you, my Bowels, and the Compassions that are working in mee towards you, my Prayers, and Interces∣sions, I am offering up for you; hee shall take of all those treasures of Grace, and everlasting Consolations which are laid up for you with mee; hee shall take of mine, and shew it unto you. As much as you have in the world to afflict and amaze you, as little as you have of your own, to com∣fort you; either in your hearts, or in your houses, or among your friends, hee shall shew what I have for you to refresh you. O Christians, a sight of Christ in our sorrows, in our fears, in our thickest darkness; what day∣light
would it bring in? When thou lookest in∣to thine heart, and art astonished and confound∣ed at what thou findest there; at the blindness and the hardness, the poverty and the emptiness, the guilt and the guile, the pride and the peevishness, the evil thoughts, the vile affections, the filthy lusts, that are swarming and working in thee; when thou lookest into the world, and tremblest at what thou beholdest there; the malice, the craft, the power, that is engaged against thee; the fu∣rious spirits, the fiery tongues, the fierce looks, the violent hands, that are flying upon thee; and the little relief the earth will afford thee; when thy heart faints, and dies within thee, at the sense of this thy woeful and forlorn state; A sight of what thou hast in thy Lord presented to thee by his Spirit; look thee here soul, what thy Jesus hath sent thee down, a glance from his eye, a drop from his heart, a messe from his table; and all to tell thee, yet I do not forget thee; behold the care I take of thee, the treasures I have for thee, to encourage thy love, and reward thy faithfulness. Oh! how will this make all thy darkness to de∣part, and turn the shadow of death into the morn∣ing. Thus is the Holy Spirit given to the Saints, to bee the light of their eyes, the death of their sins, the guide of their waies, the stay of their hearts; to up-hold their grace, and to maintain their peace; to subdue their enemies, or their fears; to secure them from temptations, or succour them when tempted; to wipe off their reproach, or make it their crown; to heal their diseases, or make them their cure; to help their infirmities,
to work their works, to make their yoke easie, and their burthens light; to turn their sighs into songs, to form their groans into prayers, to send them up to their Lord, and bring down their returns; to comfort their hearts, to establish, strengthen, settle them, that they be neither offended at the chain, nor moved from the hope of the Gospel. CHAP. IV. The Earth in the Covenant. 4. GOd hath put the earth into the Covenant: Though the Saints have not their reward in this life, their portion in this world, yet this world also is theirs, Mat. 5.5. The meek shall inherit the earth, 1 Cor 3.22. Things present and things to come, all are yours. 1. The good things present. 2. The evil things present. 1. The good things present, Mark 10.30. Hou∣ses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands, now in this time, Prov. 3.16. Length of daies are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honour. Houses, and Lands, and Riches, and Honours, where are they? who are the poor of this World, the houseless, harbourless, and friendless? who have wo, and want, and shame, and sorrow? who are Strangers and Pilgrims; dwelling in tents, driven into corners; into dens,
and caves; hunted up and down upon the moun∣tains of the earth? to whom is hunger and thirst? cold and nakedness, but to the meek of the earth? Is this to inherit the earth? All theirs, when nothing theirs? yet they do inherit the earth. For 1. They shall ever have as much as will suffice them; and thats as much as all. They shall not want any thing, but what they [may] want. Your Father knoweth that you have need of these things; and he knows how much they need. More than needs, is more then enough, and more then enough, is a prejudice. Many men have too much; too much money, too much esteem, too many friends; more than they can bear; so much as to sink them, and drown them in perdition and destructi∣on. Christians shall have enough; they shall ne∣ver be in such a needy state, but whatever is ne∣cessary for them in all the earth, they shall have it; The earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof; and he hath said, That those that seek him, shall not want any thing that is good, Psal. 34.10. if the whole world can supply them out of all its store, they shall be supply'd. 2. What they have, they have a better and farther title to, then any others in the world. Though the dominion be not founded in grace, yet by grace it is established. What they have, descends upon them not barely by providence, but by pro∣mise, Heb. 1.2. Christ is heir of all things; and they are fellow-heirs with Christ. A little coming from the promise, hath more in it, than the great∣est abundance that's only handed down by com∣mon
providence; that which comes in from the promise, comes in with a blessing; if thou hast but an handful, thou hast a blessing in thy hand; if thou hast but a corner, thou hast a blessing in thy corner. A little from love, is a great bles∣sing. Thou hast God in every morsel thou eatest, and in every drop that thou drinkest; a drop from heaven will turn thy bran into the finest flower, and thy Water into Wine. O what serene and quiet lives, how void of care (distracting care) might the Saints live in the world! what are the burthens that do gall our backs? what are the briars that tear our flesh? what are the thorns that pierce through our hearts ordinarily, but the cares of this life? what shall I eat? what shall I drink? wherewith shall I be clothed? where shall I dwell? how little have I for to day? what for to morrow? what for here∣after? how shall I secure what I have? when this is gone, whence shall I be supplyed? thus do we go on, piercing our selves through with ma∣ny sorrows. Our cares for supply eat up what we have; our thoughts cut deeper than our wants; we cannot at so cheap a rate fear, as we often bear the want of all things. And why take ye thought? the earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof; and he hath said, All this is yours, you shall want nothing. You have not only your Deus providebit, providence to live upon; you have also your Deus promisit, the promise before you, and this hath all things in it; all is yours. What for to morrow? what for hereafter? why, what saith the promise? Thou shalt want nothing; neither thou nor thine: Never
saw I the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging their bread. Hast thou two worlds made sure to thee, and canst thou want? thou mayst as well whine, and make a pittiful cry at a full table, Oh where shall I have my next morsel? as under such a full promise, Oh where shall I have my next meal? O how much beneath the spirit of Christianity, are the carking anxious lives of too many Christians? you do not believe, you do not believe; you talk of your Covenant-right, of your part in the pro∣mise, of living by faith; but where is any such thing? can you trust God for your souls, and can you not trust him for your bodies, for your chil∣dren? believe, and you'l make as much, and bee satisfied as well, with a penny in the promise, with a meal in the promise, with an house in the promise, as with a penny in your purse, or a meal in your cupboard. What dost thou get by all thy cares? Which of you by taking thought, can add one cubit to his sta∣ture? one farthing to his store? If thou lose no∣thing by them, thou mayst sure put all thy gains in∣to thine eyes; tears and trouble are all they will add to thee. Bee quiet, and nothing will ail thee; let not any straits sting thee before they are; want not before thou wantest; let not the Winters frosts nip thee, whilest it is yet Summer. Know when thou art well, and be content. All is thine; if thou inheritest thy God, thou inhe∣ritest the earth; nothing of all its store shall be kept back from thee, that's necessary for thee: only thou must not look to be thine own carver; thy God will carve out what thou needest. Let
enough suffice thee, and thou shalt never have too little. Thou shalt never have so little, but thou mayest say, this little is enough. What if what thou wantest in Water, bee made up in Wine? if thou hast but little in bran, but the more in flower? a short meal with a smile from heaven, thou mayst count no fast but a feast; a little oyl in the cruse, how far will it go with a smile the blessing of the Covenant? If the upper Springs run freely, thou mayst abate a nether Spring. Let my beloved comfort me with his apples, and stay me with his flagons; and let the rest be as little and as course as it will. Let the promise be my portion, let the pipes be kept open to my soul, and then the least pittance for this car∣kass shall suffice me. O my Lord, let me feed with thee, and I will not quarrel what-ever my fare bee. Let my portion bee from thy table, and then be it much or little. Let me hear thy voice, I am thine, and with me all things; and I am con∣tent to be at thy allowance. Let thy deed of gift stand sure to me, put in my childrens names there, and I ask no more for my self or them. Hold thy peace, keep silence O my anxious soul, know when thou art well; bee in nothing careful, the Lord is at hand. 2. The evil things of this earth are theirs: the Cross is in the Covenant, Psal. 89.34. If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judg∣ments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgressions with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes. 1. The Covenant hath its cross. The Doctrine
of the Gospel is the Doctrine of the Cross, the preaching of the Gospel is the preaching of the Cross, 1 Cor. 1. The Mysteries of a crucified Jesus, and of his crucified Saints, do fill up the whole New Testament. The Cross is not only imposed upon the Saints, as their burthen, but bequeathed unto them as a Legacy. It's given unto them, as an honour and priviledge, Philip. 1.29. Ʋnto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Its joyned with the most glorious gift [the gift of faith.] Yea, and it is a greater gift then this. To suffer in Faith, is more than barely to believe. 2. By vertue of the Covenant the Cross is a Bles∣sing. The word is now changed; 'tis no longer, Cursed, but Blessed is every one that hangeth on this Tree, Mat. 5.10,11. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake; blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you, falsely for my sake. Why where is the blessedness? or wherein stands it? It stands in these things. 1. In the separation of the Cross from the Curse. 2. In the sanctification of the Cross to its ends. 3. In the proportioning of the Cross to their needs and strength. 4. In the special comforts of the Cross. 1. The Cross is separated from the Curse. There is something in this. To be able to say under the forest of afflictions, This scourge is no scorpion;
this is no curse, 'tis but a cross. Our Lord bare both the cross and the curse together, and that made his cup so bitter; but now he hath divided them; the curse he hath left upon sinners, and laid only the naked cross on his Saints. The crosses of re∣probate sinners, are all curses. Every affliction is a curse; there's wrath in all their sufferings, there's venome upon every arrow, there's vengeance in every dart, every rod is a Serpent to them. Thou that art of the number of Christs implacable ene∣mies, when he comes to fall upon thee, and to grind thee under his hand, thou wouldest have a word of comfort to be spoken to thee in thy sorrow; no, no, there's no comfort can bee spo∣ken; thou mayst say of every dart he smites thee with, This is sent of God, to revenge himself up∣on me; The crosses of the impenitent are all cur∣ses: but the Saints curses are all come to be but crosses. Though men curse, the Lord will not curse; what-ever troubles come upon thee, though there be vinegar in them, yet there's no venome in them; though there be anguish in them, yet there's no wrath in them; though they be ill look'd, yet there's no ill will in them; they come upon no ill intent, nor shall have any evil issue. The smitings of the wicked are to thee, as the smitings of the righteous were to the Psalmist, A precious balm, Psal. 14.5. Let the righteous smite mee, it shall be a kindness; it shall be an excel∣lent oyl; it shall not break mine head. And thou mayst say, Let the wicked smite me; smite me with the tongue, with the fist of wickedness, or what they will, it shall not break mine head, much less mine heart; it shall be a kindness to me, an excellent oyl.
2. The Cross is sanctified to its ends. It hath many holy and excellent ends, and it shall prosper; it shall accomplish its ends. The cross is laid on the Saint, sometimes to prove them; sometimes to reprove them; to humble them, to purge them, &c. and what-ever its sent to them for, it shall not return in vain. As the Word, so the rod, shall accomplish that for which he pleases that sent it. By this the iniquity of Jacob (shall) be purged. 3. The Cross is proportioned to their needs and strength. Jer. 30.11. I will correct thee in mea∣sure, but I will not leave thee altogether unpunished. Just so much as will serve shall suffice; the wise Physician hath respect both to the need, and to the strength of the Patient. Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; lest the Spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. The Apostle tells the Saints, Heb. 10. that they have need of patience; and their experience tells them, they have need of something to exercise their patience. And their needs are different; some are knotty pieces and need more; others are tender, and upon them less will serve. The stubborn Childe must have more stripes; the shaking of the rod will do more on some spirits, then the smart of it on others; but all need something. Let him onely that is without sin, say, I have no need of shame and sorrow. The Lord will neither over, nor under do; every one shall have his load and no more. No more than they can bear, and no less than their need requires. The Lord delights not in his childrens tears, he doth not afflict willing∣ly,
nor grieve the children of men; but yet he had rather they cry then perish. Wonder not Chri∣stians, that your tender Lord puts you to pain, and that your pains are so sharp and so many; Your heavenly Father knoweth that you have need of all these things. It's a mercy that he will chastise; you may put your corrections among your mer∣cies. His breakings of you are his blessings, his woundings are your cures; and by your own, as by your Lords stripes you are healed. And when you shall review, and read over all his darker pro∣vidences; and behold the wisdome, tenderness, which is attempered with his severities, evidenced in his laying on so much, and yet no more than was needful, you will then write down with the Psalmist, Thou in very faithfulness hast afflicted me. O my Lord, let me not want thy staff nor thy rod; neither a friend nor an enemy; neither a calm nor a storm; neither food nor medi∣cine; if my disease be too strong for my Physick, let me have yet a stronger potion; if my wan∣ton heart will not yet be tamed, put on more fet∣ters, an heavier load; load upon load, weight upon weight, and till thou seest, let me never say, it is enough. Let me never be sick of my remedy till I be cured of my disease. Let me rather suffer by the hand of a Devil, than perish by the hand of a lust. Spare not Lord, cease not Lord, to smite thy servant, till thou hast thereby smitten down all mine enemies. Peace? plen∣ty? ease? what that I may have to spend upon my lusts? to wax wanton against my God? hanc pacem nolo. Pain, trouble, want, any thing rather than
peace, upon such terms. Correct me O Lord, yet in judgment, but not in thy fury, lest I be consumed and brought to nothing. 4. The Cross hath its special comforts, 2 Cor. 1.3,4,5,6,7. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort; who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also aboundeth by Christ. And whether we be afflicted it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer; or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation: and our hope of you is stedfast, know∣ing, that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation. The comforts of the Cross are often the sweetest and the fullest, that the Saints ever taste on this side the crown. The first draught is often bit∣ter; the green cross is heavy, and 'tis necessary it should be so. As 'tis with some medicinal waters, it works by its weight; it must be an heavy yoke that will tame an unruly neck; if it gall not, it will not heal; 'tis the smart of the rod that stills the Childe. Think not your burthens will lie easie, when first laid on, and think not much if they do not. The first conflict with temptations, may put you to an harder brunt then you are aware. It must be so that it may be for your good afterward. So my Physick will work, I am content it make me sick. Tribulation worketh patience; that it
cannot do, unless it pains. It is observable, that 'tis not said, the cross worketh patience, but the  the tribulation, the pinching of the cross, or the pain the cross puts us to; this is patience, a quiet bearing that pain, which the flesh when touched puts us to. When we [feel] the thorns and the nails, when the iron enters into our [souls] when it pricks and smarts, then 'twill work. The green cross is heavy; a prison, or a wilderness, will look uncouth at the first; but when your Lord comes in, and visits you, then the sweet, the pleasure comes: and the more frowns at the thresh∣old, the more kisses you may expect afterwards; Christ doth not always meet his Saints in the Porch; the Devils Parlour, the inner prison is his banquetting house; the Dungeon his Wine-cellar; there they drink and are satisfied. The Stocks, and the Rack, are the organs that make them the sweet∣est Musick. Many a Saint hath been sadly disap∣pointed at the first, hoping to meet with Christ at the door; but behold a dreadful fight; behold sin lieth at the door; all his sins, all that ever he did against Christ, all his unthankfulness, unfaithful∣ness, unkindness, rebellion against his Lord, stand forth and stare him in the face. Christians, beware of sin now: it will meet you in the day of adver∣sity, the cross will tell you all that ever you did. I remember my faults this day; now I remember all my pleasant things; my Sabbaths, my Ordi∣nances, my Liberty, the dear society I once en∣joy'd; but trifled and wasted away; O my pride and my wantonness, my idleness, my earthliness, my hypocrisie, wherefore are you come thus to affright and torment me? Lord, whether am I
come? O how dreadful is this place? Is this my prison-entertainment? Are these my prison-con∣sorts? O what an hard lodging am I like to have with such companions? O the wormwood and the gall! a dark habitation, a bitter cup indeed is now given unto me. Is this the comfort of the cross? are these the sweets so much talked of? Yet be not dismayed, as roughly as thou art hand∣led at the door, 'tis better within; the Devil is going out in this storm; thy sins meet thee now, but 'tis only to shake hands and part; after this agony expect the Angels to come and minister to thee. Complain not if thou yet find no sweet, thou hast not drank deep enough; the next draught, the sugar may come; in the next room thou maist meet thy Lord; and then tell me, if it be short of all that hath been told thee. But shall I give you a more particular view of some of the special comforts of the Cross, or our sufferings for Christ! I shall only first pre∣mise a word, to let you understand what I mean by the sufferings of Christ. We then suffer for Christ, when we suffer for Christs Cause; when we suffer be∣cause we will be Christians, we will be holy and righteous; when we suffer because we will not sin; and when we suffer upon Christs Call, when he cuts out a cross for us, and lays it on. Then Christ calls us to suffering, when he puts us to this choice, Either to suffer or to sin; when our backs or our consciences must suffer; when we must suffer, or he must suffer by us. If any man will be my Di∣sciple, let him take up [his] cross. Christ is not, and Christians must not be prodigal of their blood; their blood is his; their estates, their names,
their liberties, are all his, and to him they must be accountable how they part with them. 'Tis not every cross that thou canst call [thy] cross; we must not leave our way to seek a cross; when Christ hath laid a cross athwart a Christians way that he should go; and he must either make a stand, or turn aside, or submit his neck to it; Then he says, There is [thy] cross, take it up and get thee on. Whatever cross be before thee, if thou hast a way open to avoid it without sin, that's none of thy cross, thou maist not take it up; or if thou dost, thou wilt have no thanks for thy pains. Christians should be wary here. Though it be an argument of a gracious spirit, to be alwayes of a ready and forward mind to suffer for Christ; and when he demands, Who will go with me? Who will bear my cross? chearfully to answer, I will go Lord, let me bear it; yet should we take heed, that as we hang not back, when he says, Go, so that we run not before he send us. Though it be an high honour to suffer for the Gospel, yet no man taketh this honour upon himself, but he that is called of God. I would not go to a Prison without a Mittimus from heaven, lest if my suffering be of my self, I be there left to shift for my self. If Christ should meet me in prison or in banishment, and demand of me, What dost thou here Elijah? Friend, how camest thou in hither? What should I say, if I could not say this, Thou Lord, hast brought me hither; my conscience, my duty hath brought me in. But understand me here with this caution; That when the Cause for the main is Christs, but the Call seems doubtful, yet when the sufferer hath
carefully enquired the mind of God, truly fol∣lows the dictates of conscience, sincerely designs the honour of Christ and his Gospel, although he should erre in some circumstances of his case, and for fear of iniquity should chuse affliction, when possibly he might have avoided both; God will surely wink at his mistakes, own his sufferings, and greatly accept and reward his readiness of mind. Yet still take heed of careless or wilful errors: take heed of preparing nails for thy own cross; thorns, scourges, spears, for thine own head or heart. Take heed both how thou shunnest, and how thou espousest a suffering state. Go not in upon heedless mistakes; go not in for good company, much less upon any carnal de∣signs; let not thy pride, or ostentacion, or the byass of any fleshly respects lead thee into the house of correction, lest thou find them the rods to lash thee when thou art there. Christians consider, if there be not sometimes some uncomfortable miscarriages in this matter; and whether it hath not been the lot of some of Christs (with how much justice or charity, let the Lord be Judge) to bee censured and reproached for unfaithful or for fearful, upon no other account but for walking by this rule, not to go to Prison without a warrant, that is, not to cast themselves into a suffering state, whilst God hath left a way open to escape, without sin. I confess the more dangerous, and the more ordinary errour is on the other hand; we are more apt (especially when afflictions are more sharp and bite in earnest, and then will be the great trial) rather sinfully to shift our selves of them, than unwarrantably to
run our selves upon them; but yet let it be con∣sidered, whether there be not an errour on this hand also. Its true where the cause is the same as to the main, different circumstances may make that to be one mans sin, which is another mans duty; yea, that may be a duty to the same man at one time, which (supposing him in differing circum∣stances) might have been his sin at another. And it is not seldome (through the unavoidable dif∣ference of our apprehensions, and the difficultie of discerning our cases) that Christians equally careful to know and do the Will of God, when the case, and the circumstances also are mostly the same, do judge differently about their Call to suf∣fering. Here let no man be so tyrannical to o∣thers, as to expect that they should go cross to their own, to comply with their brethrens, judg∣ments, and consciences. Let us not put one ano∣ther on this unmerciful necessity, either to break our peace with God, or our Friends. Let it be suf∣ficient to us, faithfully to follow our own light, without judging or quarrelling with those that are otherwise minded. Beware of bitterness. Be not cruel to consciences; smite not with the tongue, nor let an evil thought arise in thine heart, upon any such account as this. Thine arrows will re∣coyl, and fly back in thine own face. Blemish not thine own sufferings by blasting thy Brothers liberty. Let not the wariness of some be con∣demned for cowardise, nor the forwardness of others for pride or hypocrisie; but let us bee clo∣thed with humility, let us put on a spirit of self-suspition, and charity to our Brethren; and let
this Christian frame be the more studiously main∣tained, by how much the more our differing pra∣ctices according to the variety of our apprehensi∣ons, seem to condemn each other, and so provoke to uncomfortable schisms and contentions, and by how much the more pernicious such schisms are like to prove in the issue. These things premised, I shall now shew you what the special comforts of the cross are. You may expect your suffering state to be sweetned with 1. A more plentiful diffusion of special Grace. Grace is a comfort; 'tis never better with the Saints; then when that flourishes. The joy of the harvest is howling to the joy of grace; he is not a Christian, that cannot say, 'tis Summer, when these flowers appear in their beauty. Flourishing Faith and Love, have their glorious joys, 1 Pet. 1.8. The Springs of grace, are a resurrection from the dead; and there's no such spring as after a shower. Oh how green do the herbs then look; the withering flowers do then lift up the head; ne∣ver so many stars appear, nor with such lustre, as in a frosty night; grind the spices, and their fra∣grancy flows out. Saints are never more Saints, than in the house of bondage, or the Land of their pilgrimage; our Winter-weather makes us warm at heart. As our outward man perishes, our inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. Persecution is the time of life. We are delivered to death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might be manifest in our mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4.11. De∣cayed soul, comfort thine heart, the cross comes,
now thou shalt live; now thou shalt recover. This weakness will strengthen the things that remain, and are ready to die. Now faith, and love, and patience, and courage that have so long hung the wing, now lift up the head; the day of your redemption draweth nigh; this night is your day of hope. 2. A more clear revelation of special Love. Lo∣vest thou me Lord? there's enough. Let me hear thy voice, let me see thy face. Kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth. Thy lo∣ving kindness is better than life; send forth thy light, and thy truth, let these tell me, thou lovest me. Thy love-sick Spouse is sick for love; O when wilt thou say, Thou knowest that I love thee? Why come up with me on the cross; that withered tree bears more blossomes of love, than all the green trees of the field. The whole Gospel is hung upon the cross. Where our Lord hung, there's sin nail'd, the curse vacated, death vanquished; pardon, peace, joy, glory, shewed forth in open sight. There's love with all its to∣kens, go up and take. Fear not to be baptized with thy Lords Baptism, nor to drink of his cup; this cup also is the communion of the blood of Christ. Come with me into the wilderness, there will I speak comfortably to thee. When thou most wantest it, where thou wilt most value it, there will I shew thee my loves. Our Lord loves not to have love slighted; the full soul loathes the honey-comb; thou hast yet too many Lovers to bid thy Lord welcome; he keeps his best Wine till all thine own be sowred; then it will relish, and then thou shalt have it. His
oyl is for thy wounds. The Childe never knows so much of the Parents heart, and bowels, as when 'tis sick, or in distress; then every look is love; every word is pity and compassion. O the sound∣ings of Christs bowels towards his swooning chil∣dren; when thou knowest hatred, then look to know love. When thou art persecuted, when thou art cast out, and trodden under foot of men, then will he take thee in, and cherish thee. 3. A more full manifestation of glory, There's not a prison into which the Saints are cast, but hath a window into the palace. Calvary becomes a Tabor, where they have a sight of their Lord in his glory. Golgotha becomes a Pisgah, where they may look over Jordan into the land of pro∣mise. Hast thou known little of heaven? thou hast not yet been in the deep. Of Stephen the first Gospel-Martyr its said Acts 7.55. He looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. And Chap. 6.15. All that sate in the Council, saw his face, as the face of an Angel. Such an admirable splendor and serenity in his counte∣nance, as spake him rather an Angel then a man. O what an heaven was there within, that cast out such a divine lustre on his face. His joy was too big for his heart, his face must have its share; yea, his very adversaries, at second hand, beheld the glory of God. He looked up and saw heaven opened. Look∣ing down, he might see hell opened, all his tor∣mentors about him; the jaws of death ready to devour and swallow him up; but looking up, he
saw heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. O there he is, for whose sake is all this. My beloved, my beloved is yonder. Behold the region of light, whither this dark tempest is wasting me; his hell and his heaven meets, but the light swallows up the dark. Hell ceases to be hell, where heaven appears to bee heaven. This is the portion of suffering Saints. When you read what's written of those armies of Mar∣tyrs that have gone before; of their unspeakable joys, their undaunted courage, their admirable boldness; of their chearing their friends, con∣founding their foes; their rejoycing in their stripes, singing in their stocks, leaping in their chains, boasting of their bonds, kissing their stakes, em∣bracing the flames, riding up in triumph in their chariots of fire, not repenting of their Faith, nor accepting of deliverance; what doth this speak, but that their eyes, as well as their anchor, are within the vail, whither Christ their fore-runner is gone before them. Oh who would not be with them? who would fear sufferings? Soul, what art afraid of? whither art thou run∣ning? from what art thou hiding thy self? what is thine ease, or thy liberty, or thy quiet? why so loth to loose from this shore? lanch forth into the deep. Fear not transportation into thine house of bondage; when thou art once there, 'tis but look up, and thou art in Paradise. Such are the sufferings of Christ, This is the cross of the Covenant. 4. In summe; as that which comprehends all the rest, a more manifest exhibition of Christs spe∣cial presence, Jer. 30.11. I am with thee to save
thee, Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the wa∣ters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Through fire and water thou must go; we went through fire and wa∣ter into a wealthy place; but whither ever thou go∣est, he will go with thee. When the bush was on fire, the Lord was in the bush; when the three children were in the furnace, the Son of God was there with them. Isa. 63.9. In all their af∣flictions he was afflicted, he saved them by the Angel of his presence; in his love, and his pity he redeem∣ed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the dayes of old. Though all men forsook me, the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, 2 Tim. 4.16,17. The Saints shall never have this to charge upon the Lord, I was in prison, and thou visitedst me not. He is ever with them; to bear their burthens, and ease their shoulders; to plead their cause, and maintain their innocence; to wash their stripes, to wipe off their tears, to heal their wounds, to bind up their broken bones, to revive their wea∣ry spirits; to perfume their prisons, to lighten their dungeons, to lead them in their wandrings, to converse with them in their solitudes; to give down from above, in divine smiles, in illapses of spiritual joys, assurances of dearest love, tenderest care, melting sympathie, gracious acceptance, to give down from above what-ever is wanting be∣neath. In fine, to preserve them from falling by the presence of his Grace, till he present them faultless before the presence of his Glory. O
its good being with Christ any where. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, and causest thy flocks to rest at noon. Where thou feedest? yea, where thou [art,] whe∣ther feeding or fasting, whether rejoycing or mourning; where thou causest thy flocks to [rest] at noon? yea and where thou sufferest thy flocks to be scattered in the night. Where thy flocks are, thou art not far away; tell mee where thou feed∣est, tell mee where thou art. My beloved that feedeth among the lillies, feedeth sometimes among the thorns. When his love is a lilly among thorns, there hee feedeth. Hee feedeth among the thorns; he feedeth with his sheep, he feed∣eth with his Lambs where ever they feed; when darkness, and desolation, and devils, and death feed upon them, even then he feedeth them, and takes his feeding with them. O where ever my Lord is, there let my lot fall. Let me dwell amongst the thorns, so my dwelling be with my Lord amongst the lillies. Let me wan∣der amongst the mountains, whilest he is with me telling all my wandrings. Let me be scourg∣ed, so he will wash my stripes; let me weep, so he will wipe off my tears; I would not want wounds, whilest I have such oyl to pour in. Come all yee thieves and robbers, I fear you not, my dear Samaritan comes by; come yee bulls of Bashan, yee boars of the forest, let my beloved kiss mee with the kisses of his mouth, and I regard it not, though you kick me with the heel. O my Lord, bring me where thou feedest let me live in thy face, let me feel thy smiles upon my heart, let me love thee, tell me thou lovest me, remem∣brest,
pittiest, acceptest, takest care for me, and then chuse my condition, my dwelling and en∣tertainment for me. Fainting Christian, lift up thine eyes, com∣fort thine heart; here's that thou fearest and tor∣mentest thy self withall. Here is the inside of that formidable cross, the light side of those dark clouds, the sunny side of that shady thorny hedge that so wounds and afflicts thine heart. Fear not, bee strong and of a good courage. Thou still sayest, woe is me I can find no such thing; Ah, Lord God, doth he not speak parables? O that I were assured it might be thus with me; why, art thou in Covenant? believe, and all is thine. I believe, and therefore have I spoken; believe, and thou shalt see the salvation of God; as sure as the cross is thine, all the comforts of the cross are setled upon thee. Read over all the gracious words thou hast before thine eyes; view over all the instances of suffering Saints that have gone before thee, on whom these good words have been made good; in conspicuous increases of divine grace, in the signal discoveries of divine love, in the clearest and fullest revelation of divine glory, in the intimate sense of the divine presence; quickning, enlarging, encouraging, supporting their spirits, in the darkest dens, in the sharpest conflicts, with reproaches, mockings, bonds, ba∣nishments, torments, and deaths; and know that all these things are written for thy learning, that thou through patience and comfort of the Scriptures maist have hope. Read over, Isa. 51. Hearken to mee yee that fol∣low after righteousness, yee that seek the Lord, look
unto the Rock whence ye are hewen, and to the hole of the pit, whence ye are digged, for the Lord shall com∣fort Zion, hee will comfort all her wast places; hee will make her wildernesse like Eden, and all her de∣sarts like the Garden of the Lord, joy and gladness shall bee found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody, lift up your eyes to the Heavens, &c. Verse 7, 8, 12, 13. Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my Law, fear yee not the reproach of men, neither bee ye afraid of their revilings, for the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool, but my Righteousness shall bee for ever, and my salvation from Generation to Generation. I even I, am hee that comforteth you, who art thou that thou shouldest bee afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the Son of man which shall bee made as grass? and for∣gettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and layd the foundations of the earth; and hast feared continually every day, because of the fury of the oppressour, as if he were ready to destroy, and where is the fury of the oppressour. I even I am he, &c. [and where is the fury of the oppressour.] where is the fury of the oppressour? where is it not rather? is it not in the house, and in the field? is it not in the City, and in the Villages? is it not upon my Cattel, upon my Purse, upon my body, upon my Children, upon my friends, where is not the fury of the oppressour? I, but when thou re∣membrest the Lord thy maker, the Oath, the Pro∣mise, and Covenant of God; the Presence, Pro∣tection and Comfort of thy God, when thou re∣membrest this, then where is the fury of the Op∣pressour?
CHAP. V. The Angels of Light in the Covenant. 5. THe Angels of Light are in the Covenant, Heb. 1.14. are they not all Ministring Spi∣rits, sent forth for them who shall bee Heirs of Salva∣tion? Whilest our Lord himself was sent down to Minister, behold his servants are to bee mini∣stred unto, the Angels are made their Ministers, Psal. 91.11. Hee shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy waies: they have receiv∣ed a charge, and they have great advantages for the keeping the charge of the Lord. 1. They are mighty, Psal. 103.20. Bless the Lord yee his Angels, that excel in strength, an An∣gel is more than an Armie, what slaughters have the Angels made in the Armies of the Aliens; an hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians are slain by one Angel of the Lord, when encamped against Judah, Isa. 37.36. It is hard service in∣deed, that is too hard for an Angel. 2 They are numerous, there are great multi∣tudes of them, Psal. 68.17. Thousands of Angels, a multitude of the Heavenly Host, Luke 2.13. An Angel is more than an army, but what then are an Army of Angels? 3. They are faithful, They can do much for the Saints, but will they do it? yes, they are faith∣ful, They do the Commandements of God. Psal. 103.20. God bids them keep, and they are faith∣ful,
they will keep his sheep; wee are taught to pray, that the will of God may bee done on earth, as it is in Heaven; that men may bee faithful as the Angels of God. 4. They are Favourites, they behold the face of God, they dwell in his presence, they are ad∣mitted to stand before his Throne, they can bee heard; they have favour in Heaven, and there∣fore such power on earth, Mat. 18.10. Take heed yee despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that in Heaven their Angels do alwaies behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven. Touch not mine annointed, let alone my little ones, take heed, how you offend them, their Angels are before my Father, and are mighty with him, to engage his power, for their aid and de∣liverance. O the great security of the least of Saints; These Mighty ones, these Multitudes, these Faithful ones, these Favourites of Heaven, the Holy Angels of God, have all received a charge from the Lord, to preserve and defend them; Lord open their eyes that they may see. Behold the Mountains full of Cha∣riots and Horses of fire round about Elisha, 2 King. 6.17. Should a mighty Prince commit any Subject of his to a potent and faithful Life-guard, with this charge: Look to this man, keep him in safety, see that hee come to no harm; whoever offends, do you defend him; where-ever hee goes, go you with him; where-ever hee lodges stand you as a guard about the house, while hee sleeps do you watch; see that hee want for nothing, nor hurt come to him; If this were thy case, in what great
security wouldst thou count thy self; But O! what is a life-guard of men to a guard of mighty Angels. Fear not little flock, in Heaven your Angels be∣hold the face of God, and in Earth have they pitched their Tents round about you. CHAP. VI. The powers of darkness delivered over in the Cove∣nant. 6. THe powers of darkness are delivered over in the Covenant; Satan and all his Instru∣ments. We are naturally in bondage to Satan, held captive by him at his Will, 2 Tim. 2.26. His Prisoners, his Slaves, his Vassals. By the blood of the Covenant, the Lord hath brought forth his Prisoners, and redeemed his Captives, Zach. 9.11. and also hath spoiled Principalities and Po∣wers, and led Captivity Captive. In this Covenant there is deliverance of the Prisoners, and a delive∣ry over of them, by whom they were held; a Gaol-delivery and a delivery of the Jaylors too, into their hands; and they are delivered over bound, the God of this world in Chains, limited, spoiled, banished, and cast out, Mat. 16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. The Gates of Cities were antiently their special strength, and in them were their great Councels held, for the contriving and managing of all their concernments; by Hell understand the whole Infernal Corporation, all that belong to that dark Region, Satan and all his In∣struments;
the dragon with his armies, the ser∣pent and all his seed. By the gates of hell under∣stand, the power and policy, the combination and councels of Sathan and his whole party. These gates of hell shall not prevail against it; that is against the Church; neither against head, nor any member of it: they shall not prevail, that notes two things. 1. They shall fight against it; they are all com∣bin'd and listed against the Church, making a war upon it; Raze it, Raze it even to the foundati∣on thereof. Down with it root and branch, let it not have a being, let it not have so much as a name under heaven: particular quarrels there may bee betwixt devil and devil; Herod against Pi∣late, and Pilate against Herod, yet the tails of these smoaking fire-brands are united against the Lord and his anointed ones. Against their pro∣fession, against their Religion, against the soul of every Saint. What-ever vails or specious preten∣ces they varnish their quarrel with, this is it that lies at the bottom of all their counsels and ma∣chinations, wherein all their aims are concentred, to root out godliness and the professours of it out of the earth; to deceive and destroy souls for ever. 2. Though they shall fight against them, yet they shall not overcome. They shall not prevail against it, that is, not finally, in the end the victo∣ry shall be the Saints. Zach. 12.3, Jerusalem shall be a burthensom stone to all people. 1. Such a stone that they shall not be able to lift, or move it out of its place; it shall stand as a rock, against which the impetuous waves may dash themselves, but they cannot move it.
2. They shall not be able to bear it. It shall crush them that burthen themselves with it; those that shake the Church, they are pulling an house about their ears; a rock upon their loins; it shall break the backs of all those that contend against it; they shall bee cut in pieces (saith the Text) that burthen themselves with it; though all the earth, yea and hell too, be gathered together against it. It is a vain design that Sathan and his partakers are driving on, Psal. 2.1. Why do the heathens rage, and the people imagine [a vain] thing? it is a vain design, and it is a fatal design to themselves; Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron, thou shalt dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel. Gen. 3.15. In the first dawning of this glorious day light, it's promised, that the seed of the wo∣man shall break the serpents head, I will put enmi∣ty between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; It shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. John 12.31. Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this world be cast out. Cast out, whence? why cast out of his king∣dome, out of his hold, cast down from his throne and dominion. His prison is broken, and now the prey is taken from the strong, the captives of the mighty are taken away. But how was this now done, at the death of Christ, to which these words referre? Doth not Sathan still reign? Is hee not still the god of this world, and the prince of the power of the air? Yea, what hold hath hee yet of the Saints that are
in the earth? what a tyrant is hee to them? how doth hee entangle and ensnare them? what ha∣vock doth hee make in their consciences? lord∣ing it over them, leading them captive by lusts and temptations; what a strong party hath he still within them, bearing arms against their Lord, fighting against their souls? what sad spoil doth he make upon their grace, upon their peace? they cannot rest for him day nor night, abroad nor at home, alone nor in company; hee's ever follow∣ing them; whither ever they go, the Devil is at their backs; they cannot pray, nor read, nor spend a thought, nor cast a look, nor dispatch a sigh towards the Lord, but Sathan stands by to re∣sist, and hinder them; what a yoke hath he still upon their necks! what clogs and weights hath he still upon their loins? how do they mourn in their souls, whilest he vexes them from day to day? how do they groan, and travel in pain, sighing in themselves, and waiting for their redemption? How is it then said, now is hee cast out? why now hee hath received his judgment; the prince of this world is judged, Joh. 16. Now is the fatal blow given; now is the serpents head broken, though hee still may bruise, and hang in the Saints heel. The blow he levelled at our Lord, hath rebounded on his own head. Though hee be as Gad, a serpent in the way, yet you may now tread upon this serpent, and it shall not hurt you. The strong man is now bound, if hee be a god still, hee's a God in chains, a prince in fetters; he must ask leave of your father, ere he can touch one hair of your heads. Hee cannot tempt you, nor cast a bank against you, nor shoot an arrow at
you, without a commission from heaven. The devils are subject to you. He is cast out, and in your Lords name, you may cast him out. In my name shall ye cast out devils; out of possessed bodies, out of possessed souls; you may be instruments to bring many a soul to repentance; that they may re∣cover themselves out of the snares of the devil, who are held captive by him at his will. Every sinner that is converted by you, you have cast out a de∣vil out of that soul. Though he be an adversary still, yet such an adversary as may be resisted; whom resist stedfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. And if you will resist, hee shall flee from you, James 4.17. Stand, and your enemy runs. Nay more, hee is not only a conquer'd ene∣my, but made your servant. This viper shall yield you medicine against his own poyson. His smi∣tings shall be an excellent oyl; his messengers he sends to buffet you, his thorns he sticks in your flesh, shall be a prevention of greater evils. The very destruction he intends to bring upon you, shall promote your salvation, 1 Cor. 5.5. Deli∣ver such an one to Sathan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Behold the devil is the Churches servant; and such a servant as in their present state, they cannot well want. The executioner of their censures. A Common-wealth may as well want a Jaylour or an Hang-man, as the Church a Devil. Behold Sathan divided against Sathan; the devil without, against the devil within; the destroyer of souls, become the destroyer of sin. Deliver such an one to Sathan [for the destruction of
the flesh.] Though much against his mind, his hand is against his own party. Hee's made to kill his own friends, which otherwise would kill the soul. Whether he will or no, the very tormentour is made a saviour; that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Christians as much as you feel of the devils malice, you could ill want his service; there's many a soul lost and undone by a sleeping, that might have been recovered and rouzed by a raging devil. His winds shall blow off your chaff, his floods shall wash away your filth, his earth-quakes shall open your prison-doors, his tempests shall drive you to harbour. Some men want a tempest, to save them from a wrack. Nay once more; he is not low enough yet; he shall be yet brought lower. You have assurance of his total and final overthrow. Rom. 16.20. The god of peace shall tread Sathan under your feet shortly, Rev. 20.10. The devil shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone: 'Tis but a little while, and when he hath done his work, he shall be sent to his place, where he shall be shut up, and a seal set upon him; whence he shall come out no more for ever. He shall tempt no more; vex no more, deceive no more, destroy no more, torment you no more; he shall be thrust out, he shall be chain'd up; the tormentour shall be tor∣mented, day and night for ever and ever. Stand Christians, stand your ground a little while; follow your work, hold up your holy pro∣fession, hold on your holy course; keep your hearts, keep your garments, keep on your armour, keep under corruption, resist temptation, bear your af∣fliction;
hold out faith and patience, fight against your adversaries, watch with your Lord, this one hour, and behold hee that shall come, will come; he cometh quickly, and hee that is in the world, shall bee consumed with the breath of his mouth, and destroyed with the brightness of his appearing. Hee shall bee cast out, hee shall bee cast down, and rise no more for ever. CHAP. VII. Death in the Covenant. 7. GOd hath put Death into the Covenant, 1 Cor. 3.21. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or DEATH, all are yours. Death, there is a great purchase you'l say; what advantage is that? yes, death is advantage: To dye is gain; For, 1. The Commission of Death is changed. 'Twas once, take him Jaylour; away with him, carry him down, to Prison with him, there to bee re∣served to the Judgement, of the great day; It is now, take him Janitour; take him Porter; take him in, give him an entrance into his Master's joy: Death doth but take the Bride when shee is ready, and lodges her in the Chamber of the Bride-groom; this made death the Apostles desire, Philip. 1.23. I desire to depart, and to bee with Christ, which is far better. 2. Death is conquered. What does this mean, Your enemie is yours? other than this, your enemy
is conquered to you, a conquered enemy, is made a Tributary, death is dis-armed; it hath lost its sting; when a Serpent hath lost its sting, you may take it into your bosome. Hee that can say: Death where is thy sting? may go on, and add, Thankes bee to God, which hath given me the victory. A Signet sent from Heaven, with a Death's head, is a precious token; Come Christians, bee of good courage, set your feet on the neck of this King of terrours. 3. Death is at once, The destruction of all their enemies, when once death hath done its office upon them, then farewel Edom, and Ammon, and Amaleck, and Aegypt; fare-well the prick∣ing bryer, and the grieving thorne; then farewel sin and sorrow for ever; the Egyptians they have seen, and fear'd, and felt, to day, they shall ne∣ver see again for ever. It destroys it self, their last enemy by destroying them, it hath its welcome, and farewell the same moment; it is but welcome death and farewel death for ever. Death dies with them; once dead, they dye no more for ever; mortality is swallowed up of life, death is cast into the lake of fire; that is its Region; there, there they die, and dye, and dye again; over, and over, for ever, and ever; but for the Saints it doth but set them on the banks of that good Land, whe∣ther it cannot follow them; our Lord by death [by ours as well as his own] hath delivered those who for fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. Christians, you may now not onely with patience, but with desire, expect the assault of this King of terrours. What, shall tribulation, and persecution, and famine, and nakedness, and
peril, and sword? shall sorrows, and fears, and mortality dye with mee? yea, shall sin dye with mee? then welcome death, Lord strengthen me this once, let mee dye with the Philistines. Would it bee good for thee to bee with thy Father? in the bosome of thy bridegroom? the presence cham∣ber of thy Lord and Love? would it bee a mercy to thee, to weep no more, fear no more, suffer no more, bee tempted no more, sin no more? to bee uncloathed of corruption, and be cloathed upon with immortality and incorruption, then bid death welcome. Blessed souls, when you come a shoare, and see the light, the love, the joy, the rest, the glo∣ry, that is on the other side; you will then more fully understand, what this meaneth; Death is yours. Hee knew something, who said: I cannot tell you what sweet pain, and delightsome torments, are in Christs love; I often challenge time, that hol∣deth us asunder, I have for the present a sick life, much pain, and much love-sickness for Christ; O what would I give, to have a bed made to my wea∣ried soul, in his bosome! O when shall wee meet! O how long is it to the dawning of the Marriage-day, O sweet Lord Jesus take wide steps; Come o∣ver the Mountains at one stride, O my Beloved, flee as a Roe, or a young Hart upon the Mountains of separation! O if hee would fold the Heavens together like an old Cloak, and shovel time and daies out of the way, and come away.
CHAP. VIII. The Kingdome in the Covenant. 8. GOd hath put the Kingdome into this Co∣venant Matth. 5.3. Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers plea∣sure to give you the Kingdome; Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. I might here enlarge in describing the glory of this Kingdome, but when I had said all, I must at last leave it within the Vail; and therefore shall only tell you, from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him, &c. Ephes. 1.18. When by the Spirit of Wisdome, and Revelation, the eyes of your understandings are opened, yee shall know, what is the hope of his calling, and what is the riches of the glory, of his Inheritance in the Saints.
CHAP. IX. All the means of salvation in the Covenant, both outward and inward, in special, [the blessing of a new heart.] LAstly, God hath put into the Covenant all the means of salvation. And all things on their parts necessary, to the obtaining the ever∣lasting kingdome. 1. All the outward means of salvation. Ordi∣nances, Word, Sacraments, and Prayer; Officers; Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastours, and Teachers, Ephes. 4.11,12. 1 Cor. 3.22. 2. All the inward means of salvation. Every grace, every duty; their obtaining the one, and performing the other, and perseverance in both. These are all comprehended in the second part of that great promise, They shall be my people. Which though it be properly, the matter of their own stipulation, yet for this also the Lord himself un∣dertakes. You shall be my people. Two things are hereby signified. 1. I will account you, and reckon you for mine. You shall have the priviledge and the blessing of my people. I will set you apart, and separate you to my self, out of all the tribes and kindreds of the earth; and will avouch you for my portion and peculiar possession. I will set you as the apple of mine eye, as a seal upon mine heart, and upon mine arm.
I will mark you out for the people of my love; of you will I take care, for you will I provide, with you are my delights, over you will I rejoyce, with you will I dwell, and you shall dwell with me for ever. 2. I will not only reckon you for my people, but I will undertake for you, that you shall consent to me, accept of me, own me, follow me, and cleave to me as my people. I will not only sepa∣rate you to my self, but I will fashion you for my self. I will sanctifie you, and guide you, and teach you, and help you. I will fulfill in you all the good pleasure of my will. I will work all your works in you, I will avouch you for my people, and you shall avouch me for your God. You shall love me, fear me, obey me; I will keep you from falling, and preserve you to my heavenly kingdome. Particularly, the Lord hath promised to give them, 1. A new heart. 2. An heart to know the Lord. 3. One heart. 4. An heart of flesh. 5. An heart to love the Lord. 6. An heart to fear the Lord. 7. An heart to obey the Lord. 8. An heart to persevere to the end. 1. A new heart. Ezek. 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. This new heart (I take it) is the genus of all
the following graces; and therefore the less shall suffice, to be spoken of it here. A new heart, that is, not physically new in regard of substance, but morally onely, in regard of qualities. This new heart signifies both another heart, and a more excellent heart. 'Tis said of Caleb, Numb. 14.24. that he had another heart. And this other heart is declared to be a more excellent heart, than was in the rest of the people. Whilest they, ei∣ther followed not the Lord, or but haltingly, hee followed the Lord fully, Prov. 17.27. A man of understanding is of an excellent spirit. There is another heart, that is not a new heart; Nebuchadnezzer had another, but no new heart; the heart of a beast, for the heart of a man; an evil heart grown worse, is not a new heart, but the old heart grown older. We read 1 Sam. 10.9. that when Saul was anointed King, God gave [him] another heart; this was a more excellent heart, than he had before, and yet not the heart here promised. He gave to him another heart, that is, the spirit of govern∣ment; the heart of a King, for the heart of a private person; a more publick, raised, heroick heart; the heart of a King, fitted to the station and office of a King. The excellencies of this new heart are not na∣tural, but spiritual excellencies, as will appear more in the handling of the particular graces pro∣mised; and are such as fit them for their new state work reward.
1. For their new state; Christians are made the children of God, vessels of honour, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people; and God gives them an heart, answering the dig∣nity of their high calling. 2. For their new Work; a Christian hath other work to do, than other men; whilest their busi∣ness lies all here below, in this earth; in their fields, and vineyards, &c. Christians work lies above, with their God, and their Jesus; and with∣in, about their nobler, and immortal part; their work is spiritual, and such is the heart that's given to them. 3. For their new reward. God intends better things to them; a better portion; a bet∣ter hope, better comforts, joyes, delights here; and a better inheritance hereafter; and he prepares them better hearts, to receive these bet∣ter things; he will not put his new wine into old bottles. The excellencies of this new heart may be re∣duced to these three. 1. A new light; discovering the dignity of their state, the spirituality of their work, the glorie of their reward. 2. A new law, or frame, or bent of spirit; in∣clining; disposing, and fitting them to all that which they are made for. And this is the mean∣ing of Gods writing his Law in the heart. The Law written in the heart, signifies, not only the Law made known in the heart, but the heart made suitable to the Law; and adapted to the obedience of it. There is a kind of connaturalness betwixt the new heart, and all that the Law requires.
3. A new power, enabling them for their new work. We have all these mentioned in one Scri∣pture, 2 Tim. 1.7. God hath not given us a spi∣rit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. [A sound mind] there's the new light; [a spirit of love] there's the new law, or frame; and with these, [a spirit of power.] In summe, this new heart is the divine nature; the image of God renewed; the life of God be∣gotten, Christ formed in them. An heart after Gods own heart, containing in it all those graces of the Spirit, wherein stands their likeness to God, and their capacity of serving, and enjoy∣ing of him. This is the heart the Lord will give. A new heart will I give unto you. Against all those glorious things promised be∣fore, it would be objected; A kingdome promi∣sed? glory, and honour, and everlasting blessed∣ness, granted! Alas, what's all this to me? to whom is it promised? or upon what terms? when I consider what is required, 'tis all one to me, as if there had been nothing promised. The way to this blessedness is too narrow, the gate is too strait for me ever to hope to enter. What-ever the Price be, the strictness, and severities of a Christian course, the very fore-sight of them does amaze, and con∣found me. Live a new life? deny my self? take up my cross? follow Christ? spend my daies in fasting, and praying, and mourning? live by rule? look to every step, to every word, to every thought? &c. all these things are against me. A new life? a new course? if this be it, I shall ne∣ver bear it. No man having tasted of the old, will endure this new way; for he saith, the old is
better. 'Tis all one to me, as if there had been no Christ, no Gospel, no Kingdome promised, if it cannot be obtained upon other terms than these. I were even as good sit down as I am, and run the venture of what follows, as to feed my self with hopes, of that which I see, I can never ob∣tain. If I do but move heaven-wards, the stream carries me down; If I do but take up a thought, make an essay, set a foot forwards to∣wards this new course, I find mine old things hang in my heels. My old customes, my old com∣panions, mine old pleasures, and ease, and liber∣ties, quickly pull mee back. Oh what shall I do? I must bee undone, I must bee a lost and damned wretch. Fain I would be happy, but I cannot be holy. I dread, I often tremble to think of losing Christ, and the blessings of his Gospel; but this wretched heart is too hard for me, and will not come on towards it. I am ashamed, I am plagued to think, what I am like to lose, and for how little; but I cannot help it; the way is such, that this foolish heart will never en∣dure it. Why hearken soul: The Lord that hath called thee to this new course, will give thee a new heart. And there is not any thing required in an holy life so irksome, and so contrary to thee; but this new heart is so fitted, and suited to it, that it will be∣come easie to thee. Its pain will bee pleasant, its severity will be liberty, its very drudgery (as thou countest it) will be a great delight. Psal. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O God, thy Law is within mine heart. And Psal. 1,2. of the renewed soul its said, his delight is in the Law of the Lord. In the
original, his will, his heart, is in the law. The law is in his heart, and his heart is in the law. Gods will and his are the same. What-ever God bids him do, his heart bids him do; and his hand will never say his heart nay. He that delights in the law, and as 'tis a law, commanding such things, will never grudge to do what it commands. Where tis a pleasure to be commanded, tis no pain to obey. What-ever work the law cuts him out, 'tis work he loves. Bid him pray, bid him watch, bid him walk humbly with his God; 'tis work he loves; 'tis in his heart to do it. Bid a Saint draw nigh to God in any duty; 'tis as if you bid the hungry to eat, or the thirsty to drink, the naked to be cloathed, the beggar to come for an alms, or the poor labourer for a daies work. Bid a Christian to deny himself, to crucifie his flesh; 'tis the same as if you bid him, deny thine enemy, re∣venge thy self on thine enemy; such revenge is sweet: but O how pleasant is it to him, to be cal∣led to a life of praise? to live above in the light, in the love, in the joy of the Lord? to be searching, and studying, and looking into, and admiring those everlasting treasures of spiritual and heaven∣ly delights laid up in God? to behold his face, to live in his presence, and to dwell in the light of his countenance? 'tis true, there is some remain∣ing difficulty, and irksomness in the sweetest works of religion, as far forth as the heart is un∣renewed and is yet carnal; deny my self? morti∣fie lust? forsake my companions? withdraw from iniquity? Why what's this but to cut off my hand? to pluck out mine eyes? to tear my flesh? walk with God? seek his face? dwell in his presence?
'tis all one, as to bid me feed on the air, wander on the mountains, dwell in the wilderness; and as much pleasure can I find, in the one as in the other. 'Tis so indeed, as far as thou remainest carnal; the Lord God and all his ways are a wil∣derness, a land of darkness to thee; but as much as thou hast of this new heart, so much ease and pleasure, thou wilt find herein. Desponding soul; thou saist, thou art yet igno∣rant, and hast little knowledge of the way of the Lord; but behold a new light to lead thee. Thou art yet carnal, and thy heart is contrary, and ever quarrelling at it; but the new nature will end the old quarrel. Thou art weak and impotent, the work is too hard for thee, if thou lovedst it never so well; but what will this be; when thou art en∣dued with power from on high? O Friend wouldst thou indeed live this new life, get this new heart. But oh there lies the difficul∣ty; how or where shall I get it? Why, have re∣course to the Covenant, there it lies for thee. But how shall I get it thence? why hath the Lord pro∣mised to give it thee? take the word from his mouth, and put it into thine own; turn the word of promise, into a prayer? Doth he say [I will give]? let thy soul answer, [give Lord] give me this new heart. I am weary Lord, and thou art weary also of this wicked heart, at once ease thy self and me; Take away this, and give me a bet∣ter heart. Turn the word of promise into a pray∣er, and then turn the word of Prayer, into a word of Faith. He says [I will give] let thy Faith say, [thou wilt give] I shall have it; since thou hast said, thy servant also may boldly say [Thou wilt
do it.] Thou wilt give me a better heart. Farewell my old sins, lusts, and companions; farewell mine old pleasures, and ways; now for heaven in earnest, now welcome the strait gate, the new and living way. Old things are past away, all things shall become new. Turn the word of promise in∣to a prayer, turn thy prayer into a word of Faith, and God will turn the word of Faith into a word of Command. Bee it according to thy word. Let there be a new light, let there bee a new law, let there bee a new power; let there no more bee a spirit of fear in this heart, but a spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind. And as when he said in the creation of the great world, Let there bee light, let there bee a Firmament, let there bee a Sun and Moon, It was so: so when he shall say, in the new creation of this little world, let there bee light, let there bee love, let there bee power; let us again make man in our image, after our own likeness; It shall be so. The Lord hath said [I will,] let thy Prayer say [Do it Lord] let thy Faith say [thou wilt do it] and God will say, Amen, so be it. CHAP. X. An heart to know the Lord. 2. AN heart to know the Lord, Jer. 24.7. I will give them an heart to know me. The knowledge of God is the first excellency of the new heart. As in the old so in the new creation (as was said before) the first word is, let there bee
light. There is not so glorious a preheminence of day above night, as of the knowledge, above the ignorance of God. As the Firmament with∣out a Sun, as the body without an eye, so is the soul without knowledge. What this knowledge of God here promised is, will appear, if wee con∣sider. Its Object. Act. 1. The Object of this Knowledge is, God, not only the Nature, or being of God, manifested in his Essential Perfections, his Glorious Attributes, his Infiniteness, Eternity, Omnipotency, &c. In his Personal Relations, the Subsistences in the God∣head; but God in Christ, God in Covenant; yea, the whole Minde and Will of God, all that which God hath revealed to us, as our Duty, or Hap∣pinesse. God known in the heart, is the whole Bible o∣pened; The Law opened, the Gospel opened; Duties, Comforts, Priviledges made manifest. Christ opened in his Sufferings, in his Satisfaction, in his Spirit, in all the Riches of his Glory; the whole mystery of Godliness revealed; The Heart opened, man made known to himself, all the depths of the heart, all the deceits of the heart, all the faculties and powers of the heart; with their motions, operations, inclinations, the re∣ctitude, or obliquities of them. Heaven opened, the Crown, the Kingdome known; everlasting rest, glory, honour, immortality, brought to light. Hell opened, sin known, the devil known, wrath, temptations, the curse, eternal fire known. All
this, even all that God is, and all that hee hath revealed in his Word and Works, are the object of this Knowledge of God. 2. The Act. To know, is to apprehend, or un∣derstand God, and the things of God; Jer. 9.24. Let him that glorieth, glory in this, that hee (under∣standeth) and knoweth mee. Ephes. 3.18,19. That yee may [comprehend] with all Saints, what is the heighth and length, and breadth, and depth. that yee may [know] the love of Christ: This ap∣prehension of God, doth not barely note our hav∣ing received some natural, or metaphysical No∣tions of God, and the Truths that are in him; But farther, it notes: 1. An Approbation of him; an approving or liking the things that are excellent, Phil. 1.9,10. That your love may abound more and more in [know∣ledge] and in all Judgement, that yee may [ap∣prove] the things that are excellent. 2. Appropriation, The knowing of God as a re∣conciled God; a God, and a God to mee; good, and good to mee; wise and wise for mee: My Lord and my God: To know God in Christ, re∣conciled through Christ; propitious through Christ, this is saving knowledge. To know, and not pos∣sess, to see and not eat, to know an angry God, a wrathful God, a God lost; to know goodness, mercy, loving-kindness, compassion, alsufficiency, and to have the heart recurre, what is this to thee? this is none of thine; the damned thus know and dye. 3 Affection, As Psal. 9.10. Those that know thy Name, shall trust in thee; So those that know thy Name, will love thee, and fear thee, and re∣joyce
in thee, and bless thy Name; to know and hate God, to know and contemn God, to know and fly from God, to know and Blaspheme and curse God, the Devils thus know and trem∣ble. But especially that which distinguishes, this saving from common knowledge, is; Its Power. Savour. 1. Its Power, the Knowledge of God is migh∣ty; my preaching was not weak, but mighty, in you, 2 Cor. 13. It hath, A Transforming, A Fructifying, Power. 1. A Transforming Power, 2 Cor. 3.18. Wee all with open face, beholding as in a glass, the Glo∣ry of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, Rom. 12.2. Bee yee not conformed to this present world, but bee yee transformed, by the renewing of your mindes, [by the renewing of your mindes] the renovation of the minde, both is this change, and works it farther upon the whole soul, this new light is the new creature; old things pass away, all things become new, where the minde is sav∣ingly enlightned; God known in the soul, is God united to the soul; Christ revealed in the heart, is Christ formed upon the heart; there's life in this light, it is no other than the light of life. The Knowledge of God comprehends in it, and is in∣volved in, and Spirits, and animates every grace and duty; as the same soul, in the eye sees, in the ear hears, in the palate tastes; as the same juyce
which is in the Olive fatness, in the Fig-Tree sweetness, in the Oake strength, in the Rose fra∣grancy, in the Lillie beauty; So the same grace, which in the minde, is light; in the heart, is love, holy desire, holy fear, holy joy; and one says, that as feeling is inseparable to all the Organs of sense; the eye feels and sees, the ear feels and hears, the palate feels and tastes, the nostrils feel and smell; So knowledge is involved in eve∣ry grace; Faith knows and believes, Charity knows and loves, temperance knows and abstains, patience knows and suffers, humility knows and stoops, repentance knows and mourns, obedience knows and does, compassion knows and pitties, hope knows and expects, confidence knows and rejoyces; And therefore wee believe, and love, and obey, and hope, and rejoyce, because we know. God gives us this knowledge as the eye of our souls, and by that eye, hee enters with all his po∣wer and Glory, Ephes. 3.19. That ye may know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, and bee filled with all the fulness of God. Day-light is not that light wee receive by reflection from the Moon and Stars, at second hand; when the Sun is risen, and come in among us, then it is day; When the Sun of Righteousness is risen in the heart, there's the light of life; God is, and God dwells in this light, and where God dwells, every unclean thing vanishes; can Darkness dwell with the Sun? can Death dwell with Life? according to the measure of the manifestation of God in us, so far forth is sin necessarily vanished. Thou art but the carkasse of a Christian, the light that is in thee, is darkness, the life that is in thee, is death, if thou
bee not in the whole man renewed, after the Image of him that Created thee. If Christ bee not formed in thy heart, if the Love, the humility, the meek∣nesse, the patience, the compassion, the holiness of the Lord Jesus, be not begotten in thee; what∣ever thou knowest, thou knowest nothing as thou oughtest to know; if thou hast all knowledge, and hast not charity; and so, if thou hast all knowledge and hast not humility, meekness, holiness, thou art nothing; thou art but as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cimbal. Doubting Christian, that com∣plainest of, and bewailest thine ignorance, and fearest that thou knowest not God, look upwards, where his Glory dwells; lift up thine eyes and see, or if thou canst not see, lift up thy heart for eyes; Lord, where dwellest thou? let mee see thy Face, shew mee thy Glory, pitty thy blinde, let the eyes of this blinde bee opened, and the tongue of this dumb shall bee loosed, and speak forth thy praise: Look upward, and if yet thou seest not thy God, look inward; canst thou see his Face in thy soul? canst thou see his Image on thy heart? canst thou behold in (this) Glasse the Glory of the Lord, and finde thy self changed into his Image? Comfort thine heart, how short sighted soever thou seemest to bee, how dimme soever thy Can∣dle burns, how weak soever in the Knowledge of God thou complainest thou art; thou hast seen God, thou hast seen his Face in peace; God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined into thine heart, and given thee the Knowledge of his Glory in the face of Jesus Christ. 2. A Fructifying Power, this Sun-shine makes
a fruitful soil, Colos. 1.9,10. my desire for you, (saith the Apostle) is, that you may bee filled with the Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdome, and Spi∣ritual understanding. That yee might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful unto every good work, and encreasing in the Knowledge of God; Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious Power, unto all Patience, and long suf∣fering, with joyfulness; and Phil. 1.11. Being filled with the fruits of Righteousness, which are by Je∣sus Christ, unto the Glory and praise of God. Full of Light, and full of Love, of Faith, of Patience, of Humility, and fruitful in every good work; Mat. 12.35. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart, bringeth forth good things; an evil man out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things. A good man hath a good treasure within him; a treasure of Heavenly Wisdome, of Divine Truth; a treasure of Light; God hath shined into his heart; Hee's filled with all the fulness of God; And what is laid up within, hee brings forth without; An evil man hath an evil treasure, Satan hath been filling his heart, Act. 5.3. Why hath Satan filled thine heart? the treasures of darkness are there; a treasure of lust and lies; Falshood and folly are found with him, these treasures of darkness within, bring forth darkness; dark souls, lead dark lives, their way is dark, their deeds are darkness; O how fruitful are sinners in their un∣fruitful works; filled with all unrighteousness, for∣nication, wickednesse, covetousness, maliciousnesse, envy, murther, debate, deceit, malignity, &c. Rom. 1.29,30. Their hearts are full, and there∣upon their mouths full, their eyes full, their
hands full; mouths full of cursing, eyes full of adultery, hands full of violence, filled with all unrighteousness: O Generation of Vipers, how can yee being evil, (having such hearts) speak good things? all is evil that comes from you, and how can it bee otherwise? Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks: And in like manner, O Generation of Believers! How can yee being good, but bring forth good things? Or how can you say, or think, there is a treasure of Grace, a fountain of light within, when no streams spring forth? Penury in the life, speaks no great plenty in the heart; the Truths of God within you are the Seed of God, the good seed that hee sows in his fields; where there's good seed sown in good ground, you will expect a fruitful Harvest; a bar∣ren crop, speaks a barren soil, or no good seed sown there. 1 John 2.3. Hereby we do know that wee know him, if wee keep his Commandements. We know God; but are you sure of it, are you not mista∣ken? No, wee are not mistaken, wee know that wee know him: But how do you know it? Why, how are trees known? By their fruits ye shall know them. How do yee know that this is indeed the Tree of Knowledge? Why, see what fruits are hanging upon it, wee keep the Commandements; Here's Obedience growing, here's Holiness, and Righteousness, and Mercy; Doubtless this is the right Tree, for behold all the Commandements, the two Tables, hanging upon the boughs of it, and not broken, but kept and observed: Wee may as well say, Obedience is no Obedience, Duty is no Duty, Faith and Love and Humility,
and Patience are not what they are, as that the Tree that brings forth this fruit is not the Tree of Knowledge; Wee know that wee know him, because wee keep his Commandements; Yea, and the Tree of Life too, both in one; a Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon her, Prov. 3.18. Where these fruits are not found, where are nothing but shews, and sounds, painted fruits; where are nothing but the fruits of unrighteousness, contention, strife, covetousness, sensuality, and the like; he's very ignorant indeed, that is not able to say, what ever I am ignorant of, this one thing I know, that I know not God. Christian, boast not of what thou hast, but consider what thou doest, try thy head, by thine heart, and thy heart, by thine hand; Judge of thy light by thy love, and thy love by thy life; say not that God hath shined in∣to thine heart, unless thy light shine; thy works shine before men; The path of the just shineth, Prov. 4. 'Tis but a forme of Knowledge that brings forth but a forme of Godlinesse; hee that holdeth the Truth in unrighteousness, hath not the Truth, in truth in him; thou sayest thou knowest the Lord, but what say thy waies, do these speak the same things? Action is the best Interpreter of the inner man, feel the pulses of thy heart, what watchfulness, what holiness, hath thy Knowledge brought forth? hast thou received the spirit, who yet walkest in the flesh? what Heaven in thine heart, and nought but Earth in thy hand? Truth in thine heart, and Lies in thy mouth? Holiness in thy heart, Glory in thine heart, and in thy tongue nothing but filth or froth? What an heart so full, and a life so empty? how can these things
bee? Hath the light in thine heart given laws on∣ly to thine heart? or doth thine heart submit, whilest thy tongue rebells, and thou kickest with the heel? Woe to us Christians, that sinners should be so full, and Saints to empty; that they should speak what they have seen with their Father, and we should speak no more what wee have seen with our Father; that oaths, and lyes, and blasphemies, and scoffs, and cursing, should be so rife in theirs; and that truth, and goodness, and holiness, bles∣sings and praises should be no more in our mouths; that there should be so much guile in theirs, and so little grace in our lips; that the shade should be more fruitful than the Sun; that the good, should be only the barren ground; that their habitations should be so full of violence, and oppression, and wantonness; and no more mercy, and righteous∣ness, and sobriety in ours. Woe to us, that we know so much to so little purpose; that we should be bushels to hide, and not rather candlesticks to hold forth the candle of the Lord, he hath lighted up in us! Oh how many dark souls, might our candle lead on to the Sun. The light that is in Israel, might do much to the turning Egypt into a Goshen; speak, Christians, speak what you have seen, and testifie what you have believed; bring forth out of your treasure; pitty the blinde world; or at least be more help∣ful one to another. Instruct as you have been in∣structed; convince as you have been convinced; comfort as you have been comforted of God. Out-vie sinners, let not their mouths be so full of cursing, as yours of blessing; whilest theirs are
so full of blasphemies, let it be said of you as of your Lord, full of grace are their lips. Good words are not wind, you may reckon them not amongst the leaves, but the fruit. Whilest you are speaking of the things of God, you are there∣in doing the will of God. I confess the Proverb is true, The greatest talkers are not alwaies the grea∣test doers. But 'tis true also, he is seldome a great doer, that hath nothing to say. There is a speak∣ing which is our doing. There is a speaking in a way of boasting, to magnifie and set up our selves; beware of that; and there is a speaking to the use of edifying, to build up our brethren. When we are thus speaking to instruct, to convince, to a∣waken, and whet on our own, and others spirits to our work; wee are then in doing our work. Speak Christians, and speak often the things that you know; onely let me adde, let your lives speak also, and not onely your lips. If you would not bee vain-talkers, bee all tongue, let your lips speak, and your hands speak, and your feet speak, let your works and your ways speak, the wonder∣ful things of God. Bring forth what you have received; hee that's all inside, and hee that's all outside, are equally nothing. The one is a shadow without substance; the others substance is but a shadow. The one is a deceiver, the other a deceived soul. The one boasts himself, the other thinks himself something, but neither is any thing. Christians, bee full of good fruits, and you will make full proof that your wisdome is from above. If yee know these things, happy are yee if yee do them. Weakling Christian, that knowest but little of
God, and callest that little nothing; whilest thou doubtest the light hath not shined into thee, dost thou walk in that little light thou hast? dost thou shine as a light in the world? dost thou know how to be holy, and humble, and harmless, and honest? dost thou live under the power of those truths thou knowest? dost thou fear the Lord, and obey the voice of his servants? trust in the Lord, and stay thy self on thy God; thou art a childe of light, though through thy trembling heart, thou walkest in darkness. Having not seen thou lovest, and be∣lieving thou shalt rejoyce with joy unspeakable and full of glory. 2. Its favour. 2 Cor. 2.14. And maketh ma∣nifest the savour of his knowledge, by us in every place. The Knowledge of God is sweet-sented; it casts forth a fragrancy, where it comes. It hath a gratefulness to the heart, leaves sweet impressi∣ous on the senses of the Saints. They taste that the Lord is gracious. As their breathings go up as sweet incense, so his beams come down with like sweetness to them. As 'twas said of Christ, so of God: Cant. 1.3. The Name of the Lord is an ointment poured forth. Why what is his Name? Exod. 34.6. This is his Name. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth; keeping mer∣cy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. Oh what a bundle of myrrhe, what a gar∣den of spices, is here enclosed? what a sweet smelling savour doth it send forth to them who have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil? The Name of the Lord is a precious ointment,
and the knowledge of God, is this ointment poured forth. Where God is known in the soul, there his sweet savour is shed abroad. The thoughts of God are pretious, the wayes of God are pleasant to them, that understand them. His fruit was sweet unto my taste. O the ineffable pleasures of Religion! the carnal world count it a jejune and insipid thing; they cannot taste; and no wonder, for they do not see the things of God, nor can they, because they are spiritually discerned. Let God be savingly known, and then you will find what the savour of his Knowledge is. This light is sweet, it is a pleasant thing to behold this Sun. O my soul, let thy walks, let thy dwellings bee in this garden of the Lord; let the Sun shine, and the smell of his spices shall flow forth unto thee. O my Lord, shed abroad thy sweet ointments, let the smell of thy garments refresh my soul. Let mee taste and see, let me see, and I shall taste, that the Lord is gracious. Vanish all yee carnal pleasures, and sensual de∣lights; these rose-buds rot, the flowers of your gardens wither, dead Flyes are in all your oint∣ments; the light of the Lord hath shined all your glories into darkness. The waters of the Sanctua∣ry have made all your waters brackish; there re∣mains no pleasure in them. Hee that hath known the Lord, hath more or less according to the measure of his knowledge, re∣ceived in the relish and sweetness of it; and what hee hath received in, hee sends forth before men; he hath received, and hee is a sweet savour. As the Preachers, so the Practitioners of piety, are a sweet savour of Christ unto God, and hand down
the sweetness of God unto men. They are of sa∣voury lips, and of savoury lives; the savour of their graces is shed abroad in the Churches of Christ. Carnal hearts send forth a stench, instead of a sweet smell; they are all rottenness, the savour of a sepulchre is all they have. Their waies stink, their words stink, their very breath smells of a rotten heart. Yea, the very best they have, their pleasures stink, their garments, their gallantry, their powders, and perfumes, and sweet odours stink, of their proud, and vain, and sensual hearts. But O what a sent do their ulcers, and their excrements, their oathes, and their curses, and their scoffs, and their lyes send forth? Sinners, learn to know the Lord, and this will quickly change your savour. And you that know any thing of God, think not that your knowledge is saving till your souls have received in, and your waies do send forth the savour of his Know∣ledge. The last of these, the savour of this Knowledge, the pleasure that it brings in to the soul, though taken alone, it is but of uncertain signification; there may bee some pleasure and joy arise from the common Knowledge of God; and sometimes but little taste, where there is the truth of Religion. But taken in conjunction with the former, where is found both the power, and the savour, the evidence of its soundness will be more full. Find all to∣gether, this transforming, this fructifying, this savoury Knowledge, and you may rest satisfied, that this is the saving Knowledge of God. And of this is the promise, I will give them an heart to know me.
Oh! how much need have wee, still to wait, and beg, for the accomplishment of this Promise, how little sound Knowledge is there found among us? Some are weak in Knowledge; who have been long taught of God, and yet are not taught of God; God hath been teaching them, but they have not learned of him; They have had a good Master, but have been ill Schollars; weak men, so wee call a man of low understanding, a weak man. Oh! how many weak Souls are there, even among professing Christians? who, though for their time, they might have been teach∣ers of others, had yet need bee taught, the first Principles of the Oracles of God. Some men have not knowledge of God, I speak this to their shame, 1 Cor. 15. Others are men of Knowledge, but of weak Knowledge; who know much, but to little pur∣pose, their great Knowledge hath little power in them; their Lusts are too strong for their Light, Isa. 8.11. I spake unto thee with a strong hand, and instructed thee; If God have spoken to these men, yet his hand hath not instructed them; the nail hath not been struck deep enough, it dwells in the head onely, it hath not reached their heart, they have an eye, but far enough from having an heart to know the Lord: their Knowledge doth not lead them on to Religion, but must serve them instead of Religion, it is all the Religion they have, to know what it is; 'tis made to serve, and not suffer'd to guide, and govern; to serve their turns, to serve their interest, to serve their pride and their covetousness; Their Knowledge of God makes them Devils, it helps them to play
the Hypocrites, to bee Deceivers of others, yea and of their own souls: It will seek them out ac∣ceptable words, put prayers into their mouths, praises into their lips, spirituallize their language, furnish them with savoury discourses; carry them plausibly through Duties; wherein, though God hath the Name, though Souls have the Name, yet are they all but sacrifices to their Lusts; The Knowledge of God humbleth, but this Know∣ledge puffeth up, and lifteth up; puffeth them p in their own, and lifteth them up in others thoughts; and when it hath done this, it hath done them all the service they have for it to do, un∣lesse it may bee, they have some worse work for it; To make rents and divisions in the Church of Christ, to maintain disputes, to cavel, and quar∣rel, to divide, and make parties, to make twenty Religions out of one, till at length they make that one to bee none. Whilest the Apostle saies, some men have not the Knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame; I may say also, some men have the Knowledge of God, I speak this to their shame. What, the Knovvledge of God, and no more Humility? the Knowledge of God and no more Charity? I speak this to your shame. Have the Faith of Christ in respect of persons? have the Knowledge of God in respect of Parties? Know God and yet divide and scatter, and con∣found them that are of God? yea, and contend, and quarrel about such small differences, as som∣times is seen; here is God and not there; with us and not with you; when it may bee a little Cha∣rity would tell you, for the main, hee may bee with both; and so much uncharitableness makes
it a question, whether with either? The more such men pretend to the Knowledge of God, the greater their shame. Friends, beware you bee not undone, either by your Ignorance, or your Knowledge. Love not darkness, and call not darkness light; call not that the Knowledge of God which is not; mis-use not that which is; hast thou no Knowledge? What, and such a Promise before thee? I will give them an heart to know mee; they shall all know me! What, and such a Gospel before thee, the work whereof, is to open blinde eyes, and to turn from darknesse to light? open thy mouth sinner, and God will open thine eyes; ask, and thou shalt have, seek, and thou shalt finde; See, wink not at the light, that shines round about thee; Love not darkness, if thou love not death; This is E∣ternal Life to know thee. What then is ignorance? there's death in thine heart, if there bee no light in thine eye. Hast thou Knowledge? bee thankful, and bee humble; bee not high minded, but fear; prize it, but do not abuse it. Hast thou received the Know∣ledge of the Truth? Live under the Power of the Truth, thou Knowest; resign up thy self to it, to its transforming Power; give it leave to work, and to change thee into its own Image. Let this new light make thee a new man, to its governing Power; let it teach thee, and rule thee; let it teach as one that hath Authority, let it Rule, till it hath put all thine Enemies under thy feet; till every thought, imagination, every high thing be made low, and brought into captivity to Christ. Let not the light of the Lord, help thee to do the
Devil's Work; Let it not bee fodder for thy flesh, lest it bee fuel for thy flames; Let it not repent thy God nor thee, that ever thou hadst such a ta∣lent committed to thee; Let it neither be loss to God, nor the eternal loss of thine own soul: Hee that hath appeared on earth in beams of light, will bee revealed from Heaven in flames of fire, ren∣dering vengeance to all that [Know God] and obey not the Gospel of Christ: Woe to those that neither know nor obey, but Oh! what to those that obey not, though they Know? Christians, know the Lord, but know and fear, know and serve, know and honour thy God; Know God, and know thy self, thy sinne, and thy misery, thy dangers, and thy temptati∣ons; Know and mourn, know and bee ashamed, know and fear, and watch, and fight, and over∣come. Know God, and know his Will, thy du∣ty, and thy way, thy priviledges and opportuni∣ties, thy Race, and thy Crown. Know and do, and run, and suffer, and wait, and hope, and rejoyce in hope of the Glory of God. Know God, but God in Christ; God reconciled; pardoning, absolving, accepting, through him. Know, and believe, accept, adventure upon, resign, com∣mit thy self to him. Know thy God, and behold him, look upon thy God; in his power, in his wisdome, in his holiness, in his goodness, in his loving-kindness, in his mercy. Behold him in his Word, in his Works, in his Providence, in his Saints, in thy Soul, in his Son; Set him before thine eyes, look upon thy God, and never leave looking, till thou art changed into his Image, and satisfied with his Visage; and when thou art
brought up to this, then hee hath done for thee, what he hath said: I will give them an heart to know mee. CHAP. XI. One Heart. 3. ONe Heart, Ezek. 11.19. I will give them one Heart; Wee read, Hos. 14.11. Ephraim is like a silly Dove; without an Heart, Hath no heart at all; none for his God, that's as good as none; and Psal. 12.2. Wee read that Israel had a double Heart, an Heart, and an Heart; more hearts than one, but saies the Lord, I will give them an Heart, and it shall bee but one, and no more. For the opening of this (to let passe the signi∣fication it hath, as it respects Christians collective∣ly) as it respects each particular Christian: This one Heart may bee taken as opposed. To A wavering A divided A double Heart. 1. As opposed to a wavering, unstable Heart, Jam. 1.6.8. VVavering minded men have al∣most as many hearts as they live daies, or meet with cases; An heart that changes with the weather, and tacks about with every winde; that resolves and repents, that chuses and changes; that like a wave of the Sea, is tossed about with every
VVinde: This you may call, either many hearts, or no heart, as you will; Thus this one heart is a fixed, established, resolved heart, Heb. 13.9. It is good that the heart bee [established] with grace. Grace fixes, and establishes the heart, brings it to a consistency in it self, which before was any thing or nothing. 2. As opposed to a divided Heart, Hos. 10.2. An Heart cut in two as it were; some talk, that the Devil hath a cloven foot, but what-ever the Devils foot bee, to bee sure, his Sons have a clo∣ven heart, one half for God, the other for sin; one half for Christ, the other for this present World; God hath a corner in it, and the rest is for sin and the Devil: Thus this one heart, is an entire heart; all the powers of it are united with∣in it self, and go the same way; God hath the whole heart. Psal. 103.1. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name. All its springs are in him, and thither do all its streams bend their course. 3. As opposed to a double heart, or an hypo∣critical heart, properly so called. Psal. 12.2,3. that's it which is called an heart, and an heart; an heart in the breast, and another in the tongue. Our outside is presum'd to be an expression of our in∣side; what wee speak, wee pretend to bee our ve∣ry hearts. 'Tis the heart in the tongue that speaks; the heart in the eye that weeps; the heart in the hand that works; the heart in the foot, that walks; no, 'tis not so with the Hypocrite, he shews ano∣ther heart in his tongue, in his waies, than that which is within him. He hath an heart, and an heart, one in his tongue or life, and quite ano∣ther
in his breast. His course speaks him ano∣ther man, than hee is: and thus one heart signi∣fies a single or a plain heart. To summe up all together; this one heart is such as 1. Pitches on one end. 2. Has but one thing to do. 3. Does what it does. 1. Pitches on one end. God is its end. There it wholly bestows it self: I am thine. Psal. 119. And there only it takes up its rest. Psal. 39.7. And now Lord what wait I for? my hope is in thee. God is both its work and its wages. To please God, this is its whole business, and to enjoy God, this is its happiness. This is the mark it hath in its eye, this is the scope of all its motions, to honour and enjoy God. This it wills, this it loves, this it de∣sires, designs, hopes, labours for, that the Lord may possess, and be the possession of it. Particu∣larly, it gives God, the place the power of the end. 1. The place of the end. God is its first and last. Hee's first in the eye, and it looks no far∣ther. It makes him not onely the chief, but in a sense its onely aim. It will have no other God, and therefore no other end, but the Lord. It makes all things else, not onely to stoop and stand by, but to serve to him. Get you hence, stand off, is its language, to all that stands up in his room, or
stands in his way. Evil men, what-ever honour they pretend to have for the Lord, they do but make him a servant to their other Gods. Religi∣on they will take up, but 'tis onely to serve their own turns; to bring about their carnal ends; they serve not the Lord, but their own bellies; saith the Apostle, Rom. 16.18. Phil. 3.19. Nay, they make the Lord their fellow-servant. They serve, and their Religion must serve their sensual appe∣tites. Hee that will have so much religion one∣ly, as he may live upon, (which is the measure of the most) makes the Lord no longer his God, but his servant. A sincere Christian will set God up∣on the throne, and makes all things else, his ser∣vants, or his foot-stool. What-ever will not be serviceable must bee trodden in the dirt. Nothing will bee loved, and embraced, but what will set God higher, or bring God nearer to his heart. 2. The power of the end; the end hath a four-fold power; it draws. directs. governs. rewards. 1. It draws the heart to it; God who is a Christians end, is also his beginning. Our first step heaven-ward, wee owe to the influence of heaven upon us. Draw mee, wee will run after thee. Cant. 1. No man can come unto mee, unless the Father which hath sent mee, draw him. No∣thing but God will do it; as nothing will draw the soul another way; the pleasures of sin, the wages of unrighteousness, are poor and low baits
to entice a soul away from God; that is, so far as 'tis renewed; so 'tis nothing but God that draws the soul on its way, and he will do it. God draws the soul not by an act of power onely, but by moral swasion, that's the proper casuality of the end. Not by efficiency onely, but by sympathy; as by the water, the thirsty soul is drawn to the water-brooks. It is God that draws hearts after him; there are instruments, as his Word, and Ministers; and and there are arguments by which God draws; but whatever the instruments or arguments are, 'tis God that does it. What is the work of either Word, or Ministers, but to set God before them, and this draws. Instruments can do nothing, un∣less God bee the Preacher by them; arguments can do nothing, unless hee bee the medium of them; as 'twas said concerning the peoples fol∣lowing Saul, so much more concerning those that follow the Lord. Those onely follow him, whose hearts God hath touched. 'Tis not mans teaching, but Gods touching the heart that draws it heaven-ward. The tongue of man may touch the ear, 'tis God onely that touches the heart. And when he touches, then the heart will follow. As you know the needle, when its touched with a Loadstone, then it turns after it. The Loadstone is not more natu∣rall attractive of the needle, than God is of that heart which he hath touched. Cant. 5.4. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved in mee. He did but touch the door, and her heart felt him, and moved tovvards him.
O Christians, when you have been waiting upon God, in prayer, hearing or any other spiritual du∣ty, or ordinance; consider, hath mine heart been touched this day? my tongue hath been touched, mine ear hath been touched, mine heart hath been treated with, but hath the Lord touched it? hath there vertue come forth from him, which hath en∣ticed and drawn my soul after him? Sometimes by a message, or visit from heaven, the Lord hath drawn a good word from the lip, a tear from the eye; but O for touches upon souls, for turning of bowels, for the flowings out of hearts after the Lord; Hee is the only load-stone that prevails on gracious souls. Others that have many hearts, have many at∣tractives; every heart hath its peculiar god; twen∣ty gods it may be, in one man; because so ma∣ny hearts. Their pleasures are their Gods, their profits, their gods, their belly their god; their wives, or their children, their gods; and so many gods, so many ends. And every end is a load∣stone to draw them after them. Every heart will after its God. A Christian, that hath but one heart, hath but one God, and this is he that draws it on its way. Thou sayest, the Lord is thy God, thou acknowledgest, thou ownest, thou hast cho∣sen him for thine; but what doth thy God whom thou hast chosen do upon thine heart? what will the sight of God, or thy love to God, or thy hope in God, do upon thee? how far will it carry thee? which way runs thy heart? which way dost bend thy course? dost feel thy God drawing thee? and is thy heart running after him? running, notes motion, and a swift or violent motion.
I shall lay before you these six or seven ex∣pressions, the Scripture uses, to note the running of those hearts after God, whom he hath drawn. 1. The desiring of the soul after God. Isa. 26.8.9. The desire of our soul is to thy name—with my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek theee early. Desire is the soul in motion God-wards. Towards him are their desires, and they come deep, ab intimis, ab imo pectore, from their inwards, from the bottom of the heart. With my soul have I desired thee, with my spirit within mee will I seek thee. Psal. 38.9. Lord, all my desire is before thee; 'tis not all my desires, but my desire; thou seest all, and 'tis all but one desire. Hee desires pardon, hee desires peace, hee desires help, and the heealing of his wounds; but all this is but one desire. God is all. One thing have I desired, Psal. 27.4. 2. The thirsting of the sout. Psal. 42.2. My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God. Thirsting is the extremity of desire; hunger and thirst are the appetite or desire heightened; violent and painful appetites; my soul thirsteth, and is in pain till it be satisfied. 3. The longing of the soul. Psal. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is. Longing causeth languishing, and abortions, if it be not sa∣tisfied. Psal. 119.20. My soul breaketh for the longing desire it hath to thy judgments. My heart panteth, my flesh faileth, the light of mine eyes is gone from me, Psal. 38.10.
4. Calling after God, Psal. 4.1. Hear mee (when I call,) O God of my righteousness. Calling upon God, is the voice of desires. The desiring soul will not keep silence; the tongue, the eye, the ears, the hands, the knees, must all be ora∣tours, when the flame is once kindled within. 5▪ Crying after the Lord. This is an expression answering the thirsting of the soul. Crying is a passionate, and importunate praying. I cryed un∣to the Lord with my whole heart, Psal. 119.145. 6. Crying out after God. This is the manner of the longing soul. Crying out, notes more than bare crying; loud cryes, strong cryes, forced out by a paroxisme of love, or an agony the soul is in. Psal. 84.2. My soul longeth, yea even fainteth for the courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh [cryeth out] for the living Lord. 7. Following hard after the Lord, Psal. 63.8. My soul followeth hard after thee. This expression is more comprehensive, it notes, both all the workings, and breakings, and breathings of the soul within, and its diligent pursuing in the use of all outward means, and pressing on after the Lord. All those labourings, and watchings, and runnings, all that holy violence, wherewith a Saint presses into the Kingdome of God. Put all this together, and you will see the po∣wer and influence the Lord hath on holy Souls, to the drawing of them after him, they are in moti∣on Heaven-vvard; desiring, thirsting, longing, cal∣ling, crying, crying out, follovving hard after him. What aileth these souls? vvhat's the mat∣ter vvith them? vvhat vvould they have? Judg. 19.23. What aileth thee said the Danites once
to Micah, that thou comest thus after us? vvhat aileth thee? Why, you have taken avvay my Gods, and vvhat have I more? VVhat aileth these crying, longing, running Souls? vvhy, 'tis after their God they cry, 'tis after their God they run, 1 King. 19.20. Go back Elisha, said once the Prophet to him, vvhen hee had cast his Mantle on him; Go back, for vvhat have I done unto thee? VVhat hast thou done? enough to hold me from going back, there vvent vertue vvith the Mantle; the Mantle fell on his heart, as vvell as his back, and drevv it after the Prophet. Should you say thus to these, go back soul, go back from follovving thy God, for vvhat hath hee done unto thee? Oh hee hath gotten mine heart; no, no; I cannot go back, hee is my God, and vvhat have I more. 2. The end guides and directs to means: Whi∣ther shall I go from thee? thou hast the words of eter∣nal life. 3. The end governs; I shall put these both toge∣ther, what is it that Governs sinners but their ends, this points them out their work, and their way, this holds them to their work, and keeps them in their way; what ever fetters, and chains, their lusts are to them 'tis their carnal ends, to which they are in bondage; these are they that Lord it over them, and hereupon it's impossible to per∣swade a sinner to make a through change of his way, till hee hath changed his ends; herein stands the conversion of a sinner, in the changing of his ends; when hee ceases to bee any longer to him∣self, to his flesh, to the world, and for a world∣ly happiness, and is brought about to pitch on
God as his portion, and happiness, to whom hee devotes, and dedicates himself; there's conversi∣on; Sin is our turning away, and conversion is turning back to our God. Beloved, consider not barely how, but to what you live; not onely what you do, but what you would have; and never count your selves truely Godly, what-ever of God bee in your way; till God bee in your heart, and eye; Hee that hath first chosen God, and therefore a Godly life; whose Godliness of life, springs forth as the fruit of his choice of the Lord, that's a Godly man. God Governs as our King, and as our End, as our King by his Soveraignty, as our End by his Ex∣cellency; by his worthiness and goodness, as our King by Laws, as our end by love; Love will find out our way, will tell all our wandrings, will check us for our sins, sweeten our labours, quick∣en us on our course, cut out our way through dangers and difficulties, and keep us in our way till wee come to the fruition of our end; There∣fore 'tis said by the Apostle, 1 Tim. 1.9. The Law is not for a Righteous man; Love will save the law a labour, the Law is not for a Righteous man, not so much at least as for sinners; not as to the coertion of it, though still as to its obligation, the constraint of Love will much supersede the co∣ertion of Laws. 4. The end, Rewards, they have their Reward. Mat. 6. that is, they have their end, the repu∣tation for devout and charitable men, was the end of their Devotion and Charity: They pray∣ed, and fasted, and gave almes, for no other end; and the obtaining that reputation, was their re∣ward.
Verily, I say unto you, they have their re∣ward. God is the reward of his Saints, Gen. 15.1. I am thy exceeding great reward, Isa. 46.4. My judgement is with the Lord, and my reward with my God. God is the reward they [shall] receive, and the reward they look to receive, Heb. 11.29. Moses had [respect] to the recompence of re∣ward. And therefore the Argument is weighty, which Christ us'd to disswade his Disciples from being in their Devotions, in their Alms-deeds, as the Pharisees and Hypocrites are; who disfigured their countenances in their fasts; who sounded a Trumpet to proclaim their Alms, Bee yee not like them, for they have their reward. The Argument was strong to the Disciples, who being men of another Spirit, could not bee satisfied with such a reward. In these two things Saints greatly differ from the men of this world; 1. They are not willing to defer their Duties till hereafter, and 2. They dread it to have their reward here, they would dispatch their work, and are willing to go upon trust for their wages: Sinners would have their wages in hand, and bee trusted for their work till hereafter; they would bee happy here, and can bee content to stay for holiness till hereafter; 'tis soon enough to bee Saints in Hea∣ven. But Oh! it would bee a dreadful word to Saints, there are thy good things; take them, these are thy reward, these are not their end; and therefore they cannot take them for their re∣ward.
Poor foolish worldlings, how are you dis-joynt∣ed? how are your weary hearts scattered through the ends of the earth? how many masters do you serve? how many matters have you to minde? you weary your selves in the greatness of your way, and what is your reward? What the fields can give, you have; what your sheep, or your oxen can give you have; what your beds, or your tables, or your houses, or your cloathes can give you have; here a little, and there a little, you get up, your beds give you ease, your houses shelter, your sports and companions pleasure, your pa∣rasites honour; and that little you can pick up here and there, this is your reward. Verily I say unto you, you have your revvard; unhappy souls▪ you are troubled and carefull about many things, for nothing; one thing is needful; and if yet yee will be wise, chuse that good part, which shall not bee taken from you. 2. This one heart hath but one thing to do, Philip. 3.13. This one thing I do. There are all things in that one thing; all things needful. How many things soever his hand findeth to do, all is but one. Hee intends in all, God. A renewed heart designs God, and is making God-wards in all hee does. What∣ever journy he goes, 'tis God is his home; whatever race he runs, 'tis God is his mark, and prize. What∣ever battel hee fights, against flesh and blood, a∣gainst principalities and powers, 'tis that hee may cut his way through all to his God. What-ever he does, hee does it for God; what-ever hee suffers, hee suffers for God. When hee hears, or fasts, or prayes, 'tis all for God. When yee fasted, did yee at all fast to me? Yes to thee, a Christian is able
to say; hee hath many things to pray for, and fast for; hee hath bread, and cloaths, and friends, and health, and safety, and liberty, to pray for; but in all, hee prayes for God. Hee entitles God to all hee hath, and marks it up for him, and he sees and enjoyes God in all hee has; hee will not own that for a mercy, that hath not God in it, and is not a foot or wing, to carry him on towards him. And therefore what-ever hee begs to himself, 'tis that he may have it for God. What hee gives, he gives to God; whom hee forgives, 'tis for the Lords sake; whether hee eats, or drinks, or works, or buyes, or sells, or what-ever else hee does, hee does it all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31. For him hee prayes, for him he waits, for him he la∣bours, for him hee suffers, for him hee lives, to him hee dies. To me to live is Christ, Phil. 1.21. according to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing I shall bee ashamed, but that with all bold∣ness, as alwayes, so now also Christ may bee magni∣fied in my body, whether it be by life or by death. This is the one thing hee intends, this is the one thing he seeks, in all, take his whole course toge∣ther, hee can say with the Apostle. This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behinde, and reaching forth unto those things that are before, I press toward the mark, for the price of the high cal∣ling of God in Christ Jesus. 3. Hee does what hee does. And that 1. Not feignedly, but really. 2. Not faintly, but heartily. 1. Really. Hee pursues this end, in a plain and
honest way. He that hath this one heart, hath but one way. Heart and life go hand in hand; he makes strait steps to his heart, and his heart makes strait steps to his feet, he doth , and he doth also . As hee looks strait on, so hee walks strait on to his mark. Hee doth not look one way, and row another. Hee is a Jacob; a plain man, a plain-dealing man; a Nathanael, in whom is no guile. Hee turns his inside outwards; his life is not a Cloak, but a Commentary on his heart. The expositours of his inward man. His end is in his heart, and his heart is in his face, in his tongue, in his duties, and all his wayes. He is no Politician. 2 Cor. 1.12. Not in fleshly wisdom; his Religion is not a blind, or a device to delude the simple, hee is down-right, and in earnest in all hee does. Hee does the same thing he seems to do; his praying is praying indeed; his fasting, and almes are such indeed; his very profession is practice; he would not believe, nor make others believe, but that hee is what hee is. Hee seeks not commendation from men, but ap∣probation with God. His design is not inordi∣nately to commend himself to the good opinion, though hee would bee made manifest in the con∣sciences of others. Hee would not bee a lye or a cheat. Hee abhorres all lying, but most of all a religious lye. He would not lye for God, much less against him; such a lye is as blasphemy to him. Hee loves not Images; hee would have a soul in all his practices. A prayer without a soul, a sacrifice without an heart, a religious carkass is an abomination to him. Hee would not make such a noble medium as Religion, to serve to so base an end, as the serving the flesh.
Hee hath other work to do than to serve times or tables; then to please himself or men; than to serve wills, or humours, or lusts; hee hath a soul, a conscience, a God to look after; he hath but one business to do, but one Master to serve; if hee be a Magistrate, he rules for God; if he bee a Minister, hee preaches for God; if he bee a Pa∣rent, he educates for God; if hee bee a Master hee governs for God; to him he dedicates himself and his house; hee writes on his doors, this is Bethel, this is none other but the house of God. If he be a childe or a servant, he obeyes in the Lord and for the Lord; he knows he hath to do with God in all hee does; when hee is dealing with men, with his friends, with his family, in his calling, in his re∣creations, in all hee hath to do with God: and hee can take comfort in nothing, but what God will take pleasure in. Thou hast no pleasure in iniqui∣ty. Thou lovest truth in the inward parts. And there's no truth in the inward parts, but when there's truth also in the outward parts: when the heart, and tongue, and wayes agree. 'Tis vain to say, mine heart is good, when the ways are naught. A false tongue, deceitful wayes: will give the lye to the heart. Hee cannot subsist, longer than hee hath smiles from heaven. Communion with God is his life, his all is in God. His heart dies, when that fountain is stopp'd. If hee cannot have clear∣ness, and boldness in the presence of God, hee can no longer look himself in the face, but blushes and hangs downs his head with shame. Hee va∣lues not either the applause, or the scorns of men, so hee may have a witness of his acceptance with God. O Lord, dost thou regard? wilt thou ac∣cept
of me? 'tis enough. Let all the world call me, Thou Fool, Thou Pharisee, Thou Hypocrite, so the Lord will say, my childe, 'tis well. 'Tis falsely spoken, 'tis foolishly, 'tis weak∣ly done; 'tis pride, 'tis singularity, 'tis scrupulo∣sity; thus the world cry; let them alone oh my soul, I will hearken what the Lord God will say; if hee saies, Thou hast been faithful; I will hearken what conscience will say, if it says well done, let all else say what they please; this is my rejoycing, mine onely rejoycing, the testimony of my conscience, that in all simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wis∣dom, but by the grace of God I had my conversation in the world. 2. Heartily. What-ever hee does for God, he does it with a good will. Hee hath cast up all his business into one, and hee is intent upon it. Hee works righteousness, as sinners work wickedness; with both hands, earnestly, Micah 7.3. Hee is reli∣gious in good earnest, hee prayes in good earnest, he hears in good earnest, hee runs in good earnest; the powers of his soul being all united in one cha∣nel, run more strongly, his many springs falling all into one stream, make a river, that bears down all bayes before it. The Psalmist prays, Psal. 86.11. Ʋnite mine heart to fear thy Name. Unite my heart to thee, and unite mine heart in it self, that it may all run toward thee. Unite my heart to fear, and so unite my heart to love thy name, unite mine heart to serve, and follow, and live to thee. As if he should have said, O my God, mine heart is di∣vided, and discomposed, scattered up and down, I know not where; my pleasures have a part, my estate hath a part, my friends have a part, my fa∣mily
hath a part, there's little or none left for God; I have too many things to fear, too many things to love, and care for, too many things to serve and follow, to follow the Lord with any strength or intention of mind. Call in all Lord, all my parts, all my powers, command their joynt and united attendance upon thee. 1 Pet. 1.13,14,15. Gird up the loyns of your mind, and bee sober, and hope to the end (in the original 'tis hope perfectly) for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. As obedient children not fashio∣ning your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance, but as hee which hath called you is holy, so bee yee holy in all manner of conversation. Gird up the loyns of your minds. Gird and bee sober, gird and hope perfectly, gird and bee obe∣dient, gird and bee holy. Here 'tis true ungirt and unblest, ungirt and unholy: the girding is the gathering in the strength of the heart to its work. Ephes. 6.14. Stand with your loyns girt. [Stand] do not gird and ungird, stand alwayes girt; call in your hearts, and hold them in; be alwaies in a readiness to every duty, in a readiness against every temptation. Oh how loose are wee! what loose praying, and loose hearing, and loose meditation, and loose walkings, do wee satisfie our selves with! our hearts are to seek, our thoughts and affections are gadding abroad, we know not where to finde them, and our work is done thereafter. Wee excuse our non-proficiency in Religion, by our many hin∣drances; by the difficulties of our work; but the great hindrance lies here, our loyns are ungirded, our hearts are not united in our work, nor intent upon it. When God and the things of eternity
are gotten so deep into the heart, when there is such a deep sense, of the weight and importance, of the things that are eternal, abiding upon us, as over-powers; carnal objects, and loosens the heart from them; when wee feel the evidence, and the consequence of these things commanding our whole soules after them, then there's Religion in earnest; then wee go on and prosper. And thus 'tis with this one heart, there are not some light touches onely upon it; God is gotten deep into it, eternity is gotten deep into it, this is all; this is all I have to minde or do. My hope, my com∣forts, my life, my soul, all hang upon this one thing; if I speed well here, I am made for ever. What have I to do in the way of Egypt, or to drink of the waters of Sihor? what have I to do in the way of Assyria? what have I to do in the way of pleasure? What have I to do in the way of the World? To build Tabernacles for my self here below, or to drink the waters of mine own Ci∣steron? How little am I concerned in the interest of this flesh? VVhat matter's it, what becomes of it, or which way it goes? My God, my God, my soul, my soul, there lies my concernment; of these let my care onely bee. Get thee behind me Satan, hold thy peace sinful flesh, keep silence worldly cares; hinder mee not, speak no more to me of hearkening to you, away from mee ye evil-doers, I will keep the Commandements of my God; Let others do what they will, run whi∣ther they please, chuse whom they will serve, what they will follow after; come my soul, follow thou the Lord, gird up thy loyns and come away; for the other world, for the other world; make
haste, linger not, let others loyter as they will, escape for thy life, look not behinde thee, get thee up to the Mountain and live. Object. One Heart, why 'tis never more two; Two men, a new man and an old, two Nations, two selfs, there are twins in the womb of every Saint; the ungodly seem more one than they, all for sin, and for Hell; all dark, all hard, all but one stone. Sol. Yet 'tis true, the Saints, and they onely have but this one heat; For, 1. The old heart is not an heart, the old self is not the self; this old man is not the man, this is not hee, that's the heart, that hath gotten the dominion, and the rule in the man. The new heart hath the dominion; though Sin as Esau, bee the first born, yet the elder must now serve the younger; the old man is but a dead man, Col. 3.3. Yee are dead, that is, your old man is dead, your sin is slain and Crucified with Christ, and when 'tis dead, you may say 'tis not. 2. The meaning plainly is, I will give them one heart; that is, a single, sincere upright heart; they shall bee no longer an Hypocritical people. If there bee something of Hypocrisie in them, yet Hypocrites they shall no longer bee; their hearts shall bee upright before mee; sincerity stands in pitching upon chusing, and giving up our hearts to God, as our chief good, and last end. When God is our all, there is perfection, and when God is our chief, there is sincerity. I say, when God is our all, when the world hath nothing left in us, to entice or draw out our souls after it, but
God carries them wholly without any the least lik∣ing, or lusting after sinful objects, there's perfe∣ction; This is not attainable here; the heart can∣not bee thus perfectly one, till corruption hath put on incorruption; But though it bee not per∣fectly, yet it may bee sincerely one, and then 'tis so, when however, the flesh hath too great an interest in it, and influence upon it, and often pulls it aside, and puts it back; yet it still bends its course Heaven wards, and that way the stream, and strength of the soul is running, the flesh will bee putting in for a part; it would have all, it would not take its turns with God; God will not take his turns with the flesh, hee will have all or none; and the flesh would not take its turnes with him; it is not contented with now and then, it would not bee served in the fields, or in the shop, or at the Table, or in the bed onely, but in the Church, in the Chamber, in the Closet; 'twould carry away all from God, but if it cannot have all, 'twill divide with God; where-ever God is served, the flesh will bee putting in for its share. The best of Christians feel too great a truth in this; their frequent humblings, and mournings, and breakings, and self-shamings before the Lord, are mostly upon this account; This is the voice of their deepest groanings, and bitterest tears; the burthens of their mournful groans. I cannot do the things that I would; when I would do good evil is present with me; with my minde I serve the Law of God, but with my flesh the Law of sin; Woe is me my soul, how am I straitned? how am I divided Whither am I hurried? wherewithall do I come before thee Lord? Oh! what halting, and heart∣less,
and distracted duties, do I serve my God withal? This flesh eats up the fat, and the best; and onely the lame, and the lean, and the sick, are left for a Sacrifice to the Lord. Woe is mee, my leanness, my leanness: my God, my God, how art thou served? how art thou robbed of thy due? these strangers are gotten into thy Sanctu∣ary, and eat up all thy pleasant things, and what have they left thee? Such are their complaints, and their very com∣plaints are their comfort, and the witness of their sincerity, whilst they can with openness of heart make their approach and appeal to God; yet thou art my Lord, thou art my God, and I will serve thee. I have chosen thee as mine heritage for e∣ver, and I will wait for thy salvation. Hear the sighing of thy prisoner, deliver thy captive; mine heart is with thee, let not this flesh intrench upon thy light, let sin no longer reign in my mortal bo∣dy; let mee have no more to do with the Throne of iniquity, unty the cords, loose the fetters, bring my soul out of prison, search mee, O Lord, and know mine heart, prove me, and know my thoughts; Is there any [way] of wickedness in mee? do I wil∣lingly go after the Commandments? Do I [regard] iniquity in mine heart? Here it lies, 'tis true, it warres, and raises tumults, and insurrections against thee; but do I resign up my self to it? is it a pleasure to mee? am I at peace with it? O Lord, thou knowest. I cannot get rid of it, I can∣not doe the things that I would, I cannot pray as I would, nor hear as I would, nor think, nor speak, nor live as I would; whither I goe, sin goes with mee; where I lodge, it lodges; If I sit still, it
abides with me; If I run from it, it follows me; I can neither rest nor work, I can do nothing for it. I can do nothing for it, and yet blessed bee thy name, this one thing I do; what I cannot at∣tain, I follow after; I cannot conquer, yet I fight against it; I wrestle with it, though it so of∣ten give mee the fall. I trust it not, though it flatter me; I love it not, though it feed mee; I prostitute not my self unto it, though it commits so many a rape upon mee; my heart is with thee Lord, my foot is making after thee; I groan, I travel in pain, waiting for thy redemption; till I die I vvill not give over. I will die fighting, I will die hoping, I vvill die praying, Save me, O Lord, make no long tarrying, O my God. And thus you have the description of this one heart. It pitches on one end, and God is that end. It gives him the place of the end, hee is its first and last. It gives him the power of the end; this one thing the obtaining of God to be theirs, draws them on, guides, governs them, in their whole course, and is accepted by them as their onely and exceeding great reward. This instructs them, this rules, and encourages them, calls them off from sin, calls them on to duty, carries them out in suffering; all their powers are united in this one business; all their arguments are resolved into this one argu∣ment; all their rewards are summ'd up in this one reward. God shall bee glorified, and therein my soul shall bee satisfied; God shall bee mine, and glory shall bee his. In all this wee see what this one heart means, but oh how little of this Grace have wee received? how many hearts have wee! how many gods have
wee, to divide these hearts betwixt them? how small a corner. How low a place, must the Lord take up with us if hee will have any at all? how often is hee made to stand aside, or to stoop to a lust, God made to give place to the devil? Is God our All indeed, have wee none else to please, have wee none else to serve? have wee no portion, no in∣heritance, no other God but the Lord? Is hee out Alpha and Omega, our first and our last? our spring and our ocean, our summe and our scope? the rise and the rest of all our motions? what-ever our tongues speak, do our hearts also and our lives say, To mee to live is Christ? none but God? none but Christ? nothing but heaven, and glory? when wee are driving so hard for our flesh, for our pride, for our ease, for our gain, when wee are so busie this vvay, and so hearty and so zealous this vvay; vvhen these must have so great a share in our Re∣ligion, Is this still the voice, To me to live is Christ? Oh how little power hath the Lord vvith us! hovv far is it that the single interest of God vvill carry our souls? hovv little is done purely for God? wee have often many strings to our bow: there are some services, wherein there is something coming to the flesh, as well as to the name of God. Some credit, or honour, some outward ad∣vantage to bee gotten by Religion; but when all the other strings crack, but this one; when there's nothing to move us but God, oh how weak do our motions grow? The flesh often goes partner with God; there's a double trade driving in the same actions; a trade for heaven, and a trade earth together; there's something to bee gotten
by our religion, besides what's coming to God; there are fields, and vineyards, and olive-yards, friends, and honours, and preferments; as it sometimes falls out, when godliness is in the rising side; and when 'tis thus, we go smoothly and vi∣gorously on. Come see the zeal that I have for the Lord of Hosts. But when the interest of God, and the flesh divide, and part asunder; when the flesh is like to bee a loser by our Religion; when God puts us on such duty, as will spend upon the flesh, and eat out, and devour its interest; when our hearts tell us as Deborah did Barak, Judg. 4. This will not bee for thine honour, or this will not bee for thine ease, or thy safety; then what be∣comes of our zeal? oh how heavily do we then drive on? how seldome is it that this word (yet God shall bee glorified) will ballance all the pre∣judices, and confute all the cross reasonings of the flesh, and carry us on our way, without and against it. How little hath the Lord of the government of us? if hee doth govern as a King, yet how little, as our end? how little doth goodness govern? how little will love do with us? wee must have ri∣gour, and severity; wee must have spurres, and goads, and rods, and stripes, and scorpions too, and all little enough, to drive us back from those other gods which wee have chosen, and to bring us on after the Lord. If the Law be not made for the righteous; if they need not a Law, then what are we, whom a Law will not suffice? if com∣mands, threatnings, terrours, penalties, judgments, can do no more upon us; if wee are yet so loose, and so carnal, and so earthly, and so froward, and
so false, and so formal, under severest discipline; if wee will not bee whip'd into more humility, spirituallity, self-denial, watchfulness, care, activity, zeal; but are such drones, and such sleep∣ers, such earth-worms, and such sensuallists still, under all the corrections and compulsions of the law; oh what should we be, did wee want a law? were there nothing but love, to restrain us from sin, and constrain and quicken us to duty? Christians, have wee but one thing to do, in all wee do? sometimes wee are busie in doing no∣thing. Though there bee a Prayer in our mouths, the praises of God in our mouths; Christ, hea∣ven, holiness, glory, a new heart, a new life upon our tongues; there's nothing within; no prayer, no praise, no Christ, nor heaven; what have we been often doing, in the closet, in the family, in the congregation, when wee seemed to have been praying? nothing, nothing, but sow∣ing wind and good words. Sometimes we have too many things in our hearts; what a world of carnal devices, and fleshly projects have wee wrapt up in the garment of our Religion? Peter's sheet had not a more heterogeneous miscellany of creatures; four-footed beasts, wilde beasts, creep∣ing things, and fowls of the air; than our religious duties have of designes and ends. Wee have men to please, our pride, our bellies, to offer sacri∣fice to; wee bring our farms, and our oxen, and our trades before the Lord; are not our hearts, which should bee the houses of prayer, the houses of merchandise? are wee not talking, or pursuing, or in a journey, or a sleep, or driving bargains? O Christians, if wee were privy to one anothers
hearts, as God is privy to them; what abomi∣nations should wee see, brought into the holy places? What monsters would our most sacred services appear? VVhich whilst the out-side is onely viewed, are applauded and admired. Is this our singleness of heart? Oh! for shame, and blushing, and confusion of face; Oh! for a Vail to hide such hearts from the jealous eyes of the ho∣ly God, a varnish a fair out-side, hides all from men; but nothing but a dark Vail, of shame and sorrow, and tears, and repentance; a Vail dipt in Blood, in the blood of Christ; will hide them from the eyes of the Lord. Oh how little plainness and singleness of heart is there, in our ordinary course; in our dealings and conversings in the VVorld? how little faith, or truth is there in us? how little trust is there to us? what doubling, what deceitful dealing, de∣frauding, over-reaching, undermining, are wee guilty of? how false are wee in our promises? how insignificant are our words? what an uncer∣tain sound do they give? our yea may often stand for nay, and our nay for yea, Psal. 12.2. They speak vanity, every one with his neighbour, with flattering lips and a double heart do they speak; trust yee not in a friend, put not confidence in a guide. Blessed bee God, the Lord hath a Generation, on whom this cannot bee charged. Children that will not lye, nor deceive; though Satan and this evil world, binde up all in a bundle; they are all naught, they are all false, vain boasters, and deceitful workers, there's none up-right, no not one; but thanks bee to God, Satan is a lyer; the
accuser of the Brethren, is a false accuser. God hath his children that will not lye. But woe bee to those professours by reason of whom the offence cometh. Christians, hath God promised to give you one heart? Let it bee once said, this day is this Scrip∣ture fulfilled; O may you bee the accomplishment of this good word. Hath God promised to give you one heart? Do not you say, but I will not take it; two are better than one: I have found so much the sweet of deceit, that there's no life like it; Hath God said, I will give one heart? let not a∣ny one among you say, But I fear he will not. Make not the promise of God of none effect, either by your impiety or unbelief: Doth God promise to give this one heart? hee that promised it, doth also require it. Bee thy self Christian: Let it bee said thou art what thou art, bee true, bee but one; have but one heart, and let thy one heart have but one tongue, but one face; and but one thing to do. Beware of hypocrisie, beware of carnal policy; make not thy God to serve thy flesh; call not the serving of thy flesh, a serving of God, and make not thy serving of God to bee a serving of the flesh. Bee not divided betwixt God and the World: O how easie would our lives bee, did we finde our whole souls running one way? taking up w th God as the adequate object of all our po∣wers? the marke of all our motions, and the re∣ward of all our labours? did all our streams emp∣ty themselves into this Ocean, and all our lines meet in this one center? Did God onely draw and allure our hearts, and the sincerity of our hearts, give motion to all our wheels? Guide our eyes,
govern our tongues, order our steps, animate our duties, direct and quicken us in all our goings? Oh how sweet, oh how beautiful, were such a life? the Sympathy betwixt our hearts and end, there's sweetness; the harmony of our hearts and waies, there's beauty. O how sweet are the drawings of love, the free and full closure of our Spirits with God, dissolving themselves into his Will acquies∣sing, resting satisfyed in his goodness, is a sweet∣ness which no man knows, but hee that tastes it; the harmony of the power of the soul within its self of its motions and actions in the life, there's the beauty, which will eclipse the glory of the world. Christian bee it thus with thee, and thou hast the blessing, that covenant blessing, which the Lord hath promised, in saying, I will give them one heart. CHAP. XII. An Heart of Flesh. 4. AN Heart of Flesh, Ezek. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. The old heart is a stone; cold as a stone, dead as a stone, hard as a stone; but I will take away the stone, and give an heart of flesh. An heart of flesh, is a soft and tender heart; Flesh can feel any thing thats contrary to it, puts it to pain; Sin makes it smart; it cannot kick, but it is against the pricks, by its rebellion, and
resistance against the Lord, it receives a wound; it cannot hit, but it hurts it self. A soft hand gets nothing by laying on, on an hedge of thorns. A soft heart when it hath been medling with sin, is sure to smart for it. It can neither escape the pain, nor yet endure it: and what it cannot bear, 'twill take warning to avoid it. Flesh will bleed. A soft heart will mourn, and melt, and grieve, when hard hearts are moved at nothing. Flesh will yield. Its apt to receive im∣pressions. The power of God will awe it; his justice fear it; his mercy melt it; his holiness humble it, and leave the stamp, and image of it upon it. And as the Attributes, so the Word and Works of God, will make sign upon it. Who sets a seal upon a stone? or what print will it re∣ceive? upon the wax, the print will abide. God speaks once and twice, but man, hardned man will not regard it. Neither his Word, nor his rod, nei∣ther his speaking, nor his smiting will make any signe on such hearts. 'Tis the heart of flesh that hears and yields. And with such hearts the Lord delights to bee dealing. Acts 28. The heart of this people is waxed gross; they will not hear, they will not understand; and the next word is, away to the Gentiles, they will hear. Hee will no more write his Law on tables of stone: hee'l write in flesh; there the impression will take, and go the deeper: and therefore, where-ever hee intends to write, hee prepares his table: makes this stone flesh, and then engraves upon it. Par∣ticularly this tenderness admits of a double di∣stinction.
1. Respecting the object of it: so there is a ten∣derness, 1. Of Sin. 2. Of Duty. 3. Of Suffering. 1. Of Sin; and tha'ts twofold, such as disco∣vers it self, ante factum. post factum. 1. Ante factum. Or before the commissiion. Whilest it is under a temptation, or feels the first motion to sin. A tender heart startles, starts back at the sight of a sin, as at the sight of a devil, Gen. 39.9. How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? the manner of the speech, presents Joseph as a man in a fright, startled at the ugliness of the motion. So David, when hee had an opportunity, and a temptation to slay Saul, 1 Sam. 26.11. rejects it with an absit. God for∣bid. The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed. And that not onely at the higher and greater, but it resists the little ones, the smallest of sins. Is it not a little one? is no plea with it. Little or great, 'tis a sin, and that's enough. 2. Post factum. After the Commission; if it hath been brought on upon sin, yet it cannot go out with it. The skirt of Saul's garment, was too heavy for David's heart to bear. His heart smote him ptesently, 1 Sam. 24.5. Sin in the review, looks dreadfully. Its pleasant flowers quickly turn to thorns; it pricks the heart how much soever it
pleas'd the eye. It ordinarily enters by the eye; and often runs out the same way it came in; runs out in tears. When hee thought thereon, hee wept. At least, it warns, and makes more watchful af∣ter. Thou seest what 'tis, take heed; take it for a warning, and do no more. The pain of sin, if it do not force a tear, 'twill set a watch. 2. Of duty. A tender heart will neither slight a sin, nor neglect a duty. It's loth to grieve and offend, and careful to serve and please the Lord. It would not that he should suffer by it, nor so much as lose his due. It watches against sin, and unto du∣ty. It cares how to please the Lord, and its care is tender. It would not displease by its neglects or per∣formances; all must bee done that ought, and as it ought to be done. It will neither stand out with its offering, nor will it offer an unclean thing. It considers not onely what, but how. Both mat∣ter and manner, substance and circumstance, all must bee right, or 'tis not at ease. It will keep time, and as much as may bee, keep touch with the Lord in every point. It is not satisfied that it prayes sometimes, it would not lose a praying time. God will not, and it cannot lose a duty. It would neither lose by non-performance, nor lose what is performed. It would neither leave undone, nor do amiss; any failing, not onely in the matter, but in the principle, end, affection, intention; any failing pains. 3. In point of suffering. A soft heart will not bee careful what, or how much, but why, and up∣on what account, hee suffers. Will neither sinful∣ly shun the cross, nor run upon it unwarrantably. He waits for a call, and then follows. Hee is pa∣tient
under the hand of the Lord, but not insen∣sible; can be touched with an affliction, though not offended at it. The hand of the Lord hath touched mee. Hee suffers more than his own, his brethrens sufferings. His brethrens burthens, all lie on his shoulders. Hee weeps in their sor∣rows, bleeds in their wounds, his heart is bound in their chains. As the care, so the trouble of all the Churches, come daily upon him. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? hee espouses all the sufferings of Christ as his own. In all his afflictions hee is afflicted. 2. Tenderness may bee distinguished in respect of the subject of it; and so there is a tender∣ness of the conscience. the will. the affections. 1. Tenderness of conscience stands in these three things. 1. Clearness of Judgment. 2. Quickness of sight. 3. Uprightness or faithfulness. 1. Clearness of judgment. When its well in∣structed, and understands the rule; and can thence discern betwixt good and evil. Heb. 5.14. There is a tenderness that proceeds from cloudi∣ness; scrupulosity; that fears every thing, stumbles at straws, starts at shaddows; makes sins; picks quarrels at duties; and so sometimes dare not please, for fear of offending God. This is the sickness, or soreness of conscience; not its sound∣ness. 'Tis the sound conscience that is truly tender.
2. Quickness of sight, and watchfulness. I sleep, but my heart waketh. It can espie the least sins, and smallest duties. It can see sin in the very temptation; it can discover the least sin un∣der the fairest face, and the least duty, under the foulest vizor. Call it singularity, nicety, cloud it with reproaches; yet conscience can discover light shining through all the clouds; duty within, what∣soever unhandsom face it bee presented in, the former stands in consciences understanding the rule, as was said, this in strait applying the rule to cases; and distinguishing of them by it. The truly tender hath his eyes in his head; and his eyes open, to discover and discern all that comes, bee it good or evil, little or great. If but a thought comes in, what comes there, saies con∣science? what art thou? a friend or an enemy? whence art thou? from God, or from beneath? 'twill examine whatever knocks, before any free admission. O what a croud of evils do thrust in∣to loose and careless hearts; the devil comes in in the croud, and is never discovered. If the eye bee either dim, or asleep, there's entrance for any thing. Little do wee think oft-times, who hath been with us, what losses and mischiefs wee have sustained, while our hearts have been asleep; which had they been wakeful, and watchful, might have been prevented. 3. Uprightness, and faithfulness. Which di∣scovers it self, 1. In giving charge concerning duty. 2. In giving warning of sin. 3. In giving check for sin when committed.
1. In giving charge concerning duty, look to it soul, there's a duty before thee, which God calls thee to; do not say, 'tis no great hurt to let it alone, 'tis no great hurt to do it, it is questiona∣ble, whether it bee a duty or no? Many wiser than I think otherwise; do not say, 'tis a nicety, 'tis but a punctilio, 'tis meere folly, and precise∣ness; and there will bee no end of standing upon such small matters; see to it, 'tis thy duty, be∣ware thou neglect it not, the baulking of the least duty, is the neglecting of the great God of Glo∣ry. 2. In giving warning of Sin; Take heed to thy self, sin lyes at the door, thou art under a temp∣tation, the Devil is entring upon thee; do not say, 'tis but a little sin; as little as 'tis, there's Death and Hell in the bowels of it, look to it, 'tis sin, have thou nothing to do with it, keep thy self pure, and though it run upon thee, shake it off. 3. After commission, it gives check for it; re∣proving, judging, and lashing the soul for it, where hast thou been Gehazi? say not thou hast been no where; went not this heart with thee and saw thee, running out after thy covetousnesse, gad∣ding after thy pleasures, feeding thy pride, dan∣dling thy lusts, playing the Hypocrite, play∣ing the Harlot from thy God, pampring thy flesh, pleasing thine appetite; and where hast thou been? What hast thou done soul? think not to excuse or mince the matter, it cannot be excused; thou hast sinned against thy God, and now bear thy shame. This is our heart smiting of us, 2 Sam. 24. Our hearts condemning of us, 1 John 3.20. If our hearts
condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knoweth all things. 2. Tendernesse of the Will, that stands in its flex∣iblenesse, and pliableness unto the Will of God. And this is that tenderness wherein chiefly stands the blessing of a soft heart; an hard heart is stub∣born and obstinate; thy neck is as an Iron sinew, and thy brow Brasse. Thou wilt not bee rul'd, there's no bending thee, or turning thee out of thy course, thy Iron is too hard for the fire, it will not bee melted, and for the Hammer, it will not bee broken; there's no dealing with thee, thou art an untractable piece, thou wilt go neither led nor driven; thine heart is set in thee to do evil, thy will is set upon sin, and thou art set upon thine own will. The word which thou hast spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, wee will not do, but wee will do, whatever proceeds out of our own mouth; Jer. 44.16,17. Wee will do what we will do; who is Lord over us? Psal. 12. and Jer. 2.25. Thou saidst there is no hope: no, for wee have loved strangers, and after them we [will] go, come what will of it, say what thou wilt against it; Be silent Scriptures, hold thy peace, Conscience, 'tis to no purpose to speak more, there is no hope of pre∣vailing; wee are at a point, wee will take our own course. These are hard hearts, stubborn, obstinate hearts. When the Iron sinew is broken, when the re∣bellion and stubbornnesse of the Spirit is subdued, and tamed, and made gentle, and pliable, then it becomes a tender heart. There may bee some tenderness in the Con∣science, and yet the will bee a very stone; and
as long as the will stands out, there is no bro∣ken heart. Conscience may bee scared and frigh∣ted, Conscience may fly upon the Sinner; what dost thou mean soul? whither are thy rebellions carrying thee? look to thy self, hearken or thou wilt bee lost e're thou art aware. But however, God hath gotten conscience on his side, yet the Devil still rides the Will; and there sin takes up its rest. There's a double resting of sin in the soul, In Peace. In Power. 1. In Peace, when it dwells and rules in the soul without disturbance, or contradiction; when it carries all smoothly before it; when God lets it alone, and conscience speaks not a word against it; When notwithstanding those Armies of lusts, fighting against the soul, there's not so much as one weapon lift up against them; not a prayer, nor a tear, nor a wish for freedome; nor the least fear concerning the issue; this is the most dread∣ful hardness. 2. In Power, When though it can have no Peace, yet it hath still a Place in the heart. Though it can have no quiet, but conscience is still quar∣relling with it, and warning it away; yet it still holds its power over the Will, the Master of the house, is content to bee its Servant, O how ma∣ny persons are there, even amongst the Professors of Religion, who cannot sin in quiet, they are proud, or passionate, or intemperate, or covetous or false in their words, in their dealings; they are formal, and hypocritical, and slight, in their du∣ties; but they cannot go out with it with any quiet.
Conscience smites them for it, they feel many a pang, and deadly twinge in their heart; insomuch that sometimes they cry, and groan, and roar in their spirits; O for redemption, O for delive∣rance from this false, this proud, this covetous and wicked heart; and yet after all this, the Will re∣mains a captive still; Sin holds its power there; though it cannot carry it on in peace, though it cannot bee proud, or play the Hypocrite, or be covetous, or an oppressour, without some galls, and gripes in the soul; yet on it goes, the same trade is kept up, the same course is held on. God commands, cast yee out, cast yee out, come off from all your wickednesse, and evil waies, and I will receive you; No, though Conscience would, the Will cannot come, whatever rend∣ings, and tearings; whatever terrours and torments, and worryings, such souls are at any time under, whatever stings, and plagues, and fires, they find their sins to be in their souls and bones; what-ever wishings and wouldings they wring forth, that they were well rid of these plagues; whilest the will is still for them, there's an hard heart; dam∣nably hard; there's none of this heart of flesh. When the will is once broken loose from sin; when it will be content to let all go, and give up its self to the dominion of the Lord, there's a bro∣ken heart. Now speak Lord, and I will hear. Now call Lord, and I will answer. Now com∣mand me, impose on mee what thou wilt, I will submit. None but the Lord; none but Christ; no other Lord, nor lover. I am thine Lord, thine own, do with thine own, demand of thine own, what-ever thou pleasest. What God will have
mee bee, vvhat God vvill have mee do, that vvill I do, and bee. No longer vvhat I vvill, but the Will of the Lord bee done, When 'tis come to this, there's a tender heart; there's the blessing of a broken spirit; the stone hee hath taken away, hee hath given an heart of flesh. Christians, never trust to tears; never talk of terrours, trouble of conscience; of the passio∣nate workings, and meltings, which at any time you feel upon your spirits; though there be some∣thing in these, as you shall see more by and by; yet these are not the things you are to look at. A subdued, tractable, willing, obedient heart, that's the tender heart. Isa. 1.19. If yee bee willing and obedient, yee shall eat the good of the Land; but if yee refuse and rebel, yee shall bee slain with the sword; the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. 3. Tenderness of the affections. I shall instance onely in three, viz. Love. Fear. Sorrow. The tenderness of love is seen in its Benevolence. Jealousie. 1. In its benevolence. Our goodness extends not to the Lord, but our good will does. Our love can add nothing to him; can a man bee profitable to God? Job 22. If thou bee righteous what givest thou to him? chap. 35.7. Yet though it can adde
nothing, it would not that any thing be detracted from him; whilest hee can have no more, it would that hee should have his own; all that is due; his due praise, his due honour, and homage, and worship, and subjection, from every creature; it would have no abatement, not the least spot or stain upon all his glory. What's an affront to God, is an offence to love. Love beareth all things, saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. all things from God, all things from men. And yet there are two things, the love of God cannot bear; his dishonour. his displeasure. 1. His dishonour. Love would have God to bee God; to live in the glory of his Majesty, in the hearts and eyes of all the world. His reproach is grievous to him that loves, for this is the cloud that takes God out of sight. Hee loves and ho∣nours, and would that God should bee loved and honoured of all; hee fears, and would that the whole world should fear him. Hee would receive in his own breast, every arrow that's shot against his maker; hee would that his own name, and soul might stand betwixt his God, and all reproach, and dishonour. Hee would bee vile, so the Lord may bee glorious; so God may increase, he's con∣tent to decrease. Hee's not so tender of his own heart, and bowels, as of the holiness of his God. Hee would suffer, and die, and bee nothing, ra∣ther than that God should not bee all in all. Hee would rather never think, nor speak, nor bee, ra∣ther, then not bee, in word, and thought, and life, holiness to the Lord. But O what, or where
would hee bee, rather than his own hand should bee lift up against him? To see the Lord robb'd of his holiness, wrong'd in his wisdome, or his truth, or his soveraignty; to see sin, that devil; to see the world, that Idol, set up in the throne, and the God of glory made to stand aside as insignificant; to hear that blas∣phemy, God is not worth this lust, or not worthy this labour, (and what is said less in every sin) is a sword in his breast. The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon mee. Love hath tasted of God, it hath fed on his fulness, it hath its nourishment from his sweetness, it hath been warmed in his bosom, all his goodness hath pas∣sed before it; upon this it lives and feeds; and ha∣ving found and felt what the Lord is, its impati∣ent that all this goodness should be clouded or be∣lyed. Love kindled from heaven, is keen; and the keen is a tender edge; the least touch of what offends, will turn it. Lam. 1.20. I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, mine heart is [turned] with∣in mee, for I have grievously rebelled, Psal. 42.3. My tears have been my meat, continually, while they daily say unto me, where is thy God! Where is that care, and help, and that salvation of thy God, thou trustedst in! thy God is not such an one, as thou boastedst him to bee: when I remember, when I hear such things, my soul is poured out within mee. Love is large; hee that loves hath a large heart, hee can never receive, or do too much; hee would have all hee can, and he would give all hee hath to the Lord. Hee's tender how any thing bee withheld that is due, how any thing bee wasted elsewhere, that might bee useful to the Lord.
2. His displeasure. The displeasure of men it bears and rejoyces; the wrath and rage of Sathan, it bears and triumphs? though all the world, and hell to boot, bee displeased, and provoked, so God smiles, 'tis well enough. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon mee, and mine heart is glad, Psal. 4. Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled, Psal. 30.7. Let him correct mee, but O not in fury; let him smite, but not frown; let him kill mee, so hee will but love mee. And though hee smite, though hee kill mee, yet will I love and trust in him. O my God, let mee rather die in thy love, then live in thy displeasure; there's life in that death, this life is death to me. Let mee not be dead whilest alive; turn away thine anger which kills my heart. It is impatient of divine displeasure, and thence 'tis grievous to it that it does displease; thence it quarrels with sin, and falls so foul with it self for it. Is this thy kindness to thy friend? lovest thou God, soul? what and yet provokest him thus dai∣ly? love, and yet neglect to seek, and follow thy God? love, and yet so lame, and so slow, and so heavy, and so sparing in thy services to him? Is this all thy love will do? not deny thine ease, or thy pleasure, or thy liberty, or thine appetite, or thy companion, for the sake of the Lord? chuse rather to pleasure thy friend, or thy flesh, than to please God? Is this thy love? Is this thy kindness to thy friend? O false heart, O unworthy, un∣worthy spirit; how canst thou look thy God in the face? how canst thou say I love thee, when thine heart is no more with him?
2. In its Jealousie. Hee that loves the Lord is jealous; and Jealousie hath a tender edge; hee is Jealous, not of, but for the Lord, not of his God, but of himself; least any thing should steal away his heart from God. Love would bee chaste, would not bestow it self elsewhere: and yet is in great Jealousie it may bee enticed and drawn away. Hee that loves the Lord, there is not any thing, whether Wife, or Childe, or Friend, or E∣state, or Esteem, that gets near his heart, but hee's jealous of them, least they steal it away: Get you down, keep you lower, this heart is neither yours, nor mine; O my God, 'tis thine, 'tis thine Lord, take it wholly to thee, keep it to thy self, let no o∣ther Lovers bee sharers with thee. 2. There's a tenderness of fear; The tender heart is a trembling heart, the tenderness of fear is manifested in its Suspition. Caution. 1. In its Suspition, the fearful are suspitious; they look farther then they see, hee that is in dread, will bee in doubt, what may befall him, hee suspects a surprizal; every bush is a theef, every bait, he doubts may have an hook under. There is a foolish, and a causeless fear; and there is a prudent, and an holy fear; this fear is a principle of wis∣dome, Psal. 111.10. Prov. 22.3. The prudent man fore-seeth the evil, but fools go on; the snare is never nearer, than to the secure; bold ven∣turous sinners never want woe, the Devil may spare his cunning, when hee hath to do with such; nothing that looks like sin, offers it self to a tender
heart, but hee presently suspects it; every plea∣sant morsel, every pleasant cup, every pleasant companion that comes; any thing that tickles, and gratifies the flesh, hee looks through it e're hee will touch with it, least it betray his soul from God; there may bee a snare in the dish, a snare in my cup, a snare in my company; and what if there should? he feeds himself with fear, dwells, walks, converses, works, recreates himself, vvith a trembling heart, and jealous eye. 2. In its Caution; Fear is warie; some Com∣manders have set their scout watches unarmed, that fear might make them watchful, a fearful Christian, will take heed what, and whom hee trusts; hee dares not trust himself in such com∣pany, as may bee a snare unto him, hee dares not trust his heart among temptations, hee'l keep the Devil at a distance, hee will not come near where his Nets do lye. Blessed is hee that thus feareth alwaies? O the unspeakable mischief! O the multitudes of sins that wee run upon, through our secure hearts; I never thought of it, I never dreamed of any such danger; Oh I am under∣mined, I am over-reach'd, I am surprized; my foot is in the Snare, the grin hath taken mee by the heel, my soul is among Lyons; Sin hath got∣ten hold on mee; mine heart is gone e're I was a∣ware, the enemy hath come in and carryed it a∣way; hath given it to lust, to the world, to plea∣sure, to divide it amongst themselves, my faith hath failed, my conscience is defiled, my love is grown cold, my grace withered, my com∣forts wasted, my peace broken; and my God, O! where is hee become? Woe is mee, the evil that
I feared [not] is come upon mee, had I feared, I had not fallen: O that I had been wise, had kept my watch, had stood upon my guard; had I thought, had I thought, I had escaped all this danger: O Christians, bee wise in season, and take heed of the fools, too late [had I wist] 3. There's a tenderness of sorrow; Sorrow is the melting of the heart, the stone dissolved, sorrow is the wound of the heart, a wound is tender, love is tender, and therefore Godly sorrow, which is the sorrow of love; you may call it a love sickness, love is both the pain and pleasure of a mourning heart, 'tis love that wounds, and love that heals; it is both the weapon and the oyle; this sorrow hath its joy, the melted is the most joyful heart; 'tis love that makes it sad, it therefore weeps be∣cause it loves, and 'tis love that makes it glad too; It therefore joyes because in its sorrows, it sees it loves. 'Tis love that makes the wound, the matter of this sorrow being love abus'd, what hast thou done Soul? who hast thou despised? a∣gainst whom hast thou lift up thy self? thou hast sinned, thou hast sinned, and hast thereby smit∣ten and grieved thy God that loves thee, and whom thou lovest; Thou hast but one friend in Heaven, and earth, and him thou hast abused; to pleasure thy lust, thou hast pierced thy Lord, thou hast transgressed his Commandements, and trampled up∣on his Compassions; hast broken his Bonds, and kick'd at his Bowels; his greatness, and his goodness; his Law and his very Love hath been despised by thee; him who loved thee hast thou smitten. Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? O vile ungratious, unkinde, unthankful, unnatural heart; what hast thou done?
Put all this now together, and you have the heart of flesh which the Covenant promises, a Tender Heart; an heart that is tender of sin and duty, that carefully shuns sin, or is sure to smart for it; that neither slights sin, nor duty; that sayes not of the one or the other; 'tis but a little one; that can feel sufferings, but not fret at them, a Tender Conscience; that will neither winck at sin, nor excuse the sinner, that will not hold the sinner guiltless; nor say unto the wicked, thou art righteous; that will not bee smitten, but it will smite again, that will give due warning, and due correction, a flexible tractable heart; that will not resist and rebel; that sayes unto the Lord, what wilt thou have mee to do? and will not say of a∣ny thing, hee will have; any thing but this. A wil∣ling, ductile heart, stiffe against nothing but sin, that a word from Heaven, will lead to any thing. An Heart of Love; that bears good will to the Lord, and all that hee does or requires; in which good will lies, radically every good work; that saies not of any duties or sufferings, this is too great, or of any sin, this is nothing; that would bee any thing, or nothing; So God may bee all. That would rather bee displeased, than displease; that is not displeased, where God is pleased. A trembling Heart, that fears more than it sees, and flies from what it fears, whom fear makes to beware. A melting Heart, a mourning heart, that wounds it self in the wounds it hath given to the Lord, and his Name; that can grieve in love, and can love and grieve, where it cannot weep. In summe, 'tis an heart that can feel, that can bleed, that can weep;
or at least that can yeild and stoop, where it can∣not weep, nor feel but little, that will easily bee commanded, where it is not sensibly melted, this is a soft heart, this is the heart of flesh; I will take away the stone, and give them an heart of flesh. Oh what a blessing is such an heart! what a plague is an hard heart! oh what prisoners are the men of this evil world: in prison under Sathan, in prison under sin, bound under a curse, shut up under unbelief, and impenitence: the hard heart, is the iron-gate, that shuts them in that they can∣not get out. Rom. 2. Oh what an hospital is this world become: of blind, and lame, and sick, and creeples, and wounded creatures! whence are all the calamities and distresses that befall them, but from the hardness of their hearts? the stone in their hearts breeds all their diseases, brings all their calamities: hath blinded their eyes, and broken their bones, and wasted their estates: there is not one misery that befalls them, but they may write up over it, this is the hardness of my heart. Oh what a Sodom is this world become, for wickedness as well as for wrath: what drunkenness, what adulteries, what oaths, what blasphemies, and all sorts of mon∣strous sins do every where abound! whence is all this, but from the hardness of mens hearts! if you say 'tis from other causes: 'tis from unbelief, from ignorance, from impotence, from tempta∣tions; let it bee granted: yet still 'tis from hard∣ness of heart. They are wilfully ignorant, wilful∣ly weak, vvilfully run into temptations; they shut their eyes, and stop their ears, they wil not see, they will not believe. Oh what losses do they sustain!
how many Sabbaths are lost? how many Sermons are lost? how many reproofs, counsels, correcti∣ons are lost? a Gospel lost, and souls thereby like to bee lost for ever! oh what prodigies are they become? under all this sin and misery? and yet merry, jolly, laughing, and singing, and sporting, and feasting, and braving it out, as if nothing ail'd them. Feeling nothing of all that is come upon them, and fearing nothing of all that is coming. Warn them, reprove them, beseech them, 'tis all but preaching to a stone. It may bee you have sometimes wondred, to see a com∣pany of thieves in prison, to bee drinking, and carousing, and milking merry, when they know that in a few daies they must bee brought out, and hanged. When thou wondrest at these, wonder at thy self. What bitter complaints do wee some∣times hear, even from the best of Saints! oh this hard heart, oh this stubborn spirit; I cannot mourn, I cannot stoop, I cannot submit. Isa. 63.17. Why hast thou hardned our heart from thy fear? Or why hast thou left us, or given us up to an hard heart? why hast thou not softened, and humbled, and broken us? thou hast humbled us, and wee are not humbled; broken us, and wee are not broken; thou hast broken our land, broken our peace, broken our backs, but the stone is not yet broken; oh for one breach more Lord; our hearts, our hearts, let these bee once broken; our streets mourn, the Cities of our solemnities mourn, the wayes of Sion mourn, oh when wilt thou give us a mourning spirit? Oh what sorrow-bitten souls are the Saints, for want of sorrow! I mourn Lord, I lament, I weep,
but 'tis because I cannot mourn, or lament as I should; If I could mourn as I ought, I could bee comforted; if I could weep, I could rejoyce; if I could sigh, I could sing; if I could lament I could live; I die, I dye, mine heart dies with∣in mee, because I cannot cry: I cry Lord, but not for sin, but for tears for sin; I cry Lord, my ca∣lamities cry, my bowels cry, my bones cry, my soul cries, my sins cry, Lord, for a broken heart; and behold, yet I am not broken. The Rocks rent, the Earth quakes, the Hea∣vens drop, the Clouds weep, the Sun will blush, the Moon bee ashamed, the foundations of the earth will tremble at the presence of the Lord, but this heart will neither break nor tremble; O for a broken heart! If this were once done, might my soul have this wish, thenceforth my God might have his Will; what would bee hard, if my heart were tender? Labour would bee easie, pains would bee a pleasure, burthens would bee light; Neither the Command nor the Cross would bee any longer grievous, nothing would bee hard but sin. Fear, where art thou? come and plough upon this Rock; Love where art thou? come and thaw this Ice, come and warm this dead lump; come and enlarge this straitned spirit, then shall I run the way of his Commandements. Oh Brethren, how little, how very little of this tenderness is there to bee found amongst the most of Christians? The sacrifice of God, is a bro∣ken heart; Oh how far must the Lord go to finde himself such a Sacrifice? wee do but cast stones up to Heaven, when wee lift up our hearts; 'Tis a wonder, that such hearts as wee carry do not
break themselves; that our marble weeps not; that if nothing else will do it, our hardness doth not make us relent; that wee should so labour un∣der, and complain of, and yet not bee sick of the Stone. Broken hearts, yeilding and relenting spirits, tender consciences, Oh where are they? afraid of sin? tender of transgressing? or mourning under it? when shall it once bee? our lusts no more broken? our pride, our passion, our envy, our earthliness no more broken? So venturous on temp∣tation, so bold on sin, such liberty taken to transgress, such mincing, and palliating, and ex∣cusing of sin, as wee finde: Is this our broken∣ness? wee are tender, 'tis true; but of what? of dishonouring God, of abusing Grace, of neglect∣ing Duty; of defiling Conscience, of vvounding of our Souls? No, 'tis of our flesh, that wee are so tender; tender of labour, tender of trouble, tender of our carkasses, of our credits, of our Names and reputations, a tender shoulder, a tender hand, a tender foot; they can bear nothing, nor do nothing; nothing can touch our flesh, nothing can touch our Idols; our ease, or our estates, but wee shrink, and smart, and are put to pain. God may bee smitten and wee feel it not; the Gospel may bee smitten, the Church may bee smitten, conscience may bee smitten, and it moves us not; Wee can fear an affliction, fear a reproach, Oh did wee so much fear a temptation, or a sin! wee cannot want bread but wee feel it, wee cannot want cloathes, or an house, or a friend, but wee feel it; Wee cannot want our sleep, our quiet, our pleasure, our respects from men, but
wee feel it, any thing that pinches upon our flesh pierces our hearts. Wee cannot pine, or languish in our bodies, but wee feel it; a feaver; or an ague, or a consumption, or a dropsie, or any bodily sickness; Oh it makes us sick at heart; a froward yoak-fellow, an unthrifty servant, an ill neighbour, a scoffe, a sleight cannot bee born; but Oh! how much sin can bee born, while our flesh will bear nothing? Oh! how can conscience bear, and never complain? Christians consider, when our flesh must be thus tendred, what ever come of it; must be tenderly fed, must have soft rayment, soft lodging, soft usage, deal gently with it, though to maintain it, Conscience must bee racked, and wracked and wast∣ed. When our Wills cannot bee crossed, our appe∣tites cannot bee denied, but a tumult follows, the soul is in an uproar; and conscience mean while, must be denied, rated, and must go away in silence. When the Word works no more, when the prints of it are not received; the power of it is resisted; when the rod works no more; when our stripes make no sign, when the lashes on our backs fall all besides our hearts; when wee remain so vain, and so wanton, so wilful, and so carnal, and so earth∣ly; after the Lord hath been preaching, and whipping of us into a better frame, when wee stand upon our terms, keep our distances, our animosities, our heats, and heighths of spirit, our censurings, our quarrellings one with another, Christian with Christian, Professour with Profes∣sour, after the Lord hath been beating us together,
to make us friends, and all to learn us more hu∣mility, and charity; Is this our brokenness? is this our tenderness? when upon any the Lords rougher dealing with us, spitting in our faces, throwing us on our backs, trampling us in the dirt, wee are yet no more brought on our knees; Is this our brokenness? when the Lord hath been awakening us out of sleep, putting his spurres and goads in our sides, to quicken us on our way; calling to us, arise sleepers, put on sluggards, stirre up your spirits, mend your pace, I will not bee put off as I have been; no more, such loitering, and idling, and trifling, and halting, as hath been; I must have other manner of service, other manner of praying, and hearing, and walking, and working, than hath been; be zealous, and amend, more labour, more care, more watchfulness, more activity, more of the Spirit, and Soul of what you professe: When the Lord hath been thus goading, and spurring us on, and though our flesh feels, yet our hearts will not feel, nor answer the Goad or Spur; Is this an ar∣gument of tenderness? When great duties are little, and lesser are none; when great sins are infirmities, and little ones are nothing; when lying and defrauding, when false weights, and false wares, and false deal∣ings; when defaming, back-biting, tale-bearing, railing, reviling, do stand for little more than cy∣phers; when fellowship, and familiarity, with evil men in their sins; when compliance with, or con∣nivance at their wickedness; when sinful courtings, and complementings of such, to the fleshing them, and hardning them in their waies, do pass for vir∣tues, and civilities; when frothy, vvanton dis∣course,
and communication; vvhen scoffing and making a sport at the sins, or infirmities of others; vvhen sinful vain jesting, vvherein rather Consci∣ence than wit must bee deny'd; when all these pass for our ornaments, rather than our evils. Where's our tenderness? When upon the auditing of our accounts, the examining our books, and reckoning up our scores; where a talent is owing, wee bid conscience take thy bill, and write down a shekel; where twen∣ty or an hundred sins to be reckoned for, take thy bill, and write down ten or but one, and that a little one, when wee are so free in multiplying, and so false, in numbring our iniquities; where's our tenderness? Well Christians, the Lord hath promised a ten∣der heart, to make these stones flesh; and some∣thing possibly is done already upon you, towards it; O let this sad sight now laid before you, this view of what's wanting, have some influence up∣on the making it up; let the sense of no more done, work what is yet undone; as is said before, let your unbrokenness break your hearts; let the stone that yet remains, make your flesh to bleed. If you yet feel no more, may you at least feel this, that you feel not.
CHAP. XIII. An Heart to love the Lord. 4. AN heart to love the Lord. Deut. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed: to love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul. Love is the soul of the new creature; the closure of the soul with God. He that hath most of God is most a Christian, and hee that hath most of love, hath most of God. God is love. In the opening of this love to God, wee shall consider its Object. Act. 1. Its Object. The Object of divine love is God. God is good, and good is amiable. God is all good, There is none good but one, that is God. God is essentially good, goodness in the abstract; hee is infinitely excellent, hee is all perfection. In this one Attribute, all the rest of the Attributes of God are included, and this in each of them. How∣ever the Scriptures, speaking to our capacities, de∣scribe God and his glorious Attributes, in several and distinct notions; yet in each one all are in∣cluded; each one is infinite, and infinite per∣fection is essentially all perfection. God is origi∣nally good; the fountain and pattern, of all that moral good that is in the creatures; hee is boun∣tifull,
and gracious, ready to do them good; and hee is the felicitating end, or the blessedness of the soul. The goodness of God to his creatures, according to its different respects to them, hath its different and various appellations. As it is freely bestow'd, 'tis Grace: As it respect them as needy, so 'tis Bounty: as in misery, so 'tis mercy and com∣passion; as Provoking, so 'tis Patience: as it in∣tends their good, so 'tis love: as it answers both their necessities and capacities, so 'tis Al-sufficien∣cy. All these, his bounty, mercy, compassion, patience, love, al-sufficiency: all these are in one word, his goodness, and goodness calls for love. The Object of this love is God. Particularly, 1. God in himself. 2. God in Christ. 3. God in all the things of God. 1. God in himself, as hee is infinitely excellent, (as before) and so worthy of all love. God is to bee loved in himself, and for himself, for his own worthiness. God is good in himself, and therefore to bee loved for himself. 2. God in Christ. In whom alone, considering us as sinners, hee can bee said to be good to us. There is a four-fold incentive of love. Perception. Proportion. Propriety. Possession. 1. Perception; or the apprehension or under∣standing of the Object to bee loved; wee must
know before we can love; now God cannot im∣mediately be seen by mortals; hee dwelleth in light, but that light is to us invisible. Christ is the glass, in which this glory may bee seen. We can∣not see God but through a vail of flesh, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4. No man hath seen God at any time, but the only begotten of the Father, who is in the bosome of the Father, hee hath revealed him. 2. Proportion. And there is a double proporti∣on requisite. 1. In respect of quantity, there must bee sufficiency. 2. In respect of quality, there must bee suitableness. God himself is proportioned to us, consider us as rational creatures, and in our state of innocency; is both a sufficient and a suitable good; but God in Christ onely, being considered as lapsed crea∣tures, in a state of sin. God in Christ, is a God of pitty, and compassion to us; a God of patience, a God of mercy, with whom is plentious redemption. A God, pardo∣ning iniquity, and passing by transgression; loving us in our low estate, loving us and pittying us, loving us and pardoning us; loving us and wash∣ing us, loving us and saving us from our sins, and from the wrath to come. And such love is the great flame that kindles love; love breaking forth out of a cloud of wrath, and fury, and displeasure; abused love provoked love, and yet forgiving love; to whom much is forgiven, they will love much.
3. Propriety. What's good, good for us, and [our own] good, that carries our hearts. Wee most love our own good, because wee most love our selves. Our love to God is heightened from our due self-love; there is a sinful self-love; when either wee love that for a self, which is not our self; when wee love our flesh and flesh∣ly interest; or when wee love our selves inordi∣nately, more than God, and God only for our selves; and there is a lawful self-love; when wee love our selves, in the Lord, and for the Lord. And the more wee thus love our selves, the more is the Lord loved by us; and the more hee is our own, the more love hee hath. Now in Christ the Lord is [our] God. Our own God; even our own God. Psal. 67.6. O God thou art [my] God, and I will praise thee. Thou art my God and I will love thee. The Lord is God, and wee therefore love him; the Lord is good, gracious, merciful, and wee therefore love him, yea, and ought to love him, whether he bee ours or no; but when both meer, hee is God and our God; hee is good and our good; gracious, merciful, all-sufficient, and all this to us; hence is our love made perfect in us. 4 Possession; wee can love a distant, an absent good. A good that's only possible; there's love in hope; but by how much the nearer good is to us, (that is really so) by so much the more attractive and acceptable 'tis. 'Tis then most in our hearts, when 'tis most in our hands. Indeed those things which have only speciem boni, that are fancied good; or those things that are finite good; and good over-rated; that are judg'd better than they are, are lov'd most at a distance; because when
they come to hand, wee see our mistake. But that which is what it seem'd; much more, that which is above our thoughts, beyond our expecta∣tions, infinite good; by how much the nearer, 'tis ever the dearer to us. All worldly good is most valued, (at least by carnal hearts) at a distance; they promise themselves more contentment in it, than it hath to pay them; their possession is their disappointment. Whilest they lusted, they ido∣liz'd, they ador'd; but when they have tasted, and eaten, it comes out at their nostrils. Or else they sit down, with the shame of the disappointed; they are either surfeited, or hungry still. Is this all? all you can do for mee? all the pleasure, and comfort, I shall have of you? is all my expectation of delight, and satisfaction, come to no more but this? Miserable comforters are you all! possessi∣on and fruition is the proof of all things. And va∣nity proved, is the less loved. But God being an all-sufficient, incomprehensible good; by how much the nearer to us, by how much the more hee is ours by so much the more wee prize and love, because now wee find (when wee have him, wee enjoy him) that before, the one half was not told us. Now in Christ, wee have not onely a propriety in God, but in some degree, a present possession. Hee that hath the Son, [hath] the Father also. We see his light, wee feel his love, wee taste of his goodness, wee enjoy his presence, wee have God with us, wee have God in us, wee have fellow∣ship with him, he dwelleth in us, and wee in him, and hence wee love, and herein wee re∣joyce.
3. God in all the things of God, in his Word, Or∣dinances, Sabbaths, Saints, in graces, duties, in all his waies, the Saints love God, and love his word, 'tis God in the word they love; they love God, and they love Ordinances, and Sabbaths, and Saints; 'tis God in all these they love; They love the waies, and works, and all the dispensations of God, and 'tis God in them all they love, they see God in every thing, and they love God where ever they see him. They look on all these things with another eye, and therefore embrace them with another heart then other men. The Saints love to the things of God, is their love to God; for 'tis God in them (as was said) that they love, their love to them is founded either on, their participation of God, or, relation to God. Or else you may say they love the things of God, because they are, the Off-spring the Images the Chariots of God. 1. The things of God, are the Off-spring of God, as the Saints are born from above, so all the things of God, are , they come down from above, and therefore may also bee called as the Apostle stiles them, , things above, Phil. 3.1,2. If yee bee risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, set your affections on things above; things above, and the things of God, come all to one, whatsoever is from God, and belongs to
his Heavenly Kingdome, is divine, and heaven∣ly; and hee that loveth him that begets, therefore loveth those which are begotten, and whatsoever proceedeth from him. 2. The Word and the Saints are the Images of God, the character, and impresse of God are up∣on them; the Grace in the Saints, and the holy truths in the Word, are the very face of Christ; who is full of Grace and Truth, and this is their Rule, love God, and love his Image. 3. The things of God are the Chariots of God. Hee that makes the Clouds his Chariots, makes also his Word, and his Ordinances, and his Mi∣nisters, his Chariots, wherein he rides down into these lower parts, to give the World a meeting. When Ministers come, and the Word comes down, God comes down in them to visit his peo∣ple; as 'twas said of Paul, So 'tis true of Apollos, and Cephas, and all the dispensers of the Gospel, they are chosen Vessels to bear his Name, before the Sons of men; and as they are the Chariots in which God comes down, so are they also the Wagons which hee hath sent them, to fetch them up to him∣self; The Saints send up their hearts in their du∣ties, their hearts in their prayers, in their praises unto God. Old Israel's heart leap'd, when hee saw the Wagons which Joseph had sent. Oh what love doth the Psalmist expresse, to the House and Courts of the Lord! O how amiable are thy Taber∣nacles, I was glad when they said unto mee, let us go up into the House of the Lord. Hee was glad to go thither, because thence hee hoped to bee car∣ried higher, from the Mountain to the Mansion; from Mount Zion here below, to Jerusalem, which is above.
It's the duty, and the delight of the Saints to bee ascending Heaven-wards, they are dead with Christ, they are risen with Christ; and 'tis not as they would with them, but when they are ascend∣ing up with Christ, they are dead with Christ, by repentance and humiliation, they are risen with Christ, by faith and sanctification, and they ascend with Christ, by love and holy affection, this is their Chariot of fire, a Chariot, within a Chariot, that through Duties and Ordinances rides up in its own flames to the God of Love. Or if you will, the Ordinances of God, are our Jacobs Ladder reaching from Heaven to Earth; by which, Angels descend, and souls as∣cend, God comes down, and hearts go up, praises go up, and blessings come down; thou hast not prov'd what an Ordinance is, what Pray∣er means, or Preaching means, or Sacraments mean, that hast not seen God coming down, nor felt thine heart ascending by them; hee that hath felt this, will say, here let mee dwell; let others bee where they will, amongst their flocks, amongst their herds, upon their beds, or at their cups, a∣mongst their Harlots, or in their houses; It is good for mee to bee here. No wonder Christians, that carnal hearts are such strangers to the Word, can so well fit out at Duties, and can want Ordinances; Preaching and Praying, and Sabbaths, they can spare, and not feel their want, what wonder? What is Hea∣ven to Earth? what is God to flesh? these Cha∣riots would carry them away from their Gods, carry them out of their own Country, into a strange
Land, where they have neither possession nor ac∣quaintance; But oh! what a sad wonder is it, that Saints should go up so often into the Chariots, and yet be gotten no nearer home, that they should be still so much on the Earth, that have been so often mounted for Heaven; that those hearts should still bee on the dunghils, whose feet are so often on the mountain of the Lord; that the Wagons should bee so often sent down, and go up empty; scarce an heart sent up in them; yea, that they should be so far from God, when God is among them. Where's your love, Christians? how is it that it is still below? what have you here? your City is above; your home is above; your God, your Je∣sus, your treasure is above: oh how is it, that where your treasure is, your hearts bee not also? hear from God, and not God with the messenger? send up to heaven, your eyes, your hands, your prayers, your complaints, your promises, and still leave your hearts below? send up hearts to hea∣ven, and let them return again down to this earth? remain earth, and flesh, and filth, and vanity, af∣ter so much converse or pretence to it, with the holy God of spirits? lovest thou God? when thou canst so often go where hee is, and not care to see him? or if thou meet him, canst let him go without a blessing? or if he bless thee, canst go presently and exchange thy Fathers blessing for a mess of pottage? canst lose a duty in a dinner, the comforts and revivings of a Sermon, of a Sa∣crament, of a Sabbath, in an hours carnal converse in the world? did wee love our God more, cer∣tainly wee should bee more with him, and to better purpose. His meetings would bee more
precious, and the fruits of them more lasting. Wee should neither go away without his blessing, nor throw it away when wee had gotten it. Thus much for the object of love. 2. Its Act. Love is a natural Affection. The love of God is the souls clasping or closing with the Lord. It is the expansion, or going out of the heart, in its strength, after God, the uniting or knitting of the soul vvith God, vvith a compla∣cency and acquiescence in him. There are three things included in this love. 1. The strength of the heart making out after God. This is that vvhich is commonly called our amor desiderii, or our love of desire, the breathing, or thirsting, or panting of the heart, after God, Psal. 42.1. The hearts vvorking God-vvards with its might; loving him above all things, desi∣ring him above all things; and that both Intensi∣vè vvith the greatest vigour and intention: and a∣daequatè as its compleat, and adequate object. God is its All. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. 2. The uniting of the soul with God. Our clea∣ving to him. By love heart cleaves to heart, soul cleaves to soul. Its said of Shechem, Gen. 34.3. that his heart clave unto Dinah. Hee loved her vvith his heart, shee vvas gotten into his heart, and there his heart holds her. Acts 11.23. Barnabas exhorts the Church, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. It is the knitting of the soul vvith God. Its said, 1 Sam. 1.18. That the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of Da∣vid, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. And
of Jacob, Gen. 44.30. to express his tender love to Benjamin, 'tis said, his life was bound up in the lads life. Of the multitude of believers wee read Act. 4.32. that they were all of one heart and of one soul. Their love had knit them up all into one. By love wee are one with God, and hee with us. It is the souls willing of God, as I may so speak. Willing of God to it self, and willing it self, and all to God. All praises, all honour, all blessedness to him. Bee thou mine Lord, nothing less, nothing else. Bee thou mine, I need no less, I desire no more. Let mee bee thine, be to thee, bee for thee, thy servant, thy sacrifice, or what thou wilt, and let all mine bee thine; mine heart, and my hand, and my tongue, and my time, and mine interest. Let all thine bee to thee; thy hea∣vens and thy earth, with every person, with eve∣ry creature in them. Let every heart, every mouth, every limb, every creature, bee a praise to the Lord. Let the Lord live, and blessed bee my rock, let the God of my salvation bee exalted. Let eve∣ry knee bow, let every tongue confess unto God. This is the amor unionis, our love of union, as 'tis called. And 'tis the heart, the very essence of saving love; wherein are included both our ac∣cepting of God, and our surrender or resignation of our selves unto God. Amor non est nisi donum amantis in amaetum. And our wishing and wil∣ling all glory, dominion, and blessedness to him. And so here also is our amor benevolentiae, our love of benevolence. All these may bee inclu∣ded in that opening of the heart, mention'd, Acts 16.14. Its there said, that the Lord opened Ly∣dia's heart. The heart is then savingly opened,
when it freely lets out it self upon God; all its streams run in to the Lord; and when it takes in, and takes down, God into the depth of the soul. The heart thus opened to the Lord, when God is come in, will close upon him. Abide with me; thou hast entred upon thine habitation, oh let this bee thy dwelling for ever. Onely this must bee farther added, that with God it takes in all the things of God; his Word, his Ordinances, his waies, and all his dispensations. With his love his laws; with his comforts his counsels; with his counsels his corrections; with thee, I accept of all that's thine; both thy staff and thy rod; both thy yoke and thy cross; thy self Lord, thy love Lord, and what thou wilt with thee. 3. The souls talking pleasure, and taking up its rest in him. This is call'd our Amor complacen∣tiae. Where wee love there will bee a delightful stay or immoration of the mind upon God. Ubi a∣mor, ibi oculus. The object dwells in the eye; we are still looking where we love. Anima est ubi amat. When I awake, I am still with thee; there his thoughts are, of him is his meditation all the day long. My meditation of him shall bee sweet. Hee that loves dwelleth in God. I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. And why there? why there his God dwells, and therefore there his soul takes up its dwelling. There is also an acquiescence of the heart in him. Return unto thy rest, O my soul. But this is not felt, till love hath obtained. Till the soul feels it self to love and to have what it loves; to love and to bee beloved; to accept and to bee accepted of God. When it comes to
this, then I have enough. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. And here is the sweetness of Religion; the marrow and fatness of godliness, the pleasure of love. When I love I can rest; when I can rest I can rejoyce; when I feel my self to love, I know I am beloved, and then what is there wanting? where love is a stranger joy is not known; wee can never take comfort in any thing, but in that which wee love. When take wee pleasure in eating, but when we have meat that wee love? what is a friend, or a wife, or a childe, when wee love them not? what is society or communion, where love hath not first made an union? can two walk together except they bee a∣greed? with little comfort sure; they would bee better pleased, were they parted asunder. 'Tis love that is the pleasure of our lives. 'Tis love that makes heaven sweet; there wee shall have our fill of joy, because there wee have our fill of love. Heaven would bee no heaven, God him∣self could not bee the joy, if hee were not the love of his Saints. What bitter draughts will love sugar? sin, and lusts, and all the filth of the flesh, are sweet morsels to carnal hearts; 'tis meat they love. God is nothing, Christ is nothing to them; What is thy beloved more than other beloveds? Re∣ligion is a bondage to them, holiness a weariness; not the labours onely, but the joyes of the Saints, are empty and unsavoury things; there are no feasts, but love-feasts. Love is both the best dish, and the onely sauce to every dish; 'tis the best dish, he that feeds on divine love, will never complain of a short meal; and 'tis the onely sauce for every dish, 'tis but unsavoury meat that is not seasoned
with love; wee may a little change the proverb, love is the best sauce. Bee the meat never so excel∣lent, it will not relish if it bee not loved. Love will make any thing down. When it puts such a sweetness into sin, that even death, and hell will down with carnal hearts for its sake, oh what a feast will love make of holiness and glory? get love to Christ, love to Religion, and you will ne∣ver demand, where is the blessedness? where is the sweetness? Love will sweeten, both the comforts, and the exercises of Religion; 'twill make duties sweet, yea, and sufferings sweet. There are two things that are naturally sweet to love. To please. To praise. 1. He that loves will please, and observe whom hee loves. How careful are such to watch them∣selves, that they grieve not their friend; what stu∣dy does love put them upon, to find out what's grateful and acceptable. Acceptable looks, ac∣ceptable language, acceptable entertainment; what wilt thou Lord? what wilt thou have mee to bee? a servant? a door-keeper? a servant of ser∣vants for thee? I will bee nothing but what thou wilt; any thing that thou wilt have mee. What wilt thou have mee to do, Lord! let mee know thy vvill, appoint mee my vvork. O that my waies were so directed, that I might keep thy statutes. What vvilt thou have of mee? vvilt thou have mine I∣dols! mine ease, or mine honour, or my pleasure, or my house, or mine estate? vvilt thou have mine
Isaacks? is there any thing dearer to me than other, that might bee an offering to the Lord? wilt thou have my liberty, or my life! behold all is at thy feet; I can keep back nothing thou callest for. Hence love is said to bee the fulfilling of the Law. There is in this good will, radically every good work. It would walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. Love is generous; it would do great things, noble things; what shall I do for him, whom my soul honours! oh for a gift, that might bee worthy of him! but I have nothing; my goodness extend∣eth not to thee; it would give more than it owes; but where it cannot do so, where it cannot bee ge∣nerous, yet it would bee just; it would levell all accounts, and pay all debts; love would have no∣thing but love owing. It would give to all their due; it would not die in the debt of a servant, of a stranger, much less (could it help it) would it defaulk from the God of glory. That's the dai∣ly charge of love, pay what thou owest. Its receipts and returns, are a pleasure to it; any thing that comes down from heaven, and every present it has to send thither, is a joy to love. This is the mes∣sage that both speak, happy soul, thou lovest and art beloved. It catches at all opportunities, to send up messages of love, and knoweth no fitter messenger to send by, than by the hand of duty. Every duty is dispatched with this superscription, the tribute of love. Love is the spring, that sets all our wheels a going; the womb, in which all our works are form∣ed; the fire in the heart, that vents it self in our words and wayes. The fire kindled, then spake I
with my tongue. Love is to a Saint, what malice is to Sathan; that which gives force to all his act∣ings. Sathans temptations are called fiery darts; and this, not onely because they are headed, and barbed with fire; as poysoned arrows, they burn where they hit; they set sin on fire, they set the soul on fire; burning with lust, and wickedness. but because they are winged with fire, and forced with fire; the bullet is fired out of the Gun, and thence it flies so fiercely. 'Tis the malice of Sa∣thans heart that fires out all his darts. What ma∣lice doth with Sathan, that doth love with Saints. It sets the heart in a flame, of holy zeal, and acti∣vity for God. Jer. 20.9. Thy word was in mee as fire, (it hath kindled a fire there) I was weary with forbearing. An heart of love is weary, but not of action, but of idleness. Weary with forbear∣ing, not with doing; never weary of doing much, ever weary of doing nothing. O God my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed; saith the Psalmist, I will sing and give thanks. Love will adde, O God, mine heart is fiered, my heart is fiered; there's a flame kindled; mine heart burneth, in holy desires, and zeal for thee; and where love hath set the heart a burning, the heart will set the hand a working, and the feet a run∣ning. 2. He that loves will praise whom he loves. Praise is comely, and praise is a pleasure to the upright in heart. 'Tis the delight of love to be speaking of the perfections, of the vertues, of the beauties, of the excellencies of her beloved. The Spouse in the book of Canticles whose whole language is all love, her heart is so full, that her lips overflow
with the mention of the excellencies of Christ. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest amongst ten thousand. His head fine gold, his eyes Dove's eyes, his cheeks a bed of spices, his lips are lillies, his hands are gold-rings, his legs pillars of marble, his countenance excellent, his mouth sweet, yea, hee is altogether lovely; this is my beloved, and this is my friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem. Cant. 5. Who is a God like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the City of our God. Thy mercy O Lord, is in the heavens, thy faithful∣ness reacheth unto the clouds. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains, thy judgments are a great deep. How excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord, therefore the sons of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. I will speak of the glorious honour of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous works; the Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. Let all thy works praise thee, O Lord let thy Saints bless thee; let them speak of the glory of thy king∣dome, and talk of thy power. Let them abundantly utter the memory of thy goodness, and sing of thy righteousness. O my God, thou art all love, all goodness, all grace, all glory; O let thy servant bee all praise. Let this heart bee an altar, and every service a sacrifice; let this mouth bee a trumpet, and every word a Psalm; let my breath bee as incense, and every member a censer. Let all that is within mee, my soul with all its powers; let all that is without me, my body with all its members, shout for joy, and sing forth the high
praises of God. This is the voice of Love. And now you have another excellency of the new heart, laid open to your view: Love; An heart to love. Christians, prize this precious grace; prize it, and you will write down, this word also, among the great and precious Promises; and if you would prize it aright, take your estimate of it, from its worth, and its want; as we use to prize Jewels, from their excellencie, rarity. 1. Prize it, according to its worth, and excellency. Why, what is the worth? Cant. 8.7. If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would bee contemned. The whole world is not of that value, to bee a price for love; no it must come by gift, it's not to bee bought for money, love is worth as much as a soul, and that's more than all the world. What shall it profit a man, to win the whole World, and lose his own Soul? love is as much worth as all Religion; 'tis the soul and the substance of all Religion; all the Graces, the Duties and Exercises of it, are onely valued, ac∣cording to the love that is in them; what is know∣ledge, faith, hope, patience without love? what is prayer, fasting, alms, without charity? They are worth nothing, shall I say? nay they are no∣thing; If I had all knowledge, and all faith, and were all prayer, and all labour, and all suffering; and had not charity, I were nothing. Love is worth as much as Heaven is worth, as Christ, as God is worth to us. God is love, and God is not,
if love bee not in us. Dost thou prize thy sub∣stance? Is thy house, or thy mony, or thy lands, any thing to thee? Dost thou value thy soul? Is Religion, is Heaven, is Christ, is God himself of any account with thee? Then prize the love of God; Without love, God is no God to thee, Christ is no Christ to thee, Heaven is no Heaven for thee; better thou hadst no soul, no being than no love. O prize the Love of God; prize and seek, prize and pray, pray as for thy life, as for thy soul, as for thy everlasting Kingdome; Lord let mee love thee; Get love, and get all, love and thou wilt bee holy, love and thou wilt be hum∣ble, love and thou wilt bee fruitful, love, and thou wilt please, praise, and enjoy thy God, love and thou wilt fear, serve, suffer, and die for him, love, and thou shalt live; prize love, prize it ac∣cording to its worth. And 2. Prize it according to its rarity. Things excel∣lent are rated something the more for their scarci∣ty; scarcity raises the Market, the VVord of God was precious in those daies, 1 Sam. 3.1. that is, when there was a Famine of the Word, when there was no open Vision: O were the love of God, as precious as 'tis rare! what a spiritless carkass is the Religion of many Professours? what's become of the soul of it? Oh! we freeze in our Duties, we freeze in our Devotions, wee are almost frozen out of them all; if vvee have a Sacrifice left, vvhat fire is there to offer it up? The God that an∣swereth by fire, let him bee God, said Elijah: the heart that asketh by fire, that ascendeth in fire, let that bee the heart for God: Behold the wood, and the fire, but where is the Lamb for the Sacri∣fice?
Wee may say behold the wood and the sacrifice, but where is the Fire to of∣fer it up? our Spirits have taken a cold, the chill of them appears in all our duties. Rab∣bi where dwellest thou? Love where dwel∣lest thou? Zeal of God, where is thy a∣bode? how many houses must wee search? how many hearts must wee walk through, e're wee finde thine Habitation? The A∣postle tells the Romans, Rom. 10.2. that they have a Zeal of God, but not according to Knowledge; wee have the Knowledge of God, but oh! where is the Zeal? the Zeal of thine house, saith the Psalmist, hath eaten mee up; but is not that eater eaten? The house hath burnt up the fire, or if there be any fire left, is it not strange fire? not the fire of Love, but of Lust, of Pride, or Covetousness; or that wilde fire of envy, and contention, that heats our spirits? Je∣hu was all on fire against the house of Ahab; Come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts. That fire was fury, not love; or if 'twas love, 'twas self-love, not the love of God, that made all that flame; such hearts are like the evil tongue, James 3. set on fire of Hell. Such heats are not from above, but are earthly, sensual, devilish; wee freeze still, while wee thus fry; our praeter-natural
heats have extinguished the super-natu∣ral. O! how little kindly warmth do wee find in our spirits? do wee feel our hearts work∣ing upwards, ascending in our flames? wee all pretend to love, but consider, are our hearts making out in their strength af∣ter God? Wee wish well to his Name and Interest, wee wish hee were ours, wee wish our selves his; O if wishing were lov∣ing! what Christians should wee be? But doth the Kingdom of God suffer violence? who are they that so run, as if they would take God by force, take Heaven by force? The Kingdome of Heaven may offer vio∣lence if it will, and take us by force; but how little violence doth it suffer? We say wee love God, but is there not something else wee love more? wee desire to be holy, but is there not something else wee desire more? Oh how few hearty friends hath Christ in the world? and how little love from these few? so little, that we cannot tell our selves, whether it be any thing or no∣thing; how hard are we put to it? what a narrow search must we make? how many arguments must wee consult? how many marks must we consider, e're we can prove
we love him? and yet at last, are still in doubt, whether we love him or not. When we love our carnal Friends, our Wives, our Children, we can feel that we love them; when we love our Ease, or our Estates, or our Liberties, we can feel that we love them; but our God we cannot tell whether we love him or no; How few of us can boldly make our appeal to him, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. Oh! how many wounds doth Christ re∣ceive in the house of his Friends? how ma∣ny sleights must hee put up? how often when hee hath sate down, in his own, (in the highest) room, have we said, to him give this man place, give this friend or this business place; and so made him take the lower room. How hath hee when he hath come to our doors (his love hath often brought him thither) how often hath hee stood, and knock'd and call'd, open to mee my Love, my Sister; and there been made to stand, and wait, when strangers have been gotten in, and taken up all the rooms? The world can never come out of season, but Christ is fain to wait his seasons, when he can finde us at leisure; if there bee any o∣ther guest with us, our Lord must wait; Go thy way for this time, when I have a con∣venient
season, I will send for thee; how of∣ten have we agreed, and appointed to meet the Lord, at such an hour; in our Cham∣ber, in our Closet, to have converse and communion with him in Duty; and if any thing come in, o carry us another way, then presently, I pray thee have mee excused; or if we do keep our time, and shut in our selves with the Lord, and sit down to Du∣ty; what a multitude of thoughts present∣ly fall a knocking at our doors? and away our hearts go presently with them, to the ends of the earth, and leaves nothing but our carkasses behind with the Lord; O were our love stronger, our cries would bee louder, and would drown the noise of these knockings, that they would not bee heard nor heeded, it would command si∣lence to every impertinent thought. I charge you, O Daughters, that you stirre not, that you disturb not my Beloved, and my Soul; more love would command their attendance, upon the work of the Lord, would gird up the loins of the mind, and gather in all its scattered Messengers; come all yee powers of my soul, come and do your homage, come and help in the service of my God. Oh! at what distance are wee content
to live from the Lord, sometimes for many daies together? Our souls and our God are grown strange, and yet wee can bee merry, and quiet; wee can bee without the presence of God, and yet never miss it: not a smile from his face, nor a look of love from us to him, and yet no trouble fol∣lows; the Sun may bee Ecclipsed, or un∣der a Cloud, and yet no darkness upon our Spirits: wee do not walk in darkness, when wee have no light, sorrow and sadness is as far from us, as God is from us; we can warm our selves at our own fires, and re∣joyce in the light of our own sparks, as if these were the Sun; wee can do as well in a Mist, as in the Sun-shine, day and night are both alike to us; The Children of the Bride-chamber do not Fast, but can Feast, and make merry, when the Bridegroom is taken from them; their carnal content∣ments, they can make a shift with, to sup∣ply the room of their Lord. Can wee not sometimes go where our Lord feeds, and never finde him; go to pray, or go to hear, or go to a Sacrament, and the Lord never meet us there, and yet can return well enough satisfied? When wee thus want communion with God, and [can] want it; where's our love, what love
is that? which can so well bear the absence of her Beloved? Call mee no more Naomi, pleasant; but call mee Marah, bitter; I went out full, but I return empty; Full of Grace, full of Joy, because full of the Lord; but behold all is gone, my Husband is lost, my God is departed from mee: Call mee no more Naomi, but call mee Marah, for the Almighty hath dealt bitterly with me, hath hid his face from me, for these things I weep, mine eyes, mine eyes run down with tears, because the Comforter that should relieve my soul, is farre from mee; such are the tears of Love, for her absent Lord. Oh! how little Conscience is there made of bestowing that on the Lord, which wee have bestowed on him; wee give and take, wee pretend to have given all to God; but are wee not often taking away, what wee have given, and bestowing it elsewhere? Love would have all we have running into God, and would have nothing run besides; but Oh! what waste is there made? of our time, of our parts, and other Talents, which were they well husbanded, would come to much, and bee given to the Lord? when so many daies, and hours run out, and no account taken of them, on what, or on
whom, they are consumed; when our eyes, and our ears, and hands, and tongues, which were made for God; the Devil, and Lust, must so often have the using of them; when back and belly, and friends and companions, must carry away, what should bee spent on God and Souls; when what should be al∣lowed for Religion, and Charity to have the spending of, must bee at the disposure of Pride, Prodigality, and Gluttony; when our Prayers, our Fasting, our Preaching, and hearing; all our Duties must become sacrifices to our Lust, our Idols are suffer∣ed to devour the Sacrifices of the Lord; when our pride and fleshly ends, must have the offering, and the eating of our Sacrifi∣ces; this must make our Prayers, and preach our Sermons, and keep our Fasts, and give our Almes, and wear the credit, and honour of them, as its own Crown; when God is thus robbed, and wee let the thief run away with all, and is never pursu∣ed, or questioned, Oh! where is our love? Oh! how little pleasure do wee take in the Lord? what a weariness is it to us, to wait upon him? how glad are wee, when wee come [back] from the House of the Lord? when wee come off our Knees, come out of our Closets, when
the Sabbaths are gone, and the new-Moons are over, and wee make our returns from Heaven to Earth? How much work have wee, to keep our hearts by the Lord? how do they slink away e're wee are aware? and whilst wee are in his Presence, how seldome do wee rejoyce in his Presence? What hungry meals, what jejune feasts do wee make before the Lord? Wee relish not his Daintys, his Wine is but lees, his Marrow and his fat things, are but leanness to our Souls; a little love would sweeten every drop, would season every morsel, that comes from his Table; would make our very Fasts to bee pleasant bread: Wee feed upon the dish, or the trencher, and not the meat; on the bone, and not the mar∣row; Ordinances, and the external Ex∣ercises of Religion, are but the bone, or the shell, or the dish, it is God that is the Ker∣nel, the Marrow and Fatness. How little Communion have wee with the Lord, in our approaches to him, and how little sweet∣ness do wee finde in the little wee have? Communion is the pleasure of Love, and Love is the sweetness of Communion; Now I am where I would bee; O! how amiable are thy Tabernacles? very plea∣sant art thou to mee O Lord; that is the
voice of Love. Had wee more love, wee should bee more spiritual; and spiritual things, would bee more grateful to spi∣ritual hearts; Divine Love, is like the fire, it rarifies, and changes hearts into its own likeness, and then there's sweetness; O we are carnal, and that's enough to evi∣dence, that there's little of the love of God abiding in us. Consider these things, and you will see that love is a rarity; there's but little true love in the world; O prize the love of God; let its want make it prized; shall it bee so rare, and yet so cheap? prize it, and press on after it. What do these hearts below? are they not still below? so cold, such clods of clay, and yet above? so carnal, so sensual and yet in Heaven? so hungry, and so greedy in sucking the juice of this earth, in taking in its pleasures; so busy in digging out the Wealth of the earth, and searching for its treasures; [hearts] so busy this way, and yet not here? how canst thou say, I am walk∣ing with the God of Glory, when thou art still worshipping the Gods of the Earth? how canst thou say, this heart is risen, it is not here; when it may bee said to thee, be∣hold the place where it lyes; it is still in the
field, in the ridges and furrows thereof; it is still in the Mines, in the heart of the earth, see the place where it lyes; we sow our hearts with our seed, we send them down to dig in the heart of the Earth. But what do these hearts below? sursum corda, get you up, get you up; leave no∣thing but the Mantle here, your carkasses; Earth to Earth, Dust to Dust. Come heave these souls Heaven-ward; let them take the wing and be gone; O that I had the wings of a Dove, that I might fly up, and be at rest; Be lower than ever by humi∣lity, but let love be on high. Behold those cords of love, that are let down in every Ordinance, in every Provi∣dence; there's a cord let down to gather up hearts; hearken to those calls of love, come up hither, come up hither; we come Lord; thou bid'st us come, O lend us thy hand, and lift us up. Come on Christians, come let's be hap∣py, if wee love wee are happy; Come let's rejoyce, if wee love wee joy; come let's live, wee dye, wee dye; while wee linger on this earth, if wee love, wee live; let's live, and let our life bee love; let our works bee, labours of love, our sufferings seals of love, our sorrows, the sorrows of love,
our wounds, loves scars, our prayers the cryes of love, our praises, love songs, to our Lord and God. Let every duty, every exer∣cise, let every member, every power, let our bodies, let our souls, bee loves Sacri∣fices; as we see in all his, so let the Lord see love in all our waies. Canst thou not love? look till thou canst, look up to thy God, send up thy thoughts thither; let thy Meditations bee of him, these will not bee long before the Throne, e're they fetch up thy heart; Look on thy Jesus, behold his hands and his feet; come and put thy finger into the print of the Nails, and thrust thine heart into his side; and there let it lie, till thou feel it warm; Look up to thy Jesus, lift up a prayer, Lord let mee love thee; if thou lovest let mee love thee; I will seek till I can see, let mee see till I can love. What have I here Lord? my all is with thee, my help, my hope, my treasure, my life is hid with Christ in God. And yet behold this all is nothing to mee, while mine heart is no more with thee, take it Lord, take it up; where my treasure is, there let mine heart bee also. Doubting Christian, who because thou lovest so little, fearest thou lovest not at
all; cry for more, but bee thankful for what thou hast; bee ashamed thou lovest no more, but bee not dismayed, thou complainest thou canst not love God; but dost thou love his Image? his Saints, his Word, his Works, his Waies? Whilst thou sayest thou lovest not God, dost thou love Godliness; if thou canst not love, can'st grieve, can'st lament after him? hast thou chosen, dost thou hang upon, trust in the Lord? If thou canst not love, can'st fear and follow the Lord? If he be not sen∣sibly in thy affection, is he in thy thoughts, in thy mouth, in thine eye? Is hee thy aim, and thy scope? doth thy course bend towards him? Comfort thine heart in these things, thou mayest see, though thou canst not feel thou lovest.
CHAP. XIV. An heart to fear the Lord. AN heart to fear the Lord, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, I shall proceed to the opening of this by these steps; I shall shew 1. That the Lord God is a dreadful God. 2. That the Lord hath put the dread of himself upon the hearts of all the earth. 3. That yet by sin the heart of man is much hardned from the fear of the Lord. 4. That God will recover his Honour, and again put his fear into the hearts of his people. 5. What this fear of the Lord is, that he will put into them. 1. The Lord God, is a dreadfull God; he is dreadfull in the Excellency and Glory of his Ma∣jesty, Job 13.11. Shall not his Excellency make you afraid, and his dread fall upon you? His Pow∣er is dreadfull. Fear ye not me, saith the Lord? Will ye not tremble at my presence? Which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea by a perpe∣tuall decree, that it cannot pass it, and though the Waves thereof toss themselves, yet they cannot pre∣vail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it. Fear ye not me, saith the Lord? He that did this, what can he not do? His wrath is a dread, Jer. 10.10. At his wrath, the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation. Yea, his Holiness, his Truth, his Righteousness, and all his Name, Deut, 28.58. That thou mayest
fear this glorious and fearfull Name (the Lord thy God.) The Lord God is a dreadful God. 2. The Lord God hath put the dread of him∣self upon the hearts of all the earth. Not the best onely, but the worst of the sons of men. I am a great King, saith the Lord, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen. This dread of the Lord breaks forth upon them, 1. From the impress of God upon the natures of all men. As the Law, so the being of God is written in their hearts, he hath his witness in their Consciences. If the Atheists of the Earth could answer all the Arguments from without, proving that there is a God, yet they can never confute their own Consciences. If the works of God do not, their Reins shall instruct them; If they will not see, whether they will or no they shall feel that there is a God; and where ever God is felt, he is feared: Even when their mouth speaketh proud things, their heart shall meditate terror; and when nothing else is, they shall be a terror to themselves. 2. It is increased by the great works of God, his Wonders that he doth in the world; his Thun∣der, and his Hail, his Wind, and his Waves, and his Earth-quakes, make an Earth-quake in hearts. 3. Its further heightned, by his Judgments which he executeth on the Earth. The Judge∣ments of God, are God revealing himself from Heaven, against the ungodliness and unrighteous∣ness of men; and do then strike most terror, 1. When he smites suddenly, and makes quick work with sinners: as when Herod was smote
by an Angel of God, Nadab and Abihu consu∣med by fire from God, immediately upon their sin. Sudden strokes shake secure hearts. 2. When he executes strange judgments, makes a new thing, as in the case of Korah and his company, he made the Earth to open her mouth upon them and swallow them up; so he made the flies, and the froggs, and the lice, &c. to be the Executio∣ners of his Wrath on Pharaoh. 3. When he executes great Wrath for little Sins, as men ac∣count them; as in the case of Uzzah, whom he struck dead, for but touching the Ark when it shook. 4. When he exercises great severity on his own; on those that are near him. If he spa∣reth not his Sons, what will he do with his Ene∣mies? If these things be done on the green Tree, what shall be done on the dry? 4. Yet further, By their Conscience of guilt, and their binding over to the judgment to come. The sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron, with the point of a Diamond, it is graven upon the tables of their heart. The sin of [Judah] is written; yea, and the sin of the Gentile also, Rom. 2.15. Their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing. And where their sin is written, there their judgment is writ∣ten; which even nature it self will teach, doth in∣evitably follow upon sin: and this is the great dread that is upon them. The very mention of judgment to come, made a Felix tremble, at the face of a poor Prisoner. This is the terror of the Lord, mentioned by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10,11. We must all appear before the Judgment-seat.—Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we
perswade men. Death is said to be the King of terrors; and this is the terror of death, after that the judgment. All these, the impress of God up∣on their hearts; the wonders of God in the word; the vengeance of God executed on sin; the sence of guit, and of a judgment to come, do preach to the Consciences of sinners, that It is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 3. Yet by sin the heart of man is much hardned from the fear of the Lord. Sin blinds the eye, and hardens the heart; brings into danger, and puts out of fear. Who in such danger, and yet who so bold as the blind sinner? When the understan∣ding is darkned, the next word we read is, Past feeling, Eph. 4.19. There is included in the very nature of sin, a slighting of God; and by once slighting, we learn to slight him more. Slight the Command, and you will quickly slight the Curse: Laugh at duty, and 't will not be long ere you laugh at tear: And when sin hath thus hard∣ned, God will also harden; lets the sinner alone, suspends his judgments, smites the sinner with ju∣dicial blindness, and gives him up to a Reprobate mind, Rom. 1.28. And when once they come to this, then Hell is broke loose: For what follows? ver. 29. Being filled with all unrighteousness, for∣nication, wickedness, covetousness, malitiousness, and what not? Psal. 36.1. The transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, there is no fear of God before his eyes. Gen, 20 When Abraham had such a thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place, what thought he was there then? Mur∣ther, Adultery, Rapes, all manner of villany.
What sawest thou amongst us, that thou hast done this thing? What hurt, what evill didst thou see among us? What evill? Evill enough, to make me afraid; I thought the fear of God was not here, and there needs no more to make me afraid. Say of any Person, The fear of God is not in this man, and you therein say, The Devil is in him, here dwels sin, and all manner of wickedness. Say of any place, The fear of God is not in this place, and if you find it an Egypt, or Sodom for abominations, you will not wonder. Psal. 19.9. The fear of the Lord is clean. That is, not only Formaliter, but Effectivè, it cleanseth. Where this is not, every unclean thing may dwell. The reason why this world is such a world as 'tis, such a wicked world, such a treacherous, deceitful, un∣godly world; why there is so little Faith, or Truth, or Mercy, or Charity, or Sobriety, is, be∣cause there is so little of the fear of God. Sin hath cast out fear, and this hath brought forth sin in abundance. The Law is nothing, Threat∣nings are nothing, Conscience is nothing, God is nothing to men, because he is not their fear. Wickedness is as righteousness, villany as honesty; prodigality, debauchery, as temperance and so∣briety; yea, and hath gotten the start of it; it faceth the Sun, it lifts up the head, it wears the Garland; it paints it self Vertue, Generosity, Gal∣lantry, the beauty and ornament of the World, where the fear of God is departed. God may promise, threaten, command; Hear∣ken to my voice, turn at my reproofs, cast away your transgressions: Awake from your wine, be chaste, sober, be humble; let your merriment be turned
into mourning, your jollity into heaviness. Re∣member your Creator, remember your souls, why will you die? Turn and live: God may speak thus, once, and twice, and ten times, but is not regarded; his words have no weight, his counsels have no credit, his warnings are of no value with hardned fearless hearts. If the Devil speak but one, he is heard; if Lust speak but one, 'tis obeyed; if a proud companion speak but once, he is followed; whilest the word of the God of glory is made a reproach and a scorn. Oh the intollerable contempt that's poured out upon the most High, by men that fear not God! Make thy promises, and give thy gifts to whom thou wilt; give Grace, and give Glory where thou pleasest; the World for me, my Pleasures, mine Honours, my Liberty for me; this world for me, look after the other who will. Let the Lord threaten, let the day of the Lord come, let it ha∣sten that we may see it, let the Almighty do his worst, I will not hearken nor turn: This is the blasphemy of hardned fearless hearts. 4. God will recover his Honour in the hearts of his people. He will put his fear in their hearts, whilest others are hardened, they shall tremble; whilest others kick, they shall stoop; who ever despise me, of these will I be had in honour. 5. What this fear of the Lord is, that he will put into their hearts. The fear of God is taken in Scripture, 1. Sometimes more largely, as it comprehends all Religion. Job was said, Chap. 1. to be a man fearing God, that is, a godly man; but in this nse I shall not here speak of it.
2. Sometimes more Strictly, as a distinct grace, as distinguished from Faith, Love, Hope, and other graces of the Spirit. And being taken in this sense, there are these two things included in it. 1. A Reverence of God. 2. An Abhorrence of evill for Gods sake. 1. A Reverence of God. To fear God, is to have the awe of God abiding upon the heart, to be under a sence of the Majesty and Glory of the Lord, shining forth in all his Attributes, especial∣ly in his Holiness and Omniscience; the glory of his Holiness, and the sence of such an holy eye upon the soul, strikes it with dread and conster∣nation. This is exprest in Scripture by Sancti∣fying the Lord in the heart, Levit. 10.3. I will be sanctified in them that draw nigh me. Isa. 8.13. Sanctifie the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. There is mention in Scripture of a sanctifying of God, and a justifying of God: As God doth justifie, and sanctifie his people, so they are to justifie and sanctifie God. These two, the justifying and sanctifying of God, though they be much the same, yet there is some difference betwixt them: To sanctifie God, is to reverence him in our hearts, and to represent him in the glory of his Holiness before men. To justifie God, supposeth a sinful judging, and foolish charging of God, in the hearts of men, and is our vindicating of him from such charges. Is God righteous! How is it then that he is so partial in his dealings with the righteous and unrighteous? that he deals worse with those that fear him, then with those
that fear him not? Is God good? How is it then that he is so hard, not onely in imposing, but inflicting such hard things upon his own? Is God true? How is it then that he fails his peo∣ple so often, when he hath said, I will never fail them nor forsake them? Our flesh hath failed, and our heart hath failed, yea and our God hath often failed us too; we have often called, and have had no answer; we have often trusted, and have had no deliverer. Yet God is righteous, yet God is good, yet God is true; he hath not been unrighteous, he hath not been an hard Ma∣ster, he hath not failed nor forsaken; this is to justifie God. Our justifying of God, hath some kindes of re∣semblance with Gods justifying of us. Gods justification of us, stands in his not imputing sin to us, and accepting us as righteous; and our justi∣fying of God, stands in our not imputing evill to him, and our acknowledging him to be true, just, and good. God hath justified me from my sins, and thats enough to proclaim him good and faith∣full, whatever his other dealings be: Let him af∣flict me, let him chastise me, since he will not judge me nor condemn me with the world. God hath justified himself in my Conscience. I have found that the Lord is gracious, I have found that God is faithfull; he hath said he will not, and I must say, he hath not forsaken! He hath not failed, when he hath most failed me; when he hath been farthest off from my help, he hath even then been a present help in trouble: He hath answered, when he hath been most silent; he hath been most good, when he hath been most hard;
I have never found more sweet, then in his bitter Cup; I must judge my self, not my God: I have sinned, I have sinned against him, and therefore I must justifie him when he speaketh, and clear him when he judgeth. Hold thy peace queru∣lous heart, be silent all the Earth before the Lord, for truly God is good to Israel, and to them that are of a clean heart. There be few among the worst of sinners, but if Conscience might be suffered to speak, it would justifie God. 'Tis Lust that quarrels, not Conscience: 'Tis vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is there to keep his Ordi∣nances▪ His waies are unequal and hard, his pro∣mise failes, take one time with another, oftner then 'tis made good. Who is it that plagues and disappoints, and crosseth and vexeth us? This evill is of the Lord, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? Nay whom doth he pu∣nish moe then those that are nearest him? Who have sorrow, who have trouble in the flesh? Who are reproached, scorn'd, hunted up and down the world but these? This they may thank God for, and their following of him. 'Tis better be∣ing the servant of sin, then the servant of Christ. Thus Lust blasphemes; but speak Conscience; Is God unrighteous? Is God false of his word? Are the pleasures of sin better then the gain of godliness? Have the children of this world made a wiser choise then the children of light? Speak sinner, let thy Conscience speak whether it be thus or no. God hath not left himself without wit∣ness in the hearts of sinners; much more will his Saints, when they do speak their hearts, speak good of his name. But this by the way.
To return to the matter in hand. To san∣ctifie God, is especially to reverence him in the heart; to have such an high, an holy, and honou∣rable esteem of him, as commands an awe upon the heart; and that 1. At all times: My son, be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. [My son] 'Tis not on∣ly for Slaves, but for Sons to fear. [Be thou in the fear of the Lord.] 'Tis not only, Let the fear of the Lord be in thee, habitually in thy heart, but actuate and stir up this holy fear, keep up an holy awe, a deep sence of God alwaies upon thee; let the fear of the Lord be before thine eyes; be possessed and swallowed up of this fear [all the day long] where ever thou art, with whomsoever thou hast to do, remember thou hast still to do with God. A Christian should stand alwaies pro tribunali; every day should be as the last day, the day of judgment to him. So speak ye, and so do, as those that shall be judged, Jam. 2.12. The Judge stands at the door, yea, and thou mayest see him through every window, yea through every wall; every wall is a window, through which God may see and be seen. A Chri∣stian (when he is as he should be) cannot wink God out of sight; can look no where, but he be∣holds that eye that strikes an awe upon his spirit. This abiding reverence of God, what an in∣fluence will it have upon the whole course; we shall then serve God acceptably; when we fear, we shall please God; That we may serve God (ac∣ceptably) with reverence and godly fear. We shall then serve God universally in every thing. When we fear, we shall watch, unto every duty, against
every sin, Gen. 42,18. This do and live, for I fear God, said Joseph to his brethren; as if he should have said, Do not you fear to find falshood or any evil dealing from me, for I fear God; I dare not be false to you, you may trust me, you may take my word, for I fear God. We shall then walk before the Lord steadily; When we fear, we shall fix, and hold in an even frame and course. Fear will be our Ballast, whilest Love fills our Sails, Fear will Ballast our Vessell. How are slight and frothy spirits tossed up and down? Whither do they wander? How many hearts, and faces, and frames have they every day? What contradictions are they to themselves? The reve∣rence of God upon them, would fix them, and hold them in a more even and equal poise. We should then serve the Lord more Honourably; When we fear, we shall shew forth the vertues of God before the world; so much of the reverence, so much of the holiness of God upon us, The presence of a Christian walking in the fear of the Lord, is as the presence of God; the reverence of God upon his heart, casts a beam of Divine Majesty into his face, and oftentimes begets an awe and reverence of him in the hearts of the worst of sinners; they reverence, even whilest they revile and persecute him, Iohn Baptist, who was a man of a just and holy and austere life, 'tis said of him, Mark 6,20. That Herod feared him, and observed him. The austerity and holiness of his life, commanded a respect from an Herods heart. Such Christians, their waies are a conviction, and their very coun∣tenances are a rebuke to the wanton world;
they speak with authority, they exhort with au∣thority, they reprove with authority, and sin of∣ten hides it self from them, even as from the face of God. 2 Especially in our drawing nigh to God, Psal. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him. I will be sanctified in them that draw nigh me. He that fears God, trembles at the word of God: And God loves he should, Isa. 26.2. To this man will I look—that trembles at my word. That which makes him tremble is, that he sees the Word carrying up∣on it. The Holiness. The Authority of God. He reads the word, as the Epistle of God sent down to the world; his Epistle Commendatory, that sets forth the Excellency and the Glory of God, and his Letters Mandatory, that charge sub∣jection and obedience upon him; he takes every word as comming from the mouth of the holy One of Israel; he lies prostrate before the Lord, his soul bowes the knee, his heart falls down at the feet of the Almighty. The word, by how much the more it's considered as the word of God, by so much the more awe it works upon him. Every look he casts upon his Bible, is a looking into Heaven. He that fears God, fears when he comes to worship, reverences his Sanctua∣ry: In thy fear will I worship, Psal. 5.7. That which works this fear, is that he looks upon the Duties, and Ordinances of worship, as The Institutions of God.
His Application unto God. This is that which the Lord hath sanctified; behold his Image and Superscription; here he hath appointed me to wait for him; here he hath appointed to meet my soul; now I am going up to the Mount of God (the Mount of God is every where, where the worship of God is.) My soul where art thou? I am before the Lord of the whole Earth. Put off thy shoes from off thy feet; the place where thou standest is holy ground. I am before the High and holy One, the God of all the Earth; and upon transactions of Eternal consequence; to do my homage to the everlast∣ing King; to kneel before the Lord my maker; to kiss the golden Scepter; to begg my life at his hands, to behold his goings in his Sanctuary; his wisdom, and his mercy, and his goodness, are all passing before me. How dreadfull is this place? This is none other but the House of God, and the gate of Heaven, Gen. 28.17. How dreadfull is this word! This is none other but the word of God. How dreadfull is this Ordinance? This is no other but the door of glory. Tremble thou heart at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. 2. Abhorrence of evill for the Lords sake. Here we shall consider its Object. Ground. 1. The Object of this abhorrence, in general is evill, Rom. 12.9. Abhorre that which is evil, cleave to that which is good. Good is the Ob∣ject of Love, evill of Fear. Evill is twofold, Present, or to come. The former is the Object
of Grief, the latter of Fear. Particularly, the Object of this abhorrence is The wrong of God. The loss of God. 1. The wrong of God. The great and onely wrong of God is sin. Sin is the turning away of the heart from God. The great thing in all the world which God respects, and requires as his own, is Hearts. My son give me thie heart. Keep thine heart with all diligence, Prov. 4.23. Keep thine heart, that is, Keep it for me; keep it clean for God, and keep it safe for God; see that it be not defiled, nor carried away. When the heart's gone, all's gone with it. If the VVorld hath gotten hearts, if Satan hath gotten hearts, let them take all, saith God; let me have either an heart or nothing; and all they are like to have that have the heart. The heart where∣ever it goes, carries all with it. VVhere we be∣stow our hearts, we bestow all that we have. Sin is the turning away of the heart. This is the ve∣ry nature of sin, The hearts departing from the living God, Heb. 3.12. And therefore this is the great wrong of God. There is but one thing in the world that God respects, and this sin steals away. Sin is the insurrection and rebellion of the heart against God; it turns from him, and turns against him, it runs over to the camp of the enemy, and there takes up arms against God. Sin is a run∣ning from God, and a fighting against God: it would spoil the Lord of all the Jewels of his Crown. It opposeth the Soveraignty of God: A sinfull heart would set up it self in Gods Throne,
it would be King in his stead, and have the com∣mand of all. Sinners would be their own Gods: Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? God shall not be God, where sin is gotten up as Lord. It assaulteth the wisdom of God. Vain man would be wise, wiser then his Maker. It char∣ges the Lord with folly, and proclaims it self the onely wise. Sinners pretend to know how to choose for themselves, and order themselves to their advantage, better then God. If God would let me alone to my self, to be at mine own finding, at mine own ordering, it should quickly be bet∣ter with me. If every thing might be with me as I would have it, my case would be well mend∣ed from what 'tis now that every thing must go as God will have it. All our quarrellings at Pro∣vidence, all our murmurings and discontents at our Lott, are our hearts charging the Lord with folly. It casts dirt on the holiness of God, it dis∣parages the goodness of God; it abuseth mercy, violates his Justice, despises his Power: In summe, it disgraceth the Throne of his glory, and layes his honour in the dust, sets the Almigh∣ty below the lowest of his creatures. Every companion shall be respected more then God, every pleasure shall be loved more then God, the Devil shall be feared more then God. Where is his love? VVhere is his fear? VVhere is his Honour? Nay where were the Lord, might sin carry it? Sin is the wrong of God, and this wrong is the especial Object of this abhorrence. A gracious heart would do no wrong, he would not wrong his Neighbour, he would not wrong his Servant, his Enemy, no not his Beast that he
possesses. But Oh should I wrong my God? Hath he ever done me any wrong? Hath he not been just to me? Yea hath he not been ever good to me? Kinde, pityful, patient, bountiful? Who hath fed me, cloathed me, kept me, succoured me comforted me? What friend have I in all the world? What Father what Portion, what Hope but the Lord? What were I? What had I, but vanity, but woe, and misery, had I not a God? I cannot wrong my God, but I wrong my self, Prov. 8.36. He that sinneth against me, wrongeth his own soul. But if I did not, if my Arrowes would not recoil, could I go out with all this in∣jury, and suffer nothing by it: Yet he is God, whom I wrong; he is holy, he is righteous, he is good, he is glorious, he is excellent; he onely is God, and shall I be injurious to him? He is wor∣thy, he is worthy of all that I have, of all the ser∣vice I can do, of all the respect I can give, of all the Praise I can offer up; if I had a thousand tongues, if I had a thousand hands, if I had a thousand lives, if I had a thousand soules, if I had all the Earth for an offring to the Lord, all would be nothing to shew forth the praise that is due to his Name as he is God, and I his creature: and when I owe so much, and have nothing to pay, shall I steal from him? Shall I rise up against him? Wast thou not afraid to lift up thy hand against the Lords Anointedi 2 Sam. 1. Shall I not be afraid to lift up mine hand against the Lord himself? To kick against God, to fight against God, Oh the Lord forbid. What art thou O my soul? What servest thou for? If thou canst not tremble, if thou dost not turn within me, if thou dost not
start back, at the very thought of so great wick∣edness. 2. The loss of God. As was said before, He that finneth against God, wrongeth his own soul: His loss is thy loss, and more thine then his; though no thanks to thee, the Lord will be no loser at last, when sinners have done their worst; he can get up his Honour out of Dishonour; he can recover his spoils out of the ashes; if he had lost all the world, he had lost nothing, he is all things in himself. When Earth and Hell have spent all their malice, God will be God; Holy Wise, Glorious, blessed for ever. Though such be the malignity of sin, that it would not give over, till God ceaseth to be God, yet God is a∣bove, too high for sin to reach; its Darts fall short of its Mark, God cannot, God will not sit down a loser by all that sin can do. But what dost thou suffer, what dost thou lose that sinnest against God? The carnal world un∣derstand not what, nor would make much rec∣koning of it, did they understand it. The loss of two pence goes often nearer them, then the loss of God. But now a Christian knows no other fear, fears no other loss; let God be secure and all is well. Sin will be the wrong of God, and the loss of God; it may be a total and eternal loss for ought he knows, at least if not assured: God lost, is the soul lost, the Kingdom lost; this is Hell, the loss of God. Better have no being, better be a Dog, or Toad, then a man without a God: or if he be not utterly lost, yet to his present sence 'twill be all one as if he had no God: his peace is lost, his comfort is lost, and his soul is often given for
lost, from whom God is departed, though but for a season; he can take pleasure in nothing, he can find rest no where, whose God is out of fight. He knows not what a God means, who can spare him till Death or Judgment. A Christian cannot live a day without him; 'tis night, 'tis all dark, he knows no day while the Sun is set upon him. How grievous do they find this loss, who have proved what it is? What wilt thou do for me, whilest I go childless? What can be done for me, whilest I go Fatherless? Here is my house, here are my friends, and my lands, but where is my God? My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Now I see what this Earth is without an Heaven; now I see what ease, and pleasure, and carnal friends are, and how little they can do for me: Yea what is prayer? What are Sabbaths? What are Sermons, Sacraments, Promises, whilest God looks not down? Oh I was wont to meet with God here, these glasses were my Windows into Heaven; and then how pleasant were they to me? Sabbaths were a delight, the Word was a Trea∣sure, Sacraments were the clusters of Canaan. But now, now all 's dark and dry; Ordinances are Wells without water; Promises are Breasts without Milk; Ministers are Stars without Light: Oh the Stars are but Clods, whilest the Sun is a Cloud to me; wo is me, I had a God. I am pained, I am pained, my head is sick, my heart is faint, my bowels are turn∣ed, my liver is poured out, the light of mine eyes is gone from me. I am weary of my groaning, I am full of tossings and turnings, there is no soundness in my flesh, no rest in my bones, while
my soul saies daily to me, Where is thy God? And if the sence of this loss worketh such grief, what wonder if the hazard of it worketh fear. Now sin divides, breaks the peace, makes God and the soul two; sin alienates, breeds a distance and estrangement betwixt God and the soul. That soul can either not see him at all, or not as a friend, whom sin hath drawn away. Sin will either clod the face of God, or clothe him with fury; will cause him either to turn his back upon the soul, or set his face against it. He that knows what 'tis to enjoy God, will dread his loss; he that hath seen his face, will fear to see his back; he loves, and therefore would not lose. 2. The ground and reason of this abhorrence, that is Two-fold: Gods Jealousie. His Peoples Ingenuity. 1. Gods Jealousie. The Lord thy God is a jea∣lous God, Exod. 20. The same Arguments which the Lord useth to keep up, and enforce his Autho∣rity upon the Consciences of his people, the same Arguments they do, and ought to make use of, to press it upon themselves. I am a jealous God, saith the Lord; 'tis true saith Conscience, the Lord is jealous; and therefore take heed to thy self soul, how thou fallest into his hands. It's a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God. The Jealousie of the Lord includes in it, His Tenderness of his Honour. Terribleness in case of Dishonour. 1. His tenderness of his Honour. The Honour of God is very tender to him, he will not lose a
tittle of it; Jer. 48.8. My glory will I not give to another, nor my praise to graven Images. I will not, and look you to it, that you do not give a∣way my glory. What was the reason that God dealt so severely with Eli and with Herod? What was Elies sin? Why that he gave away the Ho∣nour of God to his sons, 1 Sam. 2.29. Thou Ho∣nourest thy sons above me. He was so tender to his sons, that though they were become sons of Belial, and dealt so wickedly before the Lord, yet they must be dealt gently with; Nay my sons, it is no good thing that I hear of you. Such a slight reproof must serve in so dreadfull a case; he was afraid to displease his sons by a sharper reproof; this the Lord interprets, an honouring of his sons above him. Indulgent Parents, stand and tremble, you that can see your children sin, and let them go out with a Nay my sons, it is not good; a slight or cold reproof, this is no other but your honouring your sons above your God. What was Herods sin? Acts 12.22,23. that he gave not God the glory. He made an Eloquent Oration, and the people thereupon made him a God; The voice of God, and not of man, and he accepted of the ap∣plause; and thereupon the Angel of the Lord smote him, that he dyed. Eli sinned, in giving the Honour of God to his sons, and Herod in ta∣king it to himself; but God taught them both, how dear his glory is to him. 2. His Terribleness in case of his Dishonour. The mentioned instances speak him both Tender, and Terrible. Deut. 4.24. The Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God. The jealousie of a man, is the rage of a man; Prov. 6.34. and
the jealousie of God, is the rage and fury of a God. Our God is a consuming fire; that's the fire of his jealousie. The wrath of a King, is as the roaring of a Lyon; when the Lyon roareth, the Beasts of the field tremble; what then are the Terrors of the Lord? The threatnings of the Lord are terrible, Psal. 50.22. Consider this ye that for∣get God, lest he [tear you in pieces,] and there be none to deliver. Hos. 5.14. I even I will tear and go away. Tearing, and tearing in pieces, the very expectation of it is enough to tear the heart in pieces. I will tear them saith God. I my self will do it, [I even I] will tear. Its terrible to be torn of men, or of wilde Beasts; but take heed of Gods tearing. I will tear [in pieces:] I will not tear off their Hair, or their Garments, or their Ornaments; I'll tear their flesh from their bones, Limb from limb, yea soul from body; I'll tear them in pieces. I will tear them [and go away,] tear them and leave them; wound and not heal; I will tear them, and deliver them who can: yea I will tear them and trample upon them, Isa. 62.3. I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury.. Trampling notes contempt and indignation. I will make them as the dirt in the streets; the mark of my scorn and fury. His Judgments are terrible, he doth terrible things in righteousness. Go to Jerusalem and Mount Sion, and behold the Monuments of his fury there. Go to Shiloh (saith God) and see what I did to it, Ier. 7.12. But if you go down to Sodm, or look down to Tophet, and behold the terrors of the Lord there; or if you look on par∣ticular
Persons, let Nadab and Abihu, Corah, Da∣than, and Abiram, Uzzh Uzziah, Ananias and Sapphira, Herod, &c. be for instances of his dread∣fulness and severity. This jealous God, this ter∣rible God, is the God that his people fear; and they therefore fear him, because he is such a jea∣lous God. Who would not fear thee, thou King of Nations? Who can stand before thee when thou art angry? My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. Christians, Let none say, this fear is not the fear of his Children; this be to his Enemies and Slaves, not his Children; Fear ye not their fear. But are not all these things written for our learn∣ing? Is this written onely for their sakes? Or saith he not also for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written saith the Apostle in another case. Consider that full Scripture to this purpose, 1 Cor. 10.6. to the end of v. 12. Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted; Neither be ye Idolaters as were some of them; as it is written, The people safe down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twen∣ty thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmur∣ed, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. Now all these things happened unto them for exsamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. Mark, these things are our examples. Are
they examples to us, and not warnings too? Are they warnings to us, and must we not by them learn to fear and beware? Let him that thinks he standeth, take heed lest he fall. My soul standeth in a sure place, my mountain is so strong, that I shall never be moved. I am safe enough, I am in Christ, and shall not come into condem∣nation. But whatever thou thinkest, as sure as thou thinkest thou standest, take heed; take heed lest thou fall: That is, not onely into the same sins, but into the same condemnation; that's the sence of the place. Rom. 11.20. Because of unbe∣lief they were broken off, thou standest by faith. Be not high-minded, but fear. No need of fear? No need of threatnings? What may we burn half our Bibles? Can we spare so great a part of what is written? Have we out-grown the use of judgments, assoon as ever we are partakers of mercy? Have we out-grown the use of the Scourge, assoon as ever we are en∣tred into Christs School? Do we finde all too little, Mercies, Threatnings, Judgments, to keep our hearts in order? And yet is it more then needs? There are two Parties in us; we are flesh as well as spirit, and must not the flesh be fright∣ed? Will Love prevail with Lust? This Slave sure, this son of the Bond-woman must be kept in awe. Hath God no wanton children? No rebellious children? And must these have no o∣ther Discipline, but stroakings and dandlings? Believe it Christians, God will not have his terrors lost, nor lost to you; God will sometimes make his children feel, that he is a terrible God. He is Terrible out of his holy place. Beware you
be not presumptuous children. There is a three∣fold Presumption. There is a Presump∣tion Upon Temptation in confidence of strength. Upon sin in confidence of Mercy. Upon sin in contempt of Mercy and Justice. 1. A Presumption upon Temptation, in confi∣dence of strength. Some unwary souls, not know∣ing what spirit they are of, supposing themselves too hard for the Devil, will be venturing within his reach; as if they would dare him to try his skill and power: who having forgotten this Prayer [Lead us not into temptation,] put them∣selves into the Tempters hand; the falls of such will teach them to understand their folly. 2. Presumption on sin, in confidence of Mercy. And that either in confidence of mercy already obtained, I am in Christ, and my sin shall not se∣parate me from him; whatever I do, I have a Pardon in my hand. Or in hope of mercy at last, I have to do with a merciful God, and therefore may venture on a little farther; hereafter I will repent, and then I need not doubt of remis∣sion. 3. Presumption on sin in contempt of Mercy and Justice. I will have my sin, though I never find mercy. I will have my will, and my way, and run the hazard of what follows; I will take my course, and come on me what will. This last sort, who presume to sin in contempt of Mercy and Judgment; who are so drunken with their sensual delights, and given over to the hardness of their hearts, that they neither value
Mercy, nor fear wrath: What do you talk to me of Mercy, and Judgment to come? Give me my plea∣sures, and my liberties, and my mirth, and my money: think not to make me such a fool, to let go the plea∣sure and comfort of my life for I know not what un∣certain fears or hopes: Such as these, have one foot already in Hell. If it be not yet thus with thee, thou darest not contemn either Mercy or Judg∣ment: Beware thou be not Presumptuous nei∣ther in the former sences. Be not bold upon Temptations; think not that thou art strong to overcome a Temptation, when thou art so weak as not to fear it; he that fears not a Temptation, understands not it or himself. But especially be∣ware thou presume not upon sin, in confidence of Mercy. Grow not over bold upon love or pa∣tience; Laesa patientia fit furor. God loves me, therefore I may be bold to take the more liberty? the less care, the less watchfulness, the less fear, because so much Love! Spit in thy Fathers face, because he weeps over thy neck? Smite him on the face, because thou hopest he will not strike again? Tear his Bowels, because they are so tender to∣wards thee? Be froward, stubborn, wanton, and idle, because thou hast found him so indulgent? Christians consider, whether such wickedness hath not sometimes been found in some of our hearts. But take heed, you will finde, though he be a tender, yet he will not be a fond Father; where he loves, he will be feared. Some as bold and as confident as you, have felt to their cost, what 'tis to abuse patience and kindness; his Ar∣rowes in their hearts, his Terrors in their souls, hath made them to know, that the God of love is
a terrible God. And look to it, if thou yet wilt adventure, wilt be a wanton still, froward, or idle, or heedless still, he will either lash thee in∣to better manners, or cast thee out as no childe of his, but a Bastard, and Rebel. If thou wilt not take warning by others, take heed lest he make thee a warning to them which shall come after. Christians know, that though God be tender of his Saints, yet he is jealous for his Name; he tenders them as the Apple of his Eye, but not a∣bove the least title of his Honour. As God will have us love our Neighbour, so he will love his childe; but as himself: First himself, and then his childe. He will not bate an Iota of his glory, to save a world. As little offences done to his little ones, so little sins allowed by them, are as Mill stones about the neck. If they allow it in themselves, yet Heaven and Earth shall pass a∣way, and fall to nothing, ere he allow it in them. God will not, and therefore his children dare not indulge themselves in little sins. They therefore fear, because he whom they serve is a jealous God. 2. Their own ingenuity. This fear is from Love and good Nature, and is most properly the fear of children. Children fear, because God is jealous, and so do Slaves; but onely Children be∣cause God is good. Children fear, because they love; Slaves fear, although they hate: Children fear to be unworthy, Slaves onely to be unhappy and miserable. There's nothing more contrary to an ingenuous nature, then to abuse goodness and kindness; to abuse goodness, hath as black
an aspect with him, as to provoke Wrath. Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the Lord and his [goodness] in the latter dayes. But how can goodness be the Object of fear? We fear evill and not good. The meaning is, they shall fear to wrong or abuse goodness: They shall fear to wrong the Lord, because he is good. [in the latter dayes] These latter dayes that this Promise refers to, shall be dayes of more grace; wherein there shall be, not onely a more clear revelation of the goodness of God; they shall know the Lord and his goodness: But a more plentifull communication, and diffusi∣on of the goodness of God; they shall love the Lord and his goodness: They shall see themselves both more obliged by goodness, and shall feel themselves more seasoned with goodness. By grace they shall be better natured. Religion doth not make morose, but more generous, free, and in∣genuous. There's nothing more abhorrent to an ingenuous spirit, then to be base and unwor∣thy. Abuse of goodness is an unworthiness, which an ingenuous nature abhors as death to be guilty of; 'tis its destruction, 'tis disingenuity. The abuse of the goodness of God, is great un∣thankfulness, and unthankfulness is great disinge∣nuity. Ingratum si dixeris omnia dixeris. Call me un∣thankfull, and you call me all that's naught. Call me any thing else but unthankfull. Indeed were I all thanks, I should still be unthankfull; I should still be behind-hand with the goodness of the Lord; my debt is greater then I can pay, yea greater then I can acknowledge; but shall I return evil for his good? If I cannot pay, should
I deny my Debt? He that is unthankfull, what∣ever God requires of him, saies wickedly, this is more then I owe thee. God I owe thee nothing, I care not for thee; Oh this is dreadfull to a gra∣tious heart. If this be in sin, (for all sin is unthankfulness) if this be in sin, if this be the signification of all my neglects of God, and my duty to him; then the Lord forbid, what ever I suffer, that I should yeeld to sin. How shall I do this wickedness? How shall I neglect this duty and sin against God? How should I look my God or my own soul in the face, should I be so unworthy? For thy sake Lord let me not sin against thee; thou art good, thou art kind, thou art gracious, thou art holy, O let me not be a Devil; what heart, where a Devill is not, but such goodness will charm it into love? Shall I sin? Shall I rebell? For thy sake Lord I will not do it. I will not for mine own sake, for where then shall I appear? In sinning against God, I sin against mine own soul; I dare not for my life; sin and Death, sin and Hell, are link'd together; but were it not so, might I sin and escape, sin and not die, yet for thy sake Lord, I will not do it: Thou art good, good in thy self, good to me; thou att my God, thou art my Father; love, care, tenderness, compassion, kind∣ness is all that is in thine heart towards me; what I am, what I have, what I hope for; that I breathe, that I live, all is thy goodness, thy bounty to me. Oh let me not rise up against the Womb that bare me, and the Paps that give me suck. I would not to my childe, to my servant, to my friend; but Oh let me never to my Father, to
my God, return evill for good, and hatred for his good will. Let not this evill which I fear, ever come upon me; put thy fear into mine heart O Lord, that I may not sin against thee. CHAP. XV. Obedience in the Covenant. 7. OBedience, Ezek. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes; and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them, Obedience is either of the Heart, or of the Life. In this Scripture, God undertakes for both. 1. For the obedience of the Heart, he under∣takes in the former words, [I will put my Spirit in your heart;] where the Spirit dwells, be rules. Where Satan dwells, he rules, and where the Spirit of the Lord dwells, there God rules; the Spirit in the heart, is the Law in the heart. Those two Promises, I will put my Spirit in your hearts, and I will write my Law in your hearts, signifie the same thing. The Law in the heart, is the will of man melted into the will of God. The Law of God may be in the mouth, and the heart a Rebel; its reception into the heart, notes the hearts sub∣jection to it. The Obedience of the heart includes two things: 1. The opening of the heart to the Word. 2. The resolution of the heart for the Work of the Lord.
1. The opening of the heart to the Word. What wilt thou have me to do Lord! That's the voice of an obedient heart. Veniat verbum & submit∣temus. Speak Lord, command Lord, what wilt thou? And when he speaks, whatever it be, the word is embraced and accepted of the heart, Dan. 4.27. Let my counsel be acceptable to thee. The acceptance of the word in the heart, is signified by its hearkening to it. To hearken, is more then to hear; though they sometimes note the same thing, yet ordinarily, hearing is of the ear, hear∣kening of the heart, Psal. 81.11. Israel would not hearken, my people would none of me. They heard what the Lord spake, but they would not hear∣ken; that is, as tis there interpreted, they would none of the Lord. They rejected the word of the Lord which he spake unto them. When the word is let come in with Authority, suffered to rule in the soul, when the heart gives up it self unto it, then it is accepted; there's its hearken∣ing to it. 2 The resolution of the heart for the work of the Lord, Psal. 110.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. I have vowed, and I will perform. I have covenan∣ted, and I am determined to keep thy statutes. The word which thou hast spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not do, that's the rebellious; What∣soever the Lord shall speak, we will do, that's the obedient heart. Where the heart is thus resolved to obey, this is that obedience, which shall be accepted unto salvation. Where this resolution is, as there is opportunity there will be practice; and where
there's not opportunity, in Gods account, this is it. This is Praying, this is Hearing, this is gi∣ving, and feeding, and cloathing, and visiting; this is walking circumspectly, working righteousness, shewing mercy, exercising Faith, and Patience, and Repentance; this is our keeping the Com∣mandments of God, and walking in his Statutes; an heart to obey, is our obeying; an heart to do, is our doing; an heart to suffer in Gods account, is our suffering for his Name. But here it must be carefully noted, that though sincere resolution for Obedience, be Obe∣dience, yet every resolution, is not that resolu∣tion. Resolution for Obedience is then sincere, where 1. It flowes from an inward and rooted incli∣nation. 2. It's bottomed on a firm belief of Scripture Revelation. 3. It's built on the highest and weightiest Reasons. 4. It's the result of the most mature and deep deliberation. 1. A sincere resolution flowes from an inward rooted inclination, Psal. 119.112. I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes. Our new pur∣pose, is from our new nature: It is not produ∣ced by some sudden fright, or sence of danger; or meerly by a present force of Argument: but by a Divine power, working the heart to a suitable∣ness to the will and waies of God, and an habitu∣all propension and inclination thereto. Resolu∣tion for holiness, without an holy inclination, is a Blade without a Root; as fresh and as green
as it looks, 't will wither and come to nothing; no Ropt, no Fruit, nor lasting. The heart is the root of action, and grace is the life of the root: When our Resolutions are the Blade, sprouting forth of this living Root, then they will abide, and bring forth the Ear, and an Har∣vest. 2. A sincere resolution is bottomed on a firm As∣sent, to the truth of Scripture Revelation. A Christian resolves for godliness, because he be∣lieves God, that he is as he hath said, the Rewar∣der of them that diligently seek him. He is built on the Scriptures; as his hopes, so his purposes have the foundation of the Prophets and Apo∣stles, on which they stand. Whatever Resoluti∣on hath not this Foundation, is but as an house upon the Sands. 3. A sincere Resolution is founded on the highest Reason. Where we resolve without Reason, we will quickly find a Reason to change. Where we resolve we know not why, we shall change we know not how soon. To resolve we know not why, and to resolve on we know not what, will be alike unstable. Though there be Reason for Religion, yet Religion may be taken up without Reason. Whatever Reason there be for it, yet if it be not understood, or considered, 'tis all one as if there were no Reason at all. And if there seem some Reason for it, yet if it be not the highest Reason, when a stronger then it comes, we quickly change our purpose. The Reasons we have for our serving and fol∣lowing God, are the highest of all Reasons; and that whether we respect it as our duty, or our happiness. For,
1. There's none can lay such claim to us as God. Whose am I? Who hath made me? Who hath bought me? 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorifie God in your bodies and in your spirits, which are his. Psal. 100.2,3. Serve the Lord with gladness. For the Lord he is God, it is he that hath made us, not we our selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his Pasture. What reason have you to serve men, or to serve sin or the world? Men think they have reason for it, but what reason? Are any of these Gods? Are men your Gods? Is sin or the world God? Do you owe your selves to them? It is he that hath made us, and his we are: As the Apostle con∣cerning obedience to Parents, much more may it be said here; Children obey your God, for this is right. This is his due, and your duty; if any one can lay as good a claim to you, let him carry you away for servants. 2. There's none can be better to us then God. None can require, and none can reward our obe∣dience as he. Where can you be better then with God? Heel require no more, then that you serve him till you can find a better Master. He that saith 'tis best to serve sin, and the world, is a fool, and hath said in his heart, there is no God. If God be God, he is the chief, yea the onely good. If any thing in the world, upon what ac∣count soever, be thought better then the Lord, that's set up for a God in his room. 3. Whomsoever we serve, 'tis God must pay us our Wages at last. God is Judge, he is the Rewarder both of the evill and the good, both of those that serve him, and those that serve him not. If you receive the Lord, he will be your reward; if you
serve him not, he will reward you; but what re∣ward have you? Those mine Enemies which will not have me to reign over them, bring them and slay them before me; There's their reward. Sin hath its rewards, but what are they but vanity and vexation? Or if they were better, how long will they last? But when sin hath paid the most it can, Oh what a reward is there behinde that God hath to pay you! This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lye down in sorrow. 4. The Wages which God will give, shall certain∣ly be blessed or dreadfull, according to our Obedi∣ence or Disobedience. The reward that God hath to give, is an eternal reward: Eternal salvation to them that obey him, everlasting destruction to him that serveth him not. I have a soul, this carkass is the least part of me; there's another world, a world to come; a few years is the most I have to spend in this; I must abide eternally, eternally in the other world. How inconsiderable is it what I have here, whether little or more, better or worse; in a short time that will come all to one. But oh my eternity what's that like to be? Why tis God that must determine it, and he will certainly re∣ward every man according to his works, Rom. 2.6,7,8,9,10. Who will render to every man ac∣cording to his deeds. To them which by patient con∣tinuance in well doing, seek for glory, honour, and immortality, eternal life. But to them that are contentious and obey not the truth, tribulation and anguish, &c. There's glory and shame, mercy and wrath, life and death set before me; there's
no third state, one of the two must be my lot, and this is it that doth determine which; If I obey I live, if I disobey I die for ever. Now when my resolution is founded on such Reasons as these, then which none can be ima∣gined higher and more weighty; (till eternity become of less regard then time, and an immor∣tall soul be set below a perishing body) and when the question being put, Shall I follow God or not? God or the world? God or my lust? Speak soul, give in thy Answer; when this is the An∣swer it gives, Why there's none can lay such claim to me as God; there's none can be as good to me as God; whomsoever I serve, its God must be my Rewarder; my everlasting blessedness, or eternal ruine depends on him, and must be infal∣libly determined, according to my obedience or disobedience: This is the plain case, Obey, and Live: Obey, or die for ever. And therefore what can I say less or more, but that I am the Lords, and will be his Servant. Let others chuse whom they will serve, as for me, O my soul, serve thou the Lord. This resolution thus founded, is like to stand. 4. A sincere Resolution, is the fruit of mature deliberation. Deliberation gives Reason its full weight; makes the strength of it appear; it layes all things in the Ballance; its the comparing of Reasons for, and against; the weighing of Argu∣ments and Objections; encouragements, and dis∣couragements; casting the cost, as well as the gain: particularly, In this deliberation there must be a considering, 1. What there is in this Obedience.
2. What it is attended with that may dis∣courage. 1. There must be a considering, What there is in this Obedience: Or otherwise we resolve up∣on we know not what. Now there are five things in this Obedience: Subjection. Activity and Industry. Integrity. Circumspection. Spirituality. 1. Subjection. Servants must be subject, must not be at their own wills, but at the will of ano∣ther: The heart of man naturally affects Domi∣nion; that's the great controversie of sinners with God, Who shall be Lord? We are Lords, (we would be at least) we will come no more unto thee, Jer. 2.31. Obedience yields that God should be Lord; yea and all others also, whom he hath made Lords over us. The servants of Christ must not be, and yet must be the servants of men; they must not serve the lusts, but must be subject to their righteous Lawes and Commands. God must be obeyed; and Magistrates, Ministers, Ma∣sters, Parents must be obeyed in the Lord, and for the Lord; yea and they must be, when God will have it so the Servants of servants. While they must not serve the humours of the greatest, they must serve the necessities of the meanest; must stoop to the lowest of Offices, even to the washing of the feet of the least Disci∣ple: All this the Lord expects of them, and they must be subject. They must not dispute, but do his will; onely it must be considered, that there
is a double disputing the will of God: There is a disputing whether that which is pretended to be the wil of God, be so or no; this ought to be done. And there is a disputing or questioning that, which is granted to be the will of God, whether it be fit to be done or safe to be done: Is it not better to let it alone? What advantage is there in it? What reason is there for it? No, they must not thus dispute; this is Reason enough, God will have it so. Gods will is ever Reason, and it must be our Reason. It's enough for thee to say, This is that which the Lord hath commanded, and I must be subject. This is one thing that must be consi∣dered, I will Obey, but can I be Subject? 2. Activity and Industry. The servant of the Lord must be Active, and Industrious. Whom he sends into the Vineyard, he sends to work, and not to sleep. The life of a Christian is labo∣rious; whilest others are in their beds, he must be on his knees: whilest others take their Plea∣sure, he must take Pains: whilest others take their times, now a little, and then a little, he must sit at it, be ever about his Masters business. An active spirit, is an excellent spirit and tis necessary in a Christian. 1. An Active spirit, is an Excellent spirit; Sluggards are the refuse of the Earth. But here it must be considered, that there is a double Activity, Naturall, and Gracious. 1. Natural, which arises from an innate vi∣gour and vivacity of some mens spirits: There needs not industry in such, to bring forth action, 'tis but leaving nature to its course, and that will fly high enough of it self. It requires more Indu∣stry
to regulate and sometimes to restrain, then to put forth into Action. Its more labour for them to rest, then to be doing. 2. Gracious: Which is either Natural Activi∣ty, managed and improved for God, turn'd into a right course, running in a right Channel; or a Naturally Unactive spirit, raised and quickened by grace, and Religious Industry. This gracious, this holy Activity, this is the Excellency; it is the extract of the spirits and life of all our Parts and graces; and will go further, and do more high Ho∣nour, and more abundant service to God and his Gospel then is done by a thousand others. An Active Sinner, is by accident the worst of men: How much service for the Devil will he dispatch in a little time? An Active sinner is life and death met together. He is all life, and yet dead, and the more he hath of death, because so much of life; like poyson in Wine, he destroyes the more effectually: Yet the evill is not in his Activity, but in the matters wherein he is imployed; the good mettal, or keenes of a Weapon, is its Excellency; but in a mad mans hand better a wooden then an iron sword. An Active Spirit is so Excellent, that its pity that ever sin should have the using of it; 't were well for Religion, if the Devil were a Drone, and had no other servants but the Sluggards of the Earth. But Activity when set right is of great price in the sight of God: It is of great price in the sight of God, because it sets a great price upon God. Slothfulness puts a slight up∣on God; when the Scriptures have set forth the Magnalia Dei, the great things, and the deep
things of God, when the Lord Jesus is evident∣ly set forth as crucified before our eyes, as the Propitiation for sin; when the preciousness of his blood, the tenderness of his bowels, the riches of his grace, the sufficiency of his righteousness, his satisfaction and pardons, are all held forth in o∣pen sight; when the beauties of holiness, the joyes of the spirit, that peace which passeth all under∣standing, are laid forth to view; when the most glorious things are spoken of the City of God, Jerusalem which is above; when God in his word calls to us, Awake sleepers, arise sluggards, see whats before you; all this may be yours, if you will; Sloathfulness puts this slight upon all, Tush, all this is not worth the breaking my sleep for; 'tis not all worth my labour to seek after; my ease and my quiet is better to me, then God and all his glory. We may best understand the value we put on things, by the pains and the cost we are content to be at to purchase them. When sinners bestow themselves so upon the world, will bear such la∣bour and travell, are so constantly so, indefatiga∣bly industrious in the pursuance of it; and withall, run such hazards and dangers for it, they make it evident enough what rate they put upon it; he whose time, and his strength, whose days and his nights, yea whose soul, and his hopes, must all be laid out in a purchase, must all go for a piece of Land, or a little money, or pleasure; we need no other proof, what a bargain he thinks this world to be. I care not much for this world, 'tis a vanity, a shadow, the fashion of it passeth away; I hope tis far enough off my heart, how ever I am char∣ged
with greediness after it: But what then mean all the expences of thy time, of thy strength, of thy spirits, that thou daily layest out upon it? What means so much hunting after, and heaping it up for thy self? What, hast thou been hunting all this while after shadowes? Heaping up vani∣ties? No, no, thou mistakest thy self, these sha∣dowes are thy substance; these vanities are the God whom thou adorest: If thou didst not prize, thou wouldst not venture so deeply for them. And so on the other side, when so little is done for God: When any thing must suffice to be spent on souls, or eternity; what cheap things do we count them! I love God above all; with all my heart, with all my soul; he is all my hope, and all my desire; what a miserable creature were I, if it were not for my hope in God? What would all the world be to me, should I lose my soul? But dost thou speak in earnest? Dost thou think what thou speakest? What, and so very a Drone in seeking of God? What, and so indifferent, so cold, and so spiritless in thy enquiries after him, in thy motions towards him? So sparing of thy labour, so negligent of duty, so seldom at it, so soon weary, so many delayes, so many excuses? How many times hath God called thee after him, and all thine answer hath been an excuse? An ex∣cuse instead of an Ordinance, an excuse instead of a Prayer, an excuse instead of Action, an excuse instead of an Alms, an excuse instead of an Admo∣nition, or a Reproof; if he will be served with ex∣cuses, he shall have service enough, but little be∣sides. I am weary, or tis too late, or tis cold, and
and so a short, and hasty Prayer must serve, or none at all. I have much business upon me, a Family, a Farm, and the cares and trouble of it, that I cannot have so much time nor freedom to attend upon God as others have; and so a Sermon lost, a Sacrament lost. I live amongst ill neigh∣bours, if I should be so forward, and so active for God, so zealous, and so spiritual in my Dis∣course, in my way, I should be but a scoff and a reproach, and it may be a prey to evill men. I want ability to speak to the edification of others, I have not the boldness as others have, to re∣prove or admonish; I pray thee have me excused. Wise men indeed, an Excuse instead of a Duty! 'Tis all one, as if when the Lord calls to thee, Come to me and be saved, thy Answer should be, I pray thee excuse me, I must to the Devil and be damned. But is this thy love? Is this thy zeal? Is this thy valuing of God above all? Tremble Sluggard, whatever excuses thou find∣est out, ro substitute in the room of duty, this is that thou canst never excuse, nor acquit thy self of a slighting of God. Thy very excuses will ac∣cuse thee for a sloathful servant, and this for a slighter of God: Whilest the Apostle sayes, I rec∣kon that the sufferings of this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed: But I reckon saist thou, that all that glory to come, is not worthy to be compared with the present labour. But now Activity and Industry puts a great price upon God, this is written upon all our labours, He is worthy for whom I do all this.
some of the most humble watchful laborious Christians, do sometimes complain, Oh I fear, I love not God; his Favour, his Honour is little set by me; but whence then is thy care to please God? Whence are all thy labours of love? Do'st watch, and pray, and work, and run? Can'st spend and be spent for God, and yet not love him? Do'st live to God, can'st dye for God, and yet not prize him? What greater proof can'st give of love, then such labour. 2. Activity is necessary. It is a vain thing to think of making any thing of Religion without it; the work of it is too great, to be done by lying still; the comforts of it lye too deep, to be gotten out by a wish. There's many a poor man in this world, that would be the richest man in the Countrey, if riches may be gotten by a wish; he may assoon with himself into wealth, as thou into grace and comfort. This one thing, mens not being able to bear the labour of Religion, is a Rock, at which many a soul hath split, and suf∣fered an eternal wrack. He that hath some love to holiness, and yet not so much as to carry him through the work of holiness, is short of sincerity; and short of sin∣cerity, short of salvation. He that sticks not at labour, will not stick at suffering: He that sluggs at doing, will shrink back from suffering. Say not, There's a Lion in the streets; overcome the Lion, and you will not fear the Bear: Get over (Difficulties) and there's but one still more. (Di∣stress) betwixt thee and glory. Pass the first, and thou wilt be the more bold to venture the latter. Holy Activity will be a witness of thy sincerity;
carry this witness in thine heart, and then, which way ever the world does go, and what storms so∣ever may fall, thou wilt have this to uphold thee, Integrity and uprightness shall preserve me, and eter∣nity reward me. Where Sincerity is the root, and holy Activity the blossom, an eternal weight of glory shall be the fruit. Lye idle, and all will be lost. Take heed of (Soul take thine easie,) lest the next word thou hear be [This night shall thy soul be required of thee.] Well, this is a second thing included in Obe∣dience, Activity; and this also must be consider∣ed ere thou resolvest; I will Obey, but can I Labour? 3. Integrity. The Obedience which God expects, must be entire Obedience; not onely the Obedience of the whole man, but to the whole will of God. Psal. 119.8. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Comman∣dements. 1 Pet. 1.14,15. As obedient children, be ye holy in (al manner) conversation. Matth. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things, what∣soever I have commanded you. But of this having spoken more largely elswhere, it shall suffice to give some short hints, 1. Of one comprehensive duty, wherein all the rest are included, and on which they depend; and that is, The holding up, and maintaining Gods Au∣thority in the soul. As God hath set up his Au∣thority over the soul; his word which is to have the government of it, so hath he set up an Autho∣rity in the soul; the Understanding and the Con∣science. These Powers, as they are under Au∣thority, under the Authority of the word; so they
are set in Authority, over the subordinate and in∣feriour faculties, the Will, and the Passions, or Affections. But sin now hath made a mutiny, and Insurrection; the Will rises against Reason, and will not be guided; the Passions rebell a∣gainst Conscience, and will not be governed; nay they do not onely resist, but take upon them to command, and impose upon Conscience: What the Will would have, Conscience must say tis Reason it should have; must be put upon it, to finde out Arguments, to prove Will to be Rea∣son; and to determine, that what the Will would have done, ought to be done, facile credimus quod nimis volumus: We easily bring our Opinion to our Affection; bring our selves to believe that to be right, which we are unreasonably willing to have to be tight: But if it cannot prevail thus far, to gain Conscience to say that's right, which it would have to be right, then it will put hard for it, to carry it whether it be right or wrong. And this rebellion of the Will, and so of the Pas∣sions against the Reason, is the great reason of the souls rebellion against God. When Conscience hath lost its Authority, Gods Authority is gone. Whilest the Under∣standing and the Conscience are maintained in their due Authority, where the Will and Affe∣ctions are held in their due subjection, there the Lord reigneth. While Conscience rightly in∣form'd hath its due, God shall have his due: Where the Will and the Passions have no more then their due, he shall have his own. God shall be will'd the more, where nothing else is will'd too much. God shall be loved the more,
and feared the more, where nothing else is lov'd and fear'd too much. The more Anger, the more Hatred, the more Grief will be spent upon sin, if it be not inordinately spent elsewhere. Oh how much service might be done, and how much quiet would be enjoyed in the heart, were this Authority and Subjection maintained and held up. We may say of our Affections, as men say of Fire and Water, They are the worst Masters, but the best Servants. How much should the Lord have of us, were these onely the Executioners of his will. If Conscience be commanded by the word, and the Will and Affections would be commanded by Conscience, what would there then be wanting? We should then not onely be abundantly serviceable, but all would be serene, and sweet, and comfortable within us. If no∣thing were will'd, but what should be will'd, we should ever have our will. If nothing were de∣sired, but what should be desired, and no more then it should be lov'd or desired, we should ever have what we love. If we were not angry, or grieved, or afraid, but where we ought, and no more then we ought; what a calm would there be upon our spirits, even in such cases, wherein the spirits of others are like a troubled Sea, that cannot be at rest, whose waters cast forth mire and dirt: But where there is such disorder, such rebellion of the Inferiour against the Superiour Faculties, there we are at a perpetual loss, both in point of duty and comfort. This therefore is necessary, if we will be obedient: And those that have prov'd what there is in it, do understand that this is hard work.
2. I shall instance in some few particular duties that are harder then others. He that will be entirely obedient, must stick at nothing that God will have. There's scarce any thing that God requires, but Lust will be quarrelling at, as too hard; but there are some duties harder then others. It shall suffice onely to name them: The denyal of our selves. The disobliging our near∣est friends. The loving our Enemies. The diso∣beying all the world, in their unrighteous commands. Obeying God, rather then men; returning good for evill. Reproving men for sin, especially if they be Speriours, or such on whom we have dependency. The sacrificing our Isaacs, yea parting with all that we have. Well, this also must be considered ere you re∣solve; you will obey, But are you for any thing, for every thing the Lord requires? 4. Circumspection and care, Ephes. 5.15. See that ye walk circumspectly. A little labour will go far with care, but will be nothing without it. 'Tis not he that is hot, and busie, and active at all adventures; he that keeps to his Line and his Rule, hee's the obedient Christian. 'Tis not so much Action, as regular Action, wherein the life of Christianity lies. He that lives by rule, peace be on him, and mercy. Activity without care, is Extravagancie: 'Tis care that keeps within compass. He that is all Action, has the more need of caution. A Christian must have his eyes in his head, as well as a soul in his body. He that resolves well in Generals, and comes not off in Particulars, does but build Castles in the Air. What we ordinarily are, pro hic & nunc, in
Particulars, will best prove what we are. He that is for any thing but this, any time but now, is for nothing. Circumspection notes two things: Taking notice. Taking heed. He that will be circumspect, must eye and ob∣serve what's before him; must have his eye upon his End, his Rule, and his Goings; must eye duty and sin, opportunities and temptations, his times and seasons; he must take heed, as well as take no∣tice; must keep a strict eye on himself, and hold a strict hand on himselfe, that he leap not over a duty, nor turn aside to iniquity; must set a guard upon himself, upon his tongue, upon his eyes, upon his appetite, upon his company, upon his ha∣bit, upon his thoughts, upon his passions, upon all the motions of his soul, and the actions of his body. This will require something. What not a word but must be weighed? Not a look but must be look'd to? Not a thought but must be exa∣mined? Not a sin to be allowed? Not a duty to be abated? Not a circumstance to be neglected? Must all be in Weight and in Measure, by Line, and by Rule, and this alwais too? If something might serve, if sometimes might suffice, it might be borne; but to keep touch in every point, and that every day, this is an hard saying indeed. But thus it must be, to live as a Christian, and to walk exactly, accurately, precisely, is the same thing. Duty and sin, though they be as far distant as Heaven and Hell, yet there is but an hair be∣twixt them. The least latitude is a transgression,
either all this, (that is as to the purpose of the heart;) either all this, or nothing. Well, all this must be considered; You will be Obedient, but will you be circumspect? 5. Spirituality. This Obedience must be the Obedience of faith, Rom. 16.26.. It is the very life of Jesus made manifest in our mortal flesh. I live yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God. Christians Obedience is their walk∣ing in Christ, Coloss. 2.6. All the Acts of it are exerted and performed in the strength of Christ. I will go in the strength of the Lord, without him they can do nothing, but can do all things through Christ which strengthneth them. I live, yet not I, bur Christ liveth in me. I work, I wrestle, I run, yet not I, but Christ in me; as the Apostle speaks of his sins, It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. 'Tis sin that sins, so may it be said of duty, It is no more I that do it, but Christ that dwelleth in me. Though both be the act of the Person, both the sin and the du∣ty; yet the Principle of the one, is Lust, the Power of the other is of Christ. Christians cannot go through, and they dare not set upon a duty, with∣out looking up to Christ, and leaning upon him for assistance. They cannot go through, and therefore they will not set forth, but it the strength of the Lord. All teir Acts of Obedience are ex∣hibited, and offered up in the name of Christ. Their services are their sacrifices to God, and Christ is their Altar. What is a sacrifice without an Al∣tar? Christ is our Altar, which sanctifies our gift. God looks on all, and so do they, as nothing
worth without Christ; God will not accept, and therefore they will not offer other then the Lamb for their sacrifice. All their acts of Obedience are acknowledged to the praise of Christ, It is no more I that do it, but the grace of God which was with me. Grace does the work, and Grace shall carry away the praise. Christ is all in the race, and therefore on his head the Crown is set. Not un∣to us Lord, not unto us but to thy Name be the pra se. Not of us, and therefore not unto us; of him, and therefore unto him. If I am any thing, what others are not, if I have done any thing more then others, no thank to me, and therefore no praise. To him be all, who is All in all to me. Christians Obedience, is their walking in Christ. Christians Obedience is their walking in the Spirit. They have received the Spirit, and they walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16. they have not re∣ceived the spirit of this world, (their spirit is not flesh) but the Spirit which is of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. They are dead to things carnal, the spirit of the world is departed, they have given up this ghost: 'Tis the Spirit of the living God that lives in them, and in this they live and walk. They walk in the Light of the Spirit, in the Power of the Spirit; the Spirit of the Lord steets their Course, and fills their Sails; is their Pilot, and their Star, and their Wind that carries them on. When they pray, they pray in the Spirit; when they hear, they hear in the Spirit; through the Spirit, they mortifie the flesh, are crucified to the world; they obey, they suffer, they fight, they overcome, through the Spirit of the living God
that is in them: They live in fellowship with the Spirit, and by him with the Father and the Son. They dwell in the invisible world, their acquain∣tance and converse is in Heaven, thither they have access, and there they have acceptance; thither they have their recourse, and thence they have their returns. Duties and comforts, are the to∣kens that are passing betwixt Heaven and Earth. Their life is Love, and Joy, and Praise; these are the most noble acts of their Obedience, and these give Wings to their hearts, carry them on more swiftly, and more sweetly through all their course. Oh how heavily do we drive on, how slowly do our Wheels move, when the Spirit of the li∣ving God is not in the Wheels. Oh how dead are our Duties, how lame are our walkings, what low and poor spirited creatures are we: How weak are our hearts, how unripe our fruits; we do but half do what we do, there is no heart in our life, we are as bodies without souls, whilest our soul is without a Spirit. Oh how sad is it with many of us, upon this account! By our estrangement from God, we have even lost our selves; we are not what we are, because we are no more where he is. By our distances from Heaven, we are even choaked with the damps of the Earth. We are fit for little, we prosper in nothing, God takes no pleasure, and we take no comfort in any thing we do, our spirits are so chil'd and benummed within, as that we neither make sign in our work, not ridance of our way And what are we in our Societies? To how little profit do we meet? How little heat do we get
yea how much do we lose at our brethrens fires? We serve often, but to damp and cool each others spirits; as if it might be no longer said, Wo to him that is alone, but wo be to him that is in company; alone hee's more warm. Christians, I solemnly profess, I am ashamed of my self, and my heart is pained within me, to observe how insipid, how spiritless, how carnal our converses are; how often may we meet? How long may we sit, Christian with Christian, ere any thing that savours of the spirit of a Christian comes from us? Oh how hard must we strain for a few gracious words! How little does come? How heartless when it comes? How very few of us are there, whose ordinary converse speaks us to be men of another world, whose business, and whose delight lyes above, and are in good ear∣nest pressing on towards Heaven? How seldom, and how short-breath'd are our spiritual discour∣ses? How little must suffice? How quickly are we diverted to things carnal and sensual? Sure 'tis our little communion with God, that hath thus incarnated and communion of Saints. Oh let us live more in the fellowship of the Spirit, and we shall have fellowship one with ano∣ther, to better purpose. Lets warm our selves at the Sun, lets dwell more in his Beams, and we shall get and give more Light and Heat. Thus must it be considered ere we resolve, what there is in this Obedience. 2. It must be considered, What it is like to be attended withall from without. What suffering it may cost us, what scorn, and contempt, and re∣proaches, and persecutions of all sorts; it's like to
set Earth and Hell upon our backs; if carnal coun∣sels, and fleshly policies, if all the powers of darkness, if might and malice can do it, this way will be made too hot, and too hard for thee: Tri∣bulation, great tribulation thou must expect, and canst not escape; and the more strict and circum∣spect, the hotter must thou look thine Assaults will be. Professors of Religion that are of the largest size, that are not so strict to their Rule, but they can dispence with Duty: nor so forward in point of Zeal and Activity, but they can remit and abate as occasion serves, may escape this persecuting world the better; but he that will be faithful, who ever escape, is sure to be made a Prey. This also must be well considered, I will follow Christ, but can I drink of the Cup that he drank of? Can I be baptized with the Baptisme, the Baptisme of Blood that he was baptized with? There are persons, who sometimes take up the profession of Religion, and resolve all on a sudden they will follow Christ; not understanding what there is in it, or what Christianity may stand them in; who by that they have look'd a little farther, and finde it another manner of difficulty, then at first they imagined; and withall finde the Armies of the Aliens to fall on, the Doggs to tear, the Wolves to worry, the Eagles, and the Vultures, and all the Birds of Prey, to pitch upon them; and begin in earnest to feel the smart of Religion, in those persecutions that are rais'd upon them for it, presently make their retreat, and go back. Where am I? What have I chosen? Is this to be a Christian? Doth Christ look for all this from his
followers, and will he leave them to such violence and rapine, as the reward of their faithfulness to his name? I never thought it had been such hot service, and if I cannot be a Saint at a cheaper rate then this, follow Christ who will for me; let those that have nothing to lose, or can bear so much labour, and pains, and violence, take it up if they please; for my part, I must look to my self, I must not be un∣done. Master I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest, said that Scribe, Matth. 20.7. Man thou understandest not what thou sayest. Doest know whither I am going, where my dwelling, what my lodging is? The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the ayre have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head: And behold there's an end of the Scribes Christianity, we hear not one word more of it. But now, he that both knows what 'tis to be a Disciple, that hath look'd through Religion, through the length and breadth of it; hath duly weighed all that can be said for, or against his ta∣king it up; hath examined the grounds and reasons he hath for it, what weight there is in them; hath considered the Objections, hath cast up the cost and charges of it, and as the issue and result of the most serious debate, stands settled in his judgment, that all things considered, it is indisputably the best, and wisest, and safest course he can take; its beyond all controversie, without all dispute in∣comparably better for me, to hearken to the Lord in all that he shall require, and to run all hazards with him and that presently, from this day for∣ward, to the end of my life: He that stands thus
settled in his judgment and thereupon feels his soul fixing it self in this peremtory resolution; well, through the grace of God, I will be his servant; I give up my self to the government of his will; to follow him in righteousnes and holiness all my daies. I am sensible its no light thing to be a Christian, I see I must be subject, I see I must be circumspect I see I must be active, I must stick at nothing that God will have; I see this flesh wil be pained and put hard to it wil fling & groan under so severe a yoke: I see the Devil and this evil world will be upon me, laying on more lord, to make my bargain as dear as they can: But be there in it what there will, let it cost me never so dear, I am at a point; I will venture all upon it, the Lord is my God, and him will I follow in all things that he shall speak; I put my self into the everlasting Arms; I trust upon everlasting strength; I will go forth in the Name of the Lord, and now speak Lord, for I will hear. This sincere resolution, this will hold out; when our holy inclinations are so rooted and strong, that they hear down all fleshly inclina∣tions; when our assent to Scripture is so firm, that it over balances all Objections against it; when our Reasons for Religion are so high and weighty, that they weigh down the highest pre∣tences against it; when we have throughly con∣sidered what there is in it, and compar'd all that can be said, for or against our following the Lord, and upon the whole matter we judge it our best course, and accordingly resolve for it, this is sin∣cere resolution, this is the Obedience of the heart.
2. Obedience of the Life, This is the Decree bringing forth, or holy inclination and resolution springing up into action, and is a necessary proof of the soundness of the resolution. Though sincere resolution be Obedience in Gods account, yet that resolution which (suppo∣sing there be time and opportunity) does not break forth into act, is undoubtedly unsound and deceitful. There are two things infallibly included in Spiritual life; a Will, and a Power. Grace is the disposing, and the enabling the heart for an ho∣ly life, and where there is both a Will, and a Po∣wer, performance will certainly follow. This sincerity of actual Obedience, is that which the Prayer of the Psalmist looks to, Psal. 119.80. Let my heart be sound [in thy statutes] that I be not ashamed. There is a soundness in the Faith, and a sound∣ness in the Statutes of the Lord. Faith notes in Scripture, either the Doctrine of faith, or the Grace of faith. And accordingly, soundness in the faith, signifies both the receiving and enter∣taining sound Doctrine, and the sound or sin∣cere imbracing that Doctrine. Soundness in the Statutes of the Lord, notes especially the Practice, the living or walking uprightly, under the Power of that Doctrine, under the Government and O∣bedience of the Statutes of the Lord. What this Obedience of life is, its easie to gather out of what hath been spoken touching the Obedience of the heart; I shall onely adde, that this Obedi∣ence is then sound and sincere, when 1. In General, the whole course of life is the issue of the mentioned sincere resolution; when
the life is the birth of the purpose, the fruit grow∣ing up out of the holy Root. There may be actions Materially good and holy, that yet are not gracious actions; because they arise not from a right spring. When the soul hath devoted it self to God in Christ, and believingly, understand∣ingly, and deliberately decreed and determined in his strength to keep his word; and this decree or determination, goes into the performances of the life, and is the root and soul of that holy course we walk in, there's sinerity. Some persons may be found, who have taken up the Profession, and go farr in the practice of godliness; abstaining from gross sins, yea and ma∣king attempts upon the mortification of inward Lusts; applying themselves to the duties of Reli∣gion; Praying, Hearing, Reading, Meditating, Discoursing of God, and the things of God; exer∣cising themselves in the works of righteousness and mercy; being Meek, Temperate, Patient; and yet if all this do arise onely from the advan∣tages of a good Nature, good Education, good Society and Acquaintance, a powerful Ministry, or the workings of natural Conscience; as possi∣bly it may, and doth not spring forth from such a fixed, well bottomed resolution, it is short of sincerity. Whatever the Blades be, they have no Root, and will certainly wither away. 2. In Particular actions, when they are done in simplicity; and singleness of heart unto the Lord; when whatever sinful mixtures there may sometimes be of carnal respects, that may have an influence upon the exerting and bringing them forth; yet the great poise that moves the Wheels,
the swaying motive that brings us on, is God, and our respects to his will and Honour. Now for this also the Lord undertakes, pro∣mising not onely assistance, but success, sufficient grace, and efficacious grace; I will cause them to walk in my Statutes, and they (shall) keep my judg∣ments, and do them. I will not onely teach them my Statutes; I will not onely incline their hearts to my testimonies; I will not onely strengthen them for my work, but I will cause them to walk in my Statutes. The even shall be sure, they (shall) keep my judgments, and do them; my word shall fail, my promises shall be of none ef∣fect; let me be accounted unfaithfull, if I do not make them faithful to me. CHAP. XVI. Perseverance in the Covenant. 8. PErseverance. Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. The Perseverance of the Saints, is founded on the Election of God, and the immutability of his Counsel; The foundation of the Lord standeth sure, Rom. 8.38. Whom he did Predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also ju∣stified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified. This golden Chain will hold, not a link of it shall be broken: on whomsoever the first link Election
hath taken hold, it will infallibly bring him up to the last, Glory. God is not as man, that he should repent. But not to wade farther into this deep, our business lyes in the Promise of God. There are two sorts of Promises concerning Perseverance. There are Promises— To Perseverance. Of Perseverance. 1. The Promise of eternal life is made to Per∣severance. Hold out to the end, and be saved. Overcome and reign. Be faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Rev. 2,10. If thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. 1 Chron. 28.9. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Christians, beware of Apostacy, beware of Presumption; Pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. Let it not be said of you, ye (did) run well: He runs well, that gives not off, that sits not down on this side the goal. So run that ye may obtain. 2. There are Promises of Perseverance. The Covenant of God, is an everlasting Covenant. He hath commanded his Covenant for ever, Psal. 111.5. There are two things in the fore-mentioned Scripture, Jer. 32.40. secured to Believers, which secure their Perseverance. 1. God will not depart from them. 2. They shall not depart from him. 1. God will not depart from them. I will not turn aw from them. God is with me, but I fear I shall provoke him away; I shall weary him out by my sins, and drive him from me. No saith the Lord, I will not turn away from them,
to do them good. I will never fail thee, nor for∣sake thee. 2. They shall not depart from him. 'Tis true, the Lord will be with me, but tis onely while I am with him; if I depart, he wil depart: if I forsake him, he will ca me off for ever. Here's my great fear, that I shall turn away from him; there is in me an evil heart of unbelief, that's ever departing from the living God. Oh this false and fickle heart, I dare not trust it for a day, I dare not undertake for it for an hour; I doubt it will be gone ere I am aware; my corruptions are strong, my temptations are many, every day brings its temptations; and I am in great fear that by one means or other, one day or other, I shal fall before them, and depart from the living God! No saies God, fear not, thou shalt not de∣part; I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. They shall be kept by my Almighty Power, through faith unto salvation. My grace shall be with them, and my grace shall be sufficient for them; and shall preserve them to my Heavenly Kingdom. And here is the Saints security: The Lord God will not turn away from them, nor ever suffer them to run away from him. If the Promise fail, then may their faith also fail. Its true, there may be gradual declinings, and departures of the Saints from Christ for a season, but total or final there shall not be: They shall not be of them that draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul. Though they fall, they shall rise again; they may turn, but they shal re∣turn. As Hypocrites will not stay (with) Christ
alwaies, so neither will Saints alwais stay from him. And there's a like reason of both: Sinners sometimes will step aside, and salute Religion, and take some turnes with Christ; but after a while, away they must again: And there is a double Reason of it, 1. There's that within them 2. There's one without them That will fetch them back. 1. There's that within them that will fetch them back. Corrupt nature, the power of un∣mortified Lust, this it that bears the sway in their hearts; and however for the time, the stream may be somewhat turn'd out of its course, or bayd up; however by the impetus of some ex∣ternal Motives or Arguments, or the impulses of an awakened Conscience, or some sudden heat of affection, they are carried on after, and in some fair compliance with the Lord Jesus; yet when the Bay is removed, when the external force is spent, Conscience laid to sleep, the heat of affection allaid, which is often almost as soon out as in; thou very natures will reduce, and bring them back to their old course. What is it that pulls a Stone, or a lump of Clay down a∣gain, that is thrown into the Ayr? Why when the vis impressa by which they were forc'd up, is spent, their natures, their innate gravities will bring them down to their place. Sinners need no other weights to pull them down to this Earth, then their earthly hearts. 2. There's one without them that will fetch them off. Satan the god of this world, whose they are, and whom they serve; who though he indulge them so much liberty for their Religion,
as is consistent with their captive state, and may possibly secure them the more under his Domi∣nion, (Hypocrites are often the faster to Satan, for being so near to Christ) the very Religion they have, is but the Devils snare, by which he holds them back from Religion; yet lest by ven∣turing them too farr, they should be lost to him at last, he that first tempted them so near to Christ, (Hypocrites are often beholding to the Devil for their Religion they have) will quickly tempt them back again. And so on the other side, there are the like Reasons why Saints cannot alwaies wander, or stay sway from Christ. 1. There's that within them, which will bring them back. the grace of God within them, will bring them home. The grace of God, is now their nature. Sinners whilest walking with Christ, and Saints whilest wandring from Christ, are both under a force; they are carried against the stream, when the winds are down that car∣ried them on, they will return to their course. The grace of God is the seed of God, He that is born of God, sinneth not; (that is, not unto death) the seed of God remaineth in him. Thy seed of God is immortal seed; it may languish, and be ready to dye, but it shall not dye, it shall re∣cover. 2. There's one above them which will bring them back. Though he suffer them for a time, to wander from the way; yet he will not suffer them to perish from the way. Of those whom thou hast given me, I have lost none. He hath lost none, and he will lose none. He sends a
word of command after them, Jer. 3.14. Return O lack sliding children, for I am married to you. Whither are you running? Whom are you fol∣lowing after? Come back from your Lovers, re∣turn to your Husband; I am married to you, and we may not part; After the word of Command, he sends a word of Promise, ver. 22. I will heal your back-slidings. Return from your back-slidings, and I will heal them. I will forgive your back-slidings, and I wil cure you of your back sliding heart. All the Breaches they have made, shall be made up; I will pass by all that you have done, and be re∣conciled to you. If you will return, return and I will receive you. And this word of Promise, is a word of Power. I will bring you to Zion: then shall she say, I will go and return to my first Hus∣band, Hos. 2. Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, Jer. 3.22. He that will not leave his Israel after the flesh, with their I∣dols much less will he leave his Israel after the Spirit. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he that hath begun a good work, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. A good work may be said to be begun in dou∣ble sence. 1. When there is some good think a doing: Or when something is done towards it; when it is in fieri. When the Lord hath been ploughing up the fallow ground, making his Batteries a∣gainst the strong Hold, shaking secure hearts, breaking false hopes, awakening Consciences, con∣vincing sinners, spreading sin, and death, and hell, before them entring upon a Treaty with them,
and perswading them over to Christ, to make an escape: There may be hopes in this, The pains of Travel gives hopes of a Birth. But this may go back, and after the highest hopes, prove an abortion. Sinners, awakened sinners, beware you make not a stand at the Threshold; beware that your Plough'd ground be not left to lye fal∣low. Beware that the Womb prove not the Grave of all your hopes. Mistake not Conviction for Conversion; make on, let not your God, nor your souls lose the things which here been wrought. 2. When there is some good thing done. When 'tis in facto esse. When the Rubbish is removed, and the first stone is laid; when the Plough hath been going, and the good Seed is sown; when the New-creature hath passed the Birth; when Christ is formed, and the light of life is newly sprung up in the soul; it there be but a grain of Mustard-seed, the least and the lowest degree of saving Grace, broken forth in the heart, the que∣stion is not, whether it be much or little, if it be grace, there's the immortal seed, there's the good work begun, which shall be carried on till the day of Jesus Christ. Grace is a security for Glory: Yet beware Christians, let not this securi∣ty make you secure; though there be an Harvest in the seed, yet the seed must be cherished, watch∣ed, and well looked to, that it may grow up to the Harvest: He that lets it dye for want of look∣ing to, proves that it was dead whilest alive. Let not your falling short of Glory, prove that your Grace was not Grace. Christians lay hold on the Promise, and lift up
your heads; you are under fears, however it be with you for the present, you are in doubt how it may be; your way is long, and dangerous; yet your hearts are deceitful and unstable; you are going on at present, but doubt how you shall hold out: I may meet with Lions in the way, which may fright me back; I may lose my way, and never recover: I may be weary, and faint in the way, and lye down and give off. My Lord and my soul, have been often upon the parting point; I have been almost gone, and I tremble to think what may yet become of me: Yet re∣member who it is that hath said, I will not turn from you to do you good, I will put my fear in your hearts, and you shall not depart from me. Rise soul, take care for to day, and take no thought for to morrow. Mind the present duty, go on thy way, though weeping and trembling, and hard bestead; go on thy way, and then commit thy way, and thy self to him, by whose mighty Power thou shalt be kept through faith unto salvation. Faithful is he that hath called you, and will do it And now you have all. Let us hear the Con∣clusion of the whole matter. God hath made a Covenant with his people, hath given himself for their Portion, his Son for their price, his Spirit for their guide in the way, his Earth for their accommodation by the way, his Angels for their Guard, the Powers of darkness and death for their Spoils, everlasting Glory for their Crown. And because their way is difficult, and their work is contrary to them, he hath given them all that grace that is necessary to bring them to Glory.
In General, a new heart, in all things suited to their way, and throughly furnished for every good work. In Particular, Knowledge to guide, one∣ness to fix and intend, tenderness to submit ro and yeeld, love to constrain and bring on, fear to fence and hold in, obedience to perform and bring forth, and perseverance to go through, and hold out to the end; and there grace and glory meet. This is the Covenant of grace, this is the word, which by the Gospel is preached unto you. It will be said, But if God hath undertaken all this for us, what is there then left on us to do? Here's a Doctrine according to sinners hearts; if this be Gospel, then soul take thine ease, take thy liberty, cast away care, make much of thy body, God will take care of the rest. But is there nothing required of us? Let the Scriptures speak, Ezek. 36.37. Yet for all this will I be enquired of, or sought unto by the house of Israel; otherwise let them look for no such things. He that will not ask in faith, let not that man think he shall receive any thing of the Lord, Jam. 1.7. And can he think to receive any thing, that neither believes nor prayes? That neither prayes in faith, nor prays at all? Phil. 2.12,13. It's God works in you, both to will and to do. What then? Therefore sit you still and do nothing? No such matter; therefore work out your salva∣tion, with fear and trembling saith the Apostle. The promise of God was never intended, to make the command of God of none effect. God in promising grace, promises a power for duty; and as he doth not give, so we must not receive hat power or grace of God in vain. Whilst he gives
what he requires, he still requires what he gives. That promise of God (ye shall be my people) though he undertake to make it good, yet it is also the matter of our stipulation. And in this promise wherein the Lord assures us, what de fa∣cto we (shall) be, is included a Precept, wherein we may understand what de jure we (ought) to be. In undertaking to give us a new heart, a ten∣der and obedient, a persevering heart, the Lord doth promise, both to make us what we should be, and to help us in what we are bound to do; and gives us at once a clear hint, both of our mercy and our duty. This is the sence and summ of that Promise, The Lord will work all that in us, and will help and cause us to perform all that which (is required) unto salvation; and so the Promissum on Gods part, doth not make void, but establish the Debitum on ours. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? Nay we esta∣blish the Law. Though, it be certain as to the event, that all that's necessary to salvation, shall be accomplish∣ed in us, God hath undertaken that, yet it is alto∣gether as certain that God hath made our loving him, fearing him, obeying his whole will, and our sincerity, and perseverance herein, so necessary, that we cannot otherwise be saved. Christians, mistake not, nor abuse the grace of the Gospel. The Lord never meant your mercy should make void your Obligation to duty. Re∣demption from sin, was never intended as a tole∣ration of sin. He gives not his Spirit, in favour of the flesh. What he undetakes to work for
you, was never with a mind to maintain you in idleness, Tit. 2.11,12. The grace of God that bringeth salvation, teacheth us, that denying ungod∣liness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righ∣teously, and godly in this present world. Though you are saved by grace, yet you are still (in a sense) debtors to do the whole Law. Perfect Obedience to the whole Law, even to the utmost Iota, is still due from you; and if it be not in your hearts, to pay all that you owe, that is, if there be any duty commanded, in the whole book of God, that you must be dispensed with, that you will not set your hearts to observe and obey; if there be any one sin that you must be excused in, and will not part with; if there be any, the high∣est pitch of holy Care, Activity, Industry, Zeal for God and Holiness, that you will not be perswa∣ded to press hard after; this is an evidence of such an unsound heart, as hath no part in the Gospel, or the salvation thereof. Perfection is still due, though sincerity will be accepted. Sin∣cerity shall be accepted, but what is sincerity less, then an hearty willingness to be perfect, attested by a striving and pressing on to that mark which is set before us. O admire and bless the Lord, the Lord for grace, but do not turn the grace of God into licentious∣ness. Shall we continue in sin, because grace that abounded? Will ye thus requite the Lord? Will ye thus deceive your selves, O foolish people and unwise? Will you slight him because he hath loved you? Kick at him because he hath cared for you? Shake off his Yoke, because he hath secured you the Crown! Will you serve his ene∣mies,
because he hath saved you from them? Will you nourish your diseases, because he hath said he will cure you? Will you live and not eat? Reap and not Plough? Will you not eat, because he hath given you meat? Will you not run, be∣cause he hath given you Leggs? Nor work, be∣cause he hath given you hands? Nor watch, be∣cause he hath given you eyes? Or will you tempt the Lord, and call that your trust in him? Awake from such madness. Christians, say not (If God will I shall) whe∣ther I take care or no, believe or no, repent or no, be obedient, or rebellious, whether I wake or sleep, work or be idle; my unbelief, my disobe∣dience, my negligence, shall not make the faith of God of none effect. But rather, since God hath said, (you shall) let thine heart answer (I will) walk in his statutes. Arise O my soul, up and be doing; work out thy salvation, because its God that worketh in thee to will and to do: Shake off thy sloth, set to thy work, run out thy race, since God hath said, thou shalt not run, nor labour in vain. And look to it, for however thy Idleness, or greatest Unfaithfulness, will not make void the Covenant of God, yet will it make manifest, that thou hast no part nor lot in it. But to all these glorious things that have been spoken, possibly some will reply; O if all this be so, then happy Saints indeed; Happy are the peo∣ple that are in such a case, yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. But will the Lord indeed do all these things for Mortals? Will he take notice of Worms? Shall such dry bones live? Will he set such vile dust as the Apple of
his eye? Is not this too good to be true? Too great to be believed? Are we not all this while but in a Dream, or a fools Paradise? Oh that I were sure the one half were as it hath been told me. Too great to be believed? As if it must be questioned whether the Sun light, because it dazles our eyes. But what certainty would you have? Is all this too great for the great and Al∣mighty God to do, who hath said, Isa. 55.9. As the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are my wayes higher then your wayes, and my thoughts, then your thoughts. Can he not do it, who can do all things? Will he not do it, when he hath said he will? Will the Lord mock? Can God de∣ceive? Shall his Word, yea and his Oath too, those two immutable things, in which it is impossi∣ble for God to lye, can these fail? If you should hear the Lord himself speaking to you from Hea∣ven, with audible voice, My Covenant I make with thee, and it is my intent and purpose to per∣form every word that is written in it, according to the plain import and meaning thereof; there shall not a tittle fail, neither will I alter the thing that is gone forth of my lips. Heaven and Earth shall fail, but my word shall not fail; trust to it, trust everlasting truth, trust to everlasting strength. Fear not, for there shall not fail one word, of all that I have spoken by all my servants the Pro∣phets. If you should hear the Lord speaking thus to you from Heaven, what would you say? Would not this satisfie you? Why search the Scriptures, that more sure word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19. Read them diligently, understond what thou readest,
and then say, if thou doest not there finde the Lord speaking fully to thee the following words, CHAP. XVII. God speaking from Mount Gerizim. Or, the Gospel in a Map; being a short view of the exceeding great and precious Promises Mr. I. A. by another hand. The voyce of the Herauld.O All ye Inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the Earth; Come see, and hear; gather your selves together, unto the Proclamation of the great King. Hear, you that are farr off, and you that are near: He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear. I am the voyce of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Let every Valley be exalted, and every Moun∣tain made low, for the glory of the Lord is to be revealed. Go thorow, go thorow the Gates; prepare the way: Cast up, cast up the High∣way; gather out the Stones, lift up the Standard for the people; for the Lord proclaimeth salvati∣on to the ends of the Earth. Tydings, tydings, O ye Captives! Hear all ye that look for salva∣tion in Israel; behold I bring you glad tydings
of great joy, which shall be unto all people. Blessed newes! Prepare your ears, and hearts; the Lord hath commanded me, saying; Go unto the people, and sanctifie them, lt them wah and be ready, for the Lord is coming down upon Mount Sion, in the sight of all the Na∣tions: Not in Earthquakes and Fire; not in Clouds, and Darkness; not in Thundrings and Burnings, rending the Mountains, and break∣ing the Rock in pieces: He speaks not to you out of the Blackness, and Darkness, and Tm∣pest; you shall say no more, Let not God speak to us lest we dye; He cometh peaceably, he Law of kindness is in his mouth, he preacheth Peace, peace, to him that is far off, and to him that is near. Behold how he commeth, leaping upon the Mountains, he hath passed Mouth Ebal, no more wrath or cursing; he is come to Mount Gerizim, where he standeth to bless the people: As Mordecai to his Nation, he writeth the words of truth and peace, seeking the welare of his people, and speaking peace to all his Seed. Behold how he cometh, clothed with flames of Love, with bowels of Compassion, plenteous Redemption, and multiplyed Pardons. O how pregnant is his Love! O the rollings of his Bowels! Oh how full are his Breasts, even aking till they are eased by the sucking of his hungry Children!
Hearken therefore O ye Children, hearken to me. To you it is commanded, O People, Nati∣ons, and Languages, that at what time you hear the joyful sound, the Trump of Jubile, the ty∣dings of peace in the voyce of the everlasting Gospel, that you fall down before the Throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever. Arise, and come away; Prepare, prepare you; Hear not with an uncircumcised ear; you are not upon a common thing. Behold the Throne is set, the Throne of grace, where Ma∣jesty and Mercy dwell together: from thence will the Lord meet you, from thence will he commune with you, from the Mercy-seat, from between the Cherubims, upon the Ark of the Te∣stimony. Lo, the Lord cometh out of his Pavi∣lion, the mighty God from Sion. Selah. His glory covereth the Heavens, the Earth is full of his praise. A fire (of love) goeth be∣fore him, mercy and truth are round about him, righteousness, and peace are the habitation of his Throne; he rideth on his Horses and Cha∣riots of Salvation, the Covenant of life, and peace is in his mouth. Rejoyce ye Heavens, make a joyful noise to the Lord all the Earth. Let the Sea roar, the Floods clap their hands, and the multitudes of the Isles rejoyce. Stand forth the Host of Hea∣ven,
prepare your Harps, cast down your Crowns, be ready with your Trumps; bring forth your golden Vials full of Odours, for our voyces will jarr, our strings will break, we cannot, we can∣not reach the note of our Makers praise. Yet let them that dwell in the dust arise and sing. Bear your part in this glorious service, but consider and attend. Call out your souls, and all that is within you. Lift up your voyces, fix your eyes, enlarge your hearts, intend all their Powers; here is work for them all. Be intent, and serious, you cannot strein too high. Come forth ye graces, beset the way, be all in readiness. Stand forth Faith, and Hope: flame O Love, come ye warm desires, and break with longing: Let fear with all veneration do its Obeysance. Joy prepare thy songs, call up all the Daughters of Musick, to salute the Lord as he passeth by. Let the generations of the Saints appear, and spread the way with Boughs and Garments of Salvation, and songs of Delive∣rance, Deut. 29.10. to the 13. Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God, your Captains, your Elders, your Officers, with all the men of Israel; your little Ones, your Wives, and the stranger that is within thy Camp, from the hewer of Wood, to the drawer of Water: That thou shouldest enter into Covenant with
the Lord thy God, and into his Oath, which the Lord thy God maketh with thee this day: That he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he hath said unto thee, and as he hath sworn. I have done my errand. The Messenger of the morning disappeareth, when the Ori∣ent Sun cometh forth, out of his Chambrs. I vanish: I put my mouth in the dust. The voice of the Lord! The soft and still voice! O my soul, wrap thy face in the mantle, and bow thy self to the ground, and put thee in the clif of the Rock, while Jehovah proclaimeth his Name, and maketh all his goodness to pass before thee. The voice of the LORD.HEar, O ye ends of the Earth. The mighty God, the Lord hath spo∣ken: Gather my Saints unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice. Psal. 50.1,5. Behold I esta∣blish my Covenant between me, and you. Gen. 17.7. By my holiness have I sworn, that I will be your Covenant-friend. I lift up my hands to heaven, I swear I live for ever; and because I live, you shall live also. Ioh. 14.19. I will be yours: Jer. 32.38,40. Yours
to all intents and purposes: Your refuge and your rest, Jer. 50.6. Psal. 90.1. Psal. 46.1. your Patron and your Portion; Psal 73.26. Esay 25.4,5. your Heritage and your Hope; your God, and your Guide. Psal. 48.14. While I have, you shall never want; and what I am to my self, I will be to you. Psal. 34.9,10. And you shall be my People, a chosen generation, a Kingdom of Priest, an ho∣ly Nation, a peculiar Treasure unto me above all people. Exod. 19.5.6. 1 Pet. 2.9. I call Heaven and Earth to witness this day, that I take you for mine for ever. My Name shall be upon you, and you shall be Pillars in the Temple of your God, and shall go no more out.Rev. 3.12. My Livery shall you wear, and the stamp of my own Face shall you carry; Ezek. 36.25,26. with Eph. 4.24. and I will make you my Witnesses, and the Epistles of Christ unto the world, Esay 24 8. 2 Cor. 3.3. and you shall be chosen Vessels, to bear my Name before the sons of men. And that you may see I am in ear∣nest with you, lo I make with you an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; 2 Sam. 23 5. and do here solemnly deliver it to you, as my act and deed, sea∣led with sacred blood, 1 Cor. 11.25. and ratified with the Oath of a God; Heb. 6.17. a God that cannot lie, that knows no place for repentance. Tit. 1,2. 1 Lam. 15.29.
Come ye blessed, receive the Instrument of your salvation: take the writings, be∣hold the sals; here are the conveyances of the Kingdom. Fear not, the doation is free, and full. See, it is written in blood, founded on the All-sufficient me∣rits of your Surety, Heb. 9.16,17,18. in whom I am well pleased, Matth. 3.17. whose death makes this Testament unchangeable for ever; so that your names can never be put out, not your Inheritance alienated, nor your Le∣gacies diminished; nothing may be al∣tered, nothing added, nothing substract∣ed, no not for ever. Gal. 3.15,16,17. Happy art thou O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O Peo∣ple! The bles∣sings of the Covenant, are either its glorious Liberties, and Immu∣nities, or its Royal Priviledges and Prerogatives. Deut. 33.29. Onely believe, and know your own blessedness. Attend O my Chil∣dren, unto the blessings of your Father, and hear, and know the glorious immu∣nities, and the Royal Prerogatives that I here confirm upon you. The Immu∣nities and Liberties of the Cove∣nant con∣sisting in 1. Our general discharge from all our debts.Here I seal you your Pardons. Though your sins be as many as the sands, and as mighty as the Mountains, I will drown them in the deeps of my bottomless mer∣cies. Micah 7.19. I will be merciful to your un∣righteousness: I will multiply to par∣don
Heb. 8.12. where your sins have abounded, my grace shall super-abound; though they be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though red like crimson, they shall be as wooll. Esay 1.18. Behold I declare my self satisfied, and pronounce you ab∣solved: Job 33.24. The price is paid, your debts are cleared, your Bonds are cancelled. Esay 43.25. Coll. 2.13,14. Whatever the Law, or Conscience, or the Accuser hath to charge upon you, here I exonerate you, I discharge you. I, even I am he, that blotteth out your transgressions, for my Names sake. Who shall lay any thing to your charge, when I acquit you? Who shall impeach, or implead you, when I proclaim you guilt∣less? Rom. 8.33,34. Sons, Daughters, be of good chear, your sins are forgiven you. 1 Ioh. 2.12. Mat. 9.2. I will sprinkle your consciences, and put the voice of peace into their mouths, Ezek. 36.25. Heb. 9.14. Esay 57.19. and they shall be your Registers, in which I will record your Pardon, and the voyce of Guilt, and Wrath, and Terrour shall cease.Heb. 10.22. Esay 27.4,5. 2. Our release from the house of bondage; particular∣ly,Here I sign your release from the house of Bondage; Rom. 6.17,18. 1 Cor. 7.22. Come forth ye captives, come forth ye prisoners of hope; for I have found a ransomJob 33.24.: I proclaim liberty
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. Esay 61.1. & 42.7. Behold, I have broken your bonds, and shook the foundations of your prisons, and opened the iron gatesLuke 4.18.. By the blood of the Co∣venant have I sent forth the prisoners out of the pit wherein there is no water. Zech. 19.11. Arise, O redeemed of the Lord, put off the raiment of your captivities, arise and come away. From the dark and noisome prison of sin.The dark and noisome prison of sin shall no longer detain you. John 8.34,35,36. I will loose your fetters, and knock off your bolts. Sin shall not have dominion over you.Rom. 6.14.. I will heal your back-slidings, I will subdue your iniquities, Mic. 7.19. Jer. 3.12. I will sanctifie you wholly, 1 Thess. 5.23,24. and will put my fear in your hearts, that you shall not depart from me. Jet. 32.40. Though your corruptions be strong and many; yet the aids of my Spirit, and cleansing vertue of my word, and physick of my corrections shall so work together with your prayers and endeavours, as that they shall not finally prevail against you, but shall surely fall before you.Ezek. 36.27. Eph, 5.26. Esan 27.9. From the strong and stinking goal of the grave.From the strong and stinking goal of the grave do I deliver you. O death I
will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction, Hos. 13.14. my Beloved shall not ever see corruption.Psal. 16.10. I will change your rottenness into glory, and make your dust arise, and praise me. Dan. 12.2,3. Esay 26.19. What is sown in weakness I will raise in power: what is sown in corruption I will raise in incorruption: what is sown a natural body, I will raise a spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15.42,43,44. This very flesh of yours, this corruptible flesh shall put on incorruption; and this mortal shall put on immortality. 1 Cor. 15.53. Death shall be swal∣lowed up in victory, and mortality of life. 2 Cor. 5.4. 1 Cor. 15.54. Fear not, O my children; Come, and I will shew you the enemy that you dreaded. See, here lies the King of ter∣rours, like Sisera in the tent, fastened to the ground, with the nail struck through his temples. Behold the grateful present, the head of your enemy in a Charger: I bequeath you your conquered adversa∣ry, and make over death as your Lega∣cy. 1 Cor. 3.22. O death where is thy sting? where now is thine armour wherein thou trust∣edst? 1 Cor. 15.55. Come my people, enter into your chambers: Esay 26.20. Come to your beds of dust, Esay 26.20. and lay you down in peace, and let your flesh rest in hope; Esa. 57.2. for even in
this flesh shall you see God. Psal. 16.91. Job 19.25,26,27. O ye slain of death, your carcases, now as loath∣some as the carrion in the ditch, will I redeem from the power of the grave, Psal. 49.15. & fashion those vile bodies like unto the glorious body of your exalted Redeem∣er. Phil. 3.21. Look, if you can on the Sun, when shining in his strength, with such dazling glory will I cloath you, O ye of little faith.Mat. 13.43. From the dungeon of eternal darkness.From the terrible dungeon of eternal darkness do I hereby free you. Fear not, you shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2.11. Rom. 8.1. you are delivered from the wrath to come, and shall never come into con∣demnation1 Thess. 1.10. Joh. 5.24.. The flames of Tophet shall not be able to singe the hairs of your heads, no nor the smell of the fire pass up∣on you. Stand upon the brink, and look down into the horrible pit, the infernal prison, from whence I have freed you. See you how the smoke of their tor∣ments ascendeth for ever and everRev. 14.11.? Hea you the cursings and ravings, the roar∣ings and blasphemiesMat. 25.30.? What think you of those hellish fiends? would you have been willing to have had them fo your companions and tormentorsMat. 25.41.? wha think you of those chains of darkness
of the river of brimstone, of the instru∣ments of torment for soul and body, of those weepings, and wailings, and gna∣shing of teeth. Can you think of an e∣verlasting banishment of a go ye cursed? could you dwell with everlasting? could you abide with devouring fireEsay 33.14.? This is the inheritance you were born to. Eph. 2.3. But I have cut off the entail, and wrought for you a great salvation. I have not ordai∣ned you to wrath, 1 Thess. 5.9. but my thoughts towards you are thoughts of peace.Jer. 29.11. 3. Our pre∣tection from all our ene∣mies.Here I deliver you your protection. From all your enemies will I save you. 2 King. 17.39. From the arrests of the Law. I grant you a protection from the arrests of the Law: your surety hath fully an∣swered it; Gal. 3.13 Rom. 4.10. my Justice is satisfied, my wrath is pacified, my honour is repair∣ed. Dan. 2.24. 2 Cor. 5.19.20. Behold, I am near that justifie you, who is he that shall condemn you?Es. 50.8. From the powers of darkness.From the usurped dominion of the powers of darkness. Col. 1.13. I will tread Satan shortly under you, and will set your feet in triumph upon the necks of your ene∣mies. Rom. 16.20. Let not your hearts be troubled; though you be to wrestle with principa∣ities and powers, and the rulers of the darkness of this world: Eph. 6.12. for stronger s he that is in you, then he that is in the
world. 1 Joh. 4.4. He may bruise your heel, but you shall bruise his head. Gen. 3.15. Behold your Redeemer leading captivity captive, spoi∣ling principalities and powers, and tri∣umphing over them openly in his Cross. Col. 2.15. See how Satan falleth like lightning from Heaven, Luk. 10.18. and the Sam∣pson of your salvation beareth away the gates of Hell posts, and all upon his shoul∣ders, and setteth them up as Trophies of his Victory: how he pulleth out the throat of the Lion, and lifteth up the heart of the Traitour upon the top of his spear, and washeth his hands, and dyeth his robes in the blood of those your ene∣mies.Isa. 63.1,2,3. From the victory of the world.From the victory of the world, 1 John 5.4. Gal. 1.4. nei∣ther its frowns nor its flatteries shall be too hard for your victorious faith. Though it raise up Egypt, and Amalek, and Moab, and all its whole Militia a∣gainst you: yet it shall never keep you out of Canaan. Be of good comfort, your Lord hath overcome the world. Joh. 16.33. Though its temptations be very power∣ful, yet this upon my faithfulness will I promise you, that no such shall come up∣on you, but what you shall be able to bear: But if I see such trials (which you
fear) would be too hard for your graces, and overthrow your souls, I will never suffer them to come upon you; nay, I wil make your enemy to serve you, 1 Cor. 10.13. and do bequeath the world as part of your Dowry to you.1 Cor. 3.22. From the cusre of the Cross.From the curse of the Cross. Psal. 119.71. Affli∣ction shall prove a wholsom Cup to you; your Lord hath drunk the Venom into his own body, and what remains for you is but a healthful Potion, which I will promise you, shall work for your good. Rom. 8.28. Be not afraid to drink, nor desire the cup should pass from you: I bless the cup before I give it unto you. Job 5.17, &c. Drink you all of it, and be thankful; you shall finde my blessing at the bottom of the cup, to sweeten the sharpest afflictions to you. Jam. 5.1.12. Psal. 94.12. I will stand by you in all conditions, and be a fast friend to you in every change. Esay 43.2. In the Wilderness I will speak comfor∣tably to you, and in the fire, and in the water, I will be with you. Hos. 2.14. I will be a strength to the poor, and a strength to the needy in his distress; a Refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the heat, when the blast of terrible ones is as a storm against the Wall. Esay 25.4. Your suffer∣ings shall not be a cup of Wrath, but a
Grace cup; not a Curse, but a Cure; not a cure of trembling, but a cup of blessing to you. Heb. 12.6,7,8. They shall not hurt you, but heal you. Psal. 119 67. My blessing shall attend you in every condition. Gen. 26.3. I say not onely, Blessed shall you be in your Basket, and blessed in your store; but blessed shall you be in your Poverty, Gen. 28.15. and blessed shall you be in your streights: not onely blessed shall you be in your ci∣ties, and blessed shall you be in your fields,; but blessed shall you be in your bonds, and blessed shall you be in your banishment. Mark 9.29 30. 1 Pet. 3.14. Blessed shall you be when you are persecuted, and when you are re∣viled, and your name is cast out as evil: Yea then doubly blessed. Mat. 5.10,11,12. My choisest blessings, greatest good, and richest sweets will I put into your evill things. 1 Pet. 4.13,14. Luk. 6.20,21,22. These happy Immunities, these glorious Liber∣ties of the sons of God, by this immuta∣ble Charter I do for ever settle upon you; and do in, and with my Covenant unal∣terably, irrevocably, everlastingly con∣vey unto you, and confirm upon you. The Pri∣viledges, and Prero∣gatives of he Cove∣nant.Yea, I will not onely free you from your miseries; but will confer upon you Royal Priviledges, and Prerogatives, and
in state you into higher, and greater hap∣piness then ever you have fallen from. Lo I give my self to you, and all things with my self. He gives himself to us for our God.Behold O ye sons of men! Behold and wonder. Be astonished O Heavens! Be moved, ye strong foundations of the Earth! For you shall be my witnesses. This day do I by Covenant bestow my self upon my servants. Gen. 17.7. I will be your God, for ever and ever; Psal. 48.14. Jer. 32.38. Rev. 21.3. Your Own God: Psal. 67.6. Psal. 16.2. Nothing in the world is so much your own as I. The Houses that you have built, that you have bought, are not so much yours as I am. Here you are Tenants at will; but I am your eternal Inheritance. Psal. 16.5. with 73.26. These are loans for a sea∣son, but I am your dwelling place in all generations. Psal. 90.1. You have no where so great a Propriety, so sure and unalterable claim, as you have here. What do you count your own? Do you count your bodies your own, your souls your own? Nay these are not your own; they are bought with a Price. 1 Cor 6.19,20. But you may boldly make your claim to me; you may freely challenge an Interest in me. Jer. 3.19. Esay 63.16. Come near, and fear not; where should you be free, if not with your own? where
should you be bold, if not at home? You are never in all the world so much at home, as when you are with me. You may freely make use of me, or of any of my Attributes, when ever you have need. Psal. 50.15. Jer. 49.11. Psal. 145.18. I will be all to you, that you can wish. To be to us instead of all Rela∣tions. Our friend. Esay 41.8. Jam. 2.2,3. I will be a friend to you. Psal. 25.14 Ioh. 15.15. My secrets shall be with you, and you shall have all freedom of access to me, and li∣berty to pour out all your hearts into my bosom.Eph. 3.12. Heb. 4.16. Our Phy∣sitian.I will be a Physitian to you. I will heal your back-slidings, and cure all your diseases, Hos. 14.4. Psal. 103.3. Fear not, never did soul mis∣carry, that left it self in my hands, and would but follow my prescriptions. Our Shep∣herd.I will be a Shepherd to you. Psal. 23.1. and 80,1. Be not afraid of evil tidings, for I am with you; my rod, and my staff shall comfort you. You shall not want, for I will feed you; you shall not wander (to be lost,) for I will restore you. I will cause you to lie down in green Pastures, and lead you be∣side the still waters. Psal. 23. I will gather you with mine arms, and carry you in my bosom, and will lead on softly, as the flock and the children be able to en∣dure. Esay 43.11. Gen. 33.31,14. If Officers be careless, I will do the work my self. I will judge between
cattel, and cattel. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and bind up that which was broken, and strengthen that which was sick; but I will destroy the fat, and the strong, and will feed them with judge∣ment. Ezek. 34.16,17. with verse 2, 3, 4. I will watch over my flock by night. Esay 27.3. Behold, I have appointed my Ministers as your Watchmen, and Over∣seers that watch for your souls. Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.28. Yea, mine Angels shall be your Watchers, and shall keep a constant Guard upon my Flock. Dan. 3.17,23. Psal. 34.7. And if peradventure the ser∣vants should sleep, Mat. 13.25,27. mine own eyes shall keep a perpetual watch over you, by night, and by day. Psal. 34.15. and 33 18. 2 Chron. 16.9. The Keeper of Is∣rael never slumbreth, nor sleepeth, Psal. 122.3,4,5. nor withdraweth his eyes from the righte∣ous. Job 36.7. I will guide you with mine eye; I will never trust you out of mine own sight.Psal 32.8. Our Sove∣raign.I will be a Soveraign to you. The Lord is your Judge, the Lord is your Lawgiver, the Lord is your King. Esa. 33.22. Fear not the unrighteousness of men. I will judge your cause, I will defend your rights. Deu. 32 36. Psal. 140.12. and 9,4. You shall not stand at mans Bar; you shall not be cast at their Vote; 1 Cor. 4.3,5. 2 Cor. 10.18. let them curse, I will bless; let
them condemn, I will justifie. Esay 50.9. Gen. 12.3. When you come upon tryal for your lives, to have your eternal state decided, you shall see your friend, your father, upon the Bench. Psal. 88.9. Eccles. 3.16,17. Into my hands shall your cause be cast, and you shall surely stand in judgement, and be found at the right hand among the sheep, and hear the King say, Come ye blessed, inherit the King∣dom.Matt. 25.33,34. Matt 10.32. Our Hus∣band.I will be an Husband to you. Esay 54.5. In loving kindness, and in mercies will I be∣troth you unto me for ever. Hos. 2.19,20. I will espouse your Interest, and will be as oe with you, and you with me. Matt 25.40,45. Acts 9.4,5. Zach, 2.8. You shall be for me, and not for another; and I also will be for you. Hos. 3.3. Though I found you as an helpless Infant, exposed in its blood, all your unworthiness doth not discou∣rage me. Lo I have look'd upon you, and spread my skirt over you, and washed you, and put my comeliness upon you. Moreover, I swear unto you, and enter into Covenant with you, and you shall be mine. Ezek. 16.4, to the 10 Behold I do (as it were) put my self out of my own power, and do here solemnly, in this my Marriage-Cove∣nant, make away my self to you, Jer. 24.7, and 30.21,22, & 31.3.34. and with my self all things. Rev. 21.7. I will be an
everlasting Portion to you. Ezek. 44.28. Jer. 51.19 Psal. 119.57. Lift up now your eyes Eastward, and Westward, and Northward, and Southward. Have you not a worthy Portion, a goodly he∣ritage? Can you cast up your riches, or count your own happiness? Can you fathom Immensitie, or reach Omnipo∣tency, or comprehend Eternity? All this is yours. I will set open all my trea∣sures to you; I will keep back nothing from you. He ma∣keth over himself to us, in all his Essenti∣al Perfecti∣ons, and Personal Relations.All the Attributes in the Godhead, and all the Persons in the Godhead, do I hereby make over to you. In all his Essential Perfections I will be yours in all my Essential Perfections, and in all my Personal Relations. In all mine Essential Perfections. Mine Eternity, shall be the date of your happiness. His E∣ternity, as the date of our happi∣ness.I am the Eternal God; and while I am, I will be life, and blessedness to you. Psal. 90.1,2. with Psal. 48.14. 1 Tim. 1.17. with 1 Pet. 5.10. I will be a never failing Fountain of Joy, and Peace, and Bliss unto you. Psal. 36.7,8,9. and 16.11. Esay 35.10. I am the first, and last, that was, and is, and is to come, and mine eternal Power, and Godhead, shall be bound to you.Jer. 32.40. I will be your God, your Father, your Friend, while I have any being. Esay 9. Jer. 10.10. I have made mine everlasting choice in pitch∣ing
upon you. Psal. 132.13,14. Hos. 2.19. Fear not, for the Eter∣nal God is your Refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Armes. Deut. 33.27. My dura∣ble riches, and righteousness shall be yours. Prov. 8.18. Though all should forsake you, yet will not I forsake you. Heb. 13.5. Psal. 27 10. When the world, and all that is therein shall be burnt up, I will be a standing Portion for you. When you are forgotten among the dead, with everlasting loving kind∣ness will I remember you.Esay 54.10. His un∣changea∣bleness as the rock of our rest.Mine unchangeableness shall be the Rock of your rest. Mal. 3.6. Psal. 62.6,7. & 92.15. When all the world is like the tumbling Ocean, round about you, here you may fix and settle. I am your resting place.Jer. 50.6; 2 Chr. 14.11. The immutability of my Nature, and of my Counsel, and of my Covenant, are sure footing for your faith, and a firm Foundation, for your strong and ever∣lasting consolation. 2 Tim. 2.19. Heb. 6.17,18. When you are afflicted, tossed with Tempests, Esay 54.11. and not comforted; put into me: I am an Haven of Hope, I am an Harbour of rest for you; here cast your Anchors, and you shall never be moved.Jer. 17.13.17. Psal. 46.1,2,5. and 125.1. His Om∣nipotency for our guard.Mine Omnipotency shall be your Guard. I am God Almighty, your Almighty Protector, your Almighty Benefactor.Gen. 15.1. & 17.1.
What though your enemies are ma∣ny? more are they that are with you, then they that are against you; for I am with you2 Chr. 32.78. 2 King. 6.16.. What though they are mighty? they are not Almighty. Your Father is greater then all, and none shall pluck you, (pluck while they will) out of my hands. Ioh. 10.29. Who can hinder my pow∣er, or obstruct my salvationEsay 43.13. Dan. 4.35. 2 Pe. 2.9.? Who is like unto the God of Ieshurun, who rideth on the Heaven for your help, and in his excellency on the skie? I am the sword of your strength, & the shield of your excel∣lency. Deu. 33 26,29. I am your rock & your fortress, your deliverer, your strength, the horn of your salvation, your buckler, & your high tower. Psal. 18.2. I will maintain you against all the power of the enemy. You shall ne∣ver sink, if Omnipotency can support you. 1 Pe. 1.5 Ex. 28.12. The gates of Hell shall not pre∣vail against you. Mat. 16.18. Your enemies shall find hard work of it. They shall over∣come victorie, or enervate Omnipotencie, or corrupt fidelitie, or change immuta∣bilitie, or else they cannot finally prevail against you, either they shall bow or break Rev. 3.9 Es. 66.24 Though they should exalt them∣selves as the Eagle, though they should set their nest among the stars, even there will I bring them down, saith the Lord.Oba. 4. Ier. 49.16.
His faith∣fulness for our securityMy faithfulness shall be your security, Ps. 89.33,34,35. my truth, yea my oath shall fail if ever you come off losers by me. Es. 54.9,10. with Mark 10.29,30. I will make you to confess, when you see the issue and upshot of all my providences, that I was a God worthy to be trusted, worthy to be believed, worthy to be rest∣ed in, and relied upon. Psa. 34.4,5,6,8, & 84.12. & 146.5. Ier. 17.7,8. Psa. 22.4,5. If you walk not in my judgements, you must look for my threats and frowns, yea and blows too, and you shall see that I am not in jst with you, nor will indulge you in your sins. Psa, 89.30,31,32, &c. Am. 3.2. & 2 Sam. 12. to 15. 1 Pe. 4.17. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I never take from you, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Cove∣nant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. His mer∣cies as our store.My mercies shall be your store. Es. 54.7 & 63 7. Ps. 119.41. I am the Father of mercies, and such a Fa∣ther I will be to you. 2 Co. 1.3. I am the fountain of mercies, and this fountain shall be ever open to you. Ps. 36.9 with Rev. 21 6. My mercies are very ma∣ny, and they shall be multiplied towards you; Neh. 9.7. with Es. 55.7. very great, and they shall be mag∣nified upon you; 1 Ch. 21.13. with Gen. 19.19. very sure, and they shall be for ever sure to you; Es. 55.3. very ten∣der, and they shall be infinitely tender of you. Ps. 119.156. with 103.4. Though the fig-tree do not blos∣som, nor the vine bear, nor the flock
bring forth; fear not, for my compassi∣ons fail not. Hab. 3.17. Lam. 3.22. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow you all the daies of your lives. Ps. 23.6. Even to your old age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carrie you: I have made, and I will bear, even I will carrie and deliver you. Es. 46.4. I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, that I will not turn away from you to do you good. Ier. 32.40. I swear that I will shew you the kindness of God. 1 Sam. 20.14,15,17. with Esay 54,9,10. I can as soon for∣get to be God, as forget to be gracious. Psa. 77.9. While my name is Jehovah, merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, I will never forget to shew mercy to you. Ps. 103.17. with Ex. 34.6,7. All my waies towards you shall be mercy and truth. Psa. 25.10. I have sworn that I would not be wroth with you, nor rebuke you, for the moun∣tains shall depart, and the hills be remo∣ved, but my kindness shall not depart from you, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on you. His om∣nisciency as our Over∣seer.Mine Omnisciencie shall be your over∣seer, mine eies shall be ever open, obser∣ving your wants to relieve them, and your wrongs to avenge them. 1 Pet. 3.12. Ex. 3.7. Mine ears shall be ever open to hear the pray∣ers
of my poor, the cries of mine oppres∣sed, the clamours, calumnies, and reproa∣ches of your enemies. Psal. 34.15. Exod. 2.24,25. Zeph. 2.8,9,10. Surely I have seen your affliction, and know your sor∣rowes. And shal not God avenge his own Elect? I will avenge them speedi∣ly. Luk. 18.7,8. I see the secret Plots, and Designes of your enemies against you, Jer. 18.23. and will disannul their Counsels. Esay 8.10. with 29.14,15. Psal. 33.10. I see your se∣cret integrity, and the uprightness of your hearts towards me, while the carnal and censorious world condemn you as Hypocrites. Job 1.8,9,10,11. 2 Chron. 15.17. Your secret Prayers, Fasts, and Tears, which the world knoweth not of, I observe them, and record them. Matt. 4.6,18. Act. 10.4. Your secret care to please me, your secret pains with your own hearts, Mat. 25.34,35,36. 2 Chron. 34.27. your secret self-searchings, and self denyal; I see them all, and your Father which seeth in secret, shall reward them openly. His wis∣dom as our Counsellor-My wisdom shall be your Councellor. If any want wisdom, Jam. 1.5. let him ask of me, and it shall be given him. I will be your De∣liverer. When you are in darkness, I will be a light to you. Mic. 7.8. I wil make your way plain before you. Esay 43.19. and 57.14. You are but short sighted, but I will be eyes to you. Esay 42.6,7. and 49.6. I will watch over you, to bring upon you all the good I have promised Jer. 31.28. with 32.24. and
to keep off the evil you fear, or to turn it into good. Psal. 91.10,14. Jer. 24.5. You shal have your food in its season, and your Physick in its sea∣son: Mercies, Afflictions, all suitable, and in their season.Psal. 23.2,3. 1 Pet. 1.6. Esay 27.7,8,9. I will outwit your Enemies, and make their Oracles to speak but folly. Esay 19.11,12,13,14. The old Serpent shal not deceive you. I will acquaint you with his devices. 2 Cor. 2.11. The deceitful hearts you fear, shal not undoe you, I will discover their wiles. I know how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished. 2 Pet 2.9. Trust in me with all your hearts, and lean not to your own understanding. Prov. 3.5,9. I am God that performeth all things for you. Psal. 57.2. I will forfeit the reputation of my wisdom, if I make you not to ac∣knowledge, when you see the end of the Lord, Jam. 5.11. (though at present you wonder, and reach not the meaning of my procee∣dings) Jer. 12.1. that all my works are in Weight, and in Number, and in Time, and in Or∣der: Ecc. 3.14 If I force you not to cry out, Ma∣nifold are thy works, in wisdom hast thou made them all.Psal. 33.4, & 145.10. Psal. 104.24. His Ju∣stice as our Avenger and Re∣warder.My Justice shall be your Revenger and Rewarder. 2 Thess. 1.6. 2 Tim. 4.8 Fear not to approach; fury
is not in me. Esay 27.4. My Justice is not onely appeased towards you, but engaged for you. I am so fully satisfied in the sacri∣fice of my Beloved, that Justice it self, that was as a flaming sword, drawn against you, shall now greatly befriend you; and that which was an amazing, confounding Terror, shall now become your relief, and consolation. Eccles. 3 16,17. and 5.8. Psal. 96.10,11,12,13. Psal 97.1. with 99.1. Under all your Op∣pressions, here shal your refuge be. Psal. 6.9. and 103.6. Let me know your grievances, my Justice shall right your wrongs, and reward your services. Psal. 146.7, Heb. 6.10. You may conclude upon your Pardons, conclude upon your Crowns, conclude upon Reparations for all your injuries, and all from the sweet conside∣ration of my Justice, 1 Joh. 1.9. 2 Tim. 4.8. 2 Thess. 14.5. 1 Pet. 2.23. the thought of which, to others, is as the horrour of the shadow of death. If you sin, despair not; remember, I am just to forgive you. If you are at any pains or cost for me, do not count it lost; for I am not unrighte∣ous to forget you. I am the righteous Judge, that have laid up for you, and will set on you the Crown of righteousness. Are you reviled, persecuted, defamed? Forget not that I am righteous, to render tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you that are troubled, rest with me.
Though all your services and sufferings, deserve not the least good at my hands, yet as I have freely passed my promise to reward them, so I will as justly keep it. His Omni∣presence, as company for us.Mine Omnipresence shall be company for you. 1 Chro. 22.18. Josh. 1.5.9. Esay 41.10. Surely I will be with you, to bless you.Gen. 26 24.. I will never leave you nor for∣sake you. No Bolts, nor Bars, nor Bonds, nor Banishment, shal remove you from me, nor keep my presence, and the influences of Heaven from you. Gen. 3.21.23. I am alwaies with you: Matt. 28 20. In your darkest nights, in your deepest dangers, I am at hand with you, a very present help in the time of trouble Psal. 46.1. and 34.18. I am not a God afar off, or asleep, or in a journey, when you need my counsel, mine ear, or mine aid: I am alwaies nigh unto them that fear me.Psal. 145 18. No Patmos, no Prison shall hinder the presence of my grace from you. Rev. 1.9,10. Act. 16 25,26. My presence shall perfume the noysomest Wards, and lighten the darkest Dunge∣ons where you can be thrust.Act. 12.7 Esay 58.10. His Holi∣ness as a Fountain of grace to us.My holiness shall be a fountain of grace to you. Ioh. 1.16 2 Pet. 1.4. I am the God of hope, Rom. 15.13. the God of love, 2 Cor. 13.11. the God of pati∣ence, Ro. 15.5. the Author and finisher of
faith, Heb. 12.2. the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. and I will give grace to you. Psal. 84 11. My design is to make you partakers of my Holiness. Heb. 12.10. I will be a constant spring of spiritual life to you. Gal. 2.20. Ioh. 14. and 8.12. and 10.10 and 14.6. The water that I shal give you, shal be in you as a Well of water, spring∣ing up into everlasting life. The seed of life, that I shal put into you, shal be so fd, and cherished, and maintained by my power, Ioh. 4.14. that it shal be immortal. 1 Ioh. 3.9. 1 Pet, 1.23. Col. 2.19. The Unction that you shal receive from the holy One, shal abide in you, & teach you all things (necessary for you:) and as it hath taught you, you shal abide in him.Ioh. 14.16,17 and 1 Ioh. 2.20,27. Keep but the Pipes open, and ply the means which I have prescribed, and you shal flourish in the Courts of your God. Prov. 8.34. Psal. 92 13. Yea I will satisfie your souls in drought, and make fat your bones, and you shal be like a watered Garden, Esay 58.11. Lo I will be as the dew unto you, and you shal grow as the Lilly, and cast forth your roots as Lebanon; and your bran∣ches shal spread, and your beauty shal be as the Olive-tree. Hos. 14.5,6. You shal stil bring forth fruit in old age, you shal be fat, and flourishing.Psal. 92.14. His So∣veraignty to be (as it were) com∣manded by us.My Soveraignty shal be commanded by you. Gen. 32.26,28. Deut. 9.14. You shal be my Favourites, men
of Power, to prevail with me. Hos. 12.4. Jam. 5.17,18, All mine Attributes, shal be at the command of your Prayers.Esay 45.11. His All∣sufficiency to be the lot of our InheritanceIn summe, mine Allsufficiency shal be the lot of your Inheritance. Gen. 17.1. Lam. 3.14. Psal. 16.5,6. My fullness is your treasure. Numb. 18.20. Deut, 10.9. Psal. 16 5,6. My house is your home. Psal. 91.1,9. You may come as freely to my store, as to your own Cupboard. Eph. 3.12. You may have your hand as freely in my Treasures, as in your own Purses. You cannot ask too much, you cannot look for too much from me. Eph. 3.20. Mat. 7.8. I will give you, or be my self to you instead of all comforts. Gen. 15.1. Psal. 84.11. You shal have children, or I will be better to you, then ten chil∣dren. Esay 56.3,4. You shal have riches, or I will be more to you then all riches.2 Cor. 6.10. You shall have friends, if best for you, or else I will be your Comforter in your solitude, Esay 51.3. Ioh. 14.26. 2 Cor. 1.3,4. your Counsellor in your di∣stress, Psal. 73.24. If you leave Father, or Mother, or Houses, or Lands for my sake, you shall have an hundred fold in me, even in this time. Mark 10 30. When your enemies shall remove your comforts, it shall be but as the letting the Cistern run, and opening the fountain, or putting out the candles, and letting in the sun. The swelling of the waters shal raise higher the Ark of your
comfort. Ro. 5.3. Heb. 10.34. Act. 5.41. I will be the staffe of bread to you, your life, and the strength of your daies. Deut. 30.20. Esay 33.16. I will be the house and home to you, you shall dwell with me, yea, dwell in me, and I in you. Deut. 33.12. Iohn 14.23. 1 Iohn 3.24. I will stand and fall with you. Psa. 37.17,24. & 54.4. Esay 41.10. I wil repair your losses, and relieve your needs. Phil. 4.19. Mark 8.35. Mat. 19.27,28,29. Can you burn out the Lamp of Heaven, or lave out the boundless Ocean with your hands? why the Sun shall be dark, and the Sea be dry, before the Father of Lights, the Fountain of Mercies shall be exhausted. Behold, though the world hath been spending upon the stock of my mercy, e∣ver since I created man upon earth, yet it runs with full stream still. My Sun doth diffuse its Raies, and disburse its light, and yet shines as bright as ever, Much more can I dispence of my good∣ness, and fill my creatures brim-ful, and running over, and yet have never the less in my self: and till this all-sufficiency be spent, you shall never be undone. I am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Iacob, and whatever I was to them, I will be to you. Are you in want, you know whither to go. I am ever at home, you shall not go away emptie from my door. Never
distract your selves with cares and fears, but make known your requests by pray∣er and supplication unto me. Phi. 4.6. I will help, when all do fail. Psa. 73.26. Esa. 63,5. Psal. 102.17. When friends fail, and heart fails; when your eye strings crack, and your heart strings crack; when your acquaintance leave you, and your souls leave you, my bo∣some shall be open to you. Psa 49.15. 2 Cor. 5 1. Luke 16.9,22. I will lock up your dust, I will receive your souls. His infiniteness to be the extent of our inhe∣ritance.And mine infiniteness shall be the ex∣tent of your inheritance. Can you by searching find out God? can you find out the Almighty to perfection? It is as high as Heaven, what can you do? deep∣er then Hell, what can you know? Iob 11.7,8,9. with Psa. 50.7. This heighth incomprehensible, this deep unfathomable shall be all yours, for ever yours. I am your inheritance, which no lines can measure, no Arithmetick can value, no Surveyor can describe.Ezek. 44.28. Eph. 3.8. 1 Tim. 6.16. Psa. 145.3. Lift up now your eies to the ancient mountains, and to the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, all that you can see is yours: but your short sight cannot ken the moietie of what I give you; and when you see and know most, you are
no less then infinitely short of the disco∣very of your own riches.Iob 26.14. Yea further, I will be yours in all my personal relations. In all his personal relations. God the Father to be a Father to us.I am the everlasting Father, and I will be a Father to you. Iohn 20.17. I take you for my sons and daughters. Cor. 6.18. Behold, I receive you not as servants, but as sons, to abide in my house for ever. Ioh. 8.35,36. Whatever love, or care children may look for from their father, that may you expect from me; Mat. 6.31,32. and so much more as I am wiser, and greater, and better then any earthly pa∣rents. If earthly fathers will give good things to their children, much more will I give to you. Luke 11.13. If such cannot forget their children, much less will I forget you. Esay 49 15. What would my children have? your Fathers heart, and your Fathers house: ob. 7.17. Ioh. 14 2 your Fathers care, and your Fathers ear: 1 Pet. 5.7. Mat. 7,9. your Fathers bread, and your Fathers rod, Luk. 12.30,31,32. Heb. 12.7. these shall be all yours. He promi∣seth his fa∣therly affe∣ction.You shall have my fatherly affection, my heart I share among you; my tende∣rest loves I bestow upon you.1 Iohn 3.1. Ier. 31.3. Esa. 54.8. His fatherly compassion.My fatherly compassion. As a Father pittieth his children, so will I pittie you. Psa. 103.13,14. I will consider your frame, and
not be extream to mark what is done a∣miss by you, but cover all with the man∣tle of my excusing love.Psal. 78.39. His fa∣therly instructi∣on.My fatherly instruction. I will cause you to hear the sweet voice behind you, say∣ing, This is the way, Esay 30.21. I will tender your weakness, and inculcate mine admoniti∣ons, line upon line, and seed you with milk when you cannot digest stronger meat. Esay 28,13. 1 Cor. 3.2. I will instruct you, and guide you with mine eye.Ps. 32.8 His fa∣therly protecti∣on.My fatherly protection. In my fear is strong confidence, and my children shall have a place of refuge. Prov. 14.26. My Name shall be your strong Tower, to which you may at all times flie, and be safe. Prov. 18.10. To your strong hold ye prisoners of hope. Zec. 9.12 I am an open refuge, a near and inviolable refuge for you.Ps. 48.3 Deut. 4.7. Ioh. 10.29 His fa∣therly provision.My fatherly Provision. Be not afraid of want, in your Fathers house there is bread enough. Ps. 34.9 Luk. 15.17 I will care for your bo∣dies. Cark not for what you shal eat, drink, or put on. Let it suffice you, that your Heavenly Father knoweth that you have need of all things. Mat. 6.25. to the end. Luke 12.22. to the 34. I wil provide for your souls, Meat for them and Mansions for them, and Portions for them.Ioh. 6.32. to 59. Ps. 15.12. Lam. 3.24.
Behold I have spread the Table of my Gospel for you, with priviledges and comforts that no man taketh from you. Esay 25.6. Mat. 22 4. Prov. 9.2. I have set before you the bread of life, and the tree of life, and the water of life: Joh. 6.48. Rev. 2.7. and 22.17. Eat, O friends, drink abundantly, O Be∣loved. But all this is but a taste of what I have prepared. You must have but smiles and hints now, and be contented with glimpses, and glanses here; but you shal be shortly taken up into your Fathers bosom, and live for ever, in the fullest viewes of his glory.1 Thes. 4.17. His Fa∣therly Pro∣bation.My Fatherly Probation. I will chasten you, because I love you, that you may not be condemned with the world.1 Cor. 11.32. Prov. 3.11.12. God the Son to be a husband to us.My Son I give unto you, in a Marriage-Covenan for ever: Esay 9.6. and 42.6. 2 Cor. 11.2. I make him over to you, as Wisdom, for your Illuminati∣on; Righteousness, for your Justificati∣on; Sanctification, for the curing of your Corruptions, Redemption, for your Deliverance from your Enemies. 1 Cor. 1.30. I bestow him upon you with all his full∣ness, all his merits, and all his gra∣ces. He shal be yours, in all his Offices. I have anointed him for a Prophet. Are you ignorant, he shal teach you; he shal
be eye-salve to you: Esay 49.6. and 42.16. Rev. 3.18. I have sent him to Preach the Gospel to the poor, and re∣covering of sight to the blind; to set at liberty them that are bruised. Luk. 4:18. I have established him by Oath, as a Priest for ever. Psal. 110 4. If any sin, he shall be your Ad∣vocate: He shal expiate your guilt, and make the Atonement. 1 Joh. 2.1,2. Zech. 13.1. Have you any sacrifice, any service to offer; bring it un∣to him, and you shal receive an Answer of Peace.1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15. Present your Petitions by his hand, him will I accept. Ioh. 14.13.14. Having such an High Priest over the house of God, Heb. 10.19,20,21,22. you may come, and wellcome; come with boldness. Him have I set up as King, upon my holy Hill of Sion. He shal rule you, he shal defend you. Esay 9.6,7. Mat. 1.21. He is the King of Righteousness, King of Peace; and such a King shal he be to you. Heb. 7.2. Jer. 23.6. Eph. 2.14. I will set up his Standard for you: Esay 49.22. I will set up his Throne in you. Psal. 110 2. He shal reign in righteousness, and rule in Judg∣ment: and he shal be a hiding place from the wind, a covert from the tempest, and the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Esay 32.12. He shal hear your causes, judge your Enemies, Esay 11.3.4,5. and reign till he hath put all under his feet. Psal. 110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25. Yea, and under
your feet; for they shal be as ashes under you, and you shal tread them saith the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 4.3. Yea I will undo them that afflict you, and all they that despi∣sed you, shal bow themselves down at the soles of your feet. Esay 60.4. Zeph. 3.19. And you shal go forth, and behold the carkasses of the men that have transgressed against me, for their Worm shal not die, neither shal their fire be quenched; and they shal be an abhorring to all flesh.Esay 66.24. God the Spirit to be Counsellour and Com∣forter to us.My Spirit do I give unto you for your Counsellour, and your Comforter. Ioh. 16.7 Rom. 8.14 He shal be a constant Inmate with you, and shal dwel in you, and abide with you for ever.Ezek. 36 27. Iohn 14.16,17. I consecrate you as Temples to his Holiness. 1 Cor. .16,17. and 6.19. He shal be your Guide, he shal lead you into all truth. Gal. 5.18. Ioh. 14 26. He shal be your Advocate, to endite your pray∣ers, and make intercession for you, and shal fill your mouths with the Argu∣ments, that he knows will prevail with me. Rom. 8.26.27. He shal be Oyl to your Wheels, and Strength to your Ancles, Wine to your Hearts, and Marrow to your Bones, and Wind to your Sails. He shal wit∣ness your Adoption. Rom. 8.16. He shal seal you up to the day of Redemption, and be to
you the earnest of your Inheritance, un∣til the redemption of the purchased pos∣session.Eph. 4.30. and 13,14. 2 Cor. 1.22. He giveth all things with him∣self, both present and to come.And as I give you my self, so much more all things with my self. Rom 8.32. Earth, and Heaven, Life, and Death, things present, and things to come.1 Cor. 3.22. Things present ours.Things present are yours: Lo I give you Calebs blessing, The upper Springs, and the neather Springs. I will bless you with all Spiritual blessings, in Hea∣venly places in Christ.Eph. 1.3 The up∣per springs, or blessings spiritual, as Adopti∣on, Access, Audience, Peace, Per∣severance, &c.To you pertaineth the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the Service of God, and the Promises. Rom. 9.4 To you will I give the white Stone, and the new Name, Rev. 2.17. access into my presence, Eph. 3.12. the acceptation of your Persons, Eph. 1.6 the audience of your Prayers.1 Joh. 5.14,15. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Joh. 14.27. I will undertake for your perseverance, and keep you to the end, and then will crown mine own gift with eternal life. Jer. 32.40. Joh. 10 28,29. 1 Pet. 1.5. Phil. 1.6. I have made you heirs of God, and co-heirs with your Lord Je∣sus Christ, and you shal inherit all things.Ro. 8.17. Rev. 21.7. I have granted you mine Angels for
your Guardians. The Pro∣tection of his Angels. The Courtiers of Hea∣ven shal attend upon you; they shal be all ministring spirits for your good. Heb. 1.14. Behold I have given them charge over you, upon their fidelity to look after you, and as the tender Nurse, to bear you in their arms, and to keep you from coming to any hurt. Psal. 91.11,12. These shal be as the careful Shepherds, to watch over my Flock by night, and to encamp round a∣bout my Fold.Psal. 34.7. The In∣spection of his Mi∣nisters.My Ministers I give for your Guides. Eph 4.11. Paul, Apollos, Cephas, all are yours. 1 Cor. 3.22. I am alwaies with them, and they shal be al∣waies with you to the end of the world. Matt. 28 20. Eph. 4.13. You shal have Pastours after mine own heart, Jer. 3.15. and 23.4. and this shal be my Covenant with you, that my Spirit which is upon you, and my words which I have put in∣to your mouth, shal not depart out of your mouth, nor the mouth of your seed, nor of your seeds seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.Esay 59.21. The Rod of his Dis∣cipline.In short, All my Officers shal be for the profiting, and perfecting of you. Eph. 4.12, All mine Ordinances shal be for edifying and saving of you. Act. 20.32. Rom. 1.16. The very severities of my house, Admonitions, Censures, &c. And the whole Discipline of my Family
shal be for preventing, of your infection, curing of corruption, procuring your salvation.1 Cor. 5.5,6,7. Matt. 18.15. The light of his WordMy WORD have I ordained, for converting your souls, enlightning your eyes, rejoycing your hearts, cautioning you of your dangers, cleansing your de∣filements, and conforming you to mine Image. Psal. 19 7,8,9,11. Eph. 5 26. 2 Cor. 3.18. To you I commit the Oracles of God. Rom. 3.2 Here you shal be furnished against Temptations; Matt. 4.4,7. Eph. 6.17. hence you shal be comforted under Distresses and afflicti∣o s. Psal. 119 92,93. Here you shal finde my whole Counsel. Act. 20.27. This shal instruct you in your way, correct you in your wandrings, di∣rect you into the truths to be believed, de∣tect to you the errours to be reject∣ed.2 Tim. 3.16. Psal. 119.105. The pled∣ges of his Sacra∣ments.My Sacraments I give you, as the Pledges of my love. You shal freely claim them, they are childrens bread. Lo I have given them as Seals, to certifie all that I have here promised you; Rom. 4.11. and when these sacred signes are delivered unto you, then know, and remember, and consider in your hearts, that I therein plight you my troth, and set to my hand, and do thereby ratifie and confirm every Article of these Indentures, and do actu∣ally
deliver into your own hands this glorious Charter, with all its Immunities and Priviledges, as your own for e∣ver.1 Cor. 11.25. Gen. 17.10. The Ne∣ther-springs, or Mercies Temporal.And having sowed to you so largely in Spiritual blessings, shal you not much more reap the Temporal? Be you not of doubtful mind, all these things shal be added unto you. Luk. 12.29,31. The sup∣ply of his Creatures. My creatures I grant for your servants, and supplies. Psal. 8.3. to the end Hea∣ven and Earth shal minister to you. All the stars in their courses shal serve you, and (if need be) shal fight for you. Jud. 5.20 And I will make my Covenant for you with the Beasts of the field, and with the fouls of Heaven; and you shall be in league with the stones of the field, and all shal be at peace with you. Job 5.23 Hos. 2.18. I will undertake for all your necessities. Do I feed the Fowles, and clothe the grass? and do you think I will neglect my children? Matt. 6.25. to the end. I hear the young Ravens when they cry; shal I not much more fulfil the desires of them that fear me? Psal. 145 19. with the 147.9. Fear not, you shal be sure to want no good thing; Psal. 34. ver. 10. and you would not your selves desire riches, pleasures, or preferment to your hurt. I will give meat to them that fear me: I wil be ever mindful of my CovenantPsal. 111 5.
The Co∣operation of his Pro∣vidences.My Providences shal cooperate to your good. Rom. 8.28. The cross winds shal blow you the sooner and swifter into your Harbour. Yu shal be preferred, when you seem most debased; and then be greatest gainers, when you seem to be deepest losers; and most effectually pro∣mote your good, when you seem most to deny it. 2 Cor. 4.17. Mark 10.29. Phil. 1.29 Things to come ours. Things to come are yours, the Perfecting of your souls, the Redem∣ption of your bodies, the Consummati∣on of your bliss. At death in Glorificati∣on Initiate.When you have glorified me for a while on Earth, and finished the work I have given you to do, you shal be caught up into Paradise, and rest from your La∣bours, and your works shal follow you. Rev. 14.13. Luke 23.43. The Con∣voy of An∣gels. I will send of mine own Life-guard, to conduct home your departing souls, Luk. 16.22. and receive you among the spirits of just men made perfect. Heb. 12.23. And you shal look back upon Pharaoh, and all his Host, and see your enemies dead upon the Shore. Redempti∣on from all Afflictions and Corru∣ptions. Then shal be your Redemption from all your Afflictions, and all your Corruptions. Luk. 1.28. Eph. 4 30. The thorn in the flesh taken out The thorn in the flesh shal be pulled out, and the hour of temptation shal be o∣ver, and the Tempter for ever out of work.
The sweat wiped off from our browes.The sweat shal be wiped off from your browes, and the day of cooling and refreshing shal come, and you shal sit you down for ever under my shadow. Acts 3.19. Heb, 4.9. For the Lamb that is in the midst of the Throne shal feed you, and lead you to the living Fountains of waters.Rev. 7.17. The tears wiped away from our eyes.The tears shal be wiped away from your eyes, and there shal be no more sorrow, nor crying, neither shal there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away, and behold I make all things new. Rev. 21.4,5. I will change Marah into Naomi, and the cup of sorrow, into the cup of salvation, and the bread and wa∣ter of affliction, into the wine of eter∣nal consolation. Joh 16.20.21,22. Luk. 6.21. You shal take down your Harps from the Willows, and I will turn your tears into Pearls, and your penitential Psalms into songs of Deliverance. You shal change your Ichabods into Hosanna's; and your Ejahs of sorrow, into Hallelujahs of Joy.Rev. 19.1,4,6. The Cross taken off from our backs.The cross shal be taken off from your backs, & you shal come out of your great Tribulations, and wash your Robes, and make them white in the blood of the Lamb; and you shal be before the Throne of God, and serve him night and day in
his Temple, and he that sitteth on the Throne, shall dwell among you, and you shal hunger no more, and thirst no more, neither shal the sun light upon you, nor any heat. Rev. 7.14,15,16 The load taken off from our conscien∣ces. The load shal be taken off from your Consciences. Sins nor doubts shal no more defile you, nor distress you. Rev. 21.27. and Heb. 12.23. I will make an end of sin, and knock off the Fetters of your corrup∣tions, and you shal be a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but Holy, and without ble∣mish.Eph. 5.27. Rev. 7.9.13,14. The souls admissi∣on into the chamber of Pre∣sence, and Vision of God.Thus shal you be brought to the King all glorious, in raiment of Needle-work, and clothing of Gold; with gladness and rejoycing shal you be brought, and enter into the Kings Palace. Psa. 45.9,13,14,15. So shal the be∣loved of the Lord dwel safely by him, and you shal stand continually before him, and behold the beauty of the Lord. and hear his Wisdom. 1 Cor. 13,12. Then will I open in you an everlasting spring of joy, and you shal break forth into singing, and never cease more, nor rest day nor night, saying Holy, holy, holy.Rev. 4.8. Ps. 16.11. Thus shal the grand Enemy expire with your breath, and the body of death be put off with your dying bodie; and
the day of your death shall be the birth∣day of your glory.Phi. i. 23 Lu. 23.43 Have faith in God. Mark 11.22. Wait but a lit∣tle, and sorrow shall cease, and sin be no more. At the Resurre∣ction in Glorifi∣cation consum∣mate. Redem∣ption compleatAnd then a little longer, and death shall be no more; Rev. 20 14. and 21.4. but your last enemy shall be destroyed, and your victory com∣pleated. 1 Cor. 15.26. The Re∣turn of the Re∣deemer. Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and you also shall appear with him in glory. Heb. 10 37. Col. 3.4. This same Jesus which is taken from you into Hea∣ven, Act. 1.11. shall so come as he went up into Heaven: and when he cometh, he will receive you to himself, that where he is, there you may be also. Ioh. 14.3 Behold his sign; he cometh in the clouds of Heaven with Power, & great Glory, & every eye shal see him, and all the Tribes of the Earth shal mourn because of him; Rev. 1.7 Mat. 24.30. but you shal lift up your heads, because the day of your Redemption draweth nigh. Luke 21.28. The rai∣sing of the body. Then shal he sound his Trump, 1 Cor. 15.52. 1 Thes. 4.16. and make you to hear his voice in your dust, Ioh. 5.28 and shal send his mighty Angels to ga∣ther you from the four winds of heaven, Mat. 24.31. who shal carry you in the triumphant Chariot of the Clouds, to meet your Lord; 1 Thes. 4.17. and you shal be prepared for
him, and presented to him, as a Bride a∣dorned for her Husband. Rev. 2.2. And as you have borne the Image of the Earthly, so shal you bear the Image of the Heaven∣ly, 1 Cor. 15.49. Full con∣formity both in body and soul to our glorified Saviour. and you shal be fully conformed both in body and spirit, to your glorious head. Phil. 3.21. Heb. 12.23. Then shal he confess you before his Angels, Rev. 3.5. Publick Approbati∣on and Ab∣solution. and you shal receive your open Absolution before all flesh, and be owned, approved, and applauded in the Publick audience of the general Assem∣bly. Mat. 10.32. and 26 32,34,35, &c. Solemn Espousals. And you shal be with all Royal solemnities, espoused unto the King of glory, in the presence of all his shining Courtiers, Rev. 19.7,8. 2 Cor. 4.14. Mat. 25.31. to the envy, and gnashing, and terror of your Adversaries.Luk. 13.28. The Co∣ovation and Enthronement of the Saints. Their sitting in judgment up∣n the World.So shal your Lord with his own hand crown you, Rev. 2.10. and set you in Thrones, Rev. 3.21. Mat. 19.28. and you shal judge men, and Angels: 1 Cor. .2,3. and you shal have power over the Nati∣ons, Rev. 2.26,27. and you shall set your feet upon the necks of your enemies.Psal. 49.14. Lo I have set the very day for your en∣aiment; Acts 17.31. I have provided your Crowns, 2 Tim. 4.8. I have prepared the King∣om. Mat. 25.34. Wherefore do you doubt, O
you of little faith? These are the true sayings of God. Rev. 19.9. Are you sure that you are now on Earth? so surely shal you be shortly with me in Heaven. Are you sure that you shal die? so surely shal you rise again in glory. Lo, I have said it, and who shal reverse it? You shal see me face to face, and be with me where I am, and behold my glory. 1 Cor. 13.12. Ioh. 17.24. For I will be glorified in my Saints, and admired in all them that believe; 2 Thess. 1.10. and all flesh shal know that I have loved you. Rev. 3 9. For I will make you the instances of my grace, Eph. 1.5 6. and 2.7 in whom the whole world shal see, how unutterably the Almighty God can advance the poor Worms-meat, and dust of the ground. And the despisers shal behold, and wonder, and perish: Act. 13.41. for they shal be witnesses to the riches of my magnificence, and exceeding greatness of my Power. Luk. 16.23. They shal go away into everlasting punishment, but you into life eternal.Mat. 25.46. Our Tri∣umphant Ascension into heavenFor no sooner shal their doom be past, but the Bench shal rise, Mat. 25.41,46. and the Judge shal return with all his glorious Train; with sound of trumpet, and shouts in∣credible shal he ascend, and shal lead you to your Fathers house. Psal. 45.14,15. Mat. 25.23. Joh. 14.2. with 2 Cor. 5.1. Then shal the
triumphal Arches lift up their heads, and the everlasting Gates stand open, and the heavens shal receive you all, and so shal you be ever with the Lord.Joh. 12.26. 1 Th. 4.17. And now will I rejoyce over you with singing, and rest in my love, Zeph. 3.17. and Heaven shal ring with joyes and acclamations, because I have received you safe and sound.Luk. 15.10,23,25,27. And in that day you shal know, that I am a Rewarder of them that diligently seek me; Heb. 11.6. and that I did record your words, Mal. 3.16. and bottle your tears, and tell your wandrings, Psal. 56.8. and keep an account, even to a cup of cold water, of whatever you said or did for my Name. Mat. 10.42. Blessed E∣ternity! You shal surely finde, that nothing shal be lost; 1 Cor. 15.58. but you shal have full measure, pressed down, and running over, thou∣sands of years in Paradise, for the least good thought, and thousand thousands, for the least good word; and then the rec∣koning shal begin again, till all Arith∣matick be non-plust. For you shal be swallowed up in a blessed Eternity, and the doors of Heaven shal be shut upon you, and there shall be no more going out.Dan. 12.2,3. Rev. 3.12. Luk. 16.26. Glorious company.The glorious Quire of mine holy An∣gels,
the goodly fellowship of my blessed Prophets, the happy society of Trium∣phant Apostles, the royal Hosts of victo∣rious Martyrs, these shal be your Com∣panions for ever. Mat. 8.11,12. Heb. 12.22,23. And you shal come in white Robes, with Palmes in your hands, every one having the Harps of God, and golden Vials full of Odours, and shal cast your Crowns before me, and strike in with the multitude of the heavenly Hosts, glorifying God, and saying, Hallelujah; the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth. Rev. 7.9,10,11,12. and 19 5.6. Blessing, honour, glory, and Power be unto him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and e∣ver.Rev. 5.13. In short, I will make you equal to the Angels Luk. 20.36. of God, and you shal be the everlasting Trumpets of my praise. Rev. 7.10,11,12,15. You shal be abundantly satisfied with the fat∣ness of my House, and I will make you drink of the Rivers of my pleasures. Psal. 36.8. You shal be an eternal Excellency, Esay 60.15. and if God can die, and Eternity run out, then, and not else shal your joyes expire. Beatifical Vision. For you shal see me as I am, 1 Joh. 3.2. and know me, as you are known; 1 Cor. 13 12. and shal behold my face in righteousness, and be satisfied with my likeness. Psal. 17.25. And you shal be the
vessels of my Glory, whose blessed use shall be to receive the overflowings of my Goodness, and to have mine infinite Love and Glory poured out into you brimfull, and running over for evermore.Rom. 9 23. 2 Tim. 2,20. Rev. 22.1. And blessed is he that hath believed, for there shall be a performance of the things that have been told him. Lu. 1.45. The Lord hath spoken it, you shall see my Face, and my Name shall be written in your foreheads, and you shall no more need the Sun, nor the Moon, for the Lord God shall give you light, and you shall reign for ever and ever.Rev. 22.3,4,5. He taketh us for his people.And as I give my self to you for your God, and all things with my self: so I take you for my Covenant-people, Heb 8.10 Esay 43 1. and you shall be mine in the Day when I make up my jewels, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will spare you as a man spa∣reth his own Son that serveth him. Mal 3.17 The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, Surely they are my chil∣dren. Psa. 87 6 Esay 63.8. I do not onely require you to be mine, if you would have me to be for you: but I do promise to make you mine, Lev. 20.26. Ezek. 36. 28. and to work in you the conditions which I re∣quire of you. I will circumcise your
hearts to love me. Deu. 30.6. I will take out the heart of stone. Ezek. 36.26. My Laws will I write within you.J. 31.33. Yet you must know that I will be sought unto for these things, Eze. 36,37. and as e∣ver you expect to partake of the mercies, I charge you to lie at the Pool, and wait for my Spirit, and be diligent in the use of the meanssProv. 2.3.4,5, and 8.38. Lu. 11.13. I am content to abate the rigour of the old terms. Rom. 4.6 I shall not stand upon satis∣faction. Lu. 7.42 I have received a ransome, and do onely expect your acceptance. Rev. 22.17. 1 Tim. 2.6. I shall not insist upon perfection. 1 Joh. 1.8,9. Walk before me, and be upright, and sincerity shall carry the Crown. Prov. 11.20. Gen. 17.1. Psa. 97.11. Yea, both the faith and obedience that I require of you are mine own gifts.Eph. 2.8 Phil. 2.13. I require you to accept my Son by be∣lieving: but I will give you an hand to take him, Phi. 1.29 Joh. 6.65. and to submit to and obey him: but I must and will guide your hands to write after him, and cause you to walk in my statutes. Ezek. 36 27. I will take you by the arms, and teach you to go: Hos. 11.3,4. I will order your steps. Psal, 37.3,31. Yea those things will I accept of you, as the conditions of Life, which viewed in the strictness
of my Justice, would deserve eternal Death.Eph. 3.8 with 1 Thess. 3.10. Heb. 5.9. with Eccl. 7.20. Grace! Grace! The voice of the Re∣deemed.AMen, Hallelujah. Be it to thy ser∣vants according to thy word. But who are we, and what is our Fathers House, that thou hast brought us hitherto? And now O Lord God, what shal thy ser∣vant say unto thee? for we are silenced with Wonder, and must sit down in Astonishment, for we cannot utter the least title of thy Prai∣ses. What meaneth the heighth of this strange love? And whence is this unto us, that the Lord of Heaven and Earth should condescend to enter into Covenant with his Dust, and take into his Bosom the viperous brood, that have so often spit their venome in his face. We are not worthy to be as the Hand-maids, to wash the feet of the servants of our Lord: how much less to be thy Sons and Heirs, and to be made partakers of all these blessed Liberties and Priviledges, which thou hast settled upon us. But for thy goodness sake, and according to thine own heart hast thou done all these great things. Even so Father, because so it seemed good in thy sight.
Wherefore thou art great O God, for there is none like thee, neither is there any God be∣sides thee. Sam. 7.18. to the end. And what Nation on Earth is like thy people, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for them great things and terrible? For thou hast confirmed them to thy self, to be a people unto thee for ever, and thou Lord art become their God. Wonder O Heavens, and be moved O Earth, at this great thing! Rev. 21.4. For behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. Be astonished and ravished with wonder, for the infinite breach is made up. The Offender is received, and God and man reconciled, and a Covenant of peace entered, and Heaven and Earth are all agreed upon the termes, and have struck their hands, and sealed the Indentures. O happy Conclusi∣on! O blessed Conjunction! Shall the stars dwell wtth the dust? Or the wide distant Poles be brought to mutual embraces and co∣habitation? But here the distance of the termes is infinitely greater, Rejoyce O Angels, shout O Seraphims. O all ye friends of the Bride∣groom, prepare an Epithalamium, be ready
with the Marriage song. Lo here is the wonder of wonders: For Jehovah hath be∣trothed himself for ever to his hopeless Cap∣tives, and ownes the Marriage before all the world, and is become one with us, and we with him. He hath bequeathed to us the precious things of Heaven above, and the precious things of the Earth beneath, with the fullness thereof, and hath kept back no∣thing from us. And now, O Lord, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servants, and hast left us nothing to ask at thy hands, but what thou hast already freely granted. Onely the wrd which thou hast spoken concerning thy servants, establish it for ever, and do as thou hast said, and let thy Name be magni∣fied for ever, saying, The Lord of Hosts, he is the God of Israel. Amen. Hallelujah.
A SOLILOQUY, Representing The Believers Triumph in Gods Covenant: And the various Conflicts, and glorious Conquests of Faith over Vnbelief. By the same Authour. CHAP. XVIII. The soul taketh hold on Gods Covenant.YEa, Hath God said [I will be a God unto thee?] Is it true indeed? Will the Lord be mine? Will he lay a∣side the Controversie, and conclude a Peace? Will he receive the Rebel to mercy, and open his doors to his Prodigal? I will surely go unto my Father, I will take unto me words, and bow my self before his Foot-stool, and say; Esay 56.4. O Lord, I have heard thy words, and do here lay hold on thy Covenant. I ac∣cept the kindness of God, and will adventure my self upon thy Fidelity, and trust my whole happiness here and hereafter upon these thy Promises. Farewel deceitful world, get thee under my feet. Too long have I feared thy vain threats; too long have I been deluded with
thy flattering Promises. Canst thou promise me, or deny me such things as God hath Co∣venanted to give me? I know thou canst not, and therefore I renounce thee for ever, from being the Object of my Faith, or Fear. Nor longer will I lean to this rotten Reed, no longer will I trust to this broken Idol. Avoid Sathan with thy tempting Baits. In vain dost thou dress the Harlot in her Paint and Bravery, and tell me, Matt. 4.8,9. ALL THIS WILL I GIVE THEE. Canst thou shew me such a Crown, such a kingdom, as God hath promi∣sed to settle upon me? Or that which will bal∣lance the loss of an infinite God, who here gives himself unto me? Away deceitful Lusts, and Pleasures; get you hence. I have enough in Christ and his Promises, to give my soul full content. These have I lodged in my heart, and there is no longer room for such guests as you: Never shall you have quiet entertain∣ment more within these doors. Thou God of Truth, I here take thee at thy word. Thou requirest but my acceptance and consent, and here thou hast it. Good is the word of the Lord which he hath spoken, and as my Lord hath said, so will thy servant do. My soul catcheth hold of thy Promises. These have I taken as my heritage for ever. Let others carry the Preferments, and Pos∣sessions of this world; it shal be enough to me to be an Heir of thy Promises. She ma∣keth her boast in God.O happy Soul, how rich art thou! What a Booty have I gotten! It is all mine own.
I have the Promises of this life, and of that which is to come. Oh what can I wish more! How full a Charter is here! Now my doubting Soul may boldly and believingly say with Thomas, 1 Tim. 4.8. My Lord, and my God! What need we any further witness? We have heard his words. He hath sworn by his Holiness, that his Decree may not be changed; and hath signed it with his own Signet. Rejoyce ye Heavens, strike up Celestial Quires. Help Heaven and Earth; Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his. Bless the Lord O my Soul. Oh had I the tongue of men and Angels, all were too little for my single turn. Had I as many tongues as hairs, the whole Quire were not sufficient to utter my Crea∣tors praises. Cant. 2.16.My Beloved is mine, and I am His. The Grant is clear, and my claim is firm. Who durst deny it, when God himself doth own it. Is it an hard adventure to speak after Christ himself? Why, this is the Message that he hath sent me; I ascend to my Father, and your Father; Joh. 20.17 my God, and your God. He hath put words into my mouth, and bid me to say OUR FATHER. I believe, Lord help mine unbelief. O my God, and my Father, I accept thee with all humble thankfulness, and am bold to take hold of thee. O my King, and my God, I subject my soul, and all its Powers to thee. O my Glory, in thee will I boast all the day. Oh my Rock, on thee will I build all my confidence,
and my hopes. Cant. 2.3. O staff of my life, and strength of my heart, the life of my joyes, and joy of my life, I will sit and sing under thy shadow, and glory in thy holy Name. O my Soul, arise, and take possession. In∣herit thy blessedness, and cast up thy riches. Thine is the Kingdome, thine is the Glory, and thine is the Victory. The whole Trinity is thine. All the Persons in the Godhead, all the Attributes in the Godhead are thine. And behold here is the Evidence, and these are the writings, by which all is made sure to thee for ever. Psal. 116.7. Psal. 16.6And now return to thy rest, O my Soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. Say if thy Lines be not fallen to thee in a plea∣sant place, and if this be not a goodly Heri∣tage! She quel∣leth Dis∣content, and reasoneth down un∣belief in Sequentib. Oh Blasphemous Discontent! How absurd and unreasonable an evill art thou, whom all the fulness of the Godhead cannot satisfie, because thou art denyed in a petty comfort, or crost in thy vain expectati∣ons from the world. O my unthankful Soul, shall not a Trinity content thee? Shall not Allsufficiency suffice thee? Silence you mur∣muring thoughts for ever. I have enough, I abound, and am full. Infiniteness, and Eter∣nity is mine, and what more can I ask? The As∣saults of unbelief. 1. It que∣stions the truth of the Promise.But methinks I feel some secret Damps up∣on my joy, and when I would soar aloft, and triumph in the riches of my Portion, a secret diffidence plucks me back, as the string doth the Bird, and unbelief whispers in mine ear, Sure this is too good to be true.
The Tri∣umph of Faith in the certain∣ty of Gods Truth.But who art thou that disputest against God? The Lord hath spoken it, and shall not I believe him? Will he be angry if I give my assent, and speak it confidently upon the cre∣dit of his word? Esay 54.5. Hos. 2.19. Jer. 3.19. Psal. 50.7. 2 Cor. 6.18.O my Lord suffer me to spread the writing before thee. Hast not thou said, Thy Maker is thy Husband; I will betroth thee unto me: Thou shalt call me, My Father? I pray thee O Lord, was not this thy saying; I am God, even thy God; I will be a Father unto you, and ye my Sons and Daughters? Why then should I doubt? Is not the truth of the living God sure-footing for my faith? Esay 31.3 Prov. 23.5Silence then O quarrelling Unbelief. I know in whom I have believed. Not in Friends, though numerous and potent; for they are men, and not God. Psal. 146.3,4. Not in Riches, for they make themselves wings. Not in Princes, for their breath is in their Nostrils. But let God be true, and every man a Lyar. In God have I put my trust, in his word do I hope. Matt. 7.25. 2 Tim. 2.19. Oh sure word! Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot, nor tittle of this. I have not built upon the sand of mor∣tality. Let the rain descend, and the floods come, and the winds blow; nevertheless the Foundation of God standeth sure. His ever∣lasting Counsel, and everlasting Covenant are my stay. I am built upon his Promises, and let Hell and Earth do their worst to blow up this Foundation. Now shall my Faith triumph, and my heart
be glad, and my glory rejoyce. 1 Kin. 18.39 Heb. 11.16. I will shout with the exulting Multitude. The Lord he is the God, and he is not ashamed to be called My God. He is not ashamed of my Raggs, nor Poverty, of my Parrentage, not Pedigree▪ and since his infinite condescention will own me, will he take it ill if I own him? 1 Cor. 1.29,31. Though I have nothing of my own to glory in, (unless I should glory in my shame) yet I will glory in the Lord, and bless my self in him. Deut. 33.26.For who is like unto the God of Jeshurun? Bring forth your gods, O ye Nations. Lift up now your eyes, and behold who hath cre∣ated all these things. Can any do for their Favourites as the Lord can? Or if he be an∣gry, who is that God that shal deliver out of his hands? Will you set Dagon before the Ark? Or shal Mammon contend with the Holy One! O ambitious Haman, where is now thine Idol-honour? O rich Glutton, that madest a god of Pleasure, where is now the god whom thou hast served? O sensual worldling, that knewest not where, nor how to bestow thy Goods: Do riches profit thee? Could Mammon save thee? Deceived souls! Go now to the gods that you have chosen. A∣las, they cannot for ever administer a drop of water to cool your tongues. Jer. 10.16. Psa. 90.2.But the Portion of Jacob is not like them: From everlasting to everlasting he is God. His Power is my confidence; his Goodness is my maintenance; his Truth is my shield and my buckler.
2. It con∣founds the soul with amazing Greatness, and diffi∣culty of the things.But my clamourous unbelief hath many wiles, and afresh assaults me with the diffi∣culty of the things promised, and labours to nonplus and confound me with their amazing greatness. The Tri∣umph of Faith in Gods Om∣nipotency and Vera∣city.But why should I stagger at the Promise through unbelief, robbing at once my Master of his glory, and my soul of her comfort. It is my great sin to doubt and dispute, and yet shal I be affraid to believe? O my soul, it is the highest honour thou canst put upon thy Lord, to believe against difficulties, and to look for, and reckon upon great things and wonderful, passing all created Power, and hu∣mane faith. Let not the greatness, nor the strangeness of the benefits bequeathed to thee, put thee to a stand. It is with a God thou hast to do, and therefore thou must not look for little things; that were to darken the glory of his munificence, and the Infiniteness of his Pow∣er and Goodness. Knowest thou not that it is his design to make his Name glorious? and to make thee know he is able to do for thee, above all thou canst ask or think? Surely they cannot be any small or ordinary things, that shal be done for thee, when the Lord shal shew in thee, what a God can do, and shal carry thee in Triumph before the world, and make Proclamation before thee. Thus shal it be done to the man, whom the Lord de∣lighteth to honour. What wonder if thou canst not comprehend these things? If they
exceed all thy apprehensions and conceptions? This is a good Argument for thy faith: for this is that which the Lord hath said, That it hath not entered into the heart of man, to conceive what things he hath prepared for them that love him. Now if thou couldest conceive and comprehend them, how should his word be made good. It is enough for thee that the Lord hath spoken it. Is not the word nigh thee? Hath God said I will receive you? You shal be Kings and Priests unto God, and inherit all things; and shal sit in Thrones, and judge Angels, and be ever with the Lord, and shal I dare to say him nay? Un∣reasonable Unbelief! What never satisfied? Still contradicting, and blaspheming? False whisperer, no more of thy tales. Acts 27.25. I believe God, that it shall be as he hath told me. 2 Cor. 2.14. Psal. 71.23. Psal. 92.4. Psal. 104.33.And now thanks be to God, who alwaies causeth us to triumph in Christ; therefore my lips shal praise thee, and my soul which thou hast redeemed. For thou hast made me glad through thy word, and I will triumph in the works of thy hands. I will praise the Lord whilest I live; I will sing praises to my God whilest I have any being. Oh my soul, if thou couldest wear out thy fingers upon the Harp, and wear thy tongue to the Roots, thou couldest yet never suf∣ficiently praise thy Redeemer. O mine Enemies, where is now your con∣fidence, and where is your Armour, wherein
you trusted? I will set Christ alone, against all your multitudes, and all the Power, and Malice, and Policy wherewith they are Arm∣ed. Col. 2 15. 1 Cor. 15.57. The field is already won, and the Cap∣tain of our salvation returned, with the spoils of his Enemies, having made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in his Cross. And thanks be to God, who hath given us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Of whom then should I be affraid? Be∣hold he is near that justifieth me, who shal plead with me? Matt. 16.18.O ye Powers of Hell! you are but chained Captives, and we have a sure word, that the gates of Hell shal not prevail against us. Though the world be in Arms against us, and the Devil in the head of them as their Cham∣pion; 1 Sam. 17.45,46,47 yet who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defie the Armies of the living God? Behold I come out to thee, as the stripling against Goliah, not with Sword and with Spear, but in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, in whose strength I am more then a Conquerour. O Grave, where is now thy Victory? Christ is risen, and hath broken up thy Prison, and rolled away the stone, so that all thy Priso∣ners have made an escape. Mic. 7,8. Rejoyce not a∣gainst me, O mine Enemy; though I fall, I shal rise again; though I lie in darkness, the Lord shal be a light unto me. Enlarge not thy desires O Tophet, but shut up thy flaming
Rom. 8.1. mouth for there is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Joh. 16.33 1 Cor. 3.22.O deceitful world, thou art already over∣come, and the conquered Enemy is become my servant, and I am fed with the honey taken out of the carkass of the slain Lyon. 1 Pet. 1.5. 1 Joh. 5.4. I fear not thy Threats, nor the Enchantments of thy Syren-songs, being kept by the Power of God, through a Victorious faith unto salva∣tion. O my sins, you are already buried, never to have any Resurrection, and the remem∣brance of you shal be no more. Heb. 8.12. I see my sins nailed to the Cross, and their dominion is ta∣ken away, though their lives be prolonged yet for a little season. Awake therefore, O my glory, awake Psaltery and Harp, and meet the Deliverer with triumph; Psal. 98.1,3. for his right Hand, and his holy Arm have gotten us the Victory, and all the ends of the Earth, have seen the salvation of our God. 3. It up∣braids the trembling Soul with its Vnwor¦thiness.Yet methinks my unworthiness flies in my face, and I hear my cavilling Unbelief thus upbraiding me, and crying out, O proud Pre∣sumption! That thou that art conscious to thy self of thy great unworthiness, shouldest pretend a claim to God and glory! Shal da∣ring dust think to share with the Almighty? and say of his endless Perfections, They are my right? Bold sinner, stand off, and trem∣ble at thy presumptuous Arrogance. Faith sub∣scribes the charge, and Triumphs in Gods free grace.O my God, I lay my hand upon my mouth. I confess the charge of mine unworthiness.
My guilt and shame is such as I cannot cover, but thou canst, and dost. Thou hast cast a Mantle upon my nakedness, and hast promised my transgressions shal not be mentioned, and that thou wilt multiply Pardons. And shal I rake up what thou hast buried, and then af∣fright my self with the Ghosts that infidelity hath raised? Is it presumption to take the Par∣don that thou dost offer? or to receive and claim thee as mine, when it is but what thou hast promised. I durst not have approached thee, but upon thy call; nor have pretended a Title, but upon thy Grant. I should have thought it Diobolical pride, to have pleaded an Interest in thee, and claimed kinred to thee, but that thou hast shewed me the way. And thou my soul, art thou ignorant of Gods great Design? Knowest thou not, that it is his purpose to glorifie Free-Grace? And how should Grace appear to be Grace indeed, were there any worthiness in the subject. Thine unworthiness is but a foyle, to set off the Beauty and Riches of Free Love and Mercy. 4. It que∣stions the Believers Title to Gods grace and interest in the Pro∣mise.But I cannot shake off this Briar. Alas, what a cavilling Sophister is Unbelief! And will never be answered! Now is it ready to tell me, What if the Promise should be a sure Foundation? yet thou mayest not build upon another mans ground. What though the grace and mercies of God are infinite? yet Doggs may not catch at the Childrens bread.
Thou hast not right, nor title to the Promise, therefore cease thy pretended claim. The Tri∣umph of Faith in the clear∣ness of the Blievers Evidences. But O my soul, wherefore shouldst thou doubt? Whose Image and Superscription is this? Dost thou not bear upon thee the marks of the Lord Jesus? I have given up my name to him, and taken hold of his Covenant, and therefore may claim an interest. Esay 56.4. I have accepted the matter, and closed with the Mediator, and subscribed to the conditi∣ons of the Covenant, and therefore cannot question but it is mine. The Lord hath offered to be my God, and I have took hold of his offer. Psal. 73.25,26. I have taken him as God, and given him the supremacy. O my soul, look round about thee in Heaven and in Earth; is there any thou dost esteem or va∣lue in comparison of God? Phil. 3.8. Is there any thou dost love like him, or take that content or felicity in, that thou dost in him? Phil. 1 20 Are not thy chief desires and designes to glorifie, and en∣joy him? Thou canst not deny but it is truly thus. Psal 26.8. and 84 1,2,3. Psal. 27.4. and 119.57. Psa. 119 38 2 Cor. 5.8 Act. 24.16. with Rom. 6.19. Luke 14.33. Psal 16 5,6. I am sure nothing but God will con∣tent me. I am never so well in all the world, as in his company. My soul seeketh him a∣bove all, and rests in him alone, as my satis∣factory Portion. He offereth to take me as one of his people, and I have resigned my self accordingly to him as his; and have put both my Inward, and Outward man under his Go∣vernment, and given up All to his dispose, and am resolved to be content with him, as my Allsufficient happiness.
John 1.12.Besides I have taken him in his own way through Christ, whom he hath tendered to me as my Head and Husband, and I have accor∣dingly, solemnly and deliberately taken him. Luke 14.26. to the end. Matth. 11.29. Phil. 3.9. 2 Tim. 1.12. O my soul, dost not thou know thy often debates? hast thou not put Christ and all the world into the ballance? hast thou not cast up the cost, and reckoned upon the Cross, and willingly put thy neck under Christs yoke, and ventured thy sal∣vation upon Christ alone, and trusted him with all thy happiness, and all thy hopes? hast thou not over and over resolved to take him with what comes, and that he shall be enough, though in the loss of all things? 1 Cor. 1.20. Thou canst not but know, that these have been the trans∣actions between Christ and thee, and there∣fore he is thine, and all the Promises. Yea and Amen to thee through him. Act. 20.21: Rom. 2.7.And for the terms of the Covenant, I love, and like them: my soul embraceth them; nei∣ther do I desire to be saved in any other way, then by repentance towards God, and faith to∣wards our Lord Jesus Christ, and sincere obe∣dience to his Gopel. Phil. 3.. to the 10. 2 Cor. 5.7. 2 Cor. 4.18. 1 Thes. 1.9 10. Tit. 2.13. Heb. 10 34. & 11.35.I am willing to go out of my flesh, and do look unto Jesu for righteousness, and strength, and trust my salvation wholly in this bottome. I am content to deal upon trust, and venture all in hopes of what is to come, and to tarry till the next world for my preferment. I am wil∣ling to wait till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and have laid up my happiness on the other side the Grave.
Rom. 7.24. Gal. 5.17.And though my sins be many, yet I should belye mine own knowledge, if I should say they were not my constant trouble and bur∣then, and the enemies against which I daily watch, and with whom my soul hath no peace. Psal. 39.1. & 17.3. Mine own heart knoweth that I hate them, and desire and endeavour their utter destructi∣on, and do resolve against them all, and am wil∣ling to use all Gods means (that I know) to mortifie them. Psal. 119.101,104. Rom. 7.15,16, &c. 1 Cor. 9.26,27. 1 John 1.9. Rom 6.16. Psal. 119.6. Psal. 119.5 30,173. Mat. 6.33. 2 Cor. 5.9. 'Tis too true that I often fall, and fail; yet my conscience beareth me wit∣ness, that I confess and bewail it, and do not ordinarily, and deliberately allow my self in any sin whatsoever against my knowledge. And though my obedience be miserably lame, yet, O Lord, thou knowest, that I have respect unto all thy commandments, and do strive to come up to what thou requirest. The Holy Ghost is witness, and my conscience also, that I first seek the Kingdome of God, and the righteousness thereof; and that it is my chief care to please God, and keep from sin. Psa. 18.23. & 19.13. & 119.133. Matt. 5.6. Speak Oh my soul, Is not holiness thy design? dost thou not thirst for it, and follow after it? dost thou not in thy setled choice prefer the holy wayes of God, before all the pleasures and delights of sin? Psal. 119.14,15,16. 111,112. Thou knowest it is thus; and therefore no more disputing; thou hast sin∣cerely taken hold of Gods Covenant, and with∣out controversie it must be thine. O my God, I see thou hast been at work with my soul. I find the prints, I see the foot∣steps. Surely this is the finger of God. I am
thy Servant, O Lord, truly I am thy Servant; Psal. 116.16. Psal. 16.2. and my soul hath said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord. It must be so. Wouldst thou ever set thy mark upon anothers goods? or shall God disown his own workmanship? My name is written in Heaven. Thou hast written thy Name upon my heart, and therefore I cannot question but thou hast my name on thine heart. I have chosen thee O Lord as my happiness, and heritage, and therefore I am sure thou hast chosen me; 1 John 4.19. for I could not have loved thee, except thou hadst loved me first. O my Lord discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, the bracelets, and the staffe? I know thou wilt acknowledge them. 1 Pet. 1.3.And now blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his abundant mercy hath begotten me again to a lively hope. Faith makes its claim to all the benefits of the Co∣venant, and stirs up the soul to joy and thank∣fulness, in sequentib.And thou my soul, believe, and wait, look through the window, and cry through the lat∣tice, and rejoyce in the hope of the glory of God.Hab. 2.3. The Vision is for an appointed time, wait for it. It will come in the end, & will not tarry.Jam. 5 7. Behold the Husbandman waiteth for the precious fruits of the Earth. Be thou also patient. He hath long patience, and wilt not thou have a little patience? he for the fruits of the Earth, but thou for the joyes of Heaven. He upon meer probabilities, but thou upon in∣fallible certainties. He for a Crop of Corn, but thou for a Crown of Glory. Were he but sure that every Corn would bear a Crow, how
plentifully would he sowe, how joyfully would he wait? Why such is thy harvest. As sure as the Summer delights do follow the Winters severities; as sure as the wisht-for Harvest doth follow the toilsome and costly Seeds-time, so sure shall thy Lord return, and bring thy reward with him. Revel. 22.12. Therefore my soul, love and long for the approaching Jubi∣le, and wait all the daies of my appointed time, until my change shall come. O blessed state that my Lord hath transla∣ted me into! O happy change that he hath made! I was a stranger, and he took me in, and made me an heir; and preferred me from the Dunghill to the Throne, and from a Hew∣er of wood, and Drawer of water, to attend his Court, and know his Counsels, and do his pleasure. Happy am I that ever I was born to partake of this endless dignity. Hebr. 12.22,23,24.O my Lord, it is no little thing thou hast given me in hand. I am already come to mount Zion, and the City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumera∣ble company of Angels; to the general Assem∣bly and Church of the first-born, and to God the Judge of all, and unto the Spirits of Just men made perfect, and unto Jesus the Medi∣ator of the New Covenant, and unto the blood of sprinkling. Gal. 4.6. Luke 5.20. My heart reviveth, as Jacobs, when I behold the tokens which thou hast sent me, the spirit of Adoption, the pardon of my sins, my patent for Heaven, the chain of thy Graces, the Son of thy Bosome, and the New
Testament in his blood, 1 Cor. 11.25. Luk. 12.32. Cant. 1.10. Joh. 3.16. Joh. 14.21,23. and the Letters of his love. My Lord hath said that he will love me, and manifest himself unto me; and that the Father will love me, and both will come unto me, and make their abode in me. But is it true indeed? Will the Lord dwel on Earth? Or if he will, shal so foul a Stable, so unclean a Stye, as my heart hath been, shal this be the place that the Lord of life will take up his lodging, and keep his Court in? Will he indeed come with all his Train of Graces, and live, and walk in me? How can these things be? But he hath said it, and I do, and I will believe it. Psal. 31.19.Yet all this is but the earnest of what is to come. Oh how great is thy goodness, laid up for them that fear thee? Yet a little while, and my warfare shal be accomplished, and the Heavens must receive me, till the time of the restitution of all things. 2 Pet. 1.14. It is but for a short term that I shal dwel in this dirty flesh, in an earthen Tabernacle. Joh. 12.26 My Lord hath shewed me, that where he is, there shal his servant be. Now the living, is tyed to the dead; and my Soul is a Stage of strife, and a Field of war. 1 Cor. 13.10. But tis but a little moment, and that which is perfect shal come; perfect Holiness, and perfect Peace; eternal Serenity, and a Se∣rene Eternity. O my sins. Rev. 21.27. I am going where you cannot come; where no unclean thing shal enter, nor any thing that defileth. Methinks I see all my Afflictions and Temptations, all mine in∣firmities,
and corruptions falling off me, as E∣lijah's Mantle at his translation. O my Soul, dost thou not see the Chariots of fire, and the Horses of fire come to take thee up? Luk. 16.22. Be thou as poor as Lazarus, yet God will not disdain to send a Party of An∣gels to conduct thee home. How canst thou doubt of ready reception, who hast such a friend in Court, who will lead thee with bold∣ness into his Fathers presence. Gen. 45.16. If there were Joy in Pharaoh's Court, when it was said, Jo∣seph's Brethren are come; surely it will be welcom newes in Heaven, when its told, Je∣sus his Brethren are come. My Soul, fear not to enter, though the Lord be clothed with Terrour and Majesty: For thy Redeemer will procure thee favour, and plead thy right. Joh. 16.27 I am sure of welcom, for the Father himself loveth me. I have tasted and tryed his love; Luke 15. and when I had played the wicked Prodigal, yet he despised not my Raggs, but fell on my neck, and kissed me, and Heaven it self made merry over me. Much more will he receive me gladly, and let out his loves upon me, when presented to him by his Son, in his perfect likeness, as a fit Object for his everlasting delight. Fear not, O my Soul, as if thou wert going to a strange place. Why Heaven is thy Countrey, and thy home: wilt thou doubt of leave, or fear of welcome, when it is thine own home? Why, my Soul, thou wast born from above, and here is thy Kindred, and thy Fathers House, and therefore
thou shalt surely be admitted. And then shall I see the glorious preparations of Eter∣nal Love, and the blissful Mansions of the Hea∣venly Inhabitants. Doubtless it shal be thus. These are not sick-mens Dreams, or childrens hopes. The living God cannot deceive me: and may not I certainly promise my self, what the Lord hath promised me? I will sooner think that all my senses are deluded, and what I see and feel, and taste, is but a fancy, then think that the living God will deceive me, or that his unchangeable Covenant will fail. 1 Joh. 3.2. Now I am a son of God, but it doth not yet appear what I shal be: but this I know, I shal be like him, and see him as he is. I know it shal be thus. Why, what secu∣rity should I ask of God? He hath given me all the assurance in the world. And though the word of God be enough, yet he willing to shew more abundantly to the Heits of Pro∣mise, the immutability of his Counsel, con∣firmed it by an Oath: Heb. 6.17. that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lye, I might have strong consolation. O un∣reasonable Unbelief! What shal not the Oath of a God put an end to thy strife? O my God, I am satisfied: it is enough. Now I may be bold without presumption, and boast without Pride. And will no more call my Duty Arrogance, nor my Faith a Fancy. O my Soul! There is but a short life be∣twixt
thee and Glory, where holy Angels, and glorified Saints shal be mine onely Associates, and Love and Praise mine onely employment. Job. 38.7. Methinks I hear already how the Morning∣stars sing together, and all the sons of God shout for joy. O that I could come in for one! But it was said unto me, I should rest yet for a little season, but I shal stand in the lot at the end of the daies.Dan. 12.13. It is well Lord; thy word is enough. Thy Bond is as good, as ready payment. The holy Ghost tells me, that life and glory abide me; Luk. 23.43. that look what day I loose from the body, the same day I shal be landed in Paradise. A∣men. It is as I would have it. But this is not all. When my body hath slept a short Nap in the dust, Christ will call to it, Come up hither. Ah true Yoke-fel∣low, it will be hard parting, but welcome meeting. I could not leave thee, but to live with Christ. Col. 3.4. But he will raise thee a glorious Temple; and when he shal appear, will bring me with himself in glory; and then I shal re∣enter thee as a Royal Mansion, wherein I shal abide with the Lord for ever. For as we have served our Redeemer together, so we must be glorified together with him. And when the Lord hath married us both together again, then will he marry us both unto him∣self. For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shal stand at the last day over the Earth. And though after my skin, wormes destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shal see
God. Whom I shal see for my self, and mine eyes shal behold, and not another, though my Reines be consumed within me. My Lord hath already told me how it shall be. He hath set down the time, and shewed me the Robes of immortality, and the Crown of life, that I must put on; and the Throne of glory, and the Seat of judgement, that I must sit in. He hath told me the manner in which I shal be presented to him, and espoused by him. He hath told me where he will set me, and what he will say to me, and how he will acknow∣ledge my mean services, and remember what I have forgotten: Mat 25.35,37. how he will praise the works, that I have been ashamed of, and re∣ward me openly, for what I have buried in se∣crecy; Mat. 6.4. and not forget the poorest Almes that I have given for his Name. Then will he confess me before his Father, and before the Angels of God. Thus saith the true, and faithful witness, and we know that his Testi∣mony is true. 1 Joh. 5.10Ah my Soul, see that thou make not God a Lyar. O my God, I have believed thy report, and do look for all these things, according to thy Promise. I know thou intendest me but for a very little while for this lower Region. This world is but the house of my Pilgrimage, and my soul now is but like a Bird in the shel: but when the shel is crackt, then shal she take wings like a Dove, and soar aloft to thee, and flee away, and be at rest.
Yet I doubt not thy care for my despicable dust. I know that nothing will be lost; Joh. 6.39. I know not where they will lay me: but thy wakeful eye observeth, and will not be to seeking at what door to knock, nor at what grave to call for me. I believe, and am sure that I shal come a glorious piece out of thy hands, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, crowned with honour and glory. And when my Absolution is read, and sentence past upon the world, then must I be taken up to dwell with thee. Let not my Lord be angry, that thy dust and ashes speaketh thus unto thee. Thou Lord hast raised my expectations, and haste made me to look for all these great things from thee. In vain haste thou written all these things unto me, if I should not believe them; and a distrustful diffidence would put a high dishonour upon thy Truth. O Lord it repenteth me, it repenteth me of my jealousies, and my doubtful thoughts a∣bout thee. I know thou lovest an humble confidence, and delightest in nothing more then to see thy children trust thee. I know the building of my hopes, lies not an hairs breadth over the foundation of thy Promi∣ses; yea, 'tis sure, my expectations are infi∣nitely short of what I shal find. Joh. 3.33. Eph. 2.20 Mat 7.25 Psal. 39.7.O my God, my heart trusteth safely in thee, and I here set to my seal that thou art true. Christ is my Bottom in which I venture, and the Corner-stone on which I build, and there∣fore
my fraught is ensured, and my building shall challenge the winds and floods. And now, O Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee. O my blessedness, let me enjoy thee. O my life, let me possess thee. O desire of mine eyes, let me see thy face, and hear thy voice; for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance is comely. I ask but what thou hast promised: Matth. 5.8. for thou hast told me, that I shall see God, and thou wilt speak to me mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of God shall I behold. 1 Cor. 13.9,0.So shall my knowledge be perfected, and I shall see the inaccessible light, and my tender eye shall not water, nor my sight dazle; but I shall with open face look stedfastly on the Son of Righte∣ousness, and behold his glory. Then shall Faith be turned into fruition, and Hope into Possession, and Love shall arise like the full Moon in her brightness, and never wax, nor wane more. O thou God of my hopes, I look for a new body, and a new soul, for new Heavens, and for a new Earth, according to thy promise; when my whole soul shall be wholly taken up with thee, and all mine affections strained to the highest Peg, and all the Wheels of my raised powers set in most vigorous and perpetual motion towards thee, still letting in, and still laying out: and thus shall there be an everlasting communication of joy and glory from thee, and of love and praise from me. O my soul, thou art rich indeed, and increased in goods. Thou hast no reason to envy the glory
nor grandeur of the mightiest on earth: Psa. 49.14,17. For their glory shall not descend after them; like Sheep shall they be laid in their graves, and Death shall feed upon them, and there's an eternal end of all their pomp and excellency. But my Kingdome is an everlasting Kingdome. My Robes shall never wear, my Crown shall never totter, my Throne shall never be vacant; My Bread shall never mold, my Garland shall never wither, my House shall never moulder, my Wine shall never sowre, but everlasting joy shall be upon my head, and sorrow and sighing shall flie away. O my God, how happy hast thou made me! It is better then I could have wished. Thou hast done all things well. Thou hast setled them for ever. The whole Earth cannot shew any such he∣ritage or Tenure. The world can state out her possessions but for years, nor can she make a good title for that neither. But mine Inheritance is for ever, and none can put me out of possession. The thing is established in Heaven; and in the Volume of the Book it is written of me. My evidence cannot be lost. It is recorded in the Court above, and enrolled in the sacred leaves of the Word, and entred upon the Book of my Conscience, and herein I do, and will rejoyce. Now my soul wipe up thine eyes, and go away with Hannah, and be no more sad. What though mine House be not so with God, so happy, so pro∣sperous as I could wish? What though they be encreased that trouble me, and my temptations and afflictions be like the rolling Billows, riding on one anothers backs for haste. Yet shall my
soul be as a rock unmoved, and sit down satisfied in the security and amplitude of my portion. For God hath made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; and herein is all my salvation, and all my desire. And now what remaineth, O Lord, but that I should spend the remainder of my daies in loving, praising, and admiring thee. But wherewith shall I come before the Lord, or bow my self to the most High God. What shall I give thee to express my thankfulness, though not to requite thy boun∣ty? Alas my poor little soul! Alas that thou art so little. How narrow are thy capacities! How disproportionate are thy powers! Alas that my voice can reach to no higher a note! But shall I do nothing, because I cannot do all? Lord I resign to thee. With the poor Widow, I cast my two mites (my soul and body) into thy Treasury. All my powers shall love and serve thee. All my members shall be weapons of Righ∣teousness for thee. Here is my good will. Behold my substance is thy stock; mine interest is for thy service. I lay all at thy feet: There thou hast them, they are thine. My Children I enter as thy Servants. My possessions I resign as thy right. I will call nothing mine, but thee. All mine are thine: I can say My Lord, and my God, and that is enough; I thankfully quit my claim to all things else. I will no more say, My House is mine, or my Estate mine; I my self am not mine own: Yet it is infinitely better for me to be thine, then if I were mine own. This is my happiness, that I can say my own God, my own Father. And O
what a blessed exchange hast thou made with me! to give me thy Self who art an infinite Sum, for my self who am but an insignificant Cypher. And now Lord, do thou accept, and own my claim. I am not worthy of any thing of thine, much less of thee. But sith I have a Deed to shew, I bring thy Word in my hand, and am bold to take possession. Dost thou not know this hand? wilt thou not own this name? wilt thou not confirm thine own grant? It were infidelity to doubt it. I will not disparage the faithfulness of my Lord, nor be afraid to averre, and stand to what he hath said and sworn. Hast thou said, Thou art my God, and shall I fear thou art mine enemy? Hast thou told me, Thou art my Father, and shall I stand a∣loof, as if I were a stranger? I will believe. Lord silence my fears; and as thou hast given me the claim and title of a Child, so give me the confi∣dence of a Child. Let my heart be daily kept alive by thy promises, and with this staffe let me pass o∣ver Jordan. May these be my undivided compani∣ons, and comforters: When I go, let them lead me; when I sleep, let them keep me; when I awake, let them talk with me. And do thou keep these things for ever upon the imaginations of the thoughts of the hearts of thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. And let the heart of thy Servant be the Ark of thy Testament, wherein the sacred records of what hath passed between thee and my soul, may for ever be preserved. Amen. Thus far my Friend. So be it.
CHAP. XIX. An Exhortation to Sinners. O Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord: Ye men of this world, ye spirits that are in Prison, held captive to iniquity, under the Prince of this world; in a Covenant with Death, at an agreement with Hell; without Christ, Ali∣ans from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, without God in the world; who have said, We will not have this man to rule over us; let us break his Bonds asunder, and cast his Cords from us; who are joyned to Idols, have chosen you other gods, are following after other Lovers: who walk after the course of this world, according to the Prince of the Power of the Ayr, the spirit that now worketh in the children of Disobedi∣ence; having your conversation in the Lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and being still as you were by nature, the children of Wrath, in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. O ye sons of death, ye children of the night, and of darkness, Hear and your souls shal live; to you also is the word of this salvation sent; even the strangers, and those that are afar off, that will lay hold on the Covenant, and chuse the thing that pleaseth God, these also shal have a name in his house, even the glorious name of Sons and Daughters. The Lord hath sent a
word into Jacob, and it shal light upon Edom and Amaleck, and the uncircumcised Philistines, even as many of them, as the Lord our God shal call, Act. 2.39. Hearken O people, you that are polluted in your blood; written in the Earth,, free among the dead; come in, let your Covenant with death be made void, and your agreement with Hell be disanulled, strike a League with the Almighty, and your names also shal be written amongst the living in Jerusalem. Stand ye before the Lord, come and let us rea∣son together. Where are you? What is your Portion and Inheritance? Ye are cursed with a Curse. Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion of your cup, Psal. 11.6. What are you seeking? whither are you travelling? After a few years of your vanity are over, where must your dwelling be? Who can dwell with the devour∣ing fire? Who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Look before you, behold that smoaking Furnace, that burning Lake, that bottomless Pit that's ga∣ping for you, and at your next step may swallow you up. Escape for your lives, why will ye dye? Turn and live. Do you believe the Resurrection from the dead? the Judgment to come, and the invisible World? Is it to the spirit of a man, as to the spi∣rit of a beast? Doth it perish with his carkase? Dieth a Man as a Dogg dieth? Dieth a wise man as a fool dieth? Fall all things alike to all? just, and unjust, good and bad, after this life, as well as in it?
Do you believe the Scriptures? Are they but a Fable? If you hope they are, are you sure they are? Dare you venture your souls upon it? Whilest the Saints venture on the Truth, dare you venture your souls on the Falshood of it? Dare you stand forth and say, If this word be not a lye, let me be damned for ever? I am content that the everlasting worm shal gnaw my heart, that the infernal fire shal burn my flesh, and bones, and soul for ever and ever, if it prove not at last a meer Forgery and Imposture. Do you believe the Scriptures to be true in∣deed? If you do, what do they preach to you? Do they speak any thing if not this, That there is another life and death, besides that which is within the kenn of mortal eyes; that the other life, and the other death are Eternal; that upon your being found within, or without the Covenant of God, hangs your eternal judgment, either for life or death; that whilst you are in a Covenant with death, and in a course of iniquity, you are without the Covenant of God, and can have no benefit by it; that under sin, and out of Covenant, out of Covenant and out of Christ; out of Christ, and under Condemnation. Are there any things which that word which you profess to believe to be as true, and to stand as sure as Heaven and Earth; are there any things that this speaks more plainly, then these things, and such like? What and yet secure in a state of sin? Aliens from God, enemies of all Righte∣ousness, and yet in quiet? Are you resolved to sell Eternity for time, life for death, a soul for the pleasures of sin? Is this the choice you have
made, and are you resolved to stand to it? Let me have this world; my Portion here, my good things here, and then let me be damned in the other world: Let me sin here, and suffer here∣after; let me laugh here, and lament hereafter; let me flourish, and prosper, and live at ease, and in honour, and in pleasure and at liberty here, and let my Prison, and my Pain, and my Anguish, and my Plagues be beneath; there let me be torn, let me burn, let me roar, let me die; so I may be rich, and be merry, and rejoyce a while here; let time be my Heaven, and eternity be my Hell; speak in earnest, is this your choice? or that you may not be put to it to make a new choice, will you take upon you to make a new Gospel? And dividing what God hath joyned together, will you joyn what he hath divided? Will you write this for Gospel? Holiness and Hell, sin and glory, Christ and the Curse, the Devil and the Crown: Let the wicked hold on his way, and the unrighteous his thoughts, let him still run away from the Lord, and be shall have mercy; and from his God, and he will abundantly pardon. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leadeth unto death, and few there be that finde it; but broad is the gate, and wide is the way that leadeth unto life, and the whole world are going in thereat. Blessed are the proud in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are they that laugh now, blessed are the froward, the merci∣less, the impure in heart, the persecutors for Righ∣teousness sake, for great is their reward in Heaven. Within shal be the Doggs, and the Swine, the Whore∣mongers, the Sorcerers, the Drunkards, the Ruffi∣ans,
the Blasphemers, the Gallants, the Idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lye: And with∣out shall be the Lambs, and the Doves, the Holy, and the Humble, and the Meek, and the Merciful, and the Upight in heart, and the Poor in spirit, and Peace-makers, the persecuted for Righteousness sake, and whosoever loveth truth, and maketh God his trust, these shal go into everlasting fire, but the un∣godly into life Eternal. Are these the Articles of your Creed? Is this your Gospel? if it be, O what is your Heaven? If it be not, if the old Gospel must stand, Oh where are your souls? Are your souls lost, and are they not worth the recovery? Why will ye dye, turn and live; Oh when shal it once be? As an Embassadour for Christ, to whom is committed the word of Reconciliation, having hinted to you what's Law, so in the name of the Eternal God, I publish to you the everlasting Gospel. The Lord God having entred into a Covenant of life, with the first Adam, for himself and all mankinde in him; this Covenant being broken, whereby sin hath entred, and death by sin, and all the world is now becom guilty before God; bound over to the vengeance of eternal Fire, and under an utter impossibility of recovery, by ought that that Covenant can do; hath out of his abundant grace, made a new Covenant, on which whoso∣ever shal lay hold, shal be delivered out of the state of Death and Wrath, into a state of Life and Blessedness, Rom. 8.3. What the Law could not do,
being weak through the flesh, God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh; and with him this graci∣ous grant, that whosoever believeth in him, shal not perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3.16. And this is the Covenant that hath been declared un∣to you. This new Covenant is a Marriage-Covenant, Hos. 2.10. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea I will betroth thee to me in righteousness, and in loving-kindness, and in mercies. In it the Lord makes offer, and invites you to accept of an Hus∣band, and a Dower: The Husband is the Kings son, the Lord Jesus Christ; and with him the lost Kingdom, and all that belongs to the Kingdom of God. for a Dower. Liberty for the Captives, the opening of the Prison to them that are bound; riches to the poor, eyes to the blinde, feet to the lame, healing to the diseased, and life to the dead. And whoever among you all, who are persons under the Law, held by the cords of your sins, whose souls are fast bound in fetters of Iron, who are willing that your Covenant with death be made void, and your agreement with Hell be disannulled; and will joyn your selves to the Lord, and be brought within the bonds of this Co∣venant, all the blessings of this Covenant are made over, and stand sure unto you. The Grant is made, the Deed is drawn, and sealed; the Lord hath set to his Seal, come you in, and seal the Counter-part; set to your seal, and the Match is made up. Christ, and with him all things are yours, and you are his. Ac∣cept
and live, refuse and dye for ever. Come on then, sinner, what sayest thou? Dost thou consent? Dost thou accept? Or as Laban to Rebekah, Wilt thou go with this man? Let me espouse thee to this one Husband; onely let me first tell thee, The matter is solemn, and thou must be serious. 'Tis for life, 'tis for Eter∣nity. Consider therefore, and let thine heart, lying prostrate before the Almighty, come in and make answer to these demands, which from him, and in his great and dreadful Name I make unto thee. 1. Wilt thou have Jesus for thine Husband? Understand before thou answer. The taking of Christ for thine Husband, implies, Intimate Union. Ingenuous Subjection. Total Dependance. 1. Intimate Union; by choosing and accepting of him for thine, and resigning and giving up thy self to him, for his own; to cohabit and live with him, in the dearest conjugal affection for ever. 2. Ingenious Subjection; by a free and chear∣ful putting thy self under him, as thy Lord whom thou wilt obey, and be subject to, in all things. The Wife must be subject to her Husband; yet not as a slave by constraint, but freely, and by consent. 3. Total Dependanse; holding of him as thy head, expecting nothing, owning nothing, but what descends upon thee from him. Depend∣ing
on him for all things; the bearing of thy debts, thy discharge from thy Bonds, and thy whole provision for a livelihood and mainte∣nance. Consider then, what sayest thou? Doth thine heart choose, and accept, and resign up it self un∣to Christ? Dost thou choose him as an Husband? Thou canst choose him as a Refuge, to hide thee from danger; thou canst choose him as a Friend, to help thee in thy need; but dost thou choose him for thine Husband? Wilt thou cleave to him? love, honour, and obey him? Dost thou under∣stand his manner? the Law of his house, his Fa∣mily order, and discipline? Dost thou know his Commands and Expectations? how holy, how spiritual, how strict, and self-denying, how hum∣ble and submissive he looks thy whole carriage should be? Wilt thou be at his finding? Wilt thou look unto him, and lean upon him for all thou needest? Shal all thy desire be to him, and thy dependance on him? Thou art a Bondman, who shal be thy Redemption? Thou art a Male∣factor, who shal be thy Satisfaction? Thou art a Leper, whence dost look for cleansing? Thou art a Beggar, whence dost expect an Inheritance? Wilt lean upon thy Beloved for all! Shal he be thy Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, Re∣demption, and Inheritance? Wilt do him this honour, to trust him for all this? to cast all thy Burthens, thy care, thy fears, thy sins, thy guilt, thy hopes upon him? Canst say, O my God, I have sinned, I have sinned, thy Law have I bro∣ken, thy love have I slighted, I have fallen from
thee, and run over to thine Enemies; I have fallen under thy displeasure, wrath is provoked, justice hath taken hold of me, my soul is undone, how dreadful is thy controversie with me, and I have nothing to answer but this, my Jesus shal answer for me. O my Jesus, thou hast wooed and invited sin∣ners unto thee, thou hast sent forth thy Messen∣gers, and thy Word, into the high wayes and hed∣ges, into the Goales and Hospitals of the world; a∣mong the poor, the blinde, and the bound, and the diseased, and those that are in debt, and distress; to take from among them a Wife for thy bosome. Behold thy word hath found among the Cap∣tives, this wretched Adulteress, my poor Harlot soul; which hath dealt treacherously with thee, and hath followed after other Lovers, hath fallen among Theeves and Robbers, is bruised, wound∣ed, and undone; having Prodigally spent and wa∣sted all that I had. But behold I come at thy word, if thou sayest, I have no pleasure in thee, if thou spit in my face, and spurn me with thy foot, and trample me in the dirt, or send me back to my Prison, and leave me to bear the shame of my Whoredoms, I must be silent and speechless. But wilt thou receive me? Wilt thou take me into thine house? Wilt thou spread thy skirt over me? shal I be called by thy Name? Wilt thou love me, and be joyned unto me? Wilt thou be Surety for thy servant? Wilt thou that my debts be upon thee? my bonds be upon thee? My wants, my sins, my sorrowes,
my fears, my plagues, my help, my soul be up∣on thee? Wilt thou Lord? and can I say thee nay? wilt thou take them, and can I refuse to lay them upon thee? I consent Lord, I consent to thee; be thou mine Husband, and mine helper; love me, discharge me of this guilt, loose me from these fet∣ters, cleanse me from this filthiness, and then ask what thou wilt; impose upon me whatever thou pleasest. Love thee? honour thee? obey thee? Oh what is my love, what is my obedience, that thou shouldest accept, or I should deny it to thee? 'Tis but little that I can do, this heart is so false and so feeble, that I am afraid how I undertake for it, but such as it is, take it to thee. I bestow it wholly upon thee, with this promise, that if thou wilt help me I will love thee, if thou wilt help me I will be subject to thee, and lay up all my hopes and expe∣ctations with thee. Now Soul, now that thou know∣est what it means, now say, wilt thou have Christ for thine husband? 2. Wilt thou take him for better for worse, for rich∣er for poorer? Though thy Lord be a King, yet his Kingdome is not of this world. He came not to be ministred unto, but minister; he came to serve, and to suffer, and all those that will follow him, must suf∣fer with him. He came not to divide lands, and spoils, and crowns, and temporal dignities, and ho∣nours amongst his Disciples; but crosses, and pri∣sons, and scourges, and wants. Thou wilt joyn thy self to the Lord, but wilt thou take up thy lot with him? Thou wilt live with him, and abide with him, but dost know where he dwells, and what his enter∣tainment
is? Sometimes he hath bread, and some∣times he is hungry; sometimes he hath clothes, and sometimes is naked; sometimes he hath an house, and sometimes he hath none, sometimes he hath friends, and sometimes he hath none; he is sometimes used kindly, and sometimes as coursly; sometimes 'tis Hosanna, and sometimes Crucifige; sometimes he is cried up as a King, sometimes cried out against as a Devil; and as it is with the Master, so will it be with the Scholar; as with the Lord, so with the Disciple; where he is, thou must be also. Canst thou say, Whither thou goest, I will go with the; where thou feedest, I will feed with thee; where my Lord dwelleth, if in a tent, if in a cave, if in a dungeon, if in a wilderness, where ever my Lord dwelleth, let me dwell with him? Consi∣der what thou sayest, and be not over-hasty. May be thou dost not yet know, what hunger and thirst, and nakedness mean; what the wrath of man, what their reproachings, and spittings, and stripes, and bonds mean; may be thou hast thought, this may be far enough off, and may never come upon me; or hast taken up a resolution through inco∣gitancy, not weighing how sharp, and how pinch∣ing they may be to thee. But suppose thou wert now just come to it; and that thou sawest, that thy first foot Christ-ward, would be the parting point betwixt thee and all that is dear unto thee in the world; that thy first step heaven-ward would be into the fire, or the water, or into the camp of the Philistines, whose faces were all fill'd with fury against thee. Hast thou yet such a far deeper sence of the eternal sufferings, thou art in danger
of; such a setled belief, of thy absolute necessity of Christ to thy escaping these; such an high value of the love of Christ, and the everlasting salvation thou expectest by him, as does over-ballance and swallow up the sharpest and the quickest sense thou hast or canst have, of the greatest things thou shalt suffer by him? hast thou cast up all afflictions ima∣ginable, and then put thy soul to it? now resolve what to do; either this or no Christ, either this or no Crown, either this Cross or the Curse, either the wrath of man or the wrath of God, Scorpions, and Dragons, and Devils; shriecking and howl∣ing, and gnashing of teeth for ever and ever. Con∣fess Christ and be confessed of him, suffer with Christ and reign with him, weep with Christ and rejoyce with him, die with Christ and live for ever, deny Christ, forsake Christ and perish for ever? hast thou thus put thy self to it? and after the most solemn debate thou hast had, what is the result? Now tell me, Christ or no Christ? wilt thou have Christ for better for worse? how dear soever he cost thee? 3. Wilt thou forsake all others? Thou hast three Husbands that lay claim to thee; Sin, the World, and the Devil. Wilt thou re∣nounce, and be divorc'd from all these? There's no compounding betwixt Christ and them; he or they must go. The renouncing of sin stands, In the disengaging of the heart from it. In the engaging of the heart against it. 1. In the disengaging or loosening of the heart from sin. 'Tis an hearty willingness to let it go; a wil∣lingness
to part, is our parting with sin. A break∣ing the Peace, the cutting off the League betwixt sin and the soul, when a sinner stands so clearly convinc'd of the worth of Christ, of the value of a soul, of the enmity of sin against Christ and and the soul, of the unworthiness of sin, with all its pleasures and so advantages, to be laid in the bal∣lance with Christ, is willing to be rid of it. What is there in it? What can it do for me? How long will it last me? Where will it lead me? O the after births of sin: O the tail of these Locusts, the sting, the sting that I see there! Can I want a Christ? or can I hope that he'll dwell with such Neighbours? Can I bear the loss of my soul? or can it escape if these escape? I see its vain to think of keeping both Christ and Lusts; its vain to think of saving both my sins, and my soul: tis all one, as to be saved and to be damn'd, I may as well bring Heaven and Hell together. Well, let them go: henceforth hold thy peace sin, plead no more with me for entertainment; be a stranger for ever to me; henceforth I know thee no more. 2. In the engaging the heart against sin. When the heart is not onely content to let it depart, but gives it a Bill of divorce, and sends it away. When it can want it, and cannot bear it; when it deals with it, as the Egyptians with Israel; at first they have onely leave given them to be gone, but at length they thrust them out, Exod. 12.33. They were urgent upon them, that they might send them out of the Land in hast; for they said, we be all but dead men.
Be gone sin, I am but a dead man if thou abi∣dest with me; and so it will no longer court it as a friend, but curse it as an enemy; fears it, hates it, and is resolved to be its mortal enemy; and to this end is determined to use all Gods means, To discover, To destroy it. 1. To use all Gods meanes to discover it; to bring to light the hidden things of darkness. Sin goes under a disguise, tis hard to know friends from enemies; they had need have their senses about them, and well exercised too, that can dis∣cern betwixt good and evil. Heb. 5.14. Who can understand his Errours? Psal. 19.12. Sinne lies in the dark. The heart of man is desperately wicked, who can know it? There's too much wic∣kedness, and it lies too deep to be discerned by every eye; he that means in earnest to cast out, must first search out his iniquities. Let us search and try our wayes, Lam. 3.40. He must search the Scriptures which describe these Enemies, and mark them out what they are, and how many, and how they may be known; where ever you finde them, and under what disguise soever they appear; must search the heart, where if they walk no more openly, they will hide themselves, that they be not discovered or suspected. Thou art a fool, a self-deceiver, Sinner, who takest thy self to be an adversary to sin, and takest no care to find it out; much more who willing∣ly hidest it out of sight. He takes part with sin, which will not take pains to know it. I hate the Devil, and all his works; I repent, I forsake all my
sins, and though I have done iniquity, by the Grace of God I will do so no more: Thus vain men talk, but dost know what thou sayest? What is sin? Dost know a friend from an enemy, good from e∣vil? What are [thy] sins? What hast thou done? Wherein hast thou transgressed? What are they that have done thee mischief? What are their names? May be thou wilt say their name is Le∣gion, for they are many. In many things I have transgressed, in many things I have offendied; but in what things? Dost know thine enemy when thou seest him? or wouldst thou know him if thou couldst? Dost thou make any search or enquiry after him? when thou readest of a proud heart in the Scrip∣tures, art able to say there's one of them, that have done me mischief? or of a covetous heart, there's another of them; or of an envious, malitous, fro∣ward heart, there are more of them; or of an hard, and hypocritical, ignorant, unbelieving heart; this is he: This is my great Enemy; or if thou canst not tell dost ask? Is not this he? Are not these they? O that I could understand mine errours, Lord make me to know my transgressions. Sinners, never make your selves believe you are enemies to sin, till you make narrow and particu∣lar enquiry after it; after all sin, the several kindes of it whether of Omission, or Commission; whether Outward or Spiritual, Open or Secret, Greater or Smaller, sins of Ignorance, or Know∣ledge, of Infirmities or Presumption; your be∣loved, your most pleasing sins, your most gainful sins, whatever they be, you never renounce, till
you resolve to make a diligent search after them. 2. To use all Gods means to destroy and over∣come them. He that hides his enemy, and he that will spare him when he hath found him, is not an enemy, but a friend. He that sayes I will destroy, and will not use his weapons, either knows not what he sayes, or sayes what he never means. Thou sayest thou wilt renounce and resist all thy sins, but art thou in earnest? What course dost mean to take? Wilt thou take Gods way? He bids thee hear, believe, pray, fast, mourn, strive, fight, watch, &c. Wilt thou hear∣ken to his Counsels? wilt thou be healed of thy diseases? But wilt thou take the counsel of the Phy∣sition? Wilt thou use his Medicines? Thou wilt overcome thine enemy, but wilt thou take heed of him? Wilt thou fight against him? Wilt thou take in all the help that's offered thee? Wilt thou not onely believe, and lean upon God for his help, but wilt thou pray, and lift up thy heart for his help? Wilt thou not onely pray against thy sins, but watch against them? against the oc∣casions temptations, and beginnings of sin? Wilt thou use (all) Gods means, and against (all) thy sins? shall not thine eyes spare any of them? wilt thou make thorough work with them root and branch, old and young? Shall there be neither the lowing of the Oxen, nor the bleating of the sheep heard with thee? Wilt thou destroy the grea∣ter, and dash the little ones also against the stones?
Wilt thou avenge thy self of thine Advetsaries, and wilt thou never again agree with thine Ad∣versaries? Wilt thou never again say, Is it peace, Jehu,? is it peace, Jezabel? So if thy sins say to thee, Is it peace soul, wilt thou answer, What have you to do with peace? get you behind me. Wilt thou neither make a truce with sin, nor embrace a par∣ley, nor entertain a Treaty for peace with it? Wilt thou not draw back thine hand, nor put up thy Weapons, nor give over thy watch, nor go off thy Guard, till all thine enemies become thy footstool; all this is included in the renouncing of sin. Beware you be not mistaken here, this is the damnation of the world, their mistakes about re∣pentance. They easily say I repent of my sins, I forsake the Devil and all his works; and they as easily perswade themselves, that they do as they say: But did they understand what there is in this repentance, a searching out their sins, divi∣ding their souls from them; a painful and watch∣full shunning and resisting them in their whole course: did they know what their particular sins are, how near they are to their hearts, how they have been nursed in their bosomes, and how hard twill be now to part; even this Covetous∣nesse must go, even this sensuallity must go, these dear pleasures, these beloved gains, these pleasant companions, must all be sent away; not one to be spared nor so much as once more; did they understand this, they would then see what wind all their good words be. They as much mean to pluck their eyes out of their heads, to
tear their flesh off their bones, as to repent, if this be repentance. Well now say, wilt thou re∣pent? Wilt thou now renounce sin? Wilt thou renounce the world also? By the world understand, all the substance of the world; Houses, Lands, Money, and whatsoever worldly Possessions; all the shadowes of the world; its Honours, Pleasures, Pomps, with all its glory. The men of this world, the friendship of the world; all fleshly Relations: Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, Children, all sinful Companions, and societies whatsoever is in, and of the world. These are then renounced, when we are resol∣ved that they shall neither be Our gods or Idols: Our devils or Tempters. 1. Not our gods. Then we make the world a god to us, when we make it out happiness, or end. When we bless our selves in it, and count that our very life consists in the abundance of the things which we possess. When we devote our selves to it, making it as the blessedness, so the great business of our life. He that can want the world, and yet be blessed; he that can want, or have the world, and yet not serve it; he hath renounced it, even whilest he hath it; though tis his still, yet tis not his God. 2. Not our devils or Tempters. The world tempts in a double way: 1. Per modum Objecti; as Objects, which by som∣thing that is apprehended desireable in them, en∣tices and invites out the heart after them; or by somthing apprehended as formidable, affrights us
out of our way. Thus pleasant meats tempts the Glutton, and wine the Drunkard, and a Lyon in the streets the Coward. 2. Per modum causae Instrumentalis; as under devils, or the devils Instruments, or Agitators by which he betrayes and beguiles unstable souls: In the former sence the things of the world, in the latter, the men of the world are temptations and Tempters to us. He renounces the world, that will not be tempted by the world; that takes up with Christ, and will not be brib'd off by world∣ly advantages, nor proslyted by worldly compa∣nions. He that is resolved for Christ, though with the loss of all, and with the displeasure of all the world. He that can be poor for Christ, that can be vile for Christ, that can go hungry and na∣ked with Christ, that can go alone with Christ, and that even then, when 'tis but turning away from Christ; and he may be rich, and honourable, and be clothed, and be filled, and have company enough, as much as he desires, he forsakes the world. He that (can) renounce the world, whenever it comes to be a case either Christ must be forsa∣ken, or all things for Christ; he that [can] whose heart is brought to it, he [hath] re∣nounced the world What sayest thou now Soul? Thou wilt have Christ, but what if thou must leave all behinde thee? VVhat if he say to thee sl all that thou hst and follow me? Canst thou be poor? Canst  be naked? Canst thou be
hungry for Christ? Thou wilt have Christ, but how wilt thou leave thy Companions? What will all thy carnal friends say of thee? He's a fool, he's mad, he's besides himself. How wilt look thy Father, or thy Mother, or thy Wife in the face, who are all against it? who will be per∣swading, beseeching thee, weeping over thee, hanging upon thy neck; or it may be, scoffing, and reviling, and spitting in thy face, to discourage and hold thee back: What sayest thou now? Art thou yet for Christ? VVilt thou forsake them all, cast off all that stands in thy way? VVilt thou forsake the devil also? But I need not now ask thee that; that's done already, fare∣well Devil, when once sin and the world are cast out. If thou wilt not be tempted to sin, if the world ceases to be a temptation, the Devil were as good cease to be a Tempter. There be many that say, I defie the Devil, and yet defie not sin and the world; wise men! They like not the Devil, but yet will lick up his Excrements; they hate the Devil, and yet are never well longer then they are dancing in his chains. Defie the Devil, and yet love sin? such defiance is his de∣light. Let sin be defied, let the world be despised, and the Devil is conquered. 4. And lastly, Wilt thou cleave unto Christ, from henceforth, unto death? Thou wilt have Christ, but when? Shall this be the Marriage-day? VVilt thou from hence∣forth be the Lords? or when shall it be? Must it be to morrow first, or next moneth, or next year, or some time or other thou knowest not when?
May we not take thy promise as they did the Pro∣phecy, Ezek. 12. Is it not for many dayes to come? is it not of the times that are afar off? To morrow thou wilt, hereafter thou wilt, as good as thou hast said nothing. As good thou hadst said [never] as [not yet] Speak Soul, wilt give thy self to the Lord? wilt presently? if thou wilt, how long wilt thou abide with him? wilt thou not endorse on thy Deed of Gift, a power of revocation? wilt thou not repent, not return again from Heaven to Earth? wilt be chaste and play the Harlot no more? wilt be faithful to the death? obedient to the death? Is this thy voice, I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back? As the Lord liveth, nothing but death, no not death it self shall part thee and me. I am perswaded I am resolved, that neither life nor death, Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall sepa∣rate me from the love of God, or withdraw me from Jesus Christ my Lord. Now Soul, gather up all this together; stand thou before the Lord, the God of all the Earth, and this once more say, Wilt thou have Jesus Christ for thy Husband? dost thou choose him for thy Lord? wilt thou cleave to him in love? wilt thou lean upon him for righteousness and strength? for righteousness to pay thy debts, and for strength to pay thy vows? wilt thou be subject to him? thou knowest the commandments, how holy, how strict they be. Wilt thou obey them in all things? wilt exercise thy self to godliness in the strictness of it? wilt be a thorow-pac'd Disciple? wilt not content
thy self with such a cold or lukewarm indifferency in Religion as thy lazy flesh will bear, as thy cre∣dit, thy safety, or the temper of the times will bear? wilt follow thy Lord fully? Wilt thou take up thy lot with Christ, be it better or worse? shall his Father be thy Father, his Inheritance be thy Inheritance? yea and his Sufferings thy Sufferings? his stripes, his bonds, his poverty be thine? wilt thou espouse not his Crown onely, but his Cross too? whither ever he goes wilt thou go? where he dwells wilt thou dwell? wilt say, where ever my Lord is, there let his Servant be? Wilt thou forsake all others? all thy sins? wilt thou be made clean? wilt give up thy sores, and thy ulcers, thy filthy and fleshly lusts to be purged out? does thine heart stand dis∣engaged from every sin? is there not any one ini∣quity, concerning which thine heart sayes, Let this stay with me? wilt search out thy sins? wilt accom∣plish a diligent search, sweep every corner, search every chamber of thine heart & life? wilt go down to the bottome of thy great deep, to find out what lodges there? wilt faithfully endeavour, no more to allow thy self in any known iniquity? wilt use all Gods means for the conquering and casting them out? Wilt forsake the world? wilt cast away thine Idols? shall thy Mammon be no more a god nor a demy-god to thee? shall it neither carry away thine heart from him, nor so much as share with him in it? wilt thou not bow down to this golden Image nor serve it? wilt thou no longer serve thy greedy appetite? shall thine heart no longer go after thy covetousness? wilt thou abandon thine estate, thy pleasures, thine honours, thy friends and
companions, so far forth as any of these divide or en∣tice, or steal away thine heart from thy Lord? When ever they say, Come away, wilt thou say, Get you hence? VVilt forsake the Devil? wilt fear, and flie from, and no longer hearken to his temptations? wilt no longer regard his promises nor his threat∣nings? his flatteries nor his frowns? Coming off from the tents of all these, wilt cleave unto thy Lord from henceforth, from this day forward, and not de∣part from him for ever? Wilt hold on thy course, wilt run out thy race, wilt be faithful to the death, wilt hope to the end for the grace that shall be brought unto thee at the revelation of Jesus Christ? What sayest thou? If thou sayest [no] as the Lord liveth, thou speakest this word against thine own life. If thou refusest to enter into this Co∣venant, thou sayest, I will not be the Lords, I will none of him, I will not live; let death, and wrath, and chains, and plagues be my portion for ever. I will not be the Lords; I will not leave my sins, and my pleasures, and my companions for his love: that is, I will be a Fool, and a beast, and a Devil; I will die and will not see life. Mistake not thy self, be not deceived, 'tis a matter of life and death that is before thee. 'Tis whether Heaven or Hell, a God or no God, a Christ or no Christ, a Soul or a lost Soul, everlasting life or everlasting Fire, shall be thy portion, that stands now to be determined, by thy consent or refusal, look to it, be wise; this once for eternity. Consent and thou art blessed, consent and he is thine, and with him the King∣dome. Thy Lord hath given his consent already; view the hand-writing, the whole New Testament,
which is written in blood, and sealed as 'tis writ∣ten; there thou hast his [I will] in every line al∣most, visible before thee: put to thine and 'tis done. What sayest thou? dost thou consent? shall thine heart come in, and put to thine hand, and sub∣scribe for thee? I will. Let that be done and then say after me. A form of words expressing mans covenanting with God. O Most Dreadful God, for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech Thee accept of thy poor Prodigal now prostrating himself at thy Door: I have fallen from thee by mine iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a thousand-fold more the Child of Hell by my Wicked practice: The Terms of our conversi∣on, are either from which, or to which. But of thine infinite Grace thou hast promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I will but turn to thee with all my heart: Therefore upon the Call of thy Gospel, I am now come in, and throwing down my Weapons, submit my self to thy Mercy. The Terms from which we must turn, are Sin, Satan, the World, and our own Righteousness, which must be thus renounced.And because thou requirest, as the Condition of my Peace with thee, that I should put away mine Idols, and be at defi∣ance with all thine Enemies, which
I acknowledge I have wickedly sided with against thee, I here from the bottome of my heart re∣nounce them all, firmly Covenanting with thee, not to allow my self in any known Sin, but Con∣scientiously to use all means that I know thou hast prescribed, for the Death and utter Destruction of all my Corruptions. And whereas I have for∣merly inordinately and idolatrously let out my affections upon the World, I do here resign my Heart to thee that madest it, humbly protesting before thy Glorious Majesty, that it is the firm re∣solution of my heart, and that I do unfeignedly de∣sire Grace from thee, that when thou shalt call me hereunto, I may practice this my resolution, through thy Assistance, to forsake all that is dear unto me in this World, rather then to turn from thee to the wayes of sin, and that I will watch a∣gainst all its Temptations, whether of Prosperity or Adversity, least they should withdraw my Heart from thee, beseeching thee also to help me against the Temptations of Satan, to whose wicked Sug∣gestions, I resolve, by thy Grace, never to yield my self a Servant. And because my own righteousness is but menstruous Rags, I renounce all confidence therein, and acknowledge that I am of my self a hopeless, helpless, undone creature, without righ∣teousness or strength. The Terms to which we must turn, are either ultimate or mediate.And forasmuch as thou hast of thy bottomless Mercy offered most Graciously to me wretched sinner, to be again my God through Christ, if I would accept of thee: I call Heaven and Earth to record this day, that
The ultimate is God, the Fa∣ther, Son, and Holy Ghost, who must be thus accepted. I do here solemnly avouch thee for the Lord my God, and with all possible venera∣tion, bowing the neck or my Soul under the feet of thy most sacred Majesty, I do here take thee the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Ho∣ly Ghost, for my portion and chief good, and do give up my self, body and soul for thy servant, promising and vowing to serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the dayes of my life. The mediate terms, are ei∣ther princi∣pal, or less principal.The Principal is Christ the Mediator, who must thus be embraced.And since thou hast appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, the onely means of coming unto thee, I do here upon the bend∣ed knees of my Soul accept of him as the onely New and Living Way, by which Sinners may have access to thee, and do here solemnly joyn my self in a marriage covenant to him. O blessed Jesus, I come to thee hungry and hardly bestead, poor and wretched, and miserable, and blinde, and naked, a most loath∣some polluted wretch, a guilty condemned Male∣factor, unworthy for ever to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord, much more to be solemnly married to the King of Glory: But sith such is thine unparallel'd love, I do here with all my power accept thee, and do take thee for my Head and Husband, for better for worse, for richer for poor∣er, for all times and conditions, to love, honour, and obey thee before all others, and this to the death. I embrace thee in all thine Offices: I re∣nounce mine own unworthiness, and do here avow
thee to be the Lord my Righteousness: I renounce mine own wisdome, and do here take thee for mine onely Guide: I renounce mine own will, and take thy Will for my Law. And since thou hast told me that I must suffer if I will reign, I do here covenant with thee to take my lot, as it falls, with thee, and by thy grace assisting to run all hazards with thee, verily suppo∣sing, that neither life nor death shall part between thee and me. The less Prin∣ciples, are the Laws of Christ, which must be thus accepted.And because thou hast been pleased to give me thy holy Laws, as the Rule of my life, and the way in which I should walk to thy Kingdome; I do here willingly put my Neck under thy Yoke, and set my Shoulder to thy Burden, and subscribing to all thy Laws, as holy, just, and good; I solemnly take them, as the rule of my words, thoughts, and actions; promising, that though my flesh contradict and re∣bel, yet I will endeavour to order and govern my whole life according to thy direction, and will not allow my self in the neglect of any thing that I know to be my duty. Onely because through the frailty of my flesh, I am subject to many failings; I am bold humbly to protest, That unallowed miscarriages, contrary to the setled bent and resolution of my heart, shall not make void this Covenant; for so thou hast said. Now Almighty God, searcher of hearts, thou knowest that I make this Covenant with thee this day, without any known guile or reservation, be∣beseeching thee, that if thou espiest any flaw or
falshood therein, thou wouldest discover it to me, and help me to do it aright. And now glory be to thee, O God, the Father, whom I shall be bold from this day forward, to look upon as my God and Father; That ever thou shouldest find out such a way for the reco∣very of undone sinners; Glory be to thee, O God the Son, who hast loved me, and washed me from my sins in thine own blood, and art now become my Saviour and Redeemer: Glory be to thee, O God the holy Ghost, who by the finger of thine Almighty Power, hast turned about my heart from sin to God. O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord God Omnipo∣tent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; thou art now become my Covenant-friend, and I through thine infinite Grace, am become thy Covenant-servant, Amen, So be it. And the Covenant which I have made on earth, let it be ratified in Heaven. CHAP. XX, and Last. An exhortation to the Saints. COme ye People beloved, you that are highly favoured; The Lord is with you. Blessed are you amongst men and women. The Likes are fallen to you in a pleasant place, yea you have a goodly heritage. Come and enter upon your Lot; let your hearts be glad, let your glory re∣joyce,
but that your joy may be full, hearken to these following counsels: Make sure your interest in the Covenant. Rejoyce not in that thats none of thine. Make sure, all lies upon this: Your life, & all the comforts and concernments of it, both your eternal safety hereafter, and your success in all the parts of your Christian course here, depend on your interest in the Covenant. VVhat have you if Christ be not yours? and what have you in Christ, if you be not in Covenant? whence are your hopes, ei∣ther of mercy at last, or of prospering in any thing at present, but from the Covenant of Promise? And what have you thence, if your name be not in it! Oh give not rest to your selves, till this be put out of doubt; what ever duties you per∣form, what ever ease, or hope you finde hereup∣on, what ever transportation of affection you feel in your hearts, in the midst of all en∣quiry. But am I in Covenant? How shall I know that you'll say; why make a strict and narrow enquiry, whether those special graces already mentioned be wrought upon you. Common mercies, though even these be Covenant mercies to the Saints, yet will they not prove themselves so to be; but specially graces will be their own evidence. Things outward, fall alike to all: No man knowes love or hatred by ought that befalls him, Eccles. 9.1. Thou mayest be a son or a bastard, notwithstan∣ding all that thou enjoyest or sufferest here; but not one of the fore-mentioned graces, but is a
childes portion: Gods mark upon the heart, to di∣stinguish children from strangers. Prove that thou truly knowest the Lord, hast one heart, a tender heart, &c. and thou therein provest thy self to be a child of Promise. Read over the descriptions that have been given of these graces; observe di∣ligently where the main differene lyes betwixt common and special grace; compare thine heart with it, and thereby thou mayest give a judge∣ment of thy state. If it be yet questionable, whe∣ther it be sound or no; sit not down till thou hast obtained: but having obtained, 2. Keep your evidences clear. Have you peace? maintain it carefully. The hidden Manna will never breed worms by long keeping. Content not your selves that you once had peace; 'twill be but a poor livelihood, you will get out of what's wasted and lost. Get you good eviden∣ces that God is yours, and keep them by you, till you need them no more. Grace is your best evidence, cherish and preserve it. Get a seeing eye, and keep your eye open; get a single heart, and let it not be again divided; get a tender heart, and keep it tender; let the love and fear of God be acted in holy Obedience. An obedient, gra∣cious, watchful, active life, will keep grace in heart; and flourishing grace will speak for it self and you. Look not that the Lord should so far countenance your declinings to a more fleshly careless state, as to smile upon you in such a state; God will not be an Abettor to sin. Count up∣on it, that your grace and peace, your duty and comfort will rise and fall together; suspect those comforts that accompany you into the tents of
wickedness, and forsake you not, when you for∣sake your God. Keep up your spirits, and then lift up your heads, keep heedfully on your way, and your joy shal no man take from you. Par∣ticularly, 1. Keep close by God. 2. Keep hold on Christ. 3. Keep touch with the Spirit. 4. Keep in with Conscience. 1. Keep close to God. Keep thy self under his eye and influences. Both thy grace and thy comforts as they had their birth, so must they have their nourishment from Heaven. Lose the sight of the Sun, and darkness follows. Let thine eyes be towards the hills. Let divine love be the pleasure of thy life. Let it be thy Lords cord up∣on thine heart, let it binde thee to him; be loves Captive, let thine ear be bor'd to the threshold, be familiar in Heaven, keep thine acquaintance there, and be at peace; chide back thy gadding heart, Soul; whither art thou going? who hath the words of eternal life? let the interviews of love betwixt thy Lord and thee, be constant; let them not be onely on some few holy days of thy life. Count not thou hast lived that day, in which thou hast not liv'd with God. Keep close to God, by keeping close to duty. Keep close to duty, and keep close to God in du∣ty. Call not that a duty, which thou canst not call communion with God. Make not duty to do the work of sin, to take God out of sight. Let not Prayer, or Hearing, or Sacraments, be in∣stead of a God to thee. Such praying and hear∣ing
there is amonst many, but know not thou any thing for Religion, wherein thou meetest not with God. Behold the face of God, but behold his face in righteousness, Psal. 17.15. 'Tis ill looking on God with a blood-shot eye. Guilt upon the heart, will be a cloud that will make the Sun as darkness to thee. Walk in the light of the Lord. Walk in the light, as he is in the light. In thy light (the holiness of thy life) thou shalt see his light. The light of his holiness in thee, will be attended with the light of his countenance upon thee. By the light of his countenance, thou wilt both see thy self in thy way to thine hopes, and learn thy way more perfectly, Psal. 119.135. Make thy face to shine upon thy Servant, and teach me thy statutes. God hath many ways of teach∣ing; he teaches by Book, he teaches by his Fin∣ger, he teaches by his Rod; but his most com∣fortable and effectual teaching, is by the light of his Eye. Send forth thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me to thy holy Hill. 2. Keep hold on Christ. He is thy peace. Ap∣pear not before God, but in the blood of the Lamb; let him carry up thy duties, and own not that for a comfort, which is not brought thee by his hand. Let him be thy way to the Father, and thy Fathers way to thee. Keep fresh upon thine heart, the memory of his death and satis∣faction, and let that be thy life, and thine hope. Hast thou cast Anchor on this Rock, lose not thy hold; hang upon the horns of the Altar: Thou canst not live, but there; if thou must dye, say;
but I will dye here. Put forth fresh Acts of faith everyday and hour. Believe, believe, believe, and thou shalt be established. Fall not into Un∣belief, then thou art gone; thou departest from the living God, Heb. 3.12. 3. Keep touch with the Spirit. Observe and obey his motions; when he excites, get thee on; when he checks, get thee back; know the holy from the evil spirit, by its according or differing with the Scriptures; reject that spirit in the heart, that is not the same with the Spirit in the word. Try the Wind, what and whence it is, by thy Card and Gompass; To the Law, and to the Testimony. And when thou perceivest its from above, hoise up thy sails, and get thee on. Quench not the Spirit: Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby thou art sealed to the day of Redemption. 4. Keep in with Conscience. Make not thy witness thine enemy. Deal friendly with it; thou wilt need its good word, which thou canst not have, if it receive blowes from thee; it will not learn this Lesson to speak good for evil: or if thou shouldest beat it into it, thou art undone; if an abuse conscience speak peace, it becomes thy Traytor. Give due respect to Conscience. Let it abide with thee, in Peace, and in Power. Keep up its Autho∣rity, as Gods Vicegerent. Next under God, com∣mit the keeping of thy soul to conscience, as the Lord hath, so do thou make it superintendent in thy soul; the Judge and Over-seer of all thy mo∣tions and actions. Let conscience counsell thee, and tell thee thy way; let conscience quicken thee, and put thee on in thy way; let conscience watch
thee, that thou turn not out of thy way; let con∣science check thee, and reduce thee into thy way. Whither ever thou goest, carry conscence along with thee; carry conscience into thy Closet, let it watch thee how thou behavest thy self there; carry conscience into thy shop, let it eye thee what thou dost there; carry conscience into the fields, into the market, amongst thy friends, a∣mongst thine enemies, let it observe how thou be∣havest thy self amongst them; carry conscience with thee to thy recreation, to thy bed, to thy table; whither ever thou goest, there's like to be but sad work, if conscience be not with thee. Com∣mit the keeping of thy Covenant to conscience; let it be the Ark in which the Tables of the Testi∣mony are kept and preserved; let it be the Execu∣tor of thy Testament. Conscience is bound by thy Covenant, the Covenant layes hold on it, let it lay hold on thee. Is thy conscience bound? seek not to be loosed; is thy conscience bound, give it leave to bind thine whole man: let it bind thy thoughts, and bind thy will, and bind thy af∣fections, and hind thy tongue, and thy whole practice; thou never livest as a man in Covenant, longer then thou livest as a man of Conscience. VVhat becomes of the Covenant, when a breach is made upon Conscience? Oh what is there in the world when conscience is not! what faith, or truth, or peace is there left alive? what are Vowes, and Covenants, and Promises? what are our duties to the Lord, our dealings with men, when there is no conscience towards God? Keep thy conscience, and thou keepest thy soul; keep thy Conscience? and thou keepest thy Covenant;
keep thy Covenant, and thou keepest thy Peace; let that go, and all's lost. Let conscience govern what God hath put under its power, and let it resist all adverse Power. Let it resist temptations. When ever Satan and thy flesh fall upon thee, and tempt thee; Pity thy self, spare thy self; take thy liberty, take thine ease, take thy pleasure, provide for thy safety; what need is there of so much adoe? Why canst not take the same liberty, and allow thy self the same latitude as others do? they have souls as well as thou, and they have dangers as well as thou, and they have hopes as well as thou, and they have reasons and understand∣ings to know what they do as well as thou; and why canst thou not he content to do as they? Why let this be thy answer, But what conscience is there for it? With what conscience can I be idle, when I have said I will be doing? With what conscience can I take mine ease, when I have said I will take pains? With what con∣science can I serve my flesh, when I have said I will crucifie it? With what conscience can I love this world, when I have said I will renounce it? With what conscience can I walk at liberty, when I have said I will walk circumspectly? If all this were more then needs, (far be it from me to have such a thought, till the serving my God, and the saving my soul be more then needs.) But if it were more then needs, yet is it any more then I am bound to? Are there any such liberties put into my Indentures? Was there any ex∣ception made, of this duty, or that duty? was there a∣ny limitation made, to this measure, or that measure? hitherto I will go and no further, this little I will do and no more? Was there any such proviso put in, I will serve the Lord, Provided I may with ease or with safety? Have I not solemnly engaged to the
Lord, to obey him in all things, to follow him fully, to love him and serve him with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength, and this to the death? And Oh shal I lye unto God? Is it more then needs to be righteous, and to keep my faith? Come O my soul, come on; thou hast opened thy mouth to the Lord, and thou must not go back. Be true, be ho∣nest; be honest, though thou must swear for it, be ho∣nest, though thou suffer for it. Remember what thy mouth hath spoken, and see that thou fulfil it with thine hand. Keep conscience pure. Its the book in which all thy Records are written; let no blot be upon thy Book. Beware of sinning against conscience. Every sin a∣gainst conscience, is a blot upon conscience; and blots upon conscience, are blots upon thy Covenant-evi∣dence; thou wilt not be able to read, whether there be any thing written there for thee or not. Ah foo∣lish soul, what art thou doing? Dashing out all thy hopes with thine own hand. Beware thou content not thy self with blotted evidences. Christians, forget not this counsel; keep your Evi∣dences clear. He who hath his whole estate in bonds or writings, how charily will he keep them! If these be torn, or lost, or so blured, that they cannot be read, hee's undone. What ever else be lost, if his mo∣ney be gone, if his goods be lost, if his house be burnt, yet if his writings be safe, hee's well enough. Oh take heed and keep your writings safe and fair; keep your Title to your God clear, and you can never be poor or miserable. Whatever earth or hell can do against you, till they can tear the Covennnt of your God, or make you blot out your own names, they have left you abundantly enough, even when they have left you nothing.
O how highly are we concern'd to be tender of conscience, and yet how little care is there taken of it! What's become of the authority of conscience? when thy thoughts, and thy passions, when thines eyes and thine ears,, and thine appetite, and thy tongue are left unbridled and unconquered; when every Ser∣vant is set up to be Master, and bears rule in thee, where is thy Conscience? what's become of its au∣thority? When thy s ul hath been no better kept (what poverty and leanness is there grown upon it, what a starveling is it become, both in grace and peace, eaten out with lust, evaporated into vanity, sunk into sensua∣lity, thy spirit even transubstantiated into flesh, ready to perish, and die away for want of good looking to.) When thy Soul hath been no better kept, where is thy Conscience? when thy covenant hath been no better kept, when thy duties thou hast vowed to perform, are so ha∣stily and heedlesly shuffled over, if not totally thrust aside; when thy hours of prayer are such short hours, thy Sabbaths such Winter dayes, so short and so cold too; when thy God is so shamefully neglected, can never hear of thee, but when thou hast nothing else to do, no nor it may be then neither, when thy spare hours are hardly spared for God; when this earth, thy corn, and thy cattel, and thy pleasures and thy friends, which thou hast vowed to renounce, are let in again upon thine heart, and have stollen it away from Heaven, where is thy Conscience? When thou sleepest so, and hast let the enemy come in and sowe his tares in thy field; when thou art such a busie-body in other mens matters, and thine own vineyard thou hast not kept, but hast let it lie fallow, like the field of the Slug∣gard, all overgrown with thorns and nettles; when both thine heart and thine house are so much out of
order; when thy Wife, and thy Children, and thy Ser∣vants are left at randome, to do all, what's right in their own eyes; when more care is taken for the Asses, then for thy Sons and Daughters; when thy house is a very hospital, of blind, and lame, and sick Souls, ready to die for want of instruction and good discipline; where is thy Conscience? and if Consci∣ence be not, where is thy Covenant? and if thy Co∣venant be not, oh where is thy God and thy peace? Ah Conscience! where art thou become? what is become of that good thing committed to thee, yea what is become of thee? Ah Soul! where is thy peace? how is the keeper of thy peace laid low, and the covenant of thy peace bro∣ken? what peace whilst no Conscience, and what hast thou left, whilst no peace? Ah Lord! thy treacherous dealers, how treacherously have they dealt with thee? thy Children have forgotten thee, thy Servants are run-awayes from thee; thou art our Father, but where is thine honour? thou art our Master, but where is thy fear? we are thy Servants, but where is our faith? Ah Lord! we have dealt falsly in thy Covenant. Return, O Lord, return; repair thy watches, reco∣ver thine honours, reduce thy wanderers, restore con∣science, revive our peace, cause us to return and re∣new our covenant; and remember break not thou thy covenant with us. Christians, let us bewail lost conscience, and let it be recovered; let us weep over our dead, and let their souls return into them. Let those of us, that have ob∣tained grace to be faithful, and watchful, and tender, rejoyce and take heed: let him that standeth take heed lest he fall. Go on in the Name of the Lord: Remember his counsels; keep close by God, keep
hold on Christ, keep touch with the Spirit, keep in with Conscience; keep thine heart, keep thy gar∣ments, keep up thy watch, keep on thy way, finish thy course, keep the faith; and then let the devil do his worst, thy peace shall be extended to thee as a River, and established as a Rock; and thou shalt be able to say in the words, and in the faith of the Apostle, Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give unto me at that day, and not to me onely but to all that love his appearing. 3. Adde to your covenant, your sacrifice, Psa. 50.5. Ga∣ther my Saints together unto me, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. God hath made with you, and he expects that you make covenant with him [by sacrifice.] Sacrifices were seals of the Covenant. As Gods part of the Covenant, so our part also must be sealed, and sealed with blood; his with the blood of his Son, ours with the blood of our sins. Rom. 12.1. I beseech you therefore Brethren by the mer∣cies of God, that you present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God. The sacrificing of our selves to the Lord conprehends in it three things: Alienation, Dedication, Oblation. 1. Alienation, or the passing away of our selves, from our selves. Ye are not your own, you are bought with a price. Thus he hath said, and he expects that we should say also, True Lord, I am not mine own. 2. Dedication. or the passing over our selves to the Lord, 2 Chron. 29.35. Ye have consecrated your selves to the Lord. His we are by purchase, but he expects that we be his also by donation: his we are by conquest, but he expects we should be his by consent also. Though he may challenge us as his right, yet the most accepta∣ble claim is, when he hath us by gift. When our hearts say, I am thine Lord; then his heart will answer, Soul, thou art mine.
3. Oblation, or the actual surrender, or offering up our selves to him. In the offering this sacrifice is in∣cluded the Immolation, or slaying of it: We must slay our selves (in a spiritual sense) be mortified, be cruci∣fied with Christ, and so offered up a sacrifice to him. You will say, How is it then required, that we offer up our selves [a living sacrifice?] Answ. We are never truly alive till we are dead, Col. 3.3. Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When our flesh is dead our spirit is life, Rom. 8. As the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. that which thou sowest, so that which thou sacri∣ficest is not quickened except it die. Mortificatio est mors viva. Alapid. 'Tis onely the mortified Christian that is a living sacrifice. Christians, come and sacrifice your selves to the Lord. Come and slay your sacrifices, and so offer them up. Your sacrifice is then slain (as before 'tis intima∣ed) when your carnal self, your old man is crucified with Christ, and the body of sin destroyed, Rom. 6. when the wisdome of the flesh is crucified, and made to vanish be∣fore the wisdome of God; when the will of the flesh is subdued, and swallowed up of the Will of God; when the lusts of the flesh are vanquished, and made captives by the Law of God. Christians, It may be you are willing to make your claim to the Covenant of God, but have you made co∣venant with him? you have entred into covenant with God, but will you confirm your covenant by sacrifice? you will give your selves a sacrifice to the Lord, but is your sacrifice slain? Is the wisdome of the flesh made foolishness? How is it with your carnal wills? Is the will of the flesh broken and brought into subjection, yielding it self up to the Lord? O for an exinaniti∣on of wills, an emptying them into the Will of God! What wilt thou do? What wilt thou have? nothing
but what God will. What the Lord will have me do, or avoid, or suffer, I can no longer say him nay. Is this the Will of God, my sanctification? so 'tis mine. Is this the Will of God, my humiliation? so 'tis mine? Is this the Will of God, my tribulation? so 'tis mine. Is God for holiness? through Grace so am I. Is God for his own Will? so am I: this is all the Will I have, that the Lord may have his Will of me; may be all to me, have all from me, rule all in me, and dis∣pose of all that concerns me. How is it with your carnal affections, and fleshly lusts? are these slain? Is your covetousness, your sen∣suality, your pride, and envy; are your carnal joyes, and fears, and worldly sorrows, are these destroyed? those wild-fires, of passion, and fury, and rage, are these quenched? Come put the Knife to the throat of all these, and then there's a sacrifice for God. Go and offer it up; and let it be A Free-will-offering, A Thank-offering. 1. A Freewil-offering. Offer your selves willingly to the Lord, Psal. 110. Thy people shal be willing in the day of thy Power. O may that glorious day dawn upon us! God loves a chearful giver; offer up your hearts, with all your heart; grudge not that the Lord requires, but bless God, that he will accept of an offering; this hath a comfortable signification: If the Lord had meant to destroy us, he would not have accepted an offering at our hands, Judg. 13.23. 2. A Thank-offering. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High; Offer up your selves in token of yuor thankfulness to the Lord.: Be ye both the Priests, and the Lambs for the sacrifice. Present your selves to the Lord, as the accomplishments of his Covenant, as the fruits of the death of your Redeemer, as the Trophies of his Victory, as the spoils which he hath recovered from Death and Hell, making a shew of them openly, that it may be seen that the promise of God is not of none effect, and that Christ did not die in vain. Let your Lord Jesus when he comes down into his Garden where he left his blood, reap his pleasant fruits, and carry up
your purified Souls as the signals of his glorious atchievement. Offer up your sins to the Lord; these unclean beasts will be an acceptable sacrifice. There's more real honour growing up to the Lord, from one mortified Saint, then from ten thou∣sand Anthems from the most seraphick tongues. Offer up your duties to the Lord; your obedience for a sacrifice. To obey is better then sacrifice; then thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oyle. Let your whole life be this sacrifice: let every day be a Sabbath, every duty an Eucharist, every member a Cymbal sounding out the praises of God, Offer up the calves of your lips unto the Lord. O let your souls be filled with won∣der, and your mouths with praise. Whence in this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? Oh whence is this to us, that the Lord our Father should come, and come so near to us! Oh whence is it, That the Mighty God should indent, and come into bond with sinful man! that he who was free from all men, should make himself debtor to any! That the high and lofty One, that inhabits Eternity, should dwell in Houses of Clay, and pitch his Tabernacle in the Dust! That he who humbleth himself to behold the Heavens, should come down into the earth; and after what is he come down, but after a dead Dog or a Flea? that he should make a league with the stones of the gound, with the beasts of the field, and creeping things? should espouse dust and ashes, and gather up vile worms into his bosome? should set his heart upon shadows, and adopt the refuse of the earth for Sons and Daughters to himself? should raise the poor out of the dust, and the beggar from the Dunghil? should do such great things, and should choose the foolish, and the weak, and the base, and the contemptible, and bostow on [them] among all the world these high honors? should make them the Head and the honourable, whom the world hath made the Tail, the filth and the off-scouring of all things? should give himself to be the portion, his Son to be the ransome, his kingdome to be the heritage of bankrupts, pri∣soners, and captives? Lord what is man that thou art thus mindful of him! Soul, what is God that thou shouldst be yet unmind∣ful of him? How is it that the tongue of the dumb is not yet loosened, that the feet of the lame do not leap as an Hart? Oh what is that love, whence this strange thing hath bro∣ken forth? This this is the womb that bare thee; hence hath thy righteousness sprung forth; hence have thy dignities, thy astonishing hope, and joys arisen to thee; this is it that yearned upon thee in thy mercy, that reprived thee from death, redee∣med
thee from darkness, rescued thee as a brand out of the bur∣ning; that pitied thee in thy blood, washed thee from thy blood; spared thee, pardoned thee, reconciled thee, and brought thee, an enemy, a rebel, a traitor, into a Covenant of peace with the God of glory. Ah contemptible dust! that ever there should be such compassionate contrivements, and such astonishing condescentions of the eternal Deity, towards so vile a thing! O love the Lord all ye his Saints! O bless the Lord ye belo∣ved, ye people near unto the Lord. Alas that our hearts should be so narrow, that the waters should be so shallow with us; where are our eyes, if we be not yet filled with wonders; what hearts have we, if we have not yet filled our lips with praise: Open all thy springs, O my soul, let them flow forth in streams of love and joy; let every faculty be tuned and strained to the height; let heart and hands, and tongue, and eyes lift up their voice; be astonished O heavens, be moved ye strong foundati∣ons of the earth, fall down ye Elders, strike up ye heavenly Quires, lend poor mortals your Notes, to sing forth the high praises of God, who rideth on the heavens, and hath caused us to ride on the high places of the earth, and made us sit toge∣ther in hevenly places, shewing forth the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness to us in Christ Jesus. Awake up my Glory, awake Psaltery and Harps, I my self wil awake right early. My soul doth magnifie the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour; for he that is mighty hath done for me great things, and holy is his Name. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who hath visited and redeemed his People; who hath raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant David; who hath laid help on one who is mighty, and exalted one chosen among the People, and hath given him for a Covenant to them. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name; who hath redee∣med thy life from death, and crowned thee with loving kind∣ness and tender mercies. Salvation to our God, that sitteth on the Throne, and to the Lamb. Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and glory, and honour, and blessing; for thou livedst, and wast dead, and art alive for ever∣more. Thou hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and hast made us Kings and Priests unto our God for ever. Hallelujah, Hallelujah. FINIS.
