B1956 11271374 47218
ROME TYRANNICAL, Idolatrous, and Heretical. The Origine of Her Errors, WITH An Answer to Her Objections. Also, Three short Sermons of Repen∣tance, against Swearing and Drun∣kenness, Preached to the Ships Com∣pany before Admiral Aylmer, and several Captains. By Peter Berault. Chaplain in His Majesty's Ships the Kent and Victory, in the Late War. Gal. 3. 1. O Foolish! who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the Truth? London, Printed by W. Redmayne for the Author, 1698.
TO His Excellency The Right Honourable John L. Summers Lord Baron of Evesham, High Chancellor of England, one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Coun∣cil, and one of the Lords Justices of England, during the Absence of His Majesty. May it Please your Excellency, ROME, who in for∣mer Ages was both Holy and Orthodox, s now corrupted not only in
Her Manners, but also in Her Doctrine. Yet She is so Confident, as to accuse of Impiety and Heresie all the Protestant Churches of Eng∣land, Holland, Germany, and other Countries; and perem∣ptorily affirm, unless they be of Her Communion, they must never expect to be sav'd. And so I may say without any passion, that She is like those Lewd and Naughty Women, who quarrelling with those, that are Honest, do immediately call them infamous and opprobrious Names, lest the same should be justly retorted upon Them∣selves. I do not here intend to speak of the Vices of the
Church of Rome, since most of 'em, to our Shame, are too frequently found amongst us; I will only make mention of Her Tyrannies, Idolatries and Heresies, which, thanks be to God, are not yet seen in Reformed Churches, and were the true Reasons, why I left my Native Country, and came hither to live and end my days. I know a different Constru∣ction will be made by the Papists, as also by some Pro∣testants; for, as St. Paul, be∣ing newly converted to the Christian Religion, was not only hated by the Jews, some of them making an Oath, they would neither, eat nor
drink, till they had kill'd him; but even was suspected by the Apostles themselves, who were for some time afraid to converse with him. So when a Man leaves the Errors of the Church of Rome, and em∣braces the Truths of the Pro∣testant Religion, then all the Zealots of his former Opi∣nion do presently Anathema∣tize him; and those, who were his most intimate Friends, become his greatest Enemies. And that, which most aggravates his Trouble, is, that the Protestants, a∣mongst whom he came to se∣cure himself, do commonly doubt of the Sincerity of his Conversion, and are very shy
of putting Confidence in him. He that has powerful Ene∣mies, stands in need of a mighty Protection; and this is the reason, My Lord, why I do here, under God, implore yours; which I do not in the least question, since you are an Enemy to the Romish Er∣rors, and have a great Love for the Truth of the Refor∣med Religion, and no less Tenderness and Affection for them, that couragiously de∣fend it. The Three Sermons, I have lately presented to your Excellency, were so kindly receiv'd, that I thought, I was obliged upon the first opportunity to make some ac∣knowledgment
to your Ex∣cellency by dedicating this small Treatise. I should not offer you a Present of so little value, had I not this to en∣courage me, that it is not the Gift, but the Intention in giving, which finds acce∣ptance with Great and Gene∣rous Minds. I do not here intend to at∣tempt an enumeration of all your excellent Qualities. I will only say, that every one admires your solid Judgment, extraordinary Prudence, and wise Conduct in the high Places you are in, as well as in all the Affairs you under∣take, either Publick or Pri∣vate; that England doth find
in you both Equity and Inte∣grity in the Administration of Justice; and that our very Prudent, and most Generous King William, having chosen you amongst so many Lear∣ned Lawyers to be Chancel∣lor of England, one of the Lords of his most Honoura∣ble Privy-Council; and one of the Lords Justices of Eng∣land, during his Absence, is a certain Proof of your Merits, and the best Commendation of your eminent Virtues. These Virtues, My Lord, will render your Name Im∣mortal to Posterity, and will leave a lively Idea of your Re∣nown, which will serve to in∣fluence your Example to all
succeeding Ages. I abhor Flattery, but I love Justice; and in all that I have said here to your Excellency, every bo∣dy is obliged to declare, or with Silence give their Con∣sent, that I only give Honour to whom Honour is due. I ask your Excellency's Par∣don, for the Liberty I have taken. I pray God Almighty, that you may live long and healthful in the high Places, wherein you so worthily ac∣quit yourself. I wish you every thing, that may contri∣bute to make you intirely Happy in this World; and, when in the other you are call'd at the Judgment-Seat of our Lord Jesus Christ, you
may hear these comfortable words; Come you Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foun∣dation of the World. It is, and shall be, as long as I live, the earnest Prayer of him, that is with Sincerity and Respect, Your Excellency's Most Humble Most Obedient, and Most Affectionate Servant P. Berault.
A MON SEIGNEUR SUMMERS CHANCELIER D'ANGLETERRE. EPIGRAMME. SAge, & Juste Summers, ta profonde Science, Jointe à ta grande Probité Demande que par Equité Châcun par tout te rende Homage, & Reverence. On dit que la Justice, & que la Verité Ne sont plus icy sur la Terre; Il est Faux; car dans l'Angleterre Summers, par un beau Don de la Divinité, Possede l'une & l'autre en leur Integrité. P. Berault.
ROME, Tyrannous, Idolater, and Heretick. THE Church of Rome may be now compared to the Image of Nebu∣chadnezzar; for as his Head was of fine Gold, his Breast and Arms of Silver, his Belly and his Thighs of Brass, his Legs of Iron, and his Feet part of Iron and part of Clay: So, when we look upon the Ancient Church of Rome, She was then as pure as Gold. But when we come to the following Ages, we do find in her so notable a change; that we do now see in her an Iron-Age, and quite diffe∣rent from the former. I do not
here intend to imitate several Au∣thors; who even, when they com∣pose but a small Book, are wont to make a long Preface. They build, as the Proverb saith, the Door bigger than the House. They do promise much, and perform but little. That I may not be guilty of the fault, which I do here im∣pute to others, I immediatly enter into my Subject, and prove per Argumentum ad Hominem, that is, by the very Principles of the Church of Rome, that She is Ty∣rannous, Idolater, and Heretick. 1. I shew that She is Cruel and Tyrannous; for all those, that contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ and Law of Nature, do per∣secute Men, and cause them to die, meerly because they are not of their Opinion and Religion, are Cruel and Tyrannous. The Church of Rome, contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and Law of Nature, does persecute
Men, and cause them to die, meer∣ly because they are not of her Opi∣nion and Religion: Therefore She is Cruel and Ty∣rannous. The Major Proposition of this Argument is true; as for the Mi∣nor, which is in question, I prove it thus. It is evident, that the Roman Church does persecute Men, and cause them to die, meerly, because they are not of her Opinion and Religion. The rigorous Laws of her Inquisition, whereby She did persecute an innumerable number of Men, and cause them to die, meerly, because they were not of Her Opinion and Religion, is a convincing proof of what I say. And that it is contrary to the Do∣ctrine of Jesus Christ and Law of Nature to persecute Men, and cause them to die, because they are not of our Opinion and Reli∣gion, I shall endeavour to prove it evidently.
1. I say that this Doctrine of the Ro∣man Church, by Persecuting Men, and causing them to Die, meerly because they are not of her Opi∣nion and Religion, is contrary to Christ's Doctrine. For Jesus Christ going to Worship at Hierusalem, the Samaritans, who were of ano∣ther Religion, refusing to receive him in his Journey, two of his Disciples, James and John present∣ly took Fire, and out of a well-meaning Zeal for their Master, and of the true God, and of Hierusalem the true place of Worship, asked leave to dispatch out of the way these Enemies of God and Christ, and the true Religion. And to this end they desired our Saviour to give them Power to call for Fire from Heaven to consume them. Jesus Christ seeing them in this heat, which seem'd to be well-meaning, did very calmly, but se∣verely reprove this Temper of theirs; saying, The Son of Man is
not come to destroy Mens lives, but to save them. Luke 9. 56. You own your selves to be my Disci∣ples, but do you consider what Spirit now Acts and Governs you? Not that surely which I do teach you, which is not furious Persecu∣ting and destructive Spirit, but mild, gentle, and aiming at no∣thing but to save Men's Lives, even of our greatest Enemies. This Spirit of Persecuting and Destroy∣ing one another about Religion, is contrary to the Intention, for which I came into the World. For I am not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. Ye ought to love one another, even your greatest Ene∣mies; and far from giving you leave to Persecute them, I forbid you to hate those who Persecute you. If I would destroy my Ene∣mies, and the Hereticks that are not of my Religion, could I not do it by the Power which I have recei∣ved from my Father; and could I
not obtain of him a Legion of An∣gels to destroy them? But my In∣tention is not that Religion should be propagated in this cruel Me∣thod, but by Meekness and Per∣swasion. I will have Men to be drawn to the Profession of it by the Bonds of Love and Conviction. If any Man, saith he, will be my Dis∣ciple, if any Man will come after me. And when his Disciples were lea∣ving him, he does not, as they do in Rome and Spain, set up an Inqui∣sition to Torture and Punish them for their Defection from the Faith; only says, will ye also go away? And in imitation of this blessed Pattern the Christian Church continued to speak and act for several Ages. This was also the Language of the Holy Fathers and the Style of Councils; they said that the Christian Law doth not avenge it self by the Sword. Lex nova non se vindicat ultore gladio; and that we must not offer Violence to no Man, to compel him to
Faith. Nemini ad credendum vim inferre. And Gregorius ad Episc. Constant, Writes thus. Nova & inaudita praedicatio quae verberibus exigit Fidem. This sort of Preaching is new and strange, which extorts Faith by Whips and Scourges. If Hereticks were to be Persecuted and Destroyed, the Samaritans, who were true Hereticks, and had affronted our Saviour himself, the Honour of God and of Religion, ought certainly to be punished. And to shew the contrary, Jesus Christ does severely rebuke his Disciples that had a great mind to destroy them, saying unto them, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of; and he gives them such a Reason, as ought in all Differen∣ces of Religion, how wide soever they be, to deter Men from this Temper; for, saith he, The Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them.
What can then the Church of Rome plead for her Persecution to Men for the cause of Religion, which James and John might not much better have pleaded for themselves against the Samaritans? Does she practice these Severities out of a Zeal for the Honour of God, of Christ, and the true Religion? Upon these very Accounts it was that James and John would have called for Fire from Heaven to have destroyed the Samaritans. Is she perswaded, that those whom she Persecutes are Hereticks, and that no Punishment can be too great for such Offenders? So James and John were perswaded of the Sama∣ritans; and upon much better Grounds than those of the Church of Rome; for Jesus Christ does ex∣cuse them, saying, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of. But in the Church of Rome, and especi∣ally in the Governing part of it; this Excuse cannot be brought for
a good Plea; for the Christian Re∣ligion, which they do Profess, for∣bids them Persecution. And it is no more evident in the New Te∣stament that Jesus Christ was born, died, and rose up for Sin∣ners, than it is manifest that Chri∣stians ought not to Persecute one another for the Mis-belief of any Article of Revealed Religion; much less when these Articles are invented by Men, or are imposed as only Ceremonies. I know that those that live in the Roman Church, are not all of this Opinion, that all Hereticks, or those that are not of their Opinion ought to be Persecuted and put to Death. I knew some of them in France, which were of a better and more Christian Principles; yet it is too true that this hellish Doctrine is taught and practised among them. Their several and frequent Conspiracies in England, their cru∣el and horrible Massacres in Ire∣land,
France, and other Countries; as we may read in the History, their severe and damnable Inquisition in Italy and Spain; their rigorous Per∣secutions towards our poor Bre∣thren of the Reformed Church in France, which was these several years, and is at present  extreme, that I should be to long, if I would write it down in this Trea∣tise; and the very words of the Council of Lan, are a certain Proof of what I say. If a Temporal Lord, saith this Council, be requi∣red and warned by the Church to Purge his Country from this foul He∣resie, does neglect it, let him be Ex∣communicated by the Metropolitan Bishop; and from that time let him Denounce his Subjects, discharged of their Allegiance, and let him give his Country to be Possessed by the Catho∣licks. And in the next words, se∣veral Priviledges and great Indul∣gences are granted to all Men that
shall endeavour to destroy the He∣reticks. 2. I make it appear, that this Doctrine of Persecuting and De∣stroying those which are not of our Opinion and Religion, is con∣trary to the Law of Nature. For this is the Law of Nature, As ye would that Men should do unto you, so do you unto them. We would not be Persecuted and Destroyed for our Opinion and Religion; there∣fore we ought not to Persecute and Destroy others. But some will object, we have a Law, and by this Law they ought to be Persecuted and De∣stroyed. I Answer, if that were a suffici∣ent Reason to warrant Persecution, we could not blame the Jews, when they Crucified Jesus Christ; for they said, They had a Law, and that by this Law he ought to die. And we could not blame Queen Mary, who by a Law in her days, caused so
many to suffer Martyrdom; nor could we now blame the Papists, who by their Laws in France, Ita∣ly and Spain, establish Cruelty and Oppression, and as so many Nebu∣chadnezzars give Order, that all Persons that will not Worship their God of Bread, or refuse to bow be∣fore their Images, or will not be∣lieve what they believe, be Perse∣cuted, Tortured, and put to Death by the most cruel Torments. If any Man be found a Plotter, or breed Sedition and Disturbance in a Kingdom; if he contrive any Evil against the King or Govern∣ment, he ought to be Punish'd ac∣cording to the Law of this King∣dom. But if he only be found Er∣ring concerning some Articles of Religion, he ought to be Taught and Admonish'd by the Bishop, and afterwards rejected from the Congregation, if he will not be perswaded. But he ought not to be cast into Prison, nor deprived of
his Estate, nor sent to the Gallies, nor Condemned to Die. For this Cruelty, as I have already shewed, is not only contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, but to the Law of Nature also. And therefore it is e∣vident, that the Church of Rome is Cruel and Tyrannous; since con∣trary to Christ's Doctrine and the Law of Nature, she Persecutes and puts Men to Death, meerly because they are not of her Opini∣on and Religion. The Origine, or the Author of this hellish Doctrine was a Domini∣can Fryar, or rather the King Ne∣buchadnezzar; for as he that would not Worship his Image, was cast into a fiery Furnace, so those that will not Worship the God of Bread of the Papists, and bow to their I∣mages, are Condemn'd to be burnt alive. Secondly, I shew that the Roman Church is Idolater.
All those, that do Worship the Creature for the Creator, are Ido∣laters. The Church of Rome does Wor∣ship the Creature for the Creator; Therefore she is an Idolater. The Major Proposition of this Argument is true, and is granted by all Divines. As for the Minor, which is in question, I prove it thus. The Church of Rome does Wor∣ship a bit of Bread baked upon the Fire, and takes it for her God; there∣fore she does Worship the Creature for the Creator, therefore she is an Idolater. That the Roman Church Wor∣ships a bit of Bread baked upon the Fire, and takes it for her God; this does clearly appear, since she believes that the Bread being Con∣secrated by her Priests, is really Transubstantiated, or changed in∣to the true Body of Jesus Christ, and renders unto it the very same
Adoration that we render to the Godhead. And that it is false that this Bread Consecrated by her Priests, be really changed into the true Body of Jesus Christ. I will make it evidently appear, because this Doctrine of theirs is contrary to the Holy Scripture, to Senses, to Reason, and to the Holy Fathers. 1. I say that it is contrary to the Holy Scripture, that the Bread Consecrated by her Priests, be real∣ly changed into the true Body of Jesus Christ, and consequently be here still upon Earth; for Jesus Christ being about to leave the World, and his Disciples afflicting themselves upon this account, he doth not comfort them by saying, I leave you my Body under the Species of Bread and Wine, but he tells them, The Poor ye have with you, but me ye have not always; I came forth from the Father, and am come into the World, again I leave the World and go to the Father. He
tells them that his Father will Pro∣tect them, will send them his holy Spirit, and that he is going to pre∣pare them a place in Heaven. He tells them of his intercession, and of his second coming to Judge both the quick and the dead, and that the Heavens must receive him until the time of the restitution of all things. John 12. 8, 16, 28. Acts 3. 21. and in the 24th Chapter of St. Mat. 26 Verse, it is written, that a time will come, when they shall say, Lo, here is Christ, or there, behold he is in the secret Chambers, and that we must not believe it. By these words, it appears clear∣ly, that it is contrary to the holy Scripture, that the Body of Jesus Christ be yet here upon Earth, and consequently, that the Bread Con∣secrated by the Priests, be really changed into his Body. Object. Jesus Christ, saith the Roman Church, took Bread, and gave Thanks, and said, Take ye and
eat, this is my body which is broken for you. Matth. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 24. Jesus Christ, saith the Roman Church, is true, he has said in gi∣ving the Bread, This is my Body; therefore this Bread ought to be changed into the true Body of Je∣sus Christ; therefore he is here still upon Earth. And to shew, she saith, that it is not the Figure of Jesus Christ, and these words, This is my Body, are not Metaphorical, because he said, which is broken for you. Now it is not the Figure of Jesus Christ, which was broken for us, but his true Body. Answer, It is certain that Jesus Christ is true; and though he said, This is my Body which is broken for you, and that it was the true Bo∣dy of Jesus Christ which was bro∣ken for us, and not the Figure; yet that doth not hinder these words from being Metaphorical; and to let you see it clearly, observe my Reason. This is my Body which
was broken for you, (is) that is to say, signifieth or representeth. As you may see in several other Texts of the holy Scripture; as for Ex∣ample in this. The Rock was Christ, where this word, (was) means, did signifie or represent. Which is bro∣ken for you; the Relative, (which) does not serve to shew the Transub∣stantiation; or that the Bread is changed into the true Body of Je∣sus Christ, because it is related to this Word (Body) and not to the Proposition▪ This is my Body. It has a relation to the Attribute, and not to the Subject. That which hinders not this Proposition from being Metaphorical, no more than this, the Rock was Christ. For if the Evangelist had added, which was Crucified, or which was rai∣sed again; as the Relative (which) would not hinder this Proposition from being Metaphorical; likewise these words, which was broken for you, hinder not the other Propositi∣on from being Improper and Me∣taphorical.
Mark, that his Body was not broken before he Suffered upon Golgotha: How did he say then, which is broken, before it was bro∣ken? There is no sense of it but this. The Bread was broken, and signified that his Body should be broken. Now, as the breaking of the Bread did signifie the brea∣king of his Body, so the Bread must signifie his Body: And as his Body was not broken indeed, when the Bread was broken; so the Bread could not be his Body indeed, for then his Body should have been broken, when the Bread was broken. If because Christ saith, This is my Body, this is my Blood, they will have these words to be expounded litterally; why then do they not expound the other words of Christ litterally also concerning the Cup? For the Text saith, that he took the Cup, and said, This is my Blood. I am sure that those of the Church of Rome will not say that the Cup was
the Blood of Christ, as the words declare it to be, but that there is a Figure in these words, namely, Continens pro Contento; that by the Cup is meant the Wine in it. If then they will admit a Figure in this Proposition, why there may not be a Figure in the other; name∣ly, Signatum pro Signo; that these words, This is my Body, should be understood thus, the Bread is a sign of my Body. I may prove as well, that Christ is a Door, because he saith, I am the Door; and that he is a Vine, be∣cause he saith, I am a Vine; for his sayings are alike. But Figura∣tive Speeches must not be constru∣ed litterally. Now, that they may see, that not we only say, 'tis Bread and Wine after Consecration, Je∣sus Christ himself doth call them so. I will drink no more, saith he, of the fruit of the Vine. Jesus Christ assures, that it was the fruit of the Vine which he drank; therefore
Wine and not Blood was his drink; therefore after Consecration, Wine was still Wine. And St. Paul, 1 Cor. c. 11. does confirm it, when he plain∣ly saith, that the Communicant doth eat Bread. Therefore the Bread remains Bread after the words of Consecration: For, if it were tran∣substantiated into the Body of Christ, then were there no Bread to eat; the Body of Christ should be the thing that should be eaten, and consequently should not be cal∣led Bread. What I say may be seen by these words of Jesus Christ, wherein he assures us, That he was the bread of life which came down from Heauen, which if any man eat, he shall live for ever, John 6. 50. His Disci∣ples hearing these words, murmu∣red until he had expounded them. And how did he expound them? thus, He that comes unto me, has eaten; and he that believes in me has drunk. Afterwards, when He In∣stituted
this Sacrament in like words, they murmured not, which they would as before, if he had not resolved them before, that, to eat his Body, and to drink his Blood, was nothing but to come to him, and believe in him. For, as it is plainly said, This is my Body, so it is plainly said, These words are Spi∣rit, that is, they must be under∣stood spiritually, and not litteral∣ly; so saith St. Austin, Believe, and thou hast eaten. It was Christ's manner to speak by Similitudes, Figures, and Para∣bles, shewing one thing by ano∣ther. For example, Christ calls the Lamb the Passover, in place whereof this Sacrament succeeded. And yet the Passover was this, An Angel passed over the house of the Is∣raelites, and struck the Aegyptians, Exodus 12. 27. This was not a Lamb, and yet because a Lamb was a sign of this Passover, as the Bread and Wine are of Christ's
Body and Blood; because of that Christ called the Lamb the Passo∣ver, as he called the Bread and Wine his Body and Blood. This may be seen again in Circumcision, Baptism, and the Cup. Circumcision is called the Cove∣nant; and yet Circumcision was nothing but the cutting away of a Skin, and the Covenant is this; In Abraham's seed all nations shall be blessed; I will be their God, and they shall be my People; I will defend and save them, and they shall serve and worship me. This is not Cir∣cumcision, and yet as though the Circumcision were the Covenant it self, it is called the Covenant. Likewise, Baptism is called Re∣generation; and yet Baptism is a dipping our Bodies in Water, and Re∣generation is the renewing of our mind to the Image of God, where∣in it was Created. This is not Baptism, and yet, as though Bap∣tism were Regeneration it self, it
is so called, because it signifies Re∣generation. And the Cup is called the New Testament; and yet the Cup is but a piece of Metal, filled with Wine: And the New Testament is, He that believes in the Son of God shall be saved. This is not a Cup, and yet, as though the Cup were the New Testament it self, it is called the New Testament. So the Bread and Wine are called Christ's Body and Blood, because they sig∣nifie Christ's Body and Blood. This Doctrine of ours may be confirmed, because every Sacra∣ment was called by the thing which it signified; and yet never any Sa∣crament was taken for the thing it self. What reason have they then to take this Sacrament for the thing it self more than all the rest? It is the consent of all Divines, that a Sacrament is a Sign; therefore it is no more the thing signified, than
the Bush at the Door is the Wine in the Cellar. But what then, will the Papists say, is there nothing in this Sacra∣ment but Bread and Wine? We do not say that this Sacrament is nothing but a bare Sign, or that we receive no more than what we see: For Christ saith, that it is his Body; and St. Paul assures, that it is the Communion of Christ Body and Blood. Therefore there is more in this Sacramental Bread than in the common Bread we Eat in our Houses; for though the na∣ture of Bread be not changed, yet the use is changed. It doth not only serve the Body, as it did be∣fore, but also it serves for the nou∣rishing of our Souls; for as sure as we receive Bread, so sure we re∣ceive Christ. And you may see this by this Similitude: You have an Obligation in your hand, and I ask you, what have you there? and you answer, I have here an
hundred thousand Crowns. How! say I, I see nothing but Paper, Ink, and Wax! Oh, but by this, say you, I shall recover a hundred thousand Crowns, and that is as good. So when ye receive these Signs in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, ye receive the Vertue of Christ's Body and Blood by Faith; and it is all one as if ye should eat his Body, and drink his Blood in∣deed. Secondly, I say that it is contrary to Senses, that the Bread Con∣secrated by Popish Priests, be really changed into Christ's Body. For when the Church of Rome would oblige me to believe, that what my Senses behold, is not Bread and Wine, but the true Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ, it is clear that it is contrary to them; for my Eyes see them to be Bread and Wine, I smell nothing but Bread and Wine; I taste nothing but
Bread and Wine, and my Hands feel nothing but Bread and Wine. Object. We confess, say they, that it is contrary to Senses, but Senses ought not to be Judges in the Mysteries of Faith. I Answer. That Jesus Christ made use of the Senses, to prove to his Apostles, that he was not a Spirit, but a Body, when he said unto them, Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have, Luke 24. 32. And if the Fathers disputing against the Marcionites and Euthicheens, the former of which believed that Je∣sus Christ had not a true Body, but only the appearance; and the lat∣ter, that the Substance of his Bo∣dy was changed into the Godhead after his Resurrection, they made use of the very words of Jesus Christ. Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have. I may after their Ex∣ample, make use of my Senses in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and say, to let the Church of Rome know, that what they believe to be the true Body and Blood of Je∣sus Christ, is true Bread and Wine, Handle and see. Object. The reason, say they, why Christ's Body is not seen in the Sacrament, is because he is there miraculously. I Answer, That if the Bread be turned into the very Body of Christ by a Miracle, then should it appear visibly so. For the Nature of every Miracle is to be visibly to the outward Eyes and Senses. As when Jesus Christ turned Wa∣ter into Wine, it was visibly Wine, when Moses Rod was tur∣ned into a Serpent, it was visibly a Serpent. And so if the Bread were turned into the very Body of Christ, it should be visibly a Body, if they will hold a Miracle in this Sacrament. But St. Austin answe∣reth, that there is no Miracle in
the Sacraments. Honorem, saith he, tanquam Religiosa possunt habe∣re, stuporem tanquam mira non pos∣sunt, Tom. 1. 8. c. 12. Thirdly, I say that this Doctrine is contrary to Reason. 1. Because it supposes the same Body in seve∣ral places at one time. A Body may be considered objectively at one time in several places, but that it should be really or substantially in many places at one time alto∣gether, as the Church of Rome would have, which teaches and o∣bliges to believe that the Body of Jesus Christ is Substantially in Hea∣ven and Earth, and in every place, where the Priest pleases to Conse∣crate, or pronounce these words, This is my Body, this is my Blood, and in every part of the Consecra∣ted Bread; so that if you divide it into a thousand Parts no bigger than the Point of a Needle, he is there in every part wholly, that is contrary to Reason. For accor∣ding
to Reason, a Body of six Foot in Dimension, cannot occupy no more place than the Circumference of six Foot; and though it may be successively in several places, yet it cannot at the same time. And these words of St. Peter, Acts 3. 22. Whom the Heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, Prove my saying evidently; for though he has a glorified Bo∣dy, yet he retains the Nature and Property of a true Body still, which cannot be but in one place at once. And so saith St. Austin, in Joan. Tract. 3. Corpus Domini in quo re∣surrexit uno tantùm loco esse potest. 2. This Doctrine is contrary to Reason, because it makes Acci∣dents exist without any Subject. It is the Nature of Accidents to be joyned to their Subject. As for Example, It is the nature of the whiteness of a Stone to be joyned to the Stone; so that if you destroy the Nature or Substance of this
Stone, you must of necessity de∣stroy its Whiteness, and other its Accidents. And according to the Opinion of Modern Philosophers, who say that Accidents are no∣thing else than Matter modified, that is to say, as it is disposed to this or that Fashion; it follows that Matter cannot be destroyed with∣out its Accidents being destroyed likewise with it. It is the Opini∣on of Iraeneus, who saith, That we cannot consider Water without its Hu∣midity, nor Fire without Heat, nor a Stone without Hardness; these things being so United, that the one cannot be without the other, but that they must exist together Nevertheless, those of the Church of Rome teach the contrary; for in their Mystery of Transubstantiation, they put Ac∣cidents without any Subject; they put Colour and Quantity without Matter, Smell and Taste without Substance, Hardness and Humidi∣ty without there being any thing
that is hard and moist. I may then very well say and affirm, that this Doctrin is contrary to Reason. Fourthly, I say that it is contrary to the Holy Fathers, for St. Chryso∣stome, Epist. ad Caesar, saith, That the mystical Symbols do not lose their proper Nature, but remain in their first Substance, as the Body of Christ has preserved the true Substance of a Body when it was Glorified. And Writing to the People of Antioch, Hom. 6. he saith, That God gives us things Spiritual under things Visi∣ble and Natural; and that Bread be∣ing Sanctified, is delivered from the Name of Bread, and  exalted to the Name of the Lord's Body, although the nature of the Bread still remains. Origines in Matth. 15. speaks thus, The Bread that is Sanctified with the Word of God, as touching the material Substance thereof, goes into the Belly, and forth again like other Meats.
Justin Martyr, and Iraeneus Bi∣shop of Lyon, say, That our Flesh is nourished with the Cup, which is the Blood of Christ, and is increased with the Bread, which is the Body of Christ. These words do destroy those of the Roman Church, who, because they believe that the Bread and Wine are changed into the Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ, are forced to say, that our Body is not nouri∣shed with the Bread and Wine, but with their Accidents, or by some Substance that God Createth. Tertullian, L. 4. Advers. Marci. c, 40. saith, that Jesus Christ took the Bread, and giving it to his Disci∣ples, made it his Body, saying, this is my Body. That is to say, as Tertul∣lian himself explains it, the Figure of my Body. St. Austin, Cont. Adam. c. 12. is of that Opinion, The Lord, saith he, doubted not to say, this is my Body, when he gave but the Signs of his Bo∣dy. And in Psal. 8. He saith, That
the admirable Patience of Christ ad∣mitted Judas to the Banquet, wherein he delivered to his Disciples the Fi∣gure of his Body and Blood. And in the third Book of the Christian Doctrine, he speaks thus. When the Lord saith, if ye do not eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you shall have no life in you. He seems to command a Wic∣kedness and a great Crime; therefore it is a Figure, whereby it is injoyned unto us to think upon our Lord's Pas∣sion, and remember that his Flesh was Crucified and Wounded for us. He saith also in an Epist to Boniface, That the Sacraments are called by the name of the things they repre∣sent. The Sacrament then of the Lord's Supper, may be taken either con∣junctively with what it represents, and in this Sense it is said to be the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; or separately from the things which it signifies, and in this Sense
it is the Type, the Symbole, or Figure of the Body and Blood of Je∣sus Christ; and that is to be seen in the Affairs of the World; as when we say, that the Letters which are brought, wherein is con∣tained the Pardon which the King gives to a Criminal, are the King's Pardon. Theodoret, Dial. 2. saith, That the mystical Signs after Consecration do not depart from their Nature, but they abide still in their former Sub∣stance, Figure, and Form, and may be both seen and felt as before. And, Dial. 1. he saith, That Jesus Christ has honoured the visible Symbols with the Name of his Body and Blood, not in changing their Nature, but in ad∣ding Grace to it. The Pope Gelasius, in lib. de duab. nat. advers. nest. & Eutich. saith, That the substance or nature of Bread doth not cease, and verily there is the Image and Similitude of the Body and Blood of Christ celebrated in the
action of the Mysteries of the Body of Christ. Baronius, An. 648. N. 15. and 869. N. 3. saith, That Theodorus, Bishop of Rome, for the Condem∣nation of Pyrrhus; and that the Council held at Constantinople for the Condemnation of Photius, took the Consecrated Cup, and poured Ink into it, and having dipp'd their Pens into these two mixt Liquors, they subscribed the depositions of these Men. If they had believ'd that the Consecrated Wine was the Blood of Jesus Christ, as now the Church of Rome believes, is it cre∣dible that they would have mixt Ink with it, and dipp'd their Pens with it? No, it is not to be belie∣ved; for the Church of Rome would not do so now, but would believe they should commit an hor∣rible Sacrilege. Moreover, if the holy Fathers had believed Transubstantiation, that is, the conversion of Bread
and Wine into the true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, they would not have failed to instruct us, that a Body is under a point; that it has Accidents without any Subject, and that it is after the manner of a Spirit. They would have taught us what nourishes our Bo∣dies in receiving of this Sacrament, and from whence come the worms which are ingendred in the Bread. They would have told us what kind of action it is, which makes Christ Exist under the Species of Bread and Wine; whether it was a Reproduction, or Adduction, or U∣bification. I say, they would have taught us all these things, since the Church of Rome gives now a par∣ticular instruction in it. Now, since they were as Learned as the present Doctors of the Church of Rome are at this time; and since they said nothing of it, it is a certain sign that this Doctrin was contrary to their Opinion.
And for the confirmation of what I say is, that when the Fa∣thers disputed against Idolaters, they confuted them with these words, Why do you adore what your Hands have made, and which has neither Speech nor Motion, but is subject to Fire, and to Corruption, and to be stolen away by Thieves? This was the Argument they made use of to prove that they were Ido∣laters. If at that time they had believed Transubstantiation, the Ido∣laters would not have failed to re∣tort their Argument; and since we find they have not retorted it, it is a certain sign that this Do∣ctrin was contrary to the holy Fa∣thers. The Origine of Transubstantia∣tion was a Dream of Paschasius, a Monk of Corbis; and Innocent the Third, in the Year of our Lord 1215. set it up amongst the Arti∣cles of Faith, in the Council of Latran. So many years were past
before Transubstantiation was na∣med. Then the Pope set it on foot, and so it came out from Rome; and for want of the holy Scripture, of Reason, and holy Fathers to main∣tain it, they have since defended, and do still defend it at this day with Sword and Fire. It is then manifest, that the Bread Consecrated by the Popish Priests is not really changed into the Body of Jesus Christ; and therefore that the Church of Rome is Idolater; since in Worshiping a bit of Bread baked upon the Fire, in Praying to it, in carrying it in Procession, in shewing it to the People in their Mass, in offering Frankincense unto it, in bowing before it at the Ringing of a small Bell or Cymbal, as the People did before the Image of Nebuchadnez∣zar, and taking it for their God; She Worships the Creature for the Creator.
Object. We believe that what we do Worship is God, and that therefore hinders us from being I∣dolaters. I Answer, If this Reason were good and sufficient, the Heathens, which did Worship Jupiter, had not been Idolaters; because they believed him to be the true God. And yet the Church of Rome main∣tains, that all those who did Wor∣ship Jupiter, were Idolaters. It is then true, that to Worship as a God, that which is not God, tho' it be taken for a God, is a gross and flat Idolatry; and therefore that the Church of Rome is Idolater, be∣cause she Worships for her God a bit of Bread, which is not God, al∣though she believe, and take it for her God. 2dly, I say that she is Idolater, because she makes graven Images of the Godhead, and bows before them; and because she kneels down before those of Saints, prays to
them, kisses and serves them, offers Frankincense unto them, Crowns them with Flowers, Cloaths them with Fine Garments, and Or∣ders, as it may be seen in the II. Council of Nice; that they shall not only be placed in Churches, Chappels, and Oratories, where the Divine Majesty is Worshiped, but shall be also Honoured and Worshiped. Which is directly contrary to these words of Samuel, Prepare your hearts to the Lord, and serve him only; and to those of Christ in St. Matthew, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve; as also to those of God, in the XX Chapter of Exodus, Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven Image, nor any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in Earth beneath, or that is in the Wa∣ters under the Earth. Thou shalt not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them.
Objection, This forbidding, say they, is against Idols, and not a∣gainst Images; and when we bow to them and serve them, we do not render them a Worship of , but of  only. First, I Answer, That these words, Nor any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, &c. signi∣fie the one and the other, I mean both Idols and Images. Secondly, I say, that besides this distinction of a Worship of  and is new, and not found in the holy Scripture, the Roman Church, ac∣cording to her own Confession, and the Doctrin of her Angelick Doctor Thomas Aquinas, Worships the Cross with a Worship of . This Truth is especially seen upon Good Friday, at which time ye may see, that not only the Monks, Priests, Bishops, Cardi∣nals, and the Pope himself bow and kneel down before it, and kiss it, all Singing, Ecce lignum Crucis venite
adoremus; but that all the com∣mon People imitate them also, and even that Princes and Kings lay down before it their Crowns and Scepters. They confess also that they do Worship the Images of God the Father with a Worship of La∣tria, and likewise those of the Son and the Holy Ghost. Objection, This Worship, say they, that they do render to the Cross and Images of the Godhead and Saints, is Relative; it is not related to the Cross and Images, but to God and Saints; and that is the reason, say they, why they are not Idolaters. I Answer, That these words of Samuel, Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only; and that those of Jesus Christ in St. Matthew, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve, do quite destroy all these distinctions of the Church of Rome concerning the Relative Worship of Latria and
Dulia. For, that it is a flat Idola∣try to Worship God in any Image, I evidently shew it by the Children of Israel, when they made the golden Calf to be a Representation of God, Exod. 32. For the Text shews that it was a flat Idolatry, for which many of them were Plagu'd and Punish'd. And yet their Worship was Relative; for their meaning was to Worship the true God in the Calf; for they were not so simple as to think or believe that that dead Idol or I∣mage was God. The Idolatry then of the Church of Rome, by Wor∣shiping the Cross, and the Images of the Godhead, and by bowing down before the Images of Saints, Martyrs, Apostles, and kissing them, and imploring their assistance, and offering Frankincense unto them, is as gross and wicked as theirs was. The Origine of the Worshiping mages, proceeds from Irenea, Em∣press
of Constantinople, about the year 790. She called a Council at Nice, wherein by Intreagues and Threatnings, she did so prevail, that it was concluded we ought to Worship Images, notwithstanding the Oppositions that were then made in all Parts. For the Empe∣ror Carolus Magnus, did at the same time call a Council at Francfort, wherein that of Nice was Con∣demn'd, and the Decree of Wor∣shiping Images made void. But because they remained still in Churches, this Superstition of Worshiping them, to which the Ignorant People was always in∣clin'd, got at last the uppermost. It is then true, as I have clearly made it appear, that the Church of Rome is Idolater. Thirdly, I shew that she is Here∣tick; for all those that are obsti∣nate in their Errors, are Hereticks. The Church of Rome is obstinate in her Errors; therefore she is He∣retick.
The Major Proposition is true, and all Divines are of that Opinion. As for the Minor, which is in que∣stion, I prove it thus. All those, that refuse to obey the Holy Scripture in several Points of Faith and Practice, are obstinate in their Errors. The Roman Church refuses to o∣bey the Holy Scripture in several Articles of Faith and Practice. Therefore she is obstinate in her Errors. The Major Proposition is true al∣so, and it is the consent of all Di∣vines. As for the Minor, behold as I prove it. All those, that do add to the Ho∣ly Scripture, and diminish from it several Articles, both of Faith and Practice, refuse to obey the Holy Scripture; for Deut. 4. 2. It is commanded us neither to add to the Word of God, nor to diminish from it. And St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 6. Forbids to think above that which is Written.
But the Church of Rome adds to the Word of God, and diminishes from it several Articles both of Faith and Practice. Therefore she refuses to obey the Word of God; therefore she is ob∣stinate in her Errors; therefore she is Heretick. That the Church of Rome does add to the Word of God, and di∣minish from it several Articles, both of Faith and Practice, is that I shall endeavour to shew evidently. 1. I say that she adds to the Word of God several Articles of Faith, which she obliges to believe under the Pain of Damnation. For though it be manifested in several places of the Holy Scripture, that Jesus Christ is our Saviour, Redee∣mer and Mediator; that there is no Salvation in any other, and that there is no other name under Heaven, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 12. That we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the Righte∣ous, and that he is the Propitiation
for our Sins, 1 John 2. 1. And that there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, Tim. 2. 5. Neverthe∣less those of the Church of Rome call the blessed Virgin the She-Re∣deemer of the World, as it may be seen in Bellarmin. c. 4. of Indulgen∣ces. And in the Litanies and Hymns Composed in her Honour, they call her the Queen of Heaven, Mother of God, and their Hope, and give her such Titles as belong to God only. They implore the help of Saints, they put their Trust and Confidence in them, and take them for their Advocates and Mediators; as we may see in several Prayers, wherein they speak thus. O great Saint, in whom I put my Trust and Confidence, Pray for me miserable Sinner, &c. And though Jesus Christ, Teaching his Disciples how they ought to Pray, bid them to call upon his Father, and say, Our Father which art in Heaven. And although the Almighty spake thus
by his Prophet, Isaiah 45. 21. There is no God else beside me, a Just God and a Saviour, there is none beside me. Yet those of the Church of Rome will have us to implore the help of Saints, to trust in them, and take them for our Advocates and Mediators; as it is declared in the Council of Trent. Sess. 25. It is then evident, that this Doctrine being not found in the Holy Scrip∣ture, they add to the Word of God, and think above that which is Written. Object. We Pray, say they, and beg the Favour of the Saints, as we pray a Friend at Court to Re∣quest a Kindness from His Majesty; I Answer, they ought not to do so, for it is Written, We have an Ad∣vocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. And we do not read that any other is our Advocate. If the King's Son should say, when ye will ask my Father any Favour,
come ye unto me, and not unto a∣nother; if after this Declaration, some body should go unto another, he should be very Imprudent. Je∣sus Christ, Matth. 11. 28. Speaks thus, Come unto me all ye that la∣bour, and are heavy laden; and I will give you rest. We must not have then another Advocate beside him. By him, saith St. Paul, we have an access to the Father, and we do not read that we have it also by the blessed Virgin, or by St. Peter, St. Anthony, or any other Saint. St. Chrysostome, Hom. 2. de Ca∣nanea, speaking of this Woman, who, though she were a Sinner, was bold to come unto Christ, saith thus, Behold the Wisdom of this Woman, she doth not Pray to James, she doth not beseech John, she goes not to Peter, she looks not to the com∣pany of the Apostles, neither request any of them; but for all this she takes Repentance for her Companion, and goes to the very Fountain it self.
St. Ambrose, in Rom. c. 1. speaks thus, They are wont to use a pitiful Excuse, saying, that by the Saints they may have access unto God, as by the Earls there is Access to Kings; by Officers and Earls, Access is made to the King, because the King himself is a Man; but to come to God, from whom nothing is hid, there is no need of a Spokesman, but a devout Mind; for wheresoever such a one speaks to him, he will answer him. The Souls of Men, say Tertullian and St. Austin, do not take care of the Affairs of the Living: The Saints are not our Mediators, we do praise the Martyrs, because they fought for the Truth, but we do not Worship them. For what end then are these Solemnities? That by them we may thank God for their Victories, and en∣courage others to imitate them, and be partakers of their Palms and Crowns. But, that we may obtain them, shall we implore the Assistance
of the Saints? No, but we shall im∣plore the help of that true God, who made them Martyrs. de cura pro mortuis, c. 13. & cont. Parm. l. 2. c. 8. de Civit. l. 8. c. 27. Hereunto I may add that which is written in Ecclesiastes 9. 5. That the dead knew not any thing, neither have any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun. Wherefore I may say that the Church of Rome intreats in vain the help of the Saints; for God a∣lone does know our Thoughts. And the most Learned Doctors of that Communion cannot say how they may hear the Prayers of Men; for they confess it is not a Property of their Happiness; and some say they see only the things which be∣long to them; some say that God discovers to them the Prayers of Men; some say they see in the Face of God, as in a Looking-glass, all things here below. Some assure that the Faithful which are upon
Earth, give notice of their Desires and Minds to to the Saints, as the Angels do Communicate their Thoughts one with another. To make it short, the Roman Church is so uncertain concerning the Saints, that oftentimes she Wor∣ships and Prays to them, that are now burning in an everlasting Fire. The Origine of the Intercession of the Saints, proceeds from those publick Penitents; which for their Crimes, were Condemned to be separated from the Church for some years. For Martyrdom being in a great Honour amongst Christi∣ans, and the Church having a par∣ticular esteem for those that were Prisoners for the Gospel, the pub∣lick Penitents did Write to these Martyrs, that they would be so kind as to Intercede for them to∣wards the Church, that they might be admitted in her Com∣munion, before the time of their
Penance were expired. Such was the Intercession of Saints at that time, they knew then no other in the second Age, as it may be seen in St. Cyprian. Secondly, I say that the Church of Rome adds to the Word of God, when she teaches, and will have us to believe that there is a Purga∣tory, wherein the Souls of the Faithful departing this Life are Afflicted and Tormented; some for a short time, some for a hun∣dred years, some for a thousand and upwards, and others to the end of the World. For this Doctrine is not found in the Holy Scripture, but it is quite contrary to it; as it appears by these Words of the 14th Chapter of the Revelations, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do fol∣low them. As also by those of the Book of Wisdom, Canonized by the
general Council of Trent, wherein it is written, that the Souls of the Righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment touch them. This appears also by St. Paul, when he saith in his Epistle to the Ro∣mans, that there is now no Condem∣nation to them that are in Christ Je∣sus. Nevertheless Pope Pius the Fourth finding Purgatory very ad∣vantageous to his Kitchin, speaks thus, I certainly believe that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls de∣tained therein are relieved by the Prayers of the Faithful. And the Council of Trent, Sess. 25. gives Order to all Bishops, to take care that the sound Doctrine of Purgatory, which was delivered to us by the holy Fathers and sacred Councils be Believed, and Taught, and Preached every where. And though Mr. Amelot, who was a Papist, and translated into French the History of the Council of Trent, does confess that Purgatory can∣not
be prov'd; and though the Church of Rome cannot declare, whether this Purgatory be in the Air, or in the Earth, or in the place wherein Sins are committed; yet she saith, that the Pope with an Indulgence laid unto a Bead, or Cross, or Medal; or with a Mass Celebrated upon certain days of the Week, gives Power to deliver from this Purgatory whom he pleases, and when he thinks it fit. I say then in the first place, since this Doctrine is not found in the holy Scripture, the Roman Church addeth to the Word of God, and thinks above that which is written. 2ly, I shew she does destroy her self, when she will have us to believe under the Pain of Damnation, that there is a Purgatory. For, if there be a Purgatory, either it is to purge Sins, or to purge the Pain due un∣to them. It is not for the former, because the Roman Church believes, that Jesus Christ did by himself
purge all our sins, according to these words of St. John, His Blood cleanses us from all sins; and because they are to be purged before we be separa∣ted from this World, it is then for the purgation of the Pain; but the Pain is punished and not purged; for a Gallows is not for the purga∣tion of a Murder, but for the pu∣nishment of it. Therefore, since Purgatory, according to the Pa∣pists, is only for the Pain due to sins, they destroy themselves when they call it Purgatory. It has no warrant in the holy Scripture, for Jesus Christ shews but two places, Heaven and Hell, when he saith, that the Rich Man's Soul, which was unmerciful to Lazarus, went after his Death into Hell, and there was tormented; and that Laza∣rus's Soul, he being Dead, was carried into Abraham's Bosome, a place of Joy and Comfort. To the Thief which was Executed with Christ at his Passion, and
believed in him, Jesus Christ answered, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise: Which shews that the Souls of the Faithful never come into Purgatory-fire, to be burnt and tormented; for all their Sins are forgiven, and consequent∣ly the Punish ment incident to the same is forgiven also; and their Souls pass from Death to Life, that is, they go to Heaven. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, from henceforth they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. If from the time of their Death they have Blessedness, and Rest, then they are not in any Purgatory-fire to be burnt and tormented. The first place, saith St. Austin, Hyp. L. 5. the Faith of the Catholicks, doth by divine Authority believe, is the Kingdom of Heaven; the second is Hell; a third place we are utterly ignorant of, neither can we find such a one in the holy Scriptures. And in his En∣chiridion ad Laur. c. 67. He saith,
That those that believe a Purgatory∣fire, are much deceived, and that through a humane Conceit. Know ye, saith he, de van. secul. 1. c. That when the Soul is separated from its Body, she is immediately placed in Paradise for her good Works, or cast into Hell because of her Sins. Object. The Primitive Church, say they, did pray for the Dead, as Tertullian de Corona Mi∣litis doth confess: Therefore it is a good proof that she believed a Purgatory. I Answer, That when the Pri∣mitive Church did pray for the Dead, she did not believe they were in any place of Torments, nor that there was a Purgatory: She only believed, that the Souls of the Faithful should only enjoy the sight of God after the day of Resurrecti∣on. She prayed then for the filling up of their Glory; she prayed to be joyned with them, and be parta∣kers of the Resurrection of the
Faithful. She prayed that Jesus Christ would hasten their Resurre∣ction; and she prayed also for the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the A∣postles and Martyrs, that God would be pleased to increase their Glory; but she did not implore their assistance, nor believe a Pur∣gatory, as it is related by Justin Martyr, 9. 60. and 76. Iren. L. 5. Tertul. Cont. Marc. L. 4. c▪ 13. The Origine of Purgatory is Virgil in the sixth Book of his E∣neids, wherein he saith, that the Souls, before they enjoy Blessed∣ness, are differently purged in dif∣ferent places, as you may see in these following Verses. Ergo exercentur poenis, veterum∣que malorum Supplicia expendunt; aliae pan∣duntur inanes Suspensae ad ventos; aliis sub gur∣gite vasto Infectum eluitur Scelus, aut exu∣ritur igni, &c.
Thirdly, I shew that the Church of Rome adds to the Word of God, when she teaches, that the gene∣ral Councils and Popes are Infalli∣ble; that the latter have Authori∣ty or Pre-eminence over all other Bishops; that they have power to Depose Kings and Princes from their Thrones, and are above them; for this Doctrine is not found in the holy Scriptures. 1. I say that their general Coun∣cils and Popes are not Infallible; for St. Austin, Tom. 6. l. 2. cont. Donat. plainly teaches that God a∣lone and the holy Scriptures are In∣fallible or cannot Err. The gene∣ral Councils, saith he, which are ga∣thered of all the Christian World, are often corrected, the former by the lat∣ter, when by any tryal of things, that is opened which was shut, and that is known which was hidden. If a general Council may be corrected, as saith St. Austin, therefore it may err: Wherefore he speaks thus to Maxi∣mian
Bishop of the Arians; Neither ought I to alledge the Council of Nice, nor thou the Council of Arimini to take advantage thereby; for neither am I bound nor held by the Authority of this, nor thou of that. Set Mat∣ter with Matter, Cause with Cause, or Reason with Reason; try the Mat∣ter by the Authority of the Scriptures, l. 3. c. 4. The Council of Constantinople condemned the setting up Images in the Churches; and the Coun∣cil of Nice, Act. 4. ordered after∣wards they should be set up. One of these Councils, being contrary to the other, must needs be Erro∣neous. And that is granted by it self, when in a set Form of Prayer, which is appointed to be said after the conclusion of every Council, they pray, that God would spare their Ignorance and pardon their Errors. de ord. celeb. conc. The Pope himself may Err; for Pope Innocentius doth teach, lib. ad
Bonif. cont. Epist. Pelag. c. 4. That young Children cannot be saved, ex∣cept they receive the Baptism of Christ, and also the Communion of his Body and Blood. And Pope Ge∣lasius, Comperimus Consecra. de distinct. 2. did decree, That all they should be Excommunicated, which would receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper but in one kind. But this Doctrine is now taxed for an Error by all Papists; and the Coun∣cil of Trent, Sess. 21. Can 1. made a Decree contrary to the Doctrine of the Pope Gelasius. If any body, saith this Council, assures that all and every Faithful are obliged by God's Commandment to receive one and the other species in the holy Sa∣crament of the Lord's Supper, let him be Anathema. Therefore it is evident that the Popes may Err: And this may be seen in their own Decrees, wherein it is written, That they are to be judged of none, ex∣cept they be found erring from the
Faith, part. 1. cap. dist. 40. cap. si Papa. Whereby it appears that they thought their Popes might Err in matter of Faith, or else that ex∣ception was put in vain. For all Men are subject to Error; all Men are worse in their Words, and Sin∣ners in their Works. There is none True and Infallible but God, and his holy Scriptures, because they are inspired of him. He is the God of Truth, he cannot Lie, Tit. 1▪ 2. 2. I say that the Popes have no Authority or Pre-eminence over the other Bishops, though those of the Church of Rome stifly holding the contrary, give them the Title of Universal Bishops, and call them Gods on Earth, Kings of Kings, and Lords of Lords, as saith Albanus, de potest. pap. part. 1. n. 22. And Antonius, part. 3. n. 22. And upon the Triumphant Arch, Erected in the honour of Sixte the Fourth it was written,
Oratio vocis Mundi moderaris h henas Et meritò in Terris diceris esse Deus. But this Doctrine being not found in the holy Scriptures, it is conse∣quently manifest they do add to the Word of God. Objection, The Popes, say they, have Authority or Pre-eminence over all other Bishops, because they are Successors to St. Peter; and St. Peter had such a Pre-eminence and Authority over the rest of the Apo∣stles; because Jesus Christ told him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. I grant that Christ said to Peter, after he had confessed him to be that Christ, and the Son of the Li∣ving God, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. But these words give no Superiority to St. Peter above the other Apostles; only they shew, that the Church is builded, not upon the Person of
Peter, but upon the Rock, name∣ly upon Christ, whom St. Peter confesses to be the Son of the Living God. For, as saith St. Paul, 1. Cor. 3. 11. That Rock was Christ, and o∣ther foundation can no man lay but that which is laid already, namely, Jesus Christ. And in the second Chapter to the Ephesians, he saith, That the Church is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apo∣stles, Jesus Christ himself being the head stone in the corner. Where then can they find that St. Peter was made Prince of the Apostles, and had Pre-eminence or Autho∣rity over them? They say it is, when Jesus Christ gave unto Peter the Keys of Binding and Loosing. I answer, that Christ therein gave no more Authority to St. Pe∣ter than to the rest of the Apostles; for he doth not say, I give unto Thee, but I will give unto Thee; which Promise was afterwards per∣form'd; and when it was per∣form'd,
the Keys, or the Power of Binding and Loosing was given not only to St. Peter, but also unto all the rest together, Go ye, saith Jesus Christ, Matth. 28. 19. unto all na∣tions, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to ob∣serve all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And in the twen∣tieth Chapter of St. John, he speaks thus, Receive ye the holy Ghost, what∣soever sins ye remit, they are remit∣ted unto them; and whatsoever sins ye retain, they are retained. By these words ye may clearly see, that Jesus Christ speaks unto all the A∣postles, and not to Peter only. And so it is evident that St. Peter re∣ceives no more Power than the rest of the Apostles. I grant that St. Peter may be called the first of the Apostles in the way of reckoning; or as it is commonly seen amongst Men, who though they be equal, do notwith∣standing
determine one amongst themselves, to whom, without being greater than the others, leave is given to speak first. St. Matthew 10. 2. did mean nothing else, when he said, Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these, the first Simon, who is called Peter. He doth not distinguish him from the others but by the order of coun∣ting. If he be then the first of the Apostles, it is only by the way of reckoning: For the Scripture tells us, Ephes. 2. 20. That the Church is no less builded upon the others than upon him; when she saith that the Faithful are builded upon the Foundation of the Pro∣phets and Apostles, and that there is no other Foundation, nor other Head-stone to prop the Church but Jesus Christ, on whom the whole Edification is laid. He is the chief and principal Foundation, all the others are only subalterne and dependent. It is then impos∣sible
that St. Peter be the Founda∣tion of the Church more than are the other Apostles, and consequent∣ly have more Authority. For, as I have already made it appear, Je∣sus Christ spake to all his Disciples gathered together, when he said, Matth. 18. 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Hea∣ven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. He sends them all as his Father had sent him: He equally makes them his Ambassadors, and gives no more Power or Authority to one than to the other. Where was Peter's Supremacy or Authority, when St. Paul, Gal. 2. 11. withstood him to the Face, be∣cause he was to be blamed? And where was Peter's Pre-eminence, when in the Council held at Hie∣rusalem, where the Apostles were present, St. James, and not St. Pe∣ter did Rule in the Action? And when there was a dispute among
the Apostles, which of them should be accounted the greatest, Luke 22. 25. Jesus Christ said unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon them are cal∣led Benefactors; but ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve. If the greatest ought to be as the younger, and he that is chief as he that doth serve, what Authority has he over the rest? Since then the Pope's Authority over the o∣ther Bishops is grounded by the Church of Rome upon St. Peter's Authority over the other Apostles; and since St. Peter has no such Au∣thority over them, it follows that the Popes have none over the other Bishops. This is confirmed by the Popes themselves: For John Bishop of Constantinople aiming to be the first and have the Title of Univer∣sal
Bishop, Gregorius Bishop of Rome withstood him; and in his 54th. Epistle to the Empress speaks thus of him. By this Pride and Vanity, what is foretold but that the time of Antichrist is at hand, and art like Lucifer, who making no account of that Happiness he had in common with the whole Army of Angels, a∣spired to a singularity over all the o∣thers, saying, as it is written in Isaiah, I will raise my Throne above the stars of Heaven. And in 28 Epistle he affirms, That whosoever takes the Title of Universal Bishop to himself, he cannot be less than Antichrist. And St. Hierome ad Evag. saith, That the Bishop of Eugubium, or any other the least See, is equal to the Bi∣shop of Rome. For they are all joyned in the same Commission; they must serve in the Church, and be diligent to discharge that great Charge, which their Master Jesus Christ has eaqually laid upon them.
3. I say that the Popes have no Power to Depose Kings and Prin∣ces from their Thrones, and are not above them. For the pulling down of Princes God has reserved to himself alone that Power; for it is he that putteth down the Mighty from their Seats, and Exalteth them of low Degree. By me, saith he, the Kings Reign, and Princes bear Do∣minion. He removes Kings, and setteth up Kings, wherefore, since it is God that has this Authority proper to himself, which way can the Popes claim it, without Inju∣ry to the Power of God, and to that of Kings, whereunto they ought to be submitted. They say, it is by reason of their Keys, as it appears in the Bull of Excommunication, which the Pope Sixte the fifth thundered in the year 1585, against Henry King of Navarre, and the Prince of Con∣de, wherein he saith. That the Au∣thority given to St. Peter and his Suc∣cessors,
by the infinite Power of God, is above all Powers upon Earth, that it belongs to that Authority to cause the Laws to be observ'd, and punish the Offenders, by pulling them down from their Seats, how Powerful soever they be. This is the Origine and the Ground of the Popes Authority o∣ver all Men, and of Deposing Kings and Princes from their Thrones. But they are deceived; for they ought to remember, that the Keys given, were the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and conse∣quently by this Authority of the Keys, he cannot meddle with Ter∣restrial Kingdoms, to shut out those that are in them. And they ought also to remember, that he has no more Authority by the Power of his Keys, or of Binding and Loo∣sing, than any other Bishop; for the Keys were given to all the rest of the Apostles, as well as to St. Peter. For Christ speaks thus Re∣ceive
ye the Holy Ghost, whosoever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever Sins ye retain, they are retained. It is then mani∣fest, that it is contrary to the Will of Jesus Christ, that any Minister of the Gospel should claim Autho∣rity above another; for they are all indifferently joyned in one Com∣mission, and consequently have all equal Authority. And therefore the Pope has no more Authority by the Vertue of his Keys than any other Bishop, that is to say, none at all to Depose Kings and Princes from their Thrones. His Duty is rather to obey them, and teach the same Obedience to others, as the Apostles of Christ did. For in the first Epistle of St. Peter, 2. 13. It is Written thus, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Men for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme. And St. Paul to the Romans, 3. 1. saith; Let every Soul be Subject to the higher Powers. And
Jesus Christ himself said, that his Kingdom was not of this World. He refused to be made a King, he pay∣ed Tribute to Caesar, and com∣manded others to do the same. If then Christ were Subject to Caesar, is it not a great shame to the Pope to exalt himself above Caesar, I mean above Kings. Some Papists do Answer, that he got this Sovereign Authority by Donation from the Emperor Con∣stantine; but let it be granted, that some Christian Emperor was so foolish, as to give his Empire, (which is neither likely nor credi∣ble) yet I say it was not Lawful for him to take it, if he will be a true Minister of the Gospel, or lawful Successor of the Apostles. For Christ has expresly forbidden his Apostles, and in them all the Mi∣nisters of the Gospel, all such Do∣minions, when he told them, Matth. 20. 26. Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Do∣minion
over them, but it shall not be so among you. Which words being prohibitory shew that they must not Reign like Kings of Nations, but must serve in the Church, and be diligent in the great Charge that Jesus Christ has laid upon them. It is then evident by what I have said here before, that the Pope has no Authority over Kings and Prin∣ces, and is not above them. This may be seen by these Words of Ter∣tullian, in Apolog. We Honour, saith he, the Emperor as the next Man to God, and Inferior to god only. And in another place, he saith, that the King i the second to God, the first next after God, and before and over all Men. Optatus Cont. Parmen. l. 13. saith, that there is none above the Emperor but God only, which made the Emperor. And St. Chrysostome, ad Pop. Anthio. hom. 2. saith, He has no equal on Earth. And Gregory
Bishop of Rome, himself affirms, that Power is given to Princes from Heaven, not only over Souldiers, but Priests also. Which is confirmed by St. Peter, when he saith in his first Epistle 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance, for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, as Supream. It is then evident, that the Popes are not Infallible, that they have no Authority to Depose Kings and Princes from their Thrones, and that they are not above them. And therefore that the Church of Rome does add to the Word of God, when she holds and teaches such a Doctrine. Secondly, I say, and shall endea∣vour to make it appear, that the Roman Church diminishes from the Word of God, several Points of Faith and Practice. 1. Because she Prays, Sings, and gives Thanks to God in the Church in an unknown Tongue. 2. Because she forbids
the Reading of the Holy Scriptures to the common People. 3. Because in the Lord's Supper, she takes a∣way the Cup from them and from the Clerks that are not Priests. 4. Because she forbids every one to eat Flesh in certain Time and Days, and all Priests, Monks and Nuns to Marry. 1. I say that the Roman Church diminishes from the Word of God, when she Prays, Sings, and gives thanks to God in the Church in a Tongue unknown to the common People. For St. Paul will not on∣ly have us to speak in the Church with a known Tongue, but also he shews the Confusion of them that speak in an unknown Tongues. Ex∣cept Pipe or Harp, saith he, 1 Cor. 14. give distinction in the sound, how shall it be known what is Piped or Harped? If the Trumpet gives an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? So likewise you, except ye utter by the Tongue, Words easie to
be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? For ye shall speak into the Air. Therefore if I know not the meaning of the Voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a Barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a Barbarian unto me. Object. St. Paul saith, the Church of Rome thereby speaketh concer∣ning Sermons, and consequently doth not speak against her, because she Preaches in a known Tongue. I answer, that St. Paul speaks con∣cerning Prayers, Psalms and Thanksgivings. If I Pray, saith he, in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit Prayeth, but my Understanding is Unfruitful. What is it then? I will Pray with the Spirit, and I will Pray with the Understanding also; I will Sing with the Spirit, and I will Sing with the Understanding also; else when thou shalt bless with the Spirit, shall e, that occupyeth the Room of the Unlearned, say Amen at thy gi∣ving
of Thanks, seeing he under∣stands not what thou sayest. And notwithstanding this Or∣dinance of St. Paul, and the Con∣fusion of them which go against it; as it is declared by the Compari∣sons of the Pipe, Harp, and Trum∣pet, the Roman Church Prays, Sings, and gives Thanks in the Church in a Tongue unknown to the common People. And though in the Primitive Church, all Pray∣ers were made in the vulgar Tongue. Linguâ auditoribus non ignotâ omnia peragebantur, & con∣suetudo ita ferebat, ut tota Ecclesia si∣mul pssalleret. And though St. Au∣stin says, Deus vult ut quod Cani∣mus intelligamus & humana ratione non quasi Avium voce canamus. God will have us to understand what we Sing, and not be like Parrots, which do not understand what they say. Yet the Church of Rome doth not obey this Command∣ment,
but continue still in that Er∣ror. The Origine of this Error pro∣ceeds from the Popes of Rome, who being exalted in an eminent degree of Grandeur, could not be contented until they had set up Laws, though very irregular and unreasonable; and as it is usual amongst Conque∣rors, had introduced and impos'd their own Language upon those they had subdued and made their Slaves. So they have to the utter∣most of their Power established their Liturgies, Ceremonies and Language in all Churches, that they might serve afterwards as a Monument of their Jurisdiction and Authority upon others. 2. I say that the Roman Church doth diminish from the Word of God, when she forbids the Read∣ing of the Holy Scriptures to the common People. For this forbid∣ing of hers is wholly contrary to the Commandment of Jesus Christ,
who in the 5th chapter of St. John 39 Verse, speaks thus, Search the scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they which testifie of me. And quite con∣trary to this Ordinance of St. Paul, who writing both to the Bishops and all his Brethren, either Men or Women, either young or old, speaks thus in his first Epistle to the Thessalonians, 5. 27. I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read unto all holy Brethren. And wri∣ting to the Colossians, 4. 16. he saith, When this Epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the Epistle from Lao∣dicea. However, as if the Church of Rome were wiser than Jesus Christ, St. John, St. Paul, and all other A∣postles and holy Fathers, who did so much, and so often recommend it, she forbids it to the common People, stifly affirming that it is
dangerous, that it causes Schisms, several Sects and Heresies. For in the Council of Trent it is written, that if the Reading of the Holy Scrip∣ture be permitted in a known Tongue amongst all People, it will be more hurtful than profitable. The abuse some make of the Ho∣ly Scripture, ought not generally to condemn the use of it; other∣wise the best things would be ta∣ken away from us, because they are sometimes misused. The use of Wine would be forbidden; be∣cause many are Drunk with it, and is the cause of several Disorders. It is enough to forbid what is essen∣tially bad, without forbidding that which is essentially good. Jesus Christ doth not only permit the Reading of the Holy Scripture to some particular Jews, but he en∣joyns it unto all. earch, saith he, the Scriptu. And that he may the better  them, he makes them remember, That in them they
think they have eternal Life. He seems in another place to attri∣bute all their Errors to the Igno∣rance of that Sacred Book, when he said to the Saducees, Matth. 22. 29. Ye do err, not knowing the Scrip∣tures. Had not the Eunuch read the Prophet Isaiah, he should never have understood him. And it was by this Reading he began to be a Christian; as it may be seen in the Acts, 8. 30. The People of Berea, as it appears in the 17th Chapter of the Acts, were highly commended that they searched the Scriptures, to see whe∣ther those things were true or no, which Paul did Teach. For who∣soever he be, though he were an Angel from Heaven, if he Teach Matters contrary to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, we are to hold him accursed; as saith St. Paul, Gal. 1. 8. All Scripture, saith the same Apostle, 2 Tim. 3. 16. is gi∣ven by inspiration of God, and is pro∣fitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righ∣teousness, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works. Nevertheless the Church of Rome doth forbid to the common People so good a Book, so useful to Piety, and so necessary to Salva∣tion. Is it not then a great Cru∣elty to forbid Children to see and read the Testament of their Fa∣thers! Is it not an excess of rigour to deprive them of that which nourishes their Souls for an Eternal Life? And is it not an extreme Ty∣ranny to hinder them from seeing that, which they are to be judged upon? 3. I say that the Church of Rome diminishes from the Word of God, when in the Lord's Supper she takes away the Cup from the com∣mon People, and from the Clerks that are not Priests. For we read in St. Matthew 26. 27. that in the
Institution of this Sacrament, Jesus Christ took the Cup, and gave it all his Disciples, saying, drink ye all of it. Objection, When Jesus Christ said to his Disciples, Drink ye all of it, He spake to the Priests only, saith the Roman Church, and there∣fore the Priests only ought to drink of the Cup. I Answer, that St. Paul writing to the Corinthians, amongst whom were more Laics than Priests, doth evidently shew the contrary; for, speaking to every one, he saith, 1. Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup. St. Ig∣natius, Bishop of Antioch, and Dis∣ciple of the Apostles, in the 69th. Year of our Lord Jesus Christ, Epist. 9. ad Philadelph. saith, That one and the same Bread was broken to all, and one and the same Cup distributed to all. Justin Marty tells us, That the consecrated Bread and Wine were▪
in his time, distributed to every Com∣municant. And St. Chrysostome, Hom. 18. upon the second Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians speaks thus, There is a time, where there is no difference between Priests and thse that preside over, as when we receive the holy Mysteries; for we are all equally admitted to them. It is not now as it was under the Old Te∣stament, where the Priest did eat par∣ticular things, and the People others; where it was not lawful to the People to eat that which the High Priest was then eating. It is not so now, for one and the same Body, and one and the same Cup is given to all. The Pope Gelasius, in the Year 490. 2. Distinct. 2. Can. Comperi∣mus, did Decree, that all they should be Excommunicated, which would receive the Lord's Supper but in one kind; and his Prede∣cessor Leo did call those Sacrilegi∣ous, that did refuse to take the Cup.
And tho' in the general Council of Constance, Sess. 13. the Roman Church do confess this holy Sacra∣ment was receiv'd in the Primitive Church with the Bread and the Cup; yet in the general Council of Trent she speaks thus▪ If any man say that the Catholick Church had not just Reasons to give the Communion to the Laics, and Clerks who did not say Mass, under the accidents of Bread only, and that she Erred in this, let him be Anathema. The Reasons, saith the Roman Church, why they took the Cup from them, are many Inconveni∣encies and several Absurdities. I Answer, that besides there is no Inconveniency, though there should be any, it ought not to be above the Commandment of Jesus Christ and St. Paul. Christ, the Primitive Church, and the Apo∣stles were very Wise; and Wiser than shall ever be the Church of Rome; and since they have com∣manded
and given the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper with the Cup, the Roman Church ought to follow their example and obey them. The Inconveniencies, which they sup∣pose at this day, as that the Flies may fall into the Cup, or that the Communicant's Beard may touch the Blood, were in the time of Je∣sus Christ and his Apostles: Had there been any Inconveniency, Je∣sus Christ and his Apostles should have certainly remedy'd it. There∣fore since they have not forbidden the Cup to the common People, who did then receive the Commu∣nion, the Church of Rome ought not now to forbid it. The Origine of taking the Cup from the common People proceeds from Transubstantiation; which be∣ing believed produces Concomitancy▪ and from this Concomitancy follow∣ed this conclusion, that the Laics ought to be contented with the consecrated Bread, because the
Blood of Christ was therein contai∣ned as well as in the Cup. But I have already prov'd, that there is no Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Sup∣per: And though there were any, the Roman Church ought not to take away the Cup from the Peo∣ple; because Jesus Christ, his A∣postles, and the Primitive Church did not take it from them; and because St. Paul orders every one to take it, when he saith, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup. 4. I say that the Roman Church diminishes from the Word of God, when she forbids every one to Eat Flesh in certain times and days; and all Priests, Monks and Nuns to Marry: For St. Paul, writing to the Colossians 2. 16. speaks thus, Let no man judge you in meat and drink. And in his first Epistle to the Corinthians 10. 24. &c. what∣soever,
saith he, is sold in the Sham∣bles, that eat, asking no question for Conscience sake. If any of them, that believe not, bid you to a Feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you, eat. And writing to Timothy, he saith, That every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. And concerning Marriage, 1 Cor. 9. 6. he speaks thus, Have we not power to lead about a sister a wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas? And in the 1 to Timothy 3. 2. he saith, That a Bishop can be the hus∣band of one wife. And in the 13 to the Hebrews, that Marriage is honourable to all, and the bed unde∣filed, but whmgers and adulte∣rers God  judge. And in the to Timothy 4. 3. he tells us, that forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats is a doctrine of Devils. And Jesus Christ himself
honoured so much the Marriage of the Priests, that he did chuse the Son of the High Priest Zacharias to be his Fore-runner. To avoid For∣nication, saith St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 2. Let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband. And notwithstanding all these Texts of the holy Scripture, the Roman Church commands, under the pain of Sin unto Death, and consequently of Damnation, to ab∣stain from Flesh in certain times and days; and forbids all Bishops, Priests and Clerks to marry. And though in the Council of Nice, of which the Ecclesiastical Historian speaks thus, It pleased some Bishops to introduce a new Law in the Church; that those, who were dedicated to ho∣ly Ministry, namely the Bishops, Priests, Elders and Deacons, should lie no more with their Wives. But Pahautius an Egyptian Bishop, and who had one of his Eyes pluckt out for
the Confession of Jesus Christ, rose up, and opposed them, saying, That they ought not to impose so heavy a Yoke; because Marriage was honourable in all, and the Bed undefiled; and that this Prohibition would be hurtful to the Church, because all men had not the Gift of Continence; which did so much prevail, that the Council con∣sented to his opinion, Hist. tripart. l. 2. c. 14. Yet Gregory the VIIth▪ with cruel Decrees of Excommu∣nication, deprived Ministers of their Wives, and forced the Clergy to the Vow of Continence. And the Council of Trent, Sess. 23. Can. 11. forbids Marriage to all Clerks that are in Orders, and to all Regulers or Monks that have made a solemn Vow of Chastity; and thundereth Anathe∣ma against those that say they may marry, notwithstanding they feel they have not the Gift of Chastity. And so this Council doth not only oppose the Primitive Church, and the Apostles, but even the Law,
which God himself has pronoun∣ced. For when he said, Thou shalt not commit Adultery, thou shalt not be a Whoremonger; it is as if he should say, Thou shalt make use of Marriage, which is a proper means to avoid these two great Sins. It is an implicit Commandment of God made to all Men and Women that have not the Gift of Conti∣nence, in what state and condition soever they be. Objection, The Monks and Nuns have made a solemn Vow of perpe∣tual Chasttiy; therefore they can∣not marry. I Answer that they cannot, and ought not to make such a Vow. For every Vow, to be good, ac∣cording to the very Principles of the Church of Rome, ought to have two Conditions: It ought to be of a good thing, and ought to be in our Power. When the Jews made a Vow, that they would neither Eat nor Drink, till they had kill'd
Paul; that Vow was void, and they were not obliged by it: For, had it been in their Power, yet it was of a bad thing. And when Jacob did Vow unto God, if he could return in peace into his Fa∣ther's House, the Lord should be his God, and would offer unto him the Tenth part of his Goods, Gen. 28. 20. That Vow was good, be∣cause it contained the two requi∣red Conditions for a good Vow. It was of a good thing, and in his Power. When Monks and Nuns, at sixteen years old, Vow unto God Almighty to keep a perpetual Chasttiy, that Vow doth not bind them, because it is made of a thing which is not in their Power: For Continence is a Gift of God. He dh not grant it to every body, but to whom he pleases, Matth. 19. 11. Therefore those only, that are indeed with it, are bound to keep it. Therefore when he, that has Vowed a perpetual Chastity, finds
by experience, he is often troubl'd with the Lusts of the Flesh; and, though he has several times called upon God, they still continue to tor∣ment him, it is a certain sign that God has not granted him the Gift of Continence; and therefore will have him to make use of Marriage, which is honourable amongst all, and which he has appointed as a means to keep Mankind, and as a remedy to pacifie our inordinate Passions. For, when he made Man, he speaks thus, It is not good for a man to be alone, I will give him a companion, Gen. 2. 18. He made them male and female; and for this cause, he said, that man shall forsake Father and Mother, and cleave to his wife, Matth. 19. And St. Paul saith, That, to avoid fornication e∣very man ought to have his own wife, and every woman her own husband, for it is  to marry than burn, 1▪ Cor. 7. Formerly young Wo∣men were not admitted to take
the Nun's Vail, till they were for∣ty years old, as it may be seen, Can. Sanctimoniales causa 20. 9. 1. And though St. Paul speaks thus, I will that younger women marry, bear children, guide the house: Let not a widow be taken in the number under threescore years old; but the youn∣ger widows refuse, for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry, 1 Tim 5. Yet those of the Church of Rome laugh now at this Ordinance and Custome: For they shut up young Maids in Monastries, before they have any true knowledge of God, of the World, and of Themselves. So Rhea Sylvia Numitor's Daugh∣ter was shut up in the Monastry of Vesta by her Uncle Amulius, who had expelled Numitor for fear she should marry, and get Chil∣dren able to revenge and re-obtain her Father's Estate. They are shut up in Iron Cages, as wild Beasts, and mad Folks, for fear they should
commit any disorder. By this Prison, wherein they are shut up; and by this Prohibition of Gregory, That all Priests and Clerks ought not to converse, nor dwell with Women, nor so much as with their Mothers, Sisters, and Kindred, lest it should happen to them, as it happened to the Son of David. It is clear that nei∣ther the one nor the other have the Gift of Continence; for if they were endued with it, for what end all these Iron Cages to the Nuns, and all those strict Prohibi∣tions to the Priests? And if they have not the Gift of Continence; St. Paul commands them to marry, and consequently they are not bound to keep their Vows. There∣fore all Priests, Monks and Nnus, are obliged to them but upon this condition, that God has endued them with the Gift of Continence. As he, that made a Vow to be a great Philosopher, or famous Ora∣tor, is not bound to the perfor∣mance
of that Vow but upon con∣dition, that God gives him a suf∣ficient Wit and Strength for the obtaining of these two eminent Qualities. I have the Gift of Con∣tinence, therefore I make a Vow to keep a perpetual Chastity, that Consequence is good. But I pro∣mise unto God a perpetual Chasti∣ty, therefore he shall give me the Gift of Continence, this Conse∣quence is not good. For in the Contracts we make with Men, our Promise doth not oblige us, but as it is accepted by him, to whom we make it. And when a young Man and Maid at sixteen years old, so∣lemnly promise unto God a per∣petual Chastity, who told them that God did accept their Promise? Therefore, since many Monks, Nuns, and Priests, have neither the Gift of Continence, nor any assu∣rance that they shall have it all the Days of their Lives; it is a Rash∣ness to them to promise what is
not in their Power. Therefore their Vow wanting the last Condition to make it good, becomes void; therefore they may, and ought to Marry. For it is better to Marry than to Burn; and Marriage is Ho∣nourable in all, but the Whoremon∣gers and Adulterers God will Judge. The Origine of Monastical Life, came from several Christians, who in the time of Persecution retired into desert Places. And when Per∣secution ceased, many of them re∣sted there, either because they were used to that Calm, Innocent, and retired way of Life; or because they were afraid to fall again into Persecution. But this Monastical Life was quite different from that which is now seen at this day. For then they made no Vow of perpe∣tual Chastity; they lived with the Labour of their Hands, and many of them were Married. And St. Cyprian, l. 1. Epist. 9. c. 11. tells us, that the Virgins,
who did Consecrate themselves unto God, that they might relieve the Poor, had the liberty of break∣ing their Vow of perpetual Cha∣stity, when they thought, they might better serve God in the State of Marriage, than in that of Vir∣ginity. Let us then conclude, since those, who contrary to Christ's Doctrine, and the Law of Nature persecute, and cause Men to die, merely because they are not of their Opinion and Religion, are Cruel and Tyrannous; since those that do Worship the Creature for the Creator, are Idolaters; and since those, that do add to the Word of God, and diminish from it seve∣ral Articles both of Faith and Pra∣ctice, are Hereticks. The Roman Church, contrary to Christ's Doctrine and the Law of Nature, Persecuting and causing Men to Die, merely because they are not of her Opinion and Religi∣on;
Worshiping the Creature for the Creator; and adding to the Word of God, and diminishing from it several Articles of Faith and Practice, it doth evidently follow, that she is Tyrannous, Idolatrous and Heretick. FINIS.
First Sermon of Repentance. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. IF Lucifer with all his proud and obstinate Companions; if Dives, Judas, and many other wicked Men were cast into Hell, and did all likewise pe∣rish; it is because they did not re∣pent of their Sins. But there is this difference between Angels and Men, that though God, according to all Divines, did not grant the grace of Repentance to the former, yet he did not refuse it to the lat∣ter: For, speaking concerning Man, he saith, Ezechiel 18. 32. I will not the death of a Sinner, but that he turn and live. Repentance is called by St. Au∣stin a second Plank after Ship∣wrack.
For, when Men have made Ship-wrack, to lay hold on a Plank, is their only remedy; so, when in the vast Ocean of this World, they are lost by Sin, the only remedy left them, that they may not eternally perish, is Repentance. If I begin to Preach unto you this excellent Virtue, ye are not to wonder at me, for I do nothing but what St. John the Baptist, Je∣sus Christ, the Apostles, and Holy Prophets, have done, when they began to Preach and convert Sin∣ners. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, said Jesus Christ in his First Sermon; and in the words of my Text he speaks thus, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. By these words ye shall see the necessity and utility of Repentance; but because it is hard to Men, first I will shew you its dif∣ficulty. That Repentance is hard, will be the first part of my dis∣course; that it is necessary, will be
the second, and that it is very use∣ful, will be the third. 1. Part. I must confess that Re∣pentance is very hard; the Latin word Poenitentia does evidently shew it, for it means nothing but pain and grief. Indeed there is nothing in this World more diffi∣cult to Men than Repentance, whe∣ther we consider it in respect of the Creator, or in respect of the Crea∣ture. If we consider it in respect of the Creator, God must, without for∣cing our wills, make a change in our minds and Hearts. He must change the mind and heart of him, that feeds an Inclination for re∣venge. Love must take the place of hatred; meekness and clemency that of bitterness and cruelty. God must, without destroying the free will of Man, work so in his mind and heart, as to make him forsake and renounce the Object, which he loves best, and without which he
cannot live. This is harder to God (if I may speak so) than to create Heaven and Earth. For, when God would create all the things that are in this World, he only said, let there be such a thing, and presently it was created. But when he will convert a Sinner, and will have him to forsake his wickedness, what re∣sistance and opposition does he not find, notwithstanding the different means he makes use of. For Oftentimes God, willing to induce a Sinner to repent of his sins, cherishes him as a Nurse does her Young sucking Child, and as a good Husband his Faithful Wife. Some∣times he threatens him, as a care∣ful Father threatens his disobedient Son; as a good Master his unruled Servant; and as a just Judge his guilty Prisoner. And yet his che∣rishings and threatnings do very of∣ten prove vain and unprofitable. The sinner remains in his Crimes, and will not repent of them.
God, according to his ordinary way in the Conversion of a Sinner, must give him a preventing Grace, and afterwards an assisting one; and though these two Graces be sufficient for a true and sincere Conversion, yet to pass from Pow∣er to Act, he must needs give him another Grace, which is called ef∣fectual. This is the difficulty of Repentance considered in respect of God our Creator. But it is more hard and difficult, if we consider it in respect of the Creature. For a Man, who got a great store of Goods by an Unjust way, is bound to restore them wholly to him they belong to; for, as saith St. Austin, Non remittitur Peccatum, nisi restituatur, ablatum. A Sensual and Carnal Man, who wholly devoted himself to worldly Delights and Pleasures, is obliged to forsake them for ever. What Pain, and what Difficulty does he not find, when he takes resolution
to leave them? And this Difficul∣ty is the greater, if he be an old Sinner, and got a bad Custom. For, can the Ethiopian change his Skin, saith the Prophet Jeremiah, or the Leopard his Spots, then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil, 13. 23. We see that every day by our own experience, especially if a Man be accustomed either to Drunkenness or Impurity. For then he will find a great difficulty to subdue and forsake his filthy and dishonest Passion. If Grace invites him to abandon his Sins, and truly Repent of them, Nature present∣ly opposes it self, and gives him a quite contrary Mind. There is a Fight in that Man be∣tween Nature and Grace. And to speak otherwise, there are two Men in that Man; the Man of Grace, and the Man of Sin. The Man of Grace is willing to forsake his Sins, and Repent of them, and
the Man of Sin is unwilling. The Man of Grace speaks thus, these many Years I have committed Sins, I must now forsake them, with all the guilty Pleasures of this World, and I must wholly conse∣crate my self unto God. And the Man of Sin saith, what! wilt thou forsake those Delights, Plea∣sures, Sports and Recreations, which so many Men sigh after, and with so great a Passion, as if their soveraign Happiness were truly consisting in them? The Man of Grace saith, come, I will Repent; and the Man of Sin replies, not yet, not now, stay a little longer I pray thee. To make it short, there is a wonderful Battel in this poor Man's Heart and Mind. I look up∣on him as upon a Ship in a great and furious Storm: For as this Ship by the violence of Waves, goes sometimes as high as the Clouds, and presently seems to go down into the bottom of the Sea;
so this Man Ascends into Heaven by Grace, and Descends into Hell by Sin. What strange Fight do we see in this poor and miserable Creature? What difficulty does he not find, when he is willing to forsake his Sins? And when he delays from day to day, that Diffi∣culty encreases, for two Reasons. The first is taken from Grace, and the Second from Sin. The Reason taken from Grace is, that being necessary to forsake Sins, it goes a∣way, and forsakes the Creature, that is delaying from day to day. The other Reason taken from Sin, is because it is compared unto a young Tree, which grows every Month stronger and stronger, and is hardly pluck'd out, if we let it grow several Years. For it is ea∣sie to a Hedge-hog to thrust out her Youngs before their Bristles be grown strong; but if she stays too long, she shall rather die, then ex∣pel them out of their Hole. Sin is
like unto a Hedge-hog; for it is easie to cast it out of our Hearts, when it is Young, I mean in its beginning; but if we stay too long, what difficulty shall we not find to pluck it out of them? Such as the Ethiopian in changing his Skin, and the Leopard his Spots. Wherefore we must confess, that Repentance is hard and difficult to Men, whether considered in re∣spect of the Creator, or in respect of the Creature. Nevertheless it is necessary, unless we will all perish. And this I am going to shew you in the second part of my Discourse. 2. Part. This Man, who was sent from God, to bear witness of the Light, that all Men through him might believe; this Man, I mean St. John the Baptist, began his Sermons by this necessary Vir∣tue. And when Jesus Christ be∣gan to Preach, he began with these Words, Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. These two
Examples would be sufficient to convince us of the necessity of Repentance. But that I may re∣move all Doubts from your Minds, I will prove that we are obliged to Repent of our Sins, for two Rea∣sons. First, because we have of∣fended God, who is our Father; and secondly, because if we do not Repent, we shall all be unhappy for ever. That God is our Father, all Christians do acknowledge this Truth; for, as often as they say the Lord's Prayer, they confess God to be their Father. Yes cer∣tainly God is our Father, since he made and Created us: And to speak properly, he only is our Fa∣ther. Call no man Father on earth, for one is your Father, which is in Heaven, Matth. 23. 9. He is more properly our Father, than those that brought us into the World; because he not only con∣curs with them in the Production
of our Bodies, but also because he alone Created our Souls, and makes us partakers of his holy Grace, whereby we become his Children. If then it be true, that God is our Father, likewise it is certain we have Sinned against him two different ways; positively, when we have done those things, which we ought not to have done; and negatively, when we have left un∣done those things which we ought to have done. We have offended him in our Hearts, in our Understandings, by our Tongues, by our Hands, Feet, Ears and Eyes. In our Hearts and Understandings we have sinned a∣gainst God, as often as we have thought and desired any thing con∣trary to his holy Commandments. With our Tongues we have offen∣ded him, as many times as we took his Name in vain, or spake ill Words, or were Slanderers, or false Witnesses against our Neigh-
Neighbours. With our Hands, as often as we did strike any body, or Rob him of his Goods. With our Feet, when we went into those places, which we knew to be to us an occasion of Sin. With our Ears, when we took delight in hearing impure and obscene Words. And with our Eyes, as often as we did read bad Books, and look upon a Woman to Lust after her. Seeing then we have so many ways sinned against God, who is our Father, I think it is very rea∣sonable we should Repent. And, if to Repent is nothing but to weep for our Sins, and commit them no more, are we not obliged to it, since we have sinned against him? How cruel it is, saith St. Austin, to offend such a Father, and willingly commit any thing against his Com∣mandments! We did fall into such a Cruelty, as often as we have sinned against him. It is then ve∣ry
necessary we should Repent. Therefore let us weep for our Sins, and commit them no more. Let us begin to day, at this very hour and moment, and continue all the days of our Lives. Let us beg him Forgiveness; and kneeling with a contrite Heart, let us say as the prodigal Child, Father I have sin∣ned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. Let us imitate, David, St. Peter, and Mary Magdalen: They have Sinned, but they have Repented. They bitterly wept for their Trespasses, and commit∣ted them no more. We have fol∣lowed them in their Sins, let us follow them also in their Repen∣tance. We are obliged to't, see∣ing we have offended God, who is our Father. The second Reason why we are obliged to Repent, is because if we do not, we shall certainly be unhappy for ever.
He that is cast into an eternal Fire, is Miserable and Unhappy for ever, seeing he endures there exceeding immoderate Torments. For he undergoes two sorts of Pains, one Privative, and the other Positive. 1. Privative, because in that burn∣ing Prison he is deprived from the sight of God, who is infinitely beau∣tiful, good, perfect, and conse∣quently infinitely worthy to be lo∣ved; and put out of the Company of Jesus Christ, of the Angels, and all blessed Souls; thereby losing all the Delights, Treasures and Ho∣nours which are found in the King∣dom of Heaven. 2. Positive, Because he that is in that fiery Prison, is always full of Sorrow, Fury, Grief and Des∣pair, being detained in a place of Tears, Sighs, Groanings, gnashing of Teeth, and innumerable other Torments, which no Tongue can express. Therefore if he, that is in an eternal Fire, wherein he is suf∣fering
all these positive and priva∣tive torments, which I have just now described unto you, be un∣happy and miserable for ever; it is certain, we shall be so, unless we repent. For except ye repent, saith Jesus Christ in the words of my Text, ye shall all likewise perish. We may believe Jesus Christ, the axe, saith he, is laid unto the root of the Trees; therefore every Tree, which brings not forth good fruit, is hewen down, and cast into the fire; yes certainly, except we repent, we shall not escape these eternally burning Prisons; we shall undergo all the Torments contain∣ed therein; we shall be unfortu∣nate, and all perish for ever. For, since God did not forgive his An∣gels, and did cast into Hell the In∣habitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, with Dives, Judas, and several o∣thers, because they would not for∣sake their Sins; let us be certain, if we do not repent, we shall re∣ceive
alike punishment; we must either burn or repent, saith St. Austin, and except ye repent, saith Jesus Christ, ye shall all likewise perish. Are we then willing to escape these eternally tormenting Flames? have we a desire that our Sins should not be punish'd of God? we must needs punish them our selves, whilst we live in this World. Wilt thou not have God to punish thy sins? saith St. Austin, pu∣nish them thy self; for every iniquity either great or small, is to be punisht either by repenting Man, or by a re∣venging God. And that we may be the more inclined to repent, let us see its utility; this is the third part of my Discourse. 3. Part. Repentance is useful. 1. Because it blots out all our Sins. 2. Because thereby we obtain the Grace of God. And, 3. Because therein consists the Salvation of all Men.
Before I make it appear unto you, that Repentance blots out all our Sins; ye must know, that Sin is hurtful for three special Effects. 1. Because it kills our Souls. The Soul, saith Ezekiel, that sinneth, it shall die, 18. 4. But how can Sin kill our Soul, since it is immortal? The reason is, because there is a double life in our Soul; one na∣tural, and another supernatural. As for the former life, our Soul does not lose it by Sin; but as for the latter, which is more excellent than the other; and without which natural life is nothing but sorrow, misery, trouble and grief, Sin kills it. The Soul, that sinneth, it shall die. Secondly, Sin is hurtful, because thereby we lose infinite Riches both of Body and Soul; we lose saith Laurence Justinian in his Ser∣mon concerning St. John the Evan∣gelist, the Whiteness of Innocency, the Gown of Immortality, the Pu∣rity
of the Soul, the sweetness and delight of Contemplation, the li∣berty of Spirit, the Kingdom of Heaven, the Society of Angels, and the Love of God. Thirdly, Sin is hurtful, because he that Sinneth, from the Child of God becomes the Child of the De∣vil. He that commits Sin, saith St. John, is of the Devil, for the De∣vil sinneth from the beginning, 1 John 3. 8. If Sin be so hurtful, as I have made it appear, Repentance must needs be very advantageous, seeing it blots out all our Sins. This Truth is evident by these Words, Repent ye, and be converted, that your sins may e blotted out, Acts 3. 9. For as the Sun expells Darkness, be∣cause of the essential Opposition they have one with another; like∣wise Repentance expells Sins. It is like unto that Pool, whereof it is spoken in the Fifth Chapter of St. John, which whosoever first,
after the troubling of the Water, stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever Disease he had. Witness David and Mary Mag∣dalen. David did commit both Adultery and Murther. He killed Uriah with the Sword, and took a∣way his Wife. He Repented of his Sins, he begged Pardon unto God, and said, I have sinned against the Lord, 2 Sam. 13. 12. And what then? his Sins were blotted out, the Lord did forgive him. Mary Magdalene, whose Sins were many, and out of whom went seven Devils, Luke 1. She Repented of her Sins; for when she knew, that Jesus sat at Meat in the Pharisees House, brought an Alabaster Box of Oyntment, and stood at his Feet with Tears, and did wipe them with the Hairs of her Head, and kissed his Feet and Anointed them. And what did happen unto her? She heard Christ saying, thy Sins, which are
many, are forgiven. What happen∣ed to David and Mary Magdalen, will certainly befall us, if we do imitate them in their Repentance. Though your Sins be as Scarlet, saith the Prophet Isaiah, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as white as wool. Secondly, Repentance is useful, because thereby we obtain the Grace of God. Indeed there is no∣thing more advantageous to Man than God's Grace. For thereby we are made the Children of God, not by Nature, but by Adoption. Thereby we are made Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ, Rom. 8. 17. And thereby we are made Partakers of all the Treasures and Riches, which are found in the Kingdom of Heaven. It is then certain, that by Repentance we ob∣tain the Grace of God. For accor∣ding to all Divines, it is a Motion from Sin unto Grace. In a Motion
there are two ways, the way, whence we depart, and that, which we go to. The way, whence we depart, and which we forsake, is Sin; and that which we go to, and which we obtain, is Grace. The Publican, whom it is spoken of in St. Luke 18. 3. Does verifie the Truth of my Proposition. He comes unjust into the Temple, and standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his Eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his Breast, saying God be merciful unto me a Sinner; and he obtained Grace, for he went down to his House justified. Is any one of us a Swearer, or Drunkard, Slanderer, Proud, or given to any other Vice? He has lost the Grace of God. Is he willing to recover it? Let him humble himself be∣fore God; let him fall upon his Knees; let him sigh, weep, confess his Sins, Repent of them, and like the Publican, let him smite upon his Breast, and say, God be merciful
to me a Sinner; and then he will recover the Grace of God, and go into his Cabine justified. Thirdly, Repentance is useful, be∣cause therein consists the Salvation of all Men. Man was lost twice. First, by the original Sin, which is nothing but the Crime of Adam, and called ours, because our Will was inclosed in his. Secondly, by personal or actual Sin, so called, because it was committed by our own Will. The Sacrament of Bap∣tism, according to the common o∣pinion, was ordered by Jesus Christ to save Mankind from that first Ship-wrack; and Repentance was Established by God to save them from the second. Therefore it is called the second plank after Ship-wrack, and for that Reason therein consists the Salvation of all Men. Certainly we cannot hope to be Saved without that most excellent and necessary Virtue. If all the An∣gels
and Saints in Heaven would pray for the Salvation of an unre∣penting Soul, their Prayers would be vain, and without any good Effect. And Jesus Christ himself, saith Thomas Aquinas, cannot make happy, and save an unrepenting Soul, ut sic, that is, whilst she re∣mains in Sin; for there is a con∣tradiction between to be happy and remain in Sin; between to be saved, and to be unrepenting; Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Therefore by a contrary consequence, if ye repent, ye shall be saved, and therefore in a true and sincere Repentance consists the Salvation of all Men. Dear Friends! have mercy up∣on your Souls; be careful to pre∣serve them, for they are infinitely more to be valued than all the things in the World besides, be∣cause they are made after the I∣mage of God. For it was God, that breathed into Man the Breath
of Life, as ye may read in the 2. Ch. of Genesis. Now God being of the greatest excellency, the more any thing is like him, the more it is to be valued. But it is certain, that no Creature upon Earth is at all like God but the Soul of Man, and therefore nothing ought to have so much of your care. As for your Bodies, ye ought to imploy them for His Majesty's Ser∣vice, for the defence of your Coun∣try, for the maintainance of your Wives and Children, for the Glo∣ry of your Nation, and for the pre∣servation of your Properties and Liberties, and especially of your Religion, which ought to be dear∣er to you than your Lives; ye ought not to be afraid to be woun∣ded, nor even to be killed, for it is appointed to all men once to die, and there is nothing more glorious than to die for these aforesaid con∣siderations. Horatius, Scevola, and
several others brave and generous Men, so much renowned in the Ro∣man History, did willingly give their Lives for the Service of their Princes, and for the preservation of their Country. I speak only of your Souls, and of the great care ye are to take of them, for if ye once lose them, they are lost for ever. If ye had two Souls, in losing one, ye could save the other, but ye have but one, and if ye be so unhappy as to lose it, this loss cannot be recove∣red. I grant ye cannot lose your Souls in one sense, that is, so lose them, that they shall cease to be; but ye may lose them in another, that is, ye may lose that happy E∣state, to which they were created, and plunge them into the extre∣mest misery. In a word, ye may lose them in Hell, whence there is no fetching them back, and so they are lost for ever.
Take then care of your Souls, at least as much as ye do of your Bodies. For, when your Bodies are out of Order; as soon as ye are sick or wounded, presently ye call for the Physician and Surgeon. But when your Souls are sick, wounded by Sin, and infected with several spiritual Distempers, ye do not care to cure them by re∣penting of your Sins. Neverthe∣less, if ye do not repent, ye shall perish for ever; ye look upon Death, as if it was very far from you; and, perhaps, at this very moment in one of these Ships, that are here at anchor, there is some body dead without repenting of his Sins; and if so, his Soul is lost for ever. Think seriously of this, and make a good use of this first instruction I give you to day; obey the exhortations, threatnings, and commandments of Jesus Christ our Lord and Redeemer. Behold, saith St. Austin, with what care and
diligence an unhappy Lover obeys his Mistresses Commandments. He had rather disoblige every body than displease her. The only thing he fears, is to hear these dreadful words, be gone, I will see thee no more. A naughty Woman saith, I will see thee no more, if thou doest not what I command thee; and that frights him so much, that he is forced to obey. And Jesus Christ, who gave his life for our Salvation, saith unto us, if ye do not repent of your Sins, ye shall be separated from my face, ye shall eternally perish, and be cast into Hell-fire for ever; and we will not obey. Are we not afraid to hear him saying? Be gone, I will see you no more; depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his An∣gels. That we may not hear these terrible and dreadful words, let us obey Jesus Christ, and re∣pent
of our Sins; for except ye repent, ye shall all likewise pe∣rish. The End of the First Sermon.
Second Sermon against Swearing. Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; lest you fall into condemna∣tion, James 5. 12. IF any Man offends not in Words, saith St. James, the same is a perfect Man, and able also to bri∣dle the whole Body. Behold, we put Bridles in the Horses Mouth, that they may obey us, and we turn about their whole Body. Be∣hold also the Ships, which, though they be so great, and driven of fierce Winds, yet are they turned
about with a very small Helm, whether soever the Governour list∣eth. Even so the Tongue is a little Member, and boasts great things; behold how great a matter a little Fire kindles; and the Tongue is a Fire, a World of Iniquity, it is an unruly Evil, full of deadly Poison, therewith we bless God, and there∣with we curse Men, made after the Similitude of God; out of the same Mouth proceeds Blessing and Cursing. Divine Providence confined us together, within the narrow Li∣mits of a Ship, wherein we have time enough to edifie one another by our Tongues. God does daily present us with several Subjects of Godly Discourse; for how many Experiences of extraordinary Mer∣cies and Preservations have we to relate one to another, and bless the Lord for? What Heavenly Im∣ployment is there for our Tongues? We should call upon one another,
and say as David, come hither, and I will tell you, what God has done for my Soul, at such a time, and in such an extremity. We should call up∣on one another to pay the Vows our Lips have uttered in our Di∣stress. Thus we should provoke one another, as one lively Bird sets the whole Flock a Chearping. But if a Man should come aboard, and ask of us, as Christ did of these two Disciples going to Emmaus, what manner of Communication is this, that ye have in your Ship one with a∣nother? What sad account would he have from most of us? It may be he should find one Jesting, ano∣ther Swearing, another reviling Godliness, and even the Professors of it. This is the case with most of Seamen, I say most of Seamen, for there are some, mongst them, that live Soberly and Godly, and know how to rule their Tongues. Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth, neither by any other Oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condem∣nation. These words will give me occasion to shew you two things, which shall make the two parts of my Discourse; that there are two sorts of Oaths or Swearing; one Lawful, whereby God is Glorified, and which sometimes we ought to make use of; and another Pro∣fane, whereby od is highly of∣fended, and which we ought to a∣void. The lawful Oath will be the first part of my Discourse; and the Profane will be the second. First Part, An Oath is an Invo∣cation to God, or an Appeal to him, as a Witness of the Truth of what we say. So that in case that which we Swear, be not True; we, if not expresly, at least virtually in∣voke God as a Judge and Avenger. There are two sorts of Oaths, one Assertory, and the other Pro∣missory; an Assertory Oath is, when
we Swear and Certifie, that that thing which is in question, is so as we say, and a Promissory Oath is, when we promise by Oath some thing that is future; and if our Promise be made directly and im∣mediately to God, 'tis called a Vow; if to a Man, an Oath. This being supposed, and very true. I say with Dr. Tollotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury, that an Oath is not only Lawful, but also is sometimes necessary, as when Men's Estates are concerned, and no Evidence can be had to decide and clear the matter, but what is assured by Oath. Then it is neces∣sary to make an end of, and decide the Controversie; as it appears by these Words of St. Paul in the sixth Chapter of his Epistle to the He∣brews; an Oath, saith he, for Con∣firmation is an end of Strife. And its Lawfulness appears by several Texts of the Holy Scrip∣ture, wherein God, who is Truth
it self, and cannot lye, and conse∣quently might be believed of Men upon his bare Word, and without necessity of making an Oath; yet to confirm his Promises, is willing to take it. For when God made his promises to Abraham, because he could not swear by a greater, he swore by himself, God willing more abun∣dantly to shew unto the heirs of pro∣mise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, Heb. 6. 17. Therefore if God himself Swears, and takes an Oath, why shall it not be Lawful to Men to take an Oath in dubious Matters, and of great Concerns, and when no E∣vidence can be had to decide and clear them. Was not Mephibosheth spared be∣cause of the Lord's Oath, that was between them, between David and Jonathan the Son of Saul, as ye may read, 2 Sam. 21. 17. Did not the Law of Moses, in many cases re∣quire them? Does not Moses
make use of them, when he speaks thus. I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land, whereunto you go over Jordan to possess it. Does not St. Paul use them oftentimes? As when he saith, God is my Witness, I call God for a Record upon my Soul; before God I lie not; which Oath St. Paul, who was to teach the Precepts of Christ to others, should not have used, if they had been unlawful, and forbidden in the Holy Scrip∣tures. And Christ himself, as we may Read in the 26th Chap. of St. Mat∣thew, did not refuse it, when the High Priest asked him to answer upon his Oath, whether he was the Son of God. I adjure thee, saith the High Priest, by the living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ the Son of God. And Jesus said unto him, thou hast said.
Therefore, since Jesus Christ himself does Answer, when he is adjured upon Oath; and St. Paul oftentimes called God to witness, for the Confirmation of what he saith; seeing David, and several others in the Old Testament, and God himself, who cannot give us a bad Example, used it for the Con∣firmation of his Promises, it is a clear and evident Sign, that it is Lawful; and that we are to explain these Words of St. Matthew, swear not at all; as also those of my Text, above all things my brethren, swear not. They ought to be interpreted, not generally, but in a limited Sense, as only forbidding Swearing in common Conversation, and in our ordinary Commerce and Af∣fairs; as it appears by these words immediately following, viz. Let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil.
From whence it follows, though Swearing and Oaths ought to be avoided in our Conversations, be∣cause they are then so many Sins, yet there is a time, as when the Matter is doubtful, and of Concern, and no Evidence can be had to clear and decide it, when they are not only Lawful, but also very neces∣sary. The Corruption of humane Nature has made Man such a false and fickle Creature, that his single Testimony cannot be sufficient Se∣curity for another, especially in weighty Cases; and therefore in Swearing he calls God for a Wit∣ness of the Truth of what he saith, and affirms. Now this calling, or asking a Testimony from God, makes an Oath become a part of God's Wor∣ship, and gives him a great deal of Honour and Glory. For hereby he that Swears, acknowledges, 1. His Omnisciency. 2. His infallible Truth. and 3. His Righteousness.
He acknowledges his Omniscien∣cy; for by his Appeal to him, he acknowledges him to be the searcher of Hearts and Reins, and that he knows the secret intents and meaning of our Spirits. He ac∣knowledges also his infallible Truth; for this is manifestly car∣ried in his Oath, that though he be a false and deceitful Creature, and his Affirmation cannot obtain universal and full Evidence, yet he that is greater than he, by whose Name he Swears, cannot deceive. And lastly, he acknowledges his Righteousness; for he that Swears, does either expresly or implicitly put himself under the Curse and Wrath of God, if he Swears falsly. Therefore ye see that there is an Oath, or Swearing, which is not only Lawful, where the Matter is of Concern, and cannot be cleared and decided but by Oath; but also ne∣cessary, and conducing to the Glory of God. But there is an other Oath
Profane, whereby God is highly offended, and which we ought to avoid in our conversation; and this I will shew in the second part of my Discourse. 2. Part. Idle words, and unpro∣fitable talk, which are not referred to the glory of God, are to be a∣voided in our conversation; be∣cause we are to give an account of them in the dreadful day of Judgment, according to these words of St. Matthew, every idle word, that Men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment. And though this common evil be little regarded by Men, yet it is a Sin of a greater importance, than we can imagine. First, Because by idle and un∣profitable words, we abuse and pervert our tongue from that im∣ployment, and use, which God by the Law of Creation had de∣signed to. God did not give us the power of Speech (which is our
excellency above the Beasts) to serve a vain humour, and talk foolishly; but to extol and magni∣fie our Creator, and render him the praise for all his admirable Works, and infinite Mercies eve∣ry day bestowed upon us. This was the end of God in giving us a Tongue; and we do commonly imploy it in dishonoring him that made it. Secondly, by idle and unprofita∣ble words we waste our precious time, which is but a little Spot be∣tween two Eternities, either of fe∣licity, or misery. God turns about these glorious Celestial Bodies over our Heads in a constant revolution, to beget time for us; and the pre∣ciousness of every minute thereof results from its use; and therefore great things depend upon it, and no less than our eternal Happiness or Misery. What an evil then is it to us, to waste it away to no purpose, in our idle and unprofita∣ble
talking? which Sin is the more dangerous, because few are sensi∣ble of it: Other Sins, as Murder, Adultery, and Theft, are seldom committed, because they are hor∣rible; and when they are commit∣ted, then Conscience is startled at the horridness of them; few, ex∣cept they be profligate Wretches, dare make light of them; but for the idle and vain words, there are innumerable Swarms of them eve∣ry day, and few regard them. Thirdly, they have mischievous effects upon others; for, an idle word, or foolish Jest sticks long time in Men's mind, and becomes an occasion of Sin to them; for our foolish words may be working in the minds of our Companions, when we are laid in the Dust, or committed to the deep. And thus, though we be dead, yet we may be sinning in the Persons of our Companions. These are the bad effects of idle, unprofitable and foo∣lish
words, and why we ought to avoid them in our conversation. But if idle and foolish words ought to be carefully avoided, we ought with a greater reason to a∣void vain Swearing, and Profane Oaths, since God is highly offended thereby. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain. These words should be sufficient to hin∣der any Man from Swearing, or from any Profane Oath, because God has forbidden it, and declared him guilty, that takes his Name in vain. But that I may deter Men from Swearing, or Profane Oaths, let them consider. First, If the Heathens durst not use the name of their Idols, for fear the Earth should tremble, and swallow them up alive; shall the Sacred and Dreadful Name of the True God be Profaned by Christi∣an
Tongues, and not afraid that God will be avenged for their fre∣quent Abuses of his Holy Name? In the old Law, he that took the Name of God in vain, was Stoned to Death. If this Law were now put in Execution, how many thou∣sands should we see Stoned every day? Or rather how should we hear Men Swearing for fear of be∣ing Stoned? for the fear of Pun∣ishment, even when it is but small, if put in Execution, would be able to restrain them. 2. It is a Sin which God has se∣verely threatened, and punished with temporal and corporal Plagues. For, by reason of Oaths, saith the Prophet, Isaiah 42. 3. The land mourns, and every one that dwells therein languishes. That is, it brings the heavy Judgment of God upon whole Nations, under which they shall Mourn. And in Zachariah there is a flying Role of
Curses upon them that Swear; a flying Role, to denote the swifness of it; for it flies, saith the same Prophet, towards the House of the Swearer, and it shall therein remain, and shall consume it with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof; that is, it shall bring an utter Ruine and Destruction to his House. Wo to that wretched Family, into which this flying Role enters; wo to the Inhabitants thereof▪ 3. Profane Oaths bring spiritu∣al Plagues upon us; they bring Hell along with them; and if we be not afraid to Sin, certainly we should be afraid to Burn. If the Love of God can work nothing up∣on our Souls, his Threatnings should startle and affright us. Let us consider those Texts of the Holy Scripture, and unless God has lost all his Authority with us, they ought certainly to make us afraid. The first, are the Words of my Text, Above all things, my brethren,
swear not, neither by heaven, nei∣ther by the earth, neither by any other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; lest you fall into condem∣nation. Consider this Text seri∣ously. I think it should be like the Fingers, that came forth and wrote upon the Wall that dreadful Sen∣tence, that changed the Counte∣nance of a King, and made his Knees smite together. Above all things, that is, above all other Vi∣ces, avoid Swearing; but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; that is, accustom your selves to short and plain Affirmations, and Ne∣gations; lest you fall into condem∣nation; that is, lest for these things the Judge of Heaven and Earth should pass a Sentence of Condem∣nation to Hell upon you. O Men! dare ye then from henceforth com∣mit such a hainous Sin as Swear∣ing; seeing it will bring you under God's Judgment and Condemna∣tion? Did you never see a poor
Malefactor Tryed at the Assizes, and observe how his Face grows pale, how his Legs Tremble, and how Death displayes his Colours in his Cheeks, when Sentence is gi∣ven upon him? But what is that to God's Condemnation? What is a Gallows to Hell? The other Text is this; the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain. Now, what does God mean, when he saith, he will not hold him guiltless? The meaning is plain, that is, his Swea∣rings and prophane Oaths shall be reckoned to him, and he shall be bound to Answer God for them. The last Reason, which obli∣ges you to avoid Swearing and prophane Oaths, is, that the cu∣stom of vain and prophane Oaths, is as plain a discovery of an unre∣generate Soul, as any in the World. This is a sure sign ye are none of God's Children, nor have any thing to do with his Heavenly Pro∣mises.
For, by this, the Scripture distinguishes the State of Saints and Sinners. This Fruit of the Tongue plainly shews what the Tree is that bears it. The vile Person, saith the Prophet Isaiah, will speak of villany, and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Loquere, ut te vi∣deam, speak, that I may see what you are. What is in the Heart, is ven∣ted by the Tongue; when the Trea∣sures of Grace are in the Hearts, then good and Holy Words will be in the Lips. The Mouth of the Righ∣teous, saith David, speaks Wisdom. By thy words, saith Christ, thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be Condemned. We use to say, such Witnesses Hanged a Man; the meaning is, the Evidence they gave, did Cast and Condemn him. If the words do Evidence the State of the Soul, what a wofull State these Souls must needs be in, whose Mouths overflow with Swearing, profane Words and Curses? How
many Witnesses will be brought in, to cast them in the great day? Wherefore, that ye may not fall into such a misfortune, avoid vain Swearing, and Profane Oaths, whereby God is so highly offended; which he has punish'd with both temporal and spiritual Plagues; which are a plain discovery of an unregenerate Soul; and which God will bring to condemnation. And that ye may leave that bad, and ugly custom, wherein there is neither profit nor pleasure; consi∣der, that if every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of judg∣ment, how much more then, for immodest, obscene, filthy Words, profane Oaths, and Bloody Blas∣phemies. Before ye speak, weigh and ponder your words; beg of God to guide your Tongues, and every day say with David, set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep thou the door of my lips.
Labour to get your hearts cleansed, and purified; make the tree good, and then his fruit will be good al∣so. A holy heart will produce holy words: Consider also that no Man is the better lookt upon for his filthy words, and vain, bloody, profane Oaths; but on the con∣trary loses his esteem among all them, that have any sense or vir∣tue; and even among them, that are wicked, and great Swearers too. If there was any punishment put in Execution upon them, that Swear, and take the Sacred Name of God in vain; they would cer∣tainly forbear that horrid and un∣profitable Sin. For I observed, when I was in Holland, that, be∣cause there was so much Mony to be payed by every one, that did Swear, I never heard there any Man taking the Name of God in vain; though I were several times in the Company of above Forty Men together drinking in Taverns
and Coffee-houses. And I took no∣tice also in the Ships, where I have served; that, when the Captain ordered the Collar, which is a piece of wood of about Fifty Pounds weight, to be worn by the Sea-men, that were heard Swear∣ing, then no Profane Oath was scarce heard that day. If a small parcel of Mony to be put in a box, and given to the Poor in Holland; and if the pain and shame of wear∣ing a Collar in the Ships, be able to make Men abstain from Swear∣ing; why shall not the punishment of Hell, and of an eternal Damna∣tion threatned to them, that take God's Name in vain, have such a Power over them? Certainly they do not believe such a thing. For if they were convinced of that Truth, or that there is an avenging God; or that their Souls are Immortal; or that the Holy Scripture was cer∣tainly revealed of God, and the Threatnings therein contained a∣gainst
Swearers shall be put in Exe∣cution in the great and fearful day of Judgment; without doubt they would hereafter forbear from Swearing, and taking God's Name in vain. And that they may be per∣swaded of these Truths, I intend to publish three other Sermons; the first to God's Existence; the second of the Immortality of our Souls, and the third of the certainty of the holy Scriptures; for the Reason, why Men do continue in their Sins, is because they are not utterly and fully convinced of these important and necessary Truths. Above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; lest you fall into condem∣nation. The End of the Second Sermon.
Third Sermon against Drunkeness. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, Ephes. 5. 16. THE Sparthans brought their Children to loath Wine, by shewing them a Drunkard, whom they gazed at as a Monster; and Tertullian saith of the Primitive Christians, they drank no more than was sufficient for temperate Men: they did so eat and drink, as those that remembred they ought to pray afterwards. But now a∣mongst those that profess Christia∣nity, how ordinarily is this Sin committed, but especially by Sea-men. Some of them have gone aboard drunk, and laid the foun∣dation of their Voyage in that Sin; and though they knew not, whe∣ther
they should ever see again the Land of their Nativity, yet this was the farewel they took, this was their preparation; and so in their return, notwithstanding the terrible and astonishing works of the Lord, which they have beheld with their eyes; and their marvel∣lous preservations in so great and terrible extremities. Yet assoon as they were ashore, they went in∣to Ale-houses, there drowning the sense of God's precious Mercies and Deliverances in their Drunken Cups. I grant, that there is a lawful use of Wine and strong Drink to support Nature, not to clog it; to cure Infirmities, not to cause them; Drink no longer water, but use a little wine, for thy stomachs sake, and thine infirmities, saith St. Paul in his Epistle to Timothy 5. 23. God allows us Wine, and other strong Liquor, not only for bare necessity, but for chearfulness also;
that our Bodies may be the more fit for our Imployments. But to drink Wine, or other strong Li∣quor until we be inflamed, and our reason disturbed, is that which St. Paul forbids us in the words of my Text, Be not drunk with wine, where∣in is excess. For, saith the Pro∣phet Isaiah, 5. 11. Wo to them, that rise early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, that con∣tinue until night, till wine inflame them. And that I may deter Men from this horrible and so common a Sin, and keep a method. I will divide this Discourse into two parts, in the first I will shew them the reasons, why they ought to for∣sake that Sin; and in the second I will answer to their objections. 1. Part. The first reason, which ought to make us avoid the excess of Wine, or any other strong Li∣quor, is, because we are thereby equalized to the Beasts that perish; for the excess of Wine takes away
the Wisdom and Ingenuity of Men, and so brutifies them, as Nebuchad∣nezzar, who had the heart of a Beast given him. The heart of a Man hath generosity, and brave vigorous Spirits capable of, and fit∣ted for noble and worthy actions and imployments; but immode∣rate drinking enervates, quenches, and drowns this brave noble vi∣guor. For, no sooner is a Man brought under the dominion of Wine, but he loses the Govern∣ment of his Reason; and so be∣comes like a Beast either wallowing in the mire, or presently falling a∣sleep as a sot and stupid; or swear∣ing and quarrelling as one that is stark mad, and has lost the use of his Reason. God put all the Crea∣tures in subjection to Men, but by immoderate drinking Men put themselves in subjection to Wine, and are brought under its Domi∣nion and Power. St. Austin calls the excess of Wine a distemper of
the head, a subversion of the senses, a tempest in the tongue, a storm of the body, the Ship-wrack of vertue, the loss of time, a wilfull Madness, a pleasant Devil, a sugared Poison, a sweet Sin, which he that has, has not himself; and he, that commits it, doth not only commit Sin, but he himself is altogether in Sin. It is a Sin, which much degrades a Man, by equalizing him to a Beast, and the vilest of Beasts, a Swine, which wallows in the mire. The second reason, why Men are to avoid the excess of Wine, is be∣cause of its several bad effects. For Drunkeness wasts and scatters Men's Estates, and brings them to Poverty. The Drunkard shall be cloathed with rags, and brought to a morsel of bread. He that loves wine and oyl shall not be rich, saith Solomon, Prov. 21. 17. And in the 23. 21. he tells us, that the Drun∣kard and glutton shall surely come to Poverty; for Drunkeness doth not
only dispossess a Man of his Rea∣son, which is a rich and fair Inhe∣ritance given to him by God; but it also deprives him of his Estate, and wasts all that either the provi∣dent care of his Parents, or the blessing of God upon his own indu∣stry has obtained for him. And not to mention here the miseries and sorrows he brings thereby upon his Family, drinking the Tears, yea the Blood of his poor Wife, and helpless Children; I will only take notice of several Diseases, which are begotten by the excess in drinking strong Li∣quors. For, hence come Apo∣plexies, Gouts, Palsies, sudden Death, Trembling of the Hands and Legs, and as the Proverb saith, Plures occidit Gula quàm gladius, that is, Drunkeness kills more than the Sword. O! what a terrible thing will it be to consider upon a Death-bed, that these pangs and aches are the fruits of our Intem∣perance
and excess. Who has wo? saith Solomon; who has sorrow? who has contention? who has bab∣ling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at wine, they that go to seek mixt wine, Prov. 23. 29, 30. By this enumeration and manner of interrogation the wise Man seems to make it a difficult thing to recount the miseries and distem∣pers, that Drunkeness brings upon us. For as Vermin abounds, where there is store of corn; so do the Diseases in the Bodies of Drun∣kards, where crudities and ill hu∣mours do continually abound. Drunkeness, saith Origenes, is the fore-runner of all vices. The Drun∣kard is commonly quarrelsome, al∣ways slow to any thing that is good, and prone to all Evil. He speaks and does whatsoever the De∣vil suggests to him, be it never so obscene and ridiculous. And when he is Drunk, he never considers
that the end of his Drunkeness is Confusion, Quarrel, Riot, Sedi∣tion, and that the pleasant taste of the Liquor will prove in the end, like the sting of a Serpent, his ut∣ter ruine and destruction. Of all things to be lamented a∣mongst us this is most lamentable, that of all sorts of Men there is none more prone to this Vice than Sea-men, when they are ashoar with their Pockets full of Mony: Should they be so blinded, that no∣thing can hinder them from bring∣ing themselves and their Families to ruine, for the satisfying of their Appetites. But let them hear what God saith unto them. Wo be unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger; and the Apostle St. Paul saith, that such are excluded of the Kingdom of Heaven. Drunkeness, saith St. Gregory, is a flattering Devil, a sweet Poison, a pleasant Sin, and whosoever is under the raigning Pow∣er of this Sin, is wholly in Sin, and
makes him forget God his Creator. The Truth of this is manifest in Noah, who never forgat God, till he was Drunk. This only Sin is recorded in Holy Writ against him, whereby he gained a perpetual In∣famy. But how much more infamous must their condemnation be, who by their often reiteration of Drun∣keness, make it not only customa∣ry, but almost natural, and even boast and glory in their Shame. But let all such know, that Almighty God sees their Abominations, and will surely pour upon them the Cup of his vengeance without mix∣ture, unless they come to him by unfeigned Repentance. But this may be a good warning to them that are guilty of Drunkeness, to beware of over drinking them∣selves. For, suppose this Drun∣ken fit continue but for a while; yet in that time, before the reco∣very of their reason, they may ei∣ther
act or speak what they may repent of. They may kill a Friend, as several have done in their Glas∣ses; and so bring themselves un∣der the lash of the Law to the loss of their Lives and Fortunes, and perpetual Ignominy both of their Families and Relations. But if a∣ny Man think, he may drink much, and yet keep the perfect use of his Senses and Reason, he may as well suppose, that, when he has drunk Poison, he shall not be prejudiced thereby. Ye see that Drunkeness does not only waste and scatter our Estate, bringing us to Poverty and Misery, but also produce several other bad Effects. The third Reason, which obli∣ges us to avoid Drunkeness, is because it is a leading Sin, which has a great retinue & attendance of other Sins waiting on it. It is like a sudden Land-flood, which brings a great deal of dirt with it. So that, as Faith excels amongst Gra∣ces
and Virtues, because it enlivens and gives strength unto them; so is Drunkeness amongst other Sins. It is not so much a particular Sin against a single Commandment of God, as a general violation of the whole Law; for it warms and quickens all our Lusts and Pas∣sions, and so exposes us to every Sin. It gives occasion, yea is the real cause of many contentions, and fatal Quarrels and Murthers, which are the ordinary effects of drunken Meetings; for, when Rea∣son is lost, and Lust heated, what will not drunken Men then at∣tempt? Numquam ego Ebrium ca∣stum putabo, saith St. Hierome, that is, I will never think a Drunkard to be chast. And Solomon, speaking of a drunken Man, saith, Prov. 23. 33. Thine eyes shall behold a strange Woman, and thine heart shall utter perverse things. This Sin is well called the Devils bridle; be∣cause thereby he turns the Sinner
which way he pleases. Drunkeness is so horrid a Sin, that it deprives us of the Kingdom of Heaven. Be not deceived, saith St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effe∣minate, nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Co∣vetous, nor Drunkards, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Certainly he is not asleep, but dead, who is not startled at these words; how are Drunken Men able to face such a Text as this? Think, when Wine sparkles in the Glass, what a Cup of Wrath is in the hand of the Lord for thee. Thou wilt not now believe this, but the day will come, when thou shalt know the Price of these Brutish Pleasures, except thou dost timely forsake them. Time is allowed us by God to work out our Salvation, and there∣fore every minute of it ought to be most thriftily husbanded to
that end; but when it is laid out in immoderate Drinking, then it tends to the working of our Eternal Damnation. Besides, he that Drinks immoderately, tho' he escape being Drunk himself, is yet guilty of all the Drunken∣ness and Sins that any of his Com∣pany falls under; for, he gives them encouragement to Drink on by his example, especially if he be one of any Authority: But, if he be one whose Company the rest are fond of; his Company is then a certain ensnaring of them; for, then they will Drink too, ra∣ther than disoblige, or lose him. There is yet a greater fault that many of these Stronger brain-drin∣kers are guilty of, that is, the set∣ting themselves purposely to make others Drunk, playing, as it were, a Prize at it, and counting it mat∣ter of Triumph and Victory to see others fall before them. This is a most horrid Wickedness; it
is the making our selves the De∣vil's Factors; endeavouring, as much as we can, to draw our poor Brethren into eternal Mise∣ry, by betraying them to so grie∣vous a Sin: Therefore it may be well reckoned as the highest step of this Vice of Drinking, as ha∣ving in it the Sin of mischieving others, added to the excess in our selves. And though it be lookt upon in the World, as a matter of jest only, to make others Drunk, that we may sport our selves with their ridiculous Behaviour; yet that Mirth will have a sad con∣clusion, there being a Woe expresly threatned to that very Sin; Wo unto him, saith St. Paul, that gives his Neighbour drink, and maketh him drunk. I have now gone through the several Motives and Reasons, which do oblige us to avoid Drunken∣ness. It is a Sin so strangely raign∣ing amongst us, that no Condi∣tion,
no Age, or scarce Sex, is free from it, to the great dishonour of God, reproach of Christianity, and ruin, not only of our Souls hereaf∣ter, but even of all our present advantages, and happiness in this Life; there being no Sin, which betrays each single committer to more mischiefs, in his Understand∣ing, his Health, his Credit, and Estate, than this one doth; and we have reason to believe this Sin is one of those common crying guilts, which have long laid hea∣vy upon this Nation, and pulled down those many sad Judgments we have groaned under. Therefore, let me now intreat you by all that tenderness and love ye ought to have to the Honour of God, the Credit of your Chri∣stian Religion, eternal Welfare of your own Souls, the Prosperity of the Church and Nation whereof ye are Members; nay, by that love, which certainly ye have to
your own temporal Interest, to think seriously on what has been spoken. Ye have heard the reasons why Men ought to avoid the ex∣cess of Wine, and other strong Liquois; now let us answer to their Objections, which is the se∣cond part of my Discourse. 2. Part, The first and most own∣ed is that which they call good Fellowship; one Man drinks to keep another Company at it: But I would ask such a one, whether, if that Man were Drinking rank Poison, he would pledge him for Company; if he says he would not, I must tell him, that by the very same, nay far greater reason, he is not to do this; for, immo∣derate Drinking is that very Poi∣son: Perhaps it doth not always work Death presently, but the custom of it does usually bring Men to their ends; and therefore, though the Poison work slowly, yet it is still Poison. But however
it doth at the present work, that which a wise Man would more abhor than Death, it works Mad∣ness and Frenzy, turns the Man in∣to a Beast, by drawing his Reason, which should difference him from one. The Second is, say they, the chearing of their Spirits, making them Merry and Jolly; but sure, if the Mirth be such, that reason must be turn'd out of door, I may say with Solomon, Eccles. 2. 2. The laughter of such fools is madness. For, they that will be Drunk to put themselves in this temper, must, by the same reason, be glad of a Frenzy; if they could but be sure it would be of the merry Sort. But, little do these merry Drinkers think, what sadness they are all this while heaping up to them∣selves, often in this World, when by some mad Pranks they bring mischief upon themselves; but however, certainly in the other,
where this Mirth will be sadly rec∣kon'd for. A Third Objection of theirs is, the putting away of Cares; but I ask what these Cares are? Perhaps they are some checks and remorses of Conscience, which must be thus charmed. But it is a gross mistake, if we think to lay them down that way; we may indeed thus stop them for a while, but they will one day cry the louder for it. Sup∣pose a Thief or a Murderer knew he were pursued to be brought to Ju∣stice, would he, to put away the fear of being hang'd, fall to Drin∣king, and in the mean time take no Care for his Escape? or would we not think him desperately Mad, if he did? This is the very Case here; our Consciences tell us of our Danger, that we must e're long be brought before God's Judgment-Seat; and is it not Madness for us, instead of endeavouring to get our Pardon, to drink away the thought
of our danger? But suppose these Cares be some Worldly ones, and such as are fit to be put away; then for shame let us not so disgrace our Reason and Christianity, as to rid us of them by so pitiful and disgraceful a way. But besides, this will not do the deed neither; for tho' it may at present, whil'st we are in the heighth of our Drun∣ken fits, keep us from the sense of our Cares; yet, when our Drink∣ing is over, they will return again with greater violence; and if we have any Conscience, bring a new Care with them, even that which arises from the guilt of so foul a Sin. The Fourth is said to be the pas∣sing away of time; but this Obje∣ction is, in many, a very false plea, for they often spend their time at the Pots, not only when they have nothing to do, but even to the neg∣lect of their most necessary Business. However, it is in all a most unrea∣sonable
excuse; for there is no Man but he may find some what or o∣ther to imploy himself in. If he have little worldly Business of his own, he may yet do somewhat to the benefit of others; but howe∣ver, there is no Man but has a Soul, and if he will look carefully to that, he need not complain for want of Business, where there are so many Corruptions to mortifie, so many Inclinations to watch over, so ma∣ny Temptations (whereof this of Drunkeness is not the least) to re∣sist; the Graces of God to improve and stir up, and former neglects of all these to lament. Sure there can never want sufficient Imploy∣ment, for all these require time, and so Men at their Death find; for those, that have all their Lives made it their business to drive a∣way their Time, would then give all the World to redeem it. And certainly, where there is much lei∣sure for worldly Affairs, God ex∣pects
to have the more time im∣ployed in spiritual Exercises. And it concerns them to imploy their time to the benefit of their Souls, and not to bestow it to the Ruine of them; as they do, who spend it in Drinking. The last Objection, is that of Bar∣gaining. They say it is necessary for them to drink in this one Re∣spect of Trading with their Neigh∣bours, Bargains being most conve∣niently to be struck up in Ale-hou∣ses and Taverns. But is this a worse Reason than all the others. For the bottom of it is an aim of Cheating; for we think, when Men are in Drink, we shall the better be able to over-reach them; and so this adds the Sin of Defrauding to that of Drunkenness. Now that this is indeed the Intent, is manifest; for, if only the dispatch of Bargains were aimed at, we should chuse to take Men with their Wits about them▪ therefore the taking them when
strong Liquor has distempered their Reason, can be for nothing but to make Advantage of them. Yet this often proves a great Folly as well as Sin; for he that Drinks with an o∣ther in hope to over-reach him, does many times prove the weaker Brained, and becomes Drunk first; and then he gives the other that opportunity of cheating him, which he designed for the cheating of the other. Now this end of Drinking, is so far from becoming an Excuse, that it is an increasing of the Sin; for, if we are not to drink immode∣rately upon any occasion, much less upon so wicked an one as is the Cheating and Defrauding our Bre∣thren. See the whole Duty of Man. I have now Answered to the chiefest Drunkards Objections, which are ordinarily brought in ex∣cuse of this Sin. I am yet further to tell you, that it is not only that huge degree of Drunkenness, which makes Men able neither to go nor
to speak, which is to be look'd on as a Sin; but all lower Degrees, which do at all work upon the Un∣derstanding, whether by dulling it, and making it less fit for any Im∣ployment, or by making it too light and airy, apt to apish and ridiculous Mirth; or what is worse, by infla∣ming Men to Rage and Fury. These, or what ever else make any change in the Man, are to be rec∣koned into this Sin of Drunkenness. I have given you the Reasons why ye are to avoid the Excess in Drinking, and answered also to the Drunkards Objections. Pray make a good use of this Instruction, be not drunk with wine, nor with any other strong liquor, wherein is excess. FINIS.
