B3215 11899345 199140
portrait of King James II JACOBUS IIds. D. G. Angliae: Scotiae: Fran: et Hiber: REX. Fidei Defensor. etc. DIEU ET MON DROIT F. H. van. Hove. Sculp:
THE Present State Of His Majesties Isles and Territories IN AMERICA, VIZ. Iamaica, Barbadoes, S. Christophers, Mevis, Antego, S. Vincent, Dominica, New-Iersey, Pensilvania, Monserat, Anguilla, Bermudas, Carolina, Virginia, New-England, Tobago. New-Found-Land. Mary-Land, New-York. With New Maps of every Place. Together with Astronomical TABLES, Which will serve as a constant Diary or Calendar, for the use of the English Inhabitants in those Islands; from the Year 1686, to 1700. Also a Table by which, at any time of the Day or Night here in England, you may know what Hour it is in any of those parts. And how to make Sun-Dials fitting for all those places. Licens'd, July 20. 1686. Roger L'Estrange. LONDON: Printed by H. Clark, for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the Poultrey, 1687.
TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY JAMES II. King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, &c. Dread Sovereign, THIS Treatise, or De∣scription, of Your Ma∣jesties Dominions and Ter∣ritories in America, humbly pre∣sents itself unto Your Royal Pa∣tronage, by the hands of Your Majesties most humble and obedient Subject and Servant, Richard Blome.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. THE ensuing Discourse contains an Account of the Present State of His Majesties Dominions, on the Coast of America; wherein thou wilt find a considerable Discovery of the growing Greatness of those distant Colonies, which, by the most clement and wise Administration of the Monarchs of Great Britan, have al∣ready arrived to a Figure so Considerable, as may attract the Emulation of the Neigh∣bouring Potentates; the Golden Peru hardly affording so great a Treasure to the Catholick Crown, as these most Flourishing Plantati∣ons produce to the Crown of England. The vast Returns which the Merchants of London, and other Parts of His Majesties Dominions, make from those Parts, are a sufficient En∣couragement for any one that would study the Improvement of his Fortunes, to look into the advantages of that Extensive Traf∣fick
which those Regions produce. And since our Neighbours have not been wanting (in the most Remote Courts) to represent their Foreign Plantations as vast and mighty Accessions to their Government, and to make their State look the more Considerable in the Eyes of distant Monarchs: Why may not an Essay towards the Delineation of the English Territories in Foreign Parts (at least in some measure) contribute to raise in them an Esteem and Dread of the Mighty Power of the British Crown. Little more need be said to recommend the usefulness of the en∣suing Discourse, but that the natural result of Discoveries, is the Promotion of Improve∣ment, and the Considerate know how to make their Advantages thereof. There was intended to be added to this Volume, a Summary of the several Laws in Force in each Plantation, but that being a work which will swell to a larger Bulk than this, is reserved for a particular Treatise by it self. I have one thing more to advertise thee, That the Printer hath neglected to fix the Running-Title on the top of every Page; therefore thou may'st find that part of the Discourse which relates to them in the fol∣lowing Table. Farewel.
The Contents. JAmaica Page 1 Barbadoes Page 30 St. Christophers Page 45 Mevis Page 53 Antego Page 60 St. Vincent Page 65 Dominica Page 73 New-Jersey Page 78 Pensilvania Page 88 Montserat Page 134 Anguilla Page 137 Barbada, or Bermuda Page 141 Bermudas, or the Sum∣mer-Islands Page 146 Carolina Page 150 Virginia Page 182 Mary-Land Page 195 New-York Page 201 New-England Page 210 New-Found-Land Page 239 Tobago Page 247 Directions for the Im∣provement of the Island of Tobago Page 253 Proposals lately made by Captain John Poyntz, for Him∣self and Company, to all such People as are minded to Transport or Con∣cern themselves in the Island of Toba∣go Page 259 Proposals for further Improvement Page 261 Astronomical Tables, shewing the Rising and Setting of the Sun, with the Length of the Days and Nights in all the Principal English Plantations in the West-Indies Also Tables of the New and Full Moons in every Month, from the Year 1686, to 1700, in the Meri∣dian of London,
and from thence re∣ferred to the Meri∣dians of the Princi∣pal Plantations a∣bovesaid. The which Tables will serve as a constant Diary or Calendar, for the Ʋse of the English Inhabitants in those Islands. Also a Table by which, at any time of the Day or Night here in England, you may know what Hour it is in any of those Islands. And how to make Sun-Dials fitting for all those Remote Parts.
map of Jamaica
A New & Exact Mapp of ye. Isle of IAMAICA as it was lately Sur∣veyed by order of S. Thomas Mediford Bar. late Goverr divided into Precincts or Parishes, with its Ports, Bayes, etc. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT. Leiutenant  Doyloy late O¦der in Cheife of all ye En¦glish Army by Land and  in America & first ow of ye Isle, for his Thomas Lord Win   of  Shi &  Island S. Thomas Modifor n third Governor of ye Isle, Thomas Lyn knight, pro Go¦vernour of ye Isle The Armes of the Island. LONDON Printed for Richard Blome Ao 1671
map of Western America The North West Part of AMERICA by Robt. Morden
THE Present State OF HIS MAJESTY's Isles and Territories IN AMERICA. Of JAMAICA, THE Island of JAMAICA is situ∣ate between the Tropicks seventeen or eighteen degrees North-Latitude,Its Scituation. upon the Sea usually known by the Name of Mare del Nort, being about an hundred and forty Leagues North of the Main Continent of America; fifteen
Leagues South from the great Island of Cuba, and twenty Leagues Westward from Hispaniola, from Porto Bello, Northwards an hundred and sixty; and from Carthagena an hundred and forty Leagues. 'Tis somewhat of an Oval Form, and hath a continued Ridge of lofty Mountains running from East to West, which extend themselves from one end of it to the other, and being full of fresh Springs, furnisheth the Island with great plenty of pleasant and useful Rivers, to the great refresh∣ment of the Inhabitants, and accommodation of Trade. It is exceeding fruitful, being for the most part a rich fat soyl,Its Fertility. the Earth blackish, and mixt with clay, except in the South-west parts, where it is gene∣rally of a more red and loose Earth; but every where wonderful fertil, and incomparably apt to answer the Cultivator's expectation, and recom∣pence his pains and expence in planting; for it enjoys a perpetual Sping, and its Plants and Trees are never disrob'd of their Summer Livery, but every Month is to them like April or May to us. It is in length about 170 Miles, and about 70 in breadth,Its Form aad Extent. contain∣ing between four or five Millions of Acres, nine hundred thousand where∣of were planted in the Year 1675. There are intermixt with the Woods and Mountains, many Savanaes or Plains, which are supposed to have formerly been Fields of Indian Maiz or Wheat; but the Spaniards when they made themselves Ma∣sters of the Isle, and had destroyed all the Na∣tives, to the number of about sixty thousand Per∣sons, converted them to Pasture for the feeding of
Horses, Cows, Hogs, and other Cattel which they brought with them for Breed; which they did so fast, that there are now great Heards of Horses and other Cattel running wild in the Woods. These Savanaes are accounted the most barren parts of the Island, in regard they have lain so long with∣out Tillage; which notwithstanding doth produce such vast quantities of Grass, that the Planters are oftentimes constrained to burn it up. The Air is there very serene and clear,Its Tempera∣ture. and more temperate than in any other Islands in those parts; and in reference to Heat, is as mild as in any place that lieth between the Tropicks, in regard it is continually fann'd and cool'd by fresh Breezes, which continually blow Eastwardly; beside which, 'tis refreshed with frequent Showers of Rain, and great Dews which fall in the night, and conduce very much to the quickning the growth of what is planted; so that it may truly be called temperate and healthful; and its continual Verdure commends it as one of the most delightful Places in the World to live in, especially the South part of the Isle; the East and West parts being somewhat more subject to Rains and Winds, and in regard the Mountainous and Woody renders the Air less wholsom and agreeable than it is in the North; but especially the Southern, which gave the occa∣sion to the English to build Port-Royal there; it being thought convenient that the chief Port and Capital City be upon the best Spot they could find out in the Island. However no part of this Island is in the least subject to those violent and injuri∣ous Storms called Hurricans, wherewith the Ca∣ribbies and some other places in those parts are sometimes pestered; which with a sudden fury
drive their Ships from Harbour, cast them on shore, blow down their Houses, tear up their Canes, and hurry all into confusion. And had not this Island afforded Relief to many of the wracked Inhabitants when they had been thus di∣stressed, they must in all probability have perished. Nor doth any part of this Island unavoidably ne∣cessitate any of its new Inhabitants to any parti∣cular Distemper, as Virginia and other places do; but if those who go thither, will upon their Ar∣rival, but forbear excess of eating and drink∣ing, use moderate exercise, and make choice of such places for their settlement, as lie not too low in Vallies, where there comes but little Air; or too near Rivers, where they may peradventure be incommoded with too much moisture, or at the Foot of Mountains or Morasses, where probably you may have more Rain than you'l desire; nor by the Sea side, or upon Bays, where besides the inconvenience of its Sandiness, it will occasion your want of good Water, you will be mightily af∣flicted with the violent Reflections of the Sun's Beams, which are much fiercer here than in other parts of the Isle. It hath been observed by some who have lived in the Island, that the Mountains which run along through the midst of the Isle from one extream point to the other, are much cooler than the other parts; insomuch that sometimes in the Morning early there are small white Frosts. As for the Weather, it is less cer∣tain in Jamaica than in the rest of the Caribby Islands;The Air. but wet Seasons are most expected in May and November. The Winds blow constantly from the East without the least variation, which they call Briezes: They usually
rise about Nine in the Morning, and blow fresher as the Sun mounts higher; so that Travel and La∣bour are tolerable at Mid-day. These Easterly Winds commonly blow till about six or seven in the Afternoon, and then they change to the West; which the Islanders call Land-Briezes, because they blow off the Shoar, and carry their Ships and Ves∣sels out of their Harbors. There is no apparent Winter, only they have somewhat more Rain and Thunder in the Winter-Months than at other times; nor doth the length of the Days and Nights vary much, but they con∣tinue almost all the year round of an equal length, (viz.) about fifteen hours day: And that which seems much stranger, is, the Seas having seldom been observed to ebb or flow above a foot or there∣abouts; nor hath any Pilot ever yet been able to give a certain account of the Currents of those Seas, in regard they are so various and uncertain; nor could any ever give a reason why the Hurri∣cans and Earthquakes should never reach Jamaica, although they have so grievously afflicted the adja∣cent Islands. The Rivers of this Island are none of them fair or navigable up into the Country,Its Road and Harbors. in regard the Island is very mountainous, and their original is for the most part in those Hills that run through its Center; which running East and West, the Rivers that rise in them disembogue themselves North and South, and falling out of those high Mountains, are very fierce and rapid in their mo∣tion; being likewise in regard of the great Rains, subject to great and sudden Inundations; at which times they fall with such fury, that great Stone-Rocks and large pieces of Timber are born down,
and carried along by the violence of the Tor∣rent, which makes their usual passage so foul and troublesom, that they are thereby rendred alto∣gether unpassable by Boats and other small Ves∣sels. Besides which, there are divers of them which at some times have not one drop of Water in them, but are wholly dried up, which renders them likewise useless for Navigation; as particu∣larly that of Minoa, that runs through Clarendon, which sometimes hath not a drop of Water, and yet at other Seasons hath as much as the River of Thames at high-water: But although the Rivers are thus useless, yet towards the Sea the Island a∣bounds with great plenty of very good Bays, Roads and Harbours; the principal whereof are, 1. Port-Royal,Port-Royal. which at it first setling by the English, soon after they took the Island from the Spa∣niards, received the Name of Cagway, but when the Town began to encrease, and draw towards its perfection, it obtained in Sir Charles Littleton's time the Name of Port-Royal, in regard of the ex∣cellency of its Harbour. It is situated on the ex∣tream end of that long point of Land that makes the Harbour, running about twelve Miles from the Main Westerly, having the Sea on its South, and the Harbour on the North; which Harbour is so exceeding safe and commodious for Shipping, that they are secure in all Weathers, and can un∣lade themselves afloat at the Merchants-Key; be∣ing likewise during their Riding there, secured from any Attempts that might be made on them by an Enemy, by one of the strongest and most con∣siderable Castles that His Majesty hath in all Ame∣merica, which is well garrisonn'd with Souldiers, and hath above sixty Pieces of Cannon mounted in
it. Besides which, it is Land-lock'd by a Point of Land that runs Twelve Miles South-East from the Main of the Island, and hath the great River which runs by Los-Angelos and St. Jago (where Ships that trade to Jamaica, commonly water, and provide themselves with what Wood they want for their Voyage back) falling into it. The Harbour is about three Leagues broad in most places, and is so deep, that a Ship of a Thousand Tun may lay her sides to the Shoar of the Point, and load and unload at pleasure; nor doth there want good Anchorage in any part of it. This Harbour being so exceeding safe and commodious, is the reason why it is frequented both by Mer∣chants Ships and Men of War more than any other Port in that Island. The Point of Land whereon the Town is built, is exceeding narrow, and nothing but a loose Sand, so that it affords neither Grass, Stone, fresh Water, Trees, nor any thing else which could encourage the building a Town upon it, besides the goodness of the Harbour. It was at first began by building a few Ware-houses, but is now grown exceeding large and populous; for it contains above fifteen hundred Houses, and extends itself about twelve or thirteen Miles in length, being inhabited by Merchants, Store-house-keepers, Handicraftsmen, Vintners, Victuallers, and the like: And being so very populous, and so much frequented by Stran∣gers, as well as the Planters in the Negotiation of their Affairs, it being, as it were, the Scale of Trade in that Island, the Houses are as dear rented as in well Traded Streets in London, and Provisi∣ons are dearer than in any other place in that Island.
In the time of the Earl of Carlisle's Govern∣ment, there was a stately Church built, partly by Liberal Subscriptions of divers well disposed Gentlemen inhabiting the Isle, and partly by an As∣sessment laid upon the Inhabitants of the Port. There is likewise a House belonging to the King, though it is not very spacious. This Town of Port-Royal lieth about twelve Miles from the Me∣tropolitan Town of this Island, called St. Jago de la Vega, or the Spanish Town. Old Harbour,Old Harbour. about seven miles Westward from St. Jago, is ge∣nerally accounted next to Port-Royal, the best Harbour on the South-side; not∣withstanding which, it is not so much frequented as it was when the Spaniards enjoy'd the Isle; so that there are not above thirty Houses there, which are chiefly for the Uses of those Vessels and Mariners that come thither, and for Store-houses for Plant∣ers Goods. Port Morant,Port Morant. in the Eastern Point, is a very fair, capacious, and secure Harbour, where Ships do with great conveniency Wood, Water, and Ride fafe from the Winds, in which Place, and the Parts adjacent, a large and potent Colony of En∣glish People have seated themselves. Negril in the extream Westerly Point,Point Negril. is a good Habour very con∣venient and sufficiently secure to the Windwards. In this Harbour Men of War do often ply when they look for the return of the Spanish Ships, and not far from thence, a little to the North-West, was seated the old Town of Melila, founded by Columbus as he had suffered Shipwrack there; which was the first place the
Spaniards setled at, but they afterwards deserted it again. Port AntonioPort Antonio. is accounted the next best Port, being indeed a very safe Land-lock'd Harbour; only the coming in is some∣what difficult, in regard the Channel is a little narrowed by a small Island that lies off the Mouth of the Port. The Earl of Carlisle took up this Place, and the adjacent Countrey to plant upon. These Harbours are all of them secured either by Castles, strong Forts, or Breast-works cast up, and Guns planted on them for the Defence of the Port. But there are divers other good Bays and Harbours along the Coast of this Island,Other Harbours. which are not altogether so much frequented; as, Michael's Hole, Mucary Bay, Allegator Point, Point Pedro, Pallate Bay, Lewana Bay, Blewfield's Bay, Cabarita's Bay: These are on the South-side, and are all very good and com∣modious Harbours for Ships. On the North-side, there is Porto Maria, Ora Cabessa, Cold Harbour, Rio Nova, Montega Bay, Orange Bay, and divers more both on this and the South-side; at all which there are some Houses. There is likewise at a Place called Withy-Wood, on the South-side, about forty or fifty Houses built for the conveniency and accommodation of Vessels, many Ships frequenting that Road, in regard there is very good Land, many considera∣ble Settlements, and a pleasant Countrey all a∣bout it. This Island doth not very much abound with Towns;Their Towns. there being but three in the whole Island, that are of any considerable note; the Chief whereof is,
St. JagoSt. Jago. de la Vega, situated six miles within the Land North-West, upon a large Plain, by the side of a River called Pro de Cabre, from a certain Metal which the Spaniards found, and called by that Name, in the Mountains of Liguania, where this River hath its original Spring. This Place was when the Spaniards were Masters of the Isle, a large City, containing about two thousand Houses, two Churches, four Chappels, and an Abbey for Divine Worship, which were upon the taking the Island by the English, all destroyed, except about fifteen hundred Houses, and its Churches and Chappels reduced to a smaller number; nor did those which remained, altogether escape, but were sufficiently harassed and spoiled. But since the English have be∣gun to settle there, and in the Countrey about it, it begins to be again a place of considerable ac∣count, and grows apace towards its former splen∣dor and beauty. 'Tis the Metropolis of the Island, where the Governor himself resides, and where all the chief Courts of Judicature are kept; which occasions its being well inhabited, and a place of very great resort; so that most of its Ruinous Houses are now repaired, and it is in a fair way of extending itself to a far greater largeness than when it was enjoyed by the Spaniards; for the Town is very well situated, the Houses fair and convenient, and the Inhabitants live in as much pleasure as their hearts can wish, having their Ha∣vana, to which the better sort repair every Even∣ing to take the Air, and recreate themselves, as the Gentry at London do in Hide-Park. The second Town of Note is Port-Royal; which hath been already described; and the third is known by the Name of
Passage,Passage. situated on the Mouth of the River, six miles distant from St. Jago by Land, and about two Leagues from Port-Royal by Sea. 'Tis the greatest Passage in the whole Island, from whence it took its Name; and those who go from Port-Royal to St. Jago, land here. The whole Town doth not contain above Thirty or Forty Houses; some whereof are for Storage, and the rest are inhabited by Ale∣house-keepers, and those who keep Horses and Hackney-Coaches for the convenience of such as go from thence to St. Jago, or any Plantation thereabouts. When the Spaniards enjoyed the Place, there were divers other TownsOther Towns. which are now of no account; the Chief whereof, are, Sevilla,Sevilla. situated on the North-part of the Island, and beautified with a Collegiate Church; the chief Governor whereof bore the Title of Ab∣bot. MellilaMellila. already mentioned. Orista,Orista. situated upon the South-Seas, in which Seas there are many Rocks, amongst their Banks some Isles; as, Serva∣villa, Quitosvena, and Serrana, where Augustin Pe∣dro Serrana lost his Vessel, and saved only himself; and here in a lonesom and solitary condition spent three years without any company; after which, another Mariner, who was likewise shipwrackt upon that Coast, and saved none but himself, bore him company for four years longer. But although there areas yet no more Towns in Jamaica, yet there are divers Villages or Pa∣rishes which are well inhabited by the Englsh, in every one whereof, they have very good Plantati∣ons
well-situated, and furnished with all things necessary; especially all the Southern part, from Point Morant in the East, to Point Negrillo in the West, and so far as the Ridge or Chain of Moun∣tains that runs along the middle of the Isle. Nor are its Northern parts, especially near the Sea, without Inhabitants, who have seated themselves in good Plantations; and although they are not here so thick as on the South-side, yet they do of late very much increase and augment the number both of Persons and Plantations. The whole Island is divided in∣to fourteen Parishes,Its Division and Number of Inhabitants. Divisions, or Precincts; which are, for the sa∣tisfaction of the Reader, all set forth in the Map, and the several Places throughout the whole Island where the En∣glish have made any Settlements, marked and di∣stinguished by Cyphers. The Names of the Parishes on the South-side, are as follow; Port Royal, St. Katherines, St. John's, St. An∣drew's, St. David's, St. Thomas, Clarendon; in which seven Parishes, there are according to the best computation, about five thousand Families, and about forty five thousand Inhabitants. On the North-side are, St. George's, St. Maries, St. Annes, and St. Jame's. On the East-side, is St. Elizabeth, and two Parishes more near ad∣joyning to it, the one on the East, and the other on the North of it; all which likewise begin to grow very populous, and are supposed to contain near six thousand Inhabitants: And the great En∣couragement of gaining Riches, doth every year cause abundance of People to quit their Concerns
at Barbados, and other of our American Plan∣tations, to come and inhabit here; so that in a little time it will, in all probability, with∣in a few years become the richest, and the most populous, and potent Plantation in all the West-Indies. But besides these Inhabitants of the fourteen Precincts, there are reckoned to belong to Jamaica four thousand Privateers, Sloop and Boat-men, that ply up and down about the Isle, who are all stout, resolute, fighting Men; which they have sufficiently demonstrated in their late Exploits, and desperate Attempts upon the Spaniards in Panama, and other Parts in the South-Seas. This Isle abounds with many ex∣cellent Commodities; as,Its Product. SƲGARS, which are so good, that they out∣sell those that are made in Barbados five shillings per Cent. There are near an hundred of these Sugar-Works, which produced every year above two hundred thousand weight of Sugar: These Sugar-Works are likewise continually increasing every year, and new are always going up. CACAO, whereof we make Chocolate, is, by reason of the natural aptness of the Ground to produce and bear it, the most beneficial and staple Commodity of the Island; there being near an hundred Cacao-Walks, besides abundance of young ones newly planted and growing up, and others that are still planting; so that it will in time be∣come the most noted place for that Commodity in the World; which will redound to the great ad∣vantage of the Planters, in regard it is so much used by us and other neighbouring Nations, espe∣cially the Spaniards, who use such vast quantities of it, they alone are enough to take off all that
the Island produces; so that there is no fear that it will ever prove a Drug, and lie upon their hands. INDICO, which the Isle produces in great abundance, and very good, there being already above eighty Indico-Works, which produce above sixty thousand weight of Indico per annum; which Works do likewise very much increase every year. COTTON is another of their Products, which is very fine, and is therefore preferred by all that deal in that Commodity, before that which grows in any of the Caribby Islands. TOBACCO, which is here indifferent good, being accounted much better than that which grows at Barbadoes, but other Commodities pro∣ving more beneficial to the Islanders, there is not much of it planted, only what serves for their own spending. TORTOISE-SHELLS, which are in so much esteem with us in England for several cu∣rious Works, and therefore find as ready a vent as any Commodity whatsoever that is brought us from beyond the Seas. There are abundance of them taken on this Coast, there being a fur∣ther end in the taking them, besides the Merchan∣dizing of the Shells, for their Flesh are excellent Meat. HIDES, great quantities, whereof have been yearly made there, and are found to be very large and good. WOODS for the use of Dyers, whereof there are great variety, as Fustick, Red-Wood, &c. Here is likewise Cedar, Mathogency, Brasilletto, Lignum Vitae, Ebony, Granadilla, and divers other excellent sweet smelling and curious Woods, fit for the choicest Works, whose Names are yet unknown,
and so indeed are their excellencies; however, great quantities of 'em are continually exported thence, and great profit made of them. SALT is another of the Products of this Island, which might be made here in great quan∣tities, there being already three very large Salt-Ponds, containing near Four thousand Acres of ground, and there was made, in one Year, about Ten thousand Bushels; and the manager of it, Captain John Noye, affirmed, That he could as well have made so many Tun, if they had had vent for it. But, at present, they make little more than what is spent in the Island. Nor is it altoge∣ther void of other Salts, there having been good quantities of Nitre found in divers places in the Isle. GINGER, grows better there, than it doth in many other of the Caribby Islands, which hath occasioned the planting great quantities of it. COD-PEPPER likewise, which is a Spice very much used in all the West-Indies, grows in great plenty there; and so doth PIEMENTO, or a certain Spice which is better known by name of Jamaica-Pepper, very aromatical, and of a curious flavor, having the ex∣act taste both of Cinamon and Cloves, with a complicated mixtute of divers other sweet and cu∣rious Spices. This Spice the Island doth naturally produce; for it grows wild upon the mountainous parts of it; some whereof are plantable, and others so stony, that are unplantable; but both are generally covered with excellent Timber and great abundancy of Fruit and Spice-trees. The Spaniards, when they enjoyed the place, set a high value upon this Spice, and exported it as a very choice Commodity, as indeed it is; and the En∣glish
finding so good a vent for it, intend to imi∣tate them therein, and begin now to bring it into their Plantations, which will in time turn them to great account. DRƲGS, which this Island produces in great abundance, as, Guiacum, China-roots, Sarsaparilla, Cassia-Fistula, Tamerinds, Vinello's and Achiots or Anetto, which is like to prove a good Commodity. There are also divers sorts of GƲMS and Roots wherewith experienced Planters cure divers Wounds, Ulcers and other Maladies; as, Aloes, Benjamin, and the like: And by the report of an intelligent Physician, who made it his business to enquire and search after such things, there is likewise Cyperas, Contrayerva, Adjunctum nigrum, Cucumis agrestis, Sumach, Aca∣cia, Misleto, with many other Drugs, Balsams and Gums, whose Names and Virtues are not known or remembred. However the Planters begin every year to be better and better acquainted with their Nature and Use, and endeavour to encrease them, in order to their supplying England with them. COCHANEIL is likewise produced by a Plant that grows in this Isle; but the English, being as yet not very well skill'd in husbanding of it, and the East-winds, and many other things being enemies to its growth, its product is not very considerable. These, and the like Commodities are the Pro∣duct of this Island, which the English have already, and will in a little time improve to that degree, that it will quickly become the best and the rich∣est Plantation that they ever were or are like to be Masters of; especially if they should find out the Copper Mines, which the Spaniards say to be in
this Island, with some whereof they affirm the Bells that hung in the great Church at St. Jago to be cast. And the Silver Mines, which may pro∣bably be here as well as in Cuba and the Main Con∣tinent, since the Spaniards affirm they found one behind the Mountains, on the West of Cag∣way. But before I pass from this Discourse, of the Product of Jamaica, I shall give you an account of the manner of managing a Cacao Walk, in re∣gard it is the Chief Commodity of the Island, with a particular calculation of the change in Planting, and the profits that arise from it, as it was lately estimated by a very judicious and understanding person, and one who hath gi∣ven great incouragement to divers of the Planters there. When a person, who intends to settle at Jamaica, arrives,Of a Cocao Walk. af∣ter he hath taken a view of the Country, his first work must be to take up Six hundred Acres of Land, which must be chosen in a good place, that so the Land may be proper to produce the Nut; which Grant, for the Patent and Surveying, will cost Ten Pounds. Having taken up his Land, he must provide himself of three Negro Men, and as many Women; which, at Twenty Pounds per head, will come to an Hundred and twenty Pounds; with four White Servants, which, with their Passage and Diet for a Year, will cost him about Eighty Pounds; with Twenty Axes, and the like number of Bills and Hoes, which will cost him about Five Pounds; and with an Overseer, to look after his Servants and keep them to their work, whose Wages and Diet, at Forty Shillings a Month, will cost him Twenty
four Pounds: All which, with Eighteen Pounds, which the Provisions for his Six Negro Servants, will, at Four Pence per day, each of them cost him for the first six Months, till his own Plantation is capable of maintaining them, is Two hundred fifty seven Pounds, Five Shillings. When this is done, his next business is to set his Servants to work, whose first imployment must be to cut down the Wood, and clear a convenient place, whereon to build fitting Houses for their Lodging; which, if they begin with March, they will have effected by the middle of that Month: After which, he must set them to felling the Tim∣ber, grubbing up the Roots, and clearing a piece of Ground, of four Acres, whereon to plant Po∣tatoes; all which planting, and all, with the help of his Servants, will be easily effected by the middle of April. And then his best way is to set them to prepare more Ground, which he may plant with Plantane-Trees, and other things, (which he thinks he shall first want, for the enabling his Plantation to subsist of its self) till the begin∣ning of February, which compleats the Year. In which time they may, with ease, prepare and plant about one or two and twenty Acres, and the Plantation will be able to live of its self, for they will now be full of Potatoes and Corn, and within two Months of the new Year with Plan∣tanes, which, together with his stock of Hoggs and Fowls will sufficiently furnish him with Provi∣sions for his Servants. To improve this Ground, and plant the Cacao-Walk, he must, about the beginning of the next March, provide himself with five Negro men more, and as many Women, which will come to Two hundred pounds more: And that Month he must
imploy all the hands he has in planting Cacao-Trees between all the Rows of Plantanes, which, by this time are grown to be six foot high, and, by the be∣ginning of June, he will have, besides much other work done, the whole twenty one Acres, which were planted the year before with Cacao-Trees, which, in less than four years, will begin to bear Cods, and, in five years, produce compleat Crops, each Acre affording yearly to the Planter a Thou∣sand Weight of Cacao-Nuts, which is there worth about four Pounds per cent. so that the twenty one Acres, which are already planted and come to per∣fection, are worth Eight hundred and forty Pounds per Annum. And the whole Expence, together with Forty two Pounds fifteen Shillings more, al∣lowed for gathering and housing them, amounts but to Five hundred Pounds, so that the profit will be very considerable. All the Work, already mentioned, will be per∣formed in fifteen Months, and the remaining time, till the Cacaoes come to perfection, which will be somewhat better than four year, he may imploy in increasing the Walk, building convenient Houses, and making of Gardens for pleasure: Or, if the smalness of his Stock will not permit him to for∣bear his Money till the Cacaoes come to bear com∣pleatly, he may fall to planting Ginger, Indico, or some such kind of Commodity for present profit. And according to this Calculation the plant∣ing of a smaller or a larger Walk may be ef∣fected. There is in this Island a greater plenty of CattelTheir Cattel. than in most of the English Plantations in America. Horses so much abound there, that one of the bet∣ter
sort may be bought for six or seven Pounds. Their Cows are very large, and so numerous, that notwithstanding there have been great numbers of them killed every year, yet the number of them seems not to be lessened. Asnegroes and Mules, both wild and tame, in great abundance, which are found to be very serviceable to the Inhabitants. Their Sheep are likewise very large and tall, the Flesh whereof is very good, but the Wool long, hairy, and little worth. They have great plenty of Goats, which thrive and increase there exceed∣ingly, the Country being found very fit for them. Hoggs they have likewise in exceeding great plenty, as well wild in the Mountains, as tame in the Plan∣tations; the Flesh whereof is far better tasted, more nourishing, and much easier to be digested, than those of Europe; which is the reason why it is so much eaten in this, and indeed in all the other Islands throughout all the West Indies. They have also plenty of Rabbits, but no Hare nor Deer in all the Island. Jamaica very much abounds both in its Rivers,Their Fish. Bays, Roads, and Creeks, with great variety of excellent Fish, the great abundance whereof very much contri∣butes to the feeding of the Inhabitants, and others who frequent the Island. 'Tis true, indeed, they have none of those sorts common to us, but such vast variety of those appropriated to the Indies, that it would be too tedious to repeat their Names, were they known or remembred. The principal sort of those Fish, is the Tortoise, which are taken in such plenty about twenty or thirty Leagues to the Leeward of Port Nigril, near the Isles of Camavos, that great store of Ships from divers of the Caribby Islands resort thither
to victual and load therewith, its Flesh being re∣puted the wholsomest and best Provision in all the West-Indies. There are in Jamaica great store of tame Hens, Turkies, some eese and Ducks, but of Wild FowlTheir Fowl. such plenty, that it is almost incredible, viz. Ducks, Teal, Wigeon, Geese, Turkies, Pigeons, Guinea Hens, Plover, Flemingo's, Snipes, Parots, Para∣cheto's, with abundance more, whose Names are not yet known. There are in Jamaica very few obnoxious Beasts, and scarce any venomous things, either Animal or Vegetable.Animals and Vegetables. The most conside∣rable of all the obnoxious Creatures which infest this Isle, is the Alligator, a very voracious Crea∣ture, which in many of their Rivers and Land-Ponds, lives by preying upon such Beasts and Fowls as come thither to drink, which they catch and kill with the more ease and facility, by lying stretch'd forth upon the brinks of the Rivers, like a piece of dry Wood, which in that posture they very much resemble, so that the innocent crea∣tures approach the fatal place without the least dread of so cruel an entertainment as they meet withal from that remorsless adversary. They are ten, fifteen, and some twenty foot long, having four Feet, or rather Fins, wherewith they both walk and swim; they move forward with great swiftness and strength, but are not able to turn without much tediousness and trouble; their Back and Sides are so covered with Scales, that they are impenetrable and scarcely to be killed, unless the weapon pierce their Eye or Belly, notwithstand∣ing which they are rarely known to set upon a Man.
They breed like a Fowl, by Eggs no bigger than those of a Turky, which, having laid in the Sand, not far from the Water, she leaves the Sun-beams to hatch, without ever looking after them more: And the young ones, so soon as ever they have broke the shell, naturally creep into the water, and shift for themselves, by preying upon such things as they are able to master. But tho' the Alligator be so hurtful a creature whilst living, yet at his death he makes a retalia∣tion, and in some measure repairs the dammages of his life; for, besides their Fat, which is a sovereign Balm for internal Aches and Pains in the Joynts and Bones, they have in them Musk-Cods, stronger sented than those of the East-Indies; by which strong sent they are discovered and avoided, and, it is supposed, that the Cattel, by an instinct of nature, are likewise sensible of it, and do by that means often shun them. There is likewise the Manchonle, a kind of Crab, common to all the Caribby Islands; And Snakes and Guiana's, but they have no poisonous quality ob∣served in them. There are also in some parts of the Isle Muskettoes, and Merry-wings, but they are seldom found in any of the English Planta∣tions. It is confirmed by a long expe∣rience,Their Diseases. that there is no such anti∣pathy betwixt our Britanick Tem∣per and the Climate of Jamaic, as to necessitate them to any Distemper upon their arrival there, or occasion Diseases to prove mortal or conta∣gious more than in other parts. The Dropsie, Ca∣lentures, Feavers and Agues, are the Maladies most incident to the Inhabitants, which are generally procured by Surfeits, Slothfulness, or excessive
drinking; and although they are found to be more acute there, than with us, yet they seldom prove mortal: And the only reason that can be given for the great Mortality in the Army upon their first Arrival there, is, their want of Provisi∣ons, and their discontent, together with their unwillingness to labour and exercise themselves. The GardensTheir Gardens. adjoyning to the Planters Houses, are besides great variety of curious and delightful Flowers, and wholesom Medicinal Herbs proper to the Island, sufficiently stored with all man∣ner of Summer-Garden-Herbs and Roots common to us in England; as, Pease, Beans, Cabbage, Car∣rots, Turnips, Radishes, Onions, Lettuce, Pursley, Colli-flowers, Cucumbers, Melons, Parsley, and other Pot-herbs. The LawsTheir Laws. of Jamaica are as near as the different Cir∣cumstances of the Places will admit assimilated to those of England; and they have their several Courts, Magistrates and Officers, for executing their Laws, hearing and determinating all Causes and Controversies between party and party. Having now given a short and brief Description of this Island of Jamaica, and of whatsoever is worth observation in it, I shall next acquaint you with the State of it in the Spaniards time, and shut up my Discourse about it, with some Considerati∣ons relating to our English Affairs in America, to∣gether with some Reasons to justifie the first De∣sign in taking it, and why His Majesty should keep and support it. Columbus,Its first Disco∣very. having in the Year 1492. discover'd the Lucca's Islands, Hispaniola and Cuba, soon after
returned for Spain, to give that King an account of his Discoveries, and provide himself with Con∣veniencies for a second Voyage; which he under∣took so soon as all things were ready: And in this Voyage endeavouring to sail round Cuba, the bet∣ter to satisfie himself whether it were an Island, or a part of the Continent, he discovered the Island of Jamaica; where he made some short stay, and gave it the Name of St. Jago. In his third Voyage, he was shipwrack'd on this Coast,Columbus ship∣wrack'd and and driven to that extremity, that he was compelled to run his Ships on ground in a Port on the North-side of this Isle, to which he gave the Name of Sancta Gloria; where, having lashed them together, he lodged himself and his men on the Decks, not da∣ring to Land, in regard the Inhabitants were nu∣merous; and there had like to have ended his Life and his Discoveries together; the ungrateful Spa∣niard, especially the malicious Governor of St. Do∣mingo, who hated him extreamly for his fortunate Success, refused to send him any Relief, with a Design that he should perish in that sad and discon∣solate condition; but having after two Months lying in that deplorable condition, obtained the good opinion of the Natives, he Landed, and finding the Ground fertile, and the Natives more Civil and Ingenious than what he had met withal in any of the other Islands, he resolved to fall to Planting: In order whereunto, the Town called Metilla, was presently begun by the Spaniards; but before it was far advanced, they deserted it again, and setled ten Leagues further West; where they met with a better Bay, whereunto they gave the Name of St. Annes; which it still retains.
Near this Place they built a handsom large Town, called Sevil, which hath been already de∣scribed: But finding in time that the South-side was more fruitful and pleasant, about the Year 1590. the Spaniards forsook this likewise, and removed thither; where they built St. Jago;St. Jago built. which they en∣joyed without any trouble or mo∣lestation, till it was about 1638. surprized and taken by one Jack∣sonTaken by Jack∣son. with a Fleet of English Pri∣vateers; but having no Design but Pillage, when he had plundered the Town, he surrendred it up again to the Spaniards for a thou∣sand Beavers. More fatal to the Spaniard was the next Attempt made on this Island; for Crom∣welCromwel's Pre- having turned out the Rump, usurp'd the Title of Protector, and made peace with the Hollander, found him∣self at leisure to try his Fortune in the Indies, and endeavour by a strange kind of a sudden and unex∣pected Enterprize against the Spaniards (with whom he was about this time highly offended, for giving entertainment to his injured Sovereign) to make his Name as terrible in those remoter parts of the Earth, as his Treason and Usurpa∣tion had rendered it in Europe. In order where∣unto, having with great hurry and silence got ready a great Fleet, he sent it under Penn, who was General at Sea, and Venables, who had the Command of the Land-Forces. Having after their leaving the English Coast, toucht at Barbados, they sailed from thence di∣rectly towards Hispaniola, without making any Declaration of War against the Spanish King, and
had certainly surprized and taken Domingo, and consequently the whole Island, had not his being ruled by some strange Councils of his own, or (as some report) by his Wife, ruined the whole Design, and frustrated the Usurper of his Golden Expectations: For so terrified were the Spaniards at the sudden approach of this mighty Fleet, and the Fame of Cromwel's constant Success in all he undertook, that in great amazement and fear they forsook the Town, and left it as a prey to those new invaders, had they been speedy enough in taking possession: But seeing Venables land his Souldiers at so great a distance as 12 leagues to the westward of it, they re-assumed their courage, and betook themselves again to the defence of it. The English finding no opposition at their Land∣ing, thought themselves Lords of the Indies, and began in their own thoughts to share the Golden Mines among themselves; which they had perad∣venture effected, had not Venables's covetous hu∣mour, and an insatiable desire to appropriate all to himself, by forbidding the Souldiers by Pro∣clamation made at the Head of the Army to med∣dle with any of that rich Booty, or presume to kill any Cattle without leave, together with their tedious and disconsolate March through thick Woods, and deep scalding Sands, ready to die with Thirst, so damped their Spirits, and lost their wonted Courage, that they became an easie prey to the wary Spaniard, who taking them at that advantage, and setting upon them at unawares,The English disappointed & beaten. destroyed them without resistance, even till they were weary of killing, and Major Gen. Haines and between six or se∣ven hundred more left both their Lives and their
expected Booty behind them to pay for Venables's Folly, besides near as many more which were killed in stragling Parties; the whole Execution being performed with the loss of sixty persons on the Spaniards side. Having thus frustrated their Expectations by their unadvised Landing, and lost all hope of win∣ning that Town, they resolve however not to lose the whole Voyage without gaining something from the Spaniard, and therefore next directed their Course to Jamaica, wherein was at that time but one only Town (viz.) St. Jago, with∣in which Place dwelt all the Spaniards that were in the Isle, who kept their Slaves at several little Plantations in the Country, from whence they were continually supplied with store of Fruits and Provisions, which they luxuriously spent in their Houses, that being a lazy People, who are natu∣rally so proud, that they think it below them to take pains; designing nothing more but only to live in ease and plenty, their whole number, Slaves and all, not exceeding three Thousand. Upon the Landing of the En∣glish Army,They take Ja∣maica. the Inhabitants of St Jago forsook the Town, and betook themselves to the Moun∣tains; but after divers Skirmishes and Surprisals on both sides, seeing but little hopes of regaining the Island, several of the most considerable among them got into Cuba, but were soon after com∣manded back again by the Vice-roy of Alexico, with promises of a speedy supply to be sent after them. The Vice-roy's Promise was long before it was performed; and when the Succour came, it was but five hundred men, who refused to joyn with them, in regard they were so few in num∣ber,
and by this time grown very sickly, but for∣tified themselves at a place called St. Chereras, ex∣pecting to receive more Recruits; but the English finding them out before they came, marched im∣mediatly against them, and defeated them, and so they did about thirty Companies of Spanish Souldiers that arrived soon after; which bad Suc∣cess made the Spaniards despair of ever regaining the Island. Whereupon the English began now to form themselves into a Body or Colony; some set∣ling themselves in Plantations, and others ventu∣ring to Sea as Privateers, the better to secure themselves against the Spaniards, and force them to consent to a Peace, by their frequent annoying them, and seizing such of their Ships as they met withal; in which they proved so very successful, that Jamaica began to be much talked of, and had in great esteem in England, and fresh Supplies of Men, Ammunition, and other Necessaries were sent them thence; and so by little and little it came to its present Potency, wherein His Majesty will without doubt take care to preserve and sup∣port it, upon the following Considerations: 1. Its being so large and capacious, that it is ca∣pable of entertaining a far greater number of People than any other Island enjoyed by the En∣glish in that part of the World. 2. Its being so seated in the heart of the Spa∣nish Territories in America, that their Ships, as they come thither, and pass from Port to Port, make this Isle, or may be easily met with by those Ships that ply upon the Coast; for all the Plate-Fleet, in their return from Carthagena, steer di∣rectly from St. Domingo, and pass by one of the ends of this Isle, to recover Havana, which is the common Rendezvouz of the Spanish Armado,
before they sail home through the Gulph of Florida. Nor indeed is there any other way; for the Voyage would be too unreasonable long should they turn it to the Windward of Hispaniola; by which means, besides the great difficulty of its performance, they would lose the benefit of uniting the Fleets from Mexicos Nombre de Dios, and other places, at their common Rendezvouz at Havana, wherein their greatest Security lies; for from thence they sail all home in company together. 3. In regard Jamaica exceeds all the rest of our Plantations in America for the goodness of those Commodities proper to their several Colonies; and is besides its being so profitable in furnishing us with excellent Commodities, it likewise takes off abundance of our Manufactures, both of the product of this Kingdom, and such as are brought us from Parts beyond the Seas. 4. Because it appears to be a place considerable enough to deserve His Majesties Care for its pre∣servation, not only by its subsisting of its self when first taken; but likewise by its increasing its Potency and Grandeur, so that it will in all pro∣bability become in a little time very profitable both to the King and Kingdom, and bring into His Majesties Treasury several hundred thousand Pounds per Annum. 5. This Island being (when setled) of its self able to carry on a War against the Spaniards, when the Affairs of England shall require it. 6. The considerable progress already made in the Settlement of this Isle; nor can its distance be any real disadvantage, since the greater num∣ber of Ships are thereby employed, and conse∣quently the more Saylors, Ship-wrights, and other Tradesmen, whose Livelihood depends upon trade
at Sea. Besides, if it lay nearer, we could expect no such Commodities as we receive from thence, in regard they are appropriated to that Clime. And it must certainly be a great advantage to His Ma∣jesty to have such Merchandize within His own Dominions, as are both valued and needed by His Subjects and Neighbours, as the Cacao is, though it be at a distance. 7. The Coast of Virginia, and some of the Ca∣ribby-Islands are subject to such Gusts of Wind, that Ships are often driven to put to Sea, and fly for shelter to some or other of the Spanish Lee∣ward Ports, where they were wont to be made Prizes of; but Jamaica, since it hath fallen into our hands, hath proved a convenient Harbour for such Ships or Vessels as are at any time thus distressed; which is an Argument sufficient to perswade His Majesty to undertake its Support and Defence. A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of BARBADOS. BARBADOS is the most considerable Co∣lony which the English enjoy amongst all that Fry of Isles usually called Caribbies, and lies in 13 degrees,Its Situation. 20 minutes
map of Barbados The Island of BARBADOS. By Robert Morden.
Northern Latitude on this side the Equator; and though it be not above eight Leagues in Length, and five in breadth, where it is broadest (being exactly of an oval form) yet it is a place of great strength and potency; for besides it being naturally strong, and fortified as it were to their hands, they are able to raise ten thousand sighting men, and bid desiance to the stoutest Enemy; as appears by the several vain attempts the Spaniard hath made upon it: It is notwithstanding the smalness of its Compass, so well peopled, that it contains upwards of fifty thousand Inhabitants, besides Negro-Slaves, who are a far greater num∣ber. It was first discovered in the Reign of King James the First,Its first Disco∣very. by Sir William Curteen, who return∣ing homewards from Fernambuck in Brazil, was driven by a storm upon this Coast, and anchoring before the Isle, he went with some of his Company ashore, to inform himself of the Nature of the Place; which he found so exceed∣ingly overgrown with Woods, that they could find no plain or champaign ground sit to inhabit, nor any ether Beasts but Swine, which the Por∣tugals, having formerly put on shore here, to fur∣nish them with Provisions in case they should be cast on that shoar by foul weather, had by this time multiplied abundantly, the Fruits and Roots that grew there serving them for food; so that the Natives of the adjacent Islands (for there were none in this) were used to come thither frequently to kill them. Having made this Discovery, and informed himself as well as he could of the Nature and Condition of the Island, he gave notice thereof
to his Friends in England; from whence divers Ships were with all convenient speed dispatched thither; who, upon their Arrival, applied them∣selves to the rendering the Island sit for Habitation. In order to which, they cut down the Woods, and planted Potatoes and Maiz; which, together with the Swine which they found there, did but just keep Life and Soul together; for having as yet no∣thing to trade withal, Ships from England visited them but slowly; so that they were oft-times driven to great extremities: But having about the year 1627. increas'd the number of its Inhabitants, and Tobacco, Indico, Cotton-wool, Fustick-wood, and the like, begun to grow there, and afford great increase, the Island began to gain more repute in England, and invited divers Ships, in hope of gain, to trade with them, exchanging divers sorts of working-tools made of Iron and Steel, together with Cloth, Shirts, Drawers, Hose, Shoes, Hats, Servants, and other things which they needed, for Tobacco and other things which the Island pro∣duced. After which, they grew and increased wonderfully both in number and wealth; especi∣ally when their Sugar-Canes were grown, and they had learned the Art of making Sugar. This Isle is very hot, especially for eight Months,Its Tempera∣ture. and would be more insupportable, were it not for the cool Briezes of Wind, which rise with the Sun, and blow fresher as the Sun mounteth higher. And these Briezes blow al∣way from the North-East, except it be in the time of the Turnado, and then for an hour or two it chops into the South; but after returns to the same Point again. And it is observed, that al∣though the People do so much sweat, yet they
find not that faintness as with us in England in the Months of July and August; neither are they so thirsty, unless over-heated by excess of Labour, or drinking of strong Liquors, which the People here are too much addicted unto, to their great hurt; which, if moderately taken, would be as a great preservative to comfort and refresh their inward parts, which are left cold and faint through their sweating. Besides, our Bodies being accustomed to colder Climates, our Spirits are not so vigorous without them in a moderate manner. This Isle is not over-plentifully watered with Rivers or fresh Springs,Its Waters. there being but one that can appropriate to itself that Name, or rather a Lake which runs not far into the Land; yet not∣withstanding, the Inhabitants are not destitute thereof; for the Country lying low and level, there are several Pools or Ponds; and besides they are supplied with Rain-water by having Wells and Cisterns in their Houses. Here is also a River which the Inhabitants call Tuigh-River, from the top of whose water is ga∣thered an Oyl which serveth them to burn in their Lamps. This Isle is exceeding fertil,Its Fertility. bearing Crops all the year long, and its Trees being always cloathed in their Sum∣mer-Livery, and the Fields and Woods in their ver∣dure, renders it very delightful to the Inhabitants. But the two principal seasons of the year for plant∣ing, are in May and November, but the Sugar-Canes are planted all the year round, the making of which is not only very chargeable, but also as dange∣rous, and subject to casualties, either in the Boyling-house, with the Coppers and Furnaces,
in the Filling-Room, in the Still-House, or in the Curing-House. The Commodities this Island produceth,Its Commodities. are Sugars (which though not so white as those of Brazile, yet better when refined, being of a fairer grain) Indico, Cotton-wool, Ginger, Logwood, Fustick, and Lignum vitae; and these Commodities, espe∣cially Sugar, Indico, Cotton and Ginger, here are in such great abundance, that about two hundred Sail of Ships and Vessels, both great and small, have yearly their loading; which, after imported in the several Ports of England and Ireland, is again in great quantities exported to foreign parts, to our great enrichment; and the rather, for that they are not permitted to trade with any other Nation but the English, and such of His Majesties Subjects in New-England, Virginia and Bermudas; and in exchange of those Commodities, they take such as are necessary for the use of man, as well for the Back and Belly, as for their Houses and Plantations; with many of which they are sup∣plied from New-England, Virginia, and the Ber∣mudas, together with Servants and Slaves, with several sorts of Commodities and Provisions, as, Horses, Camels, Assinegroes, Cattel, also salted Flesh, and Fish of several sorts; Butter and Cheese; but by reason of the great heat of the weather, it will soon stink, and become unfit to eat; so that instead of Butter, they make great use of Oyl for their Sauces. The Dayes and Nights are almost throughout the year of an equal length, the Sun rising and setting at six, except about October, and then there is some small difference.
The Ayr,The Ayr. though hot, is very moist, which causeth all Iron-Tools, as Knives, Swords, Locks, Keys, &c. to rust; so that without constant usage, they will soon become eaten up with Rust. And this great heat and moisture doth cause the Plants and Trees to grow so large and high. Here are abundance of Fruits of all sorts; as, Dates,The Fruits. Oranges two sorts, the one sweet, and the other sharp, Pomgranates, Citrons, Limes, Limons, Macows, Grapes, Juniper-Apples, Papayers, Momins, Mombains, Acajous, Icacos, Cherries, Raisins, Indian-Figs, Cocoes, Plantins, Bononoes, Guavars, Prickle-Apples, Prickle-Pears, Custard-Apples, Melons, both Land and Water, and Pine-Apples, the rarest Fruit in the Indies. Here are great store of Fish in the Sea; as, Snappers, Crabs,Their Fish. Lobsters, Terbums, Macquerels, Mullets, Cavalloes, Parrot-Fish, Cony-Fish, and Green Turtles; which of all others, are the most delicious; with several other sorts appropriated to this and the rest of the Caribby-Isles; but the Rivulets or Ponds have few or no Fish in them. Here are no Beasts or Cattel but what are tame,Their Cattel. and brought them; as, Camels, Horses, Assine∣groes, Oxen, Bulls, Cows, Sheep, Goats and Hogs? which are here in great plenty in every Plantation, it being their common Food; whose Flesh is esteem∣ed very good and delicious; but as for Beef and Mutton, it is very dear, as having but a small stock; but might be soon increased, would they spare ground enough for Pasturage for them from their other occasions.
Here groweth divers sorts of English Herbs and Roots;Their Herbs. as, Rosemary, Lavender, Lavender-Cotton, Marjoram, Winter-Savoury, Time, Parsley, Tanscy, Sage, Purslan, &c. And for Roots, Cab∣bages, Coleworts, Colliflowers, Turnips, Potatoes, Onions, Garlick, Radishes, Lettice, Taragon, Mari∣golds, &c. Here are several sorts of Fowls, as,Their Fowls Turkeys, Hens, Muscovy-Ducks, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, &c. And for small Birds, great variety; as, Thrushes, Black-Birds, Sparrows, &c. Here are several AnimalsAnimals. and Insects; as, Snakes a yard and half long, Scorpions as big as Rats, but no way hurtful to Man or Beast; Lizards, which are exceeding harmless, much frequenting the Houses, and loving the company of Men; Muske∣toes, Cockroches, and Merriwings, which are very troublesom in the Night in stinging; also there are Land-Crabs, which are found good to eat. Here are great variety of Trees,Trees. fit for several Uses; as, the Locust, Mastick, Red-wood, the Iron-wood-tree and Cedar, which are fit for Building. Also the, Cassia-Fistula, Coloquintida, Tamarind, Cassary, of which is made their Bread; the Poyson-Tree, and the Physick-Nut, these have a Physical, and some a Poysonous Vertue in them. Also here are these trees following, the Calibash, the shell of whose fruit serveth to carry liquid things in, being of the na∣ture of Gourds; the Mangrass-tree, which is of an exceeding greatness, the Roucou, of whose Bark is made Ropes; as also Flax, which being spun, is employed to several uses, the Lignum Vitae, the
Palmeto, which is very large, and beautiful to be∣hold; with several others. In this Island are divers Caves, some of which are very deep, and large enough to hold five hun∣dred men; and these Caves are often the Sanctua∣ry of such Negro-Slaves that run away; in which they lie a good while before they are found out; seldom stirring in the day-time, although they are such unwholsome places, by reason of the great damps that are found in them: And it is supposed that these Caves were the Habitation of the Na∣tives. They have a Drink call'd Mobby,Their Drink. made of Potatoes soaked in water; another named Prino, made of Cassavy-Root and Water, which, though it is not so pleasant, yet is reckoned much better, made by the Indians for their own drinking, which in it self is a strong Poyson, and this they cause their old Women, whose Breath and Teeth have been tainted with divers Poxes, to chew and spit out in the water, for the better breaking and macerating the Root, and in a few hours this Juice will purge itself of its poysonous qualities; for their poyson∣ous Breath, and the poyson of the Cassary, being opposites, work with such vehemency, that they spend their poysonous qualities in the conflict; they likewise drink Crippo, Kill-Devil, Punch, Plum-Drink, Plantane-Drink, a strong Drink made of the skimming of Sugar, Beveridge, made of Spring-water, Sugar, and the Juice of Oranges, and Wine of Pines, which is only made of the Juice of the Fruit, which is the best of all. Their MeatTheir Meats. is generally Hogs-Flesh, salted Flesh or Fish, and when any of the Cattel die by any distemper, or by ac∣cident,
it is given to the Negroes, who feed like Princes on it; but they are commonly contented from weeks end to weeks end, with Potatoes, Lob∣lolly made of Maize mixt with water; Cassader-Bread, common in all the Indies, Bonariff, and such like Food that the Plantation affords; as, Pompions as sweet as Melons, Plantanes, Sugar-Canes, &c. They have also Turkeys, Pullets, Muscovy Ducks,Their Fowls. Turtle-Doves, Pi∣geons and Rabbits, with excellent Fish of divers kinds,Their Fish. not known to us, as the Green Turtle, who come in with the Tide, lie upon the Sand till the next return, and are easily taken in Lucaick Islands, though not in this; but sent hither; for it is but turning them on their backs with staves, and there they lie till they are fetched away: A large Turtle (as we have mentioned) will have in her Body half a Bushel of Eggs, which she lays in the Sands, where they hatch by the Sun, When you are to kill one of the Fishes, you lay him on his Back on a Table, and when he sees you come with a knife in you hand to kill him, he sends forth the most grievous sighs that ever were heard, and sheds Tears in abundance; after he is opened, and his Heart taken out, if you lay it in a Dish, it will stir and pant ten hours after the Fish is dead, there is none more delicious in taste, nor more nourish∣ing than he. But as for the Master-planters, Merchants Fa∣ctors, and Strangers, their Fare is far otherwise, having their curious made Dishes; as, Custards, Cheese-Cakes, Tansics, also, Sturgeon, Anchovies, Caveare, Botardo, Neats Tongues; besides Poultrey, Fish, Fowl, Mutton, Beef, Kid, Pork, Beans, Pease, several Roots, and other good Dishes. And be∣sides
the several sorts of Liquors already named, Wines, Strong Waters, Brandy, and English Beer; so that they find no want, and do not consider the condition of those poor wretches, their Ser∣vants and Slaves, who are constrained to so hard a Labour. This Island may be divided in∣to Masters, Servants and Slaves;The Division of the Island. the Masters live in all affluence of Pleasure and Delight. The Apparel they al∣low their Servants yearly, for the Men, are, six pair of Drawers, twelve pair of Shoes, three Monmouth-Caps, six Shirts; and for the Women, four Smocks, three Petticoats, four Coifs, and twelve pair of Shoes, besides a Rug-Gown to each, to keep them warm in the night, and to put on them when they come sweating from their labour. To the Negro-Men they allow but three pair of Canvas Drawers, and to the Women, but three Petticoats. But for themselves (especially the better sort) they are exceeding profuse and costly. The Lodging of these poor Wretches is worst of all; for having laboured all the day in so hot a Country, without any nourishing Diet, at night they must be content to lie hard, on nothing but a Board, without any Coverlet, in their Huts or ra∣ther Hog-sties; but Christian Servants are some∣thing better treated, being allowed Hamocks. Every Sunday (which is the only day of Rest, and should be set apart for the Service of God) they employ either in the getting of the Bark of Trees, and making Ropes with it, which they truck away for Shirts, Drawers, and the like; or else spend the Day in Recreation, as Dancing and Wrestling, which they much delight in, though
they are no great Proficients in either; for in their Dancing they use Antick Actions, their hands ha∣ving more of motion than their feet, and their head than either; nor do the men and women dance together, but apart; the Musick to which they dance being a sort of Kettle-Drums, one bigger than another, which makes a strange and various noise, but whether harmonious I leave to the Judgment of the Reader. The Servants, after five years, become Free∣men of the Island, and then employ their time as may be most to their Advantage; but the Ne∣gro-Slaves and their Children being in bondage for ever, are preserved with greater care, and used with such severity, as occasioned a great conspira∣cy against their Masters some years since; which was so closely carried, as no discovery was made till the day before it was to be acted, and then one of them, either failing of his Courage, or out of Love to his Master, discovered and prevent∣ed it; for which, many of them were put to death, as a Terror to the rest; who being so nu∣merous, might prove dangerous, but that they are kept in such strict aw, and not suffered to touch or handle a Weapon; so that nothing is more ter∣rible to them than Gun-shot; and besides, being of different Countries, do not understand one an∣others Language; for in some of those places in Africa, where petty Kingdoms are, who go to War against one another, the Prisoners that are taken on each side, they sell unto and other Euro∣pean Nations that come to traffick with them; yea, they sell their Subjects, and some poor men their Servants, and sometimes their Wives, for such Traffick as our Merchants bring them; when they are brought hither, the Planters buy them
out of the Ship, where they find them stark na∣ked, and therefore cannot be deceived in any out∣ward infirmity, chusing them as men do Horses in a Fair, and according as they are handsom, lusty, well shapen, and young; the youthfullest and most beautiful yield the greatest price; the ge∣neral rate for the better sort of Negro-Men is thirty pound sterling, and five and twenty for a Woman, is usual; if they buy any that have no Wives, they will come to their Masters and com∣plain they cannot live without, and he provides them one by the next Ships. Religion they have none, yet seem to acknowledge a God, by looking up to Heaven for Revenge when they are wronged: One Negro-Woman being brought abed of two Children, her Husband provided a Cord to hang her, as false to him, but the Overseer prevented it, by telling him, it was common with the English Women, and they liked them the better; yet if he were resolved to hang her, he should be hang'd himself by her, the fear of which hindered him. The Chief TownsChief Towns. of this Isle are St. Michael's, formerly call'd the Bridg-Town, or Indian Bridg, Little Bristol, St. Jame's and Charles-Town, with other Parishes of less Note. 1. St. Michael'sSt. Michaels. is scituate at the bottom of Carlisle-Bay in the Leeward, or Southern part of the Isle, which Bay is very capacious, deep and secure for Ships, being large enough to entertain 500 Vessels at one time. The Town is long, containing several Streets, and graced with abundance of well built Houses. It is very populous, being the residence of the Go∣vernour, or his Deputy, the place of Judicature, and the Scale of Trade, where most of the Mer∣chants
and Factors in the Isle have their Store-Houses for the negotiation of their Affairs; and from these Store-houses or Shops, the Inhabitants are supplied with such Commodities as they have occasion for, in exchange of theirs, which are the product of the Isle. The Town is ill seated, the Ground being lower than the Banks of the Sea; by which means the Spring-Tides do slow over, and there remaining, do make a kind of a moorish Bogg, which doth occasion it to be more unhealth∣ful than the other parts of the Isle. This Town for its Defence, and security of the Ships, hath two strong Forts opposite to each other, with a Platform in the midst, which also commands the Road; all which are well fortified with great Guns, &c. The principal of these Forts is called Charles Fort, being seated in Nedham's Point. 2. Little Bristol,Little Bristol. formerly Sprights Bay, situate about four Leagues Leeward from St. Michaels, hath a commodious Road for Ships, and is a place well frequented and traded unto, and is strongly de∣fended by two powerful Forts. 3. St. James,St. James. formerly called the Hall, seated not far from Bri∣stol, hath the accommodation of a good Road for Ships, and is a place of a consi∣derable Trade, for its defence, besides a large Platform, hath fortified Breast-works, and in this Town is kept for the Precinct, the Monthly Courts. Charles-Town,Charles-Town. seated wind-ward of St. Michaels, about two leagues, and an Oyster-Bay; it is secured by two strong Forts, the one to the windward, and the other to the Leeward of the
Town and Road, with a Platform in the midst. This Town hath the accommodation of week∣ly Markets, and here is kept the Monthly Courts for the Precinct. The other Places of Name along the Sea-coast of this Isle, beginning Easterly, and so encompas∣sing the Isle, are as followeth, Fowl-bay, Augustin's-bay, Maxwell's-bay, where there is a small Isle, Black Rock, The Hole, Spikes-bay, Balises-bay, Long-bay, Clark's-bay, and Constance-bay. This Island is very strong, as well by Nature as Art, being sheltered with Rocks and Shoals, and where Nature hath not thus defended it, it is for∣tified by Trenches and Ramperts, with Pallisado's, Curtains, and Counterscarps; besides, round about the Isle, regarding the Sea, is standing-wood: here are also for its further defence, three Forts, one for a Magazine for the Ammunition and Pow∣der to lie in, and the other two places for Retreats, as occasion serves. They have also, for their further security, a standing Militia, consisting of two Re∣giments of Horse, and five of Foot, which are stout and well-disciplined Men, and always to be ready on beat of Drum. The GovernmentGovernment. is by Laws agree∣able to those in England, for which they have Courts of Judicature, Ju∣stices of Peace, Constables, Church-wardens, and the like. And for the administration of Justice, here are yearly five Sessions. It is divided into Eleven Precincts, wherein are fourteen Churches and Chap∣pels; the whole so filled with Houses, that it may almost seem one great Town. There is a Fish cal∣led a Rock-fish taken near this Island, which is red, intermixt with several other colours very delight∣ful to the eye; And a great Fly, called by the In∣dians,
Cucuyos, which gives such a great light in the night, that it is called the flying Torch of America, not only guiding the Traveller, by shew∣ing his way in the night, but with the assistance of this light a man may easily write and read the smal∣lest Print; that the Indians, having these Flies fasten∣ed to their hands and feet, go a hunting all night by the light of them, which the famous Dubartus thus describes: New Spain's Cucuyo in his forehead brings Two burning Lamps, two underneath his wings, Whose shining Rays serve oft in darkest night Th' Embroiderers hand in Royal-works to light; Th' ingenious Turner with a wakeful eye To pollish fair his purest Ivory; The Ʋsurer to count his glist'ring Treasure; The learned Scribe to limn his golden Measure. Those who are desirous to know more of the Nature of the Sugar-Canes, the manner of their planting, growth, cutting, grinding, boiling, to∣gether with the manner of their conveying the Skimmings into their Cystern, where to distil it for Spirits, how long it continueth in the Curing-house before it become Muscovado-Sugar, together with the manner of its refining and making into Whites, may consult Mr. Richard Ligons description of this Isle, where they will find sufficient satisfa∣ction. The present Governour of the Island of Bar∣bado's is Sir Richard Dutton.
A DESCRIPTION Of the ISLAND of St. CHRISTOPHERS. ST. CHRISTOPHERS, so named from Christopher Columbus, the first discover thereof, who finding it very pleasant, gave it his own Name, which the shape of the Mountains likewise inclined him to, for on its upper part it hath as it were upon one of its shoulders another lesser Mountain, as St. Christopher is painted like a Giant, carrying our Saviour upon his back, like as it were a little Child. It is situated in the la∣titude of 17 degrees,Situation. and 25 minutes on this side the Line; in circuit about 75 Miles: the Land lies high in the midst, by rea∣son of some very high Mountains, from which springs several Rivers, which oftentimes, by rea∣son of the Rains falling from the Mountains, are overflown, to the detriment of the Inhabitants. The SoylThe Soyl. being light and sandy, is apt to produce all sorts of the Country-Fruits, Provision and Commodities, as Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, &c. This Isle by reason of its several great and steep Mountains, between which are dreadful Rocks and Springs of hot and sulphurous Water, with
horrid Precipices and thick Woods, yea some Springs of Sulphur, which causes one of them to be called the Sulphurous Mountain. There is on the Sea-side a Salt-Pit, called Gul∣desac; and not far from the Salt-Pit there is a small Isthmus of Land, which reacheth within a Mile and a half of the Island of Nevis and Mevis. The Island is placed exceeding delightful, and of a most delectable prospect to the eye of the be∣holder, for it is divided into several stages, from the uppermost whereof a man may take an exceed∣ing pleasant prospect of all the Plantations and Gardens, which gently descend to the Sea-side, and in regard of the general ascent of the Isle, the lower stage or story doth not debar the eye of the pleasant prospect of that which lieth at a remoter distance; and that which makes the pro∣spect the more delectable in the several Planta∣tious (which are bounded with Rows of Trees al∣ways in their verdure) are the fair Houses covered with glazed Slate. The whole Island is divided into four Quarters or Cantons; two whereof are possessed by the English, and two by the French, but so separated, that People cannot go from one Quarter to an∣other without passing over the Lands of one of the two Nations. The English have more little Rivers in their Division, the French more of the plain Countrey fit for Tillage. The Engilsh ex∣ceed the French in number, but the French have four Forts; of which, one hath regular Works like a Citadel; that of most note commands the Haven, and is called Basse-Terre; and the English only two, one commanding the great Haven, and the other a Descent not far from Pointe de Sable;
and to prevent Differences between the two Nati∣ons, each of them have a Guard upon the Fronti∣ers of their Division, which is renewed every day. The English have erected five fair Churches, well furnished with Pulpits, and Seats of excellent Joyners Work of precious Wood, the Ministers being sent thither by the Lord Archbishop of Can∣terbury; one of the Churches is at Sandy-Point, one at Palm-Tree, another near the Great Rood, and two at the Inlet of Cayoune, with many fair Stru∣ctures. The French and English Colonies had their be∣ginning at the same time; for in the Year 1625. Monsieur Desnambuck, a French, and Sir Tho∣mas Warner an English Gentleman, joyntly took possession of Sir Christophers on the same day, in the Names of the Kings of Great Britain and France, their Masters, that so they might have a place of safe Retreat, and a good Haven for the Ships of both Nations bound for America, as being well furnished with Provisions, and therefore often vi∣sited by the Spaniards, who sometimes left the Sick there to be looked to by the Caribeans, with whom they had made a Peace upon those Terms. These two Gentlemen, having thus taken pos∣session of the Island, for the better establishment of these Colonies, returned to their respective Countries, leaving some men in it to secure it; but suspecting some private Intelligence between the Indians and Spaniards, for destroying all, both English and French, in their absence, (to prevent which) they in one night rid their Hands of the most factious of that Nation, and soon after for∣ced all the rest, who were got together in several Bodies, and stood upon their Guard, to retire to
some other Islands, and leave that to their Dispo∣sal. After this, they returned home, where their Conquest and Proceeding being approved of by the Kings their Masters, they returned with Re∣cruits of Men, in the quality of Governors and Lieutenants under the Kings of Great Britain and France; and having divided the Island according to their first Agreement; and the English having plentiful Provisions from London, prospered much more than the French, who wanted necessary as∣sistance. The French, besides their several Habitations dispersed up and down in their Quarters, have at Basse-Terre (near the Haven where Ships lie at An∣chor) a Town of a good bigness, whose Houses are well built, of Brick, Free-stone and Timber, where the Merchants have their Store-houses, and is well inhabited by Tradesmen, and are well served with such Commodities both for the Back and Belly, together with Utensils for their Houses and Plantations, as they have occasion for, in ex∣change of such Commodities which are the Pro∣duct of the Island. Here is a fair and large Church, as also a pub∣lick Hall, for the Administration of Justice. Here is also a very fair Hospital, built by the General, for such People as cannot get Cure at their Houses; where they are well maintained, and attended by Physitians for the recovery of their healths. Here is also a stately Castle, being the Residence of the Governour, being most pleasantly seated at the foot of a high Mountain, not far from the Sea, having spacious Courts, delightful Walks and Gardens, which causeth a curious Prospect. In 169. a powerful Fleet from Spain under Don Frederick de Toledo, had received Order from that
King, that before he fell down the Havana, he should touch at St. Christophers, and force from thence all the English and French, who had some time before planted themselves there. This Navy consisted of twenty four great Ships of Burden, and fifteen Frigots, who first seized some English Ships that were lying at Anchor near the Isle of Mevis, and from thence came and cast Anchor in the Road of St. Christophers, in the French Division, and the Forts of both Colonies being not in a con∣dition to stand out a Siege, being unfurnished with Ammunition and Provisions, not being able to withstand so great an Army if all the Forces of the Nations had been in conjunction, which made it a very great discouragement to them; yet re∣solving the Enemy should not boast they had com∣passed their designs without Blows, they made a very vigorous opposition; but being overcome by number, the French forsook the Island; Desnam∣buck embarking all his Men in certain Ships which happened to be in the Haven. Upon this Intelli∣gence, the Quarters of the English were put into very great disorder, and in continual expectation that the Spaniards would fall upon them; some en∣deavouring to escape by Sea, or hide themselves in the Mountains; but others, being more coura∣gious, sent Deputies to Don Frederick, to pro∣pose an accommodation; but all the Answer they received, was an express Command immediately to depart the Island, or to be treated with that rigour which the Law of Arms allowed toward such as wrongfully possess that which belongs not to them; and to speed their departure, he order'd those English Ships should be restored to them that were taken at Mevis, wherein instantly they should imbark for England; and because it was
impossible those Vessels should contain so great a number, he permitted the rest to continue in the Isle till they had opportunity of Transporta∣tion. Upon which, Don Frederick weighed Anchor; but assoon as the Fleet was departed, those of the English that were left, began to rally, and took a resolution to carry on the Settlement of their Colony; during which Transaction at St. Christo∣phers, the French, who went to Sea, having suf∣fered many Inconveniences, were forced to put in at the Islands of St. Martin and Montserrat, but looking on them as Desarts in comparison of the Places they had left, and being desirous to be in∣formed of the condition of the Spaniards there, sent one of their Ships to St. Christophers; who returning, gave them an Account that the Enemy was gone, and the English couragiously employed in re-building, planting and repairing Desolati∣ons. This unexpected good News revived their decayed hopes, and persuaded them to a speedy return; the English Colony with constant sup∣plies from London, for that time grew very pow∣erful, peopling not only this Place, but sending new Plantations from hence to Barbuda, Montser∣rat, Antego, and Barbadoes which are grown very numerous and famous for the Trade of the rich Commodities they are furnished with, as well as this curious Island, whose chiefest Trade is Sugar,Their Com∣modities. Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, with several other sorts of Fruits and Provisions There is in this Isle a very pretty Animal,Animals. called a Recquet, whose Skin is of the colour of a withered Leaf, marked with little yellow or blewish points, they go on four
feet, their fore-feet being highest, their Eyes live∣ly and sparkling, they constantly hold up their heads, and are so very active, that they leap up and down perpetually, like Birds when they make no use of their Wings, their Tails are so turned up towards their back, that they make a Circle and a half; they love to look upon men, and are constantly staring on them; when they are pur∣sued, they open their mouths, and put out their tongues like little Hounds. There is a large Bird in the Carib∣bies called the Engle of Orinoca,Their Fowls. much like an Eagle in shape, all his Feathers are of light Gray, marked with black Spots, save that the end of his Wings and Tail are yellow, he hath a piercing sight, and feeds on other Birds, yet to shew his Generosity, never sets upon the weaker sort, but those that are armed with crooked Beaks and sharp Talons like himself; nay, it is observable, he never seizes his Prey on the Ground or a Tree, but stays till it has taken its slight, that he may engage it in the open Air with equal advantage, upon whom he furiously fastens his Talons, and having mastered them, tears them in pieces and devours them. There is also a large Bird in this Isle called a Craw-Fowl, about the bigness of a great Duck, the Feathers Ash colour, and hideous to the Eye; it hath a long slt back, a great head, small eyes, deep set in his head, and a short neck, under which hangs a Bag or Craw so big that it will contain two Gal∣lons of Water; they are commonly found on Trees by the Sea-side, where, assoon as they per∣ceive a Fish at advantage, they seize it, and swal∣low it whole; they are so attentive on their Fish∣ing, fixing their Eye constantly on the Sea, that
they are easily shot, and become a prey to others: They have such an an admirable Sight, that they will discover a Fish in the Sea at a very great di∣stance, and under Water above a fathom, yet they will not seize until they come almost even with it; their Flesh is not to be eaten: Here are likewise found a kind of Pheasants which are cal∣led Pintadoes, because they are as it were painted with colours, and have about them small points, like so many Eyes on a dark Ground. To conclude with these Fowls, we shall give an account of the Colibry or Humming-Bird, which is admirable for its Beauty, Bulk, sweet Sent, and manner of Life; for being the least of all Birds, he gloriously confirms the Saying of Pliny That Nature is ever greatest in its least productions: Some of these Birds are no bigger bodied than the great∣er sorts of Flies, yet of such beautiful Feathers, that the Neck, Wings and Back represent the Rainbow; there are others that have such a bright red under their Neck, that at a distance one would imagine it to be a Carbuncle, the Belly, and under the Wings as yellow as Gold, the Thighs green like an Emerald, the Feet and Beak as black as polish'd Ebony, the two little Eyes like two Diamonds set in an Oval, of the colour of burnish'd Steel, the Head is grass-green, which gives it such a lustre that it looks as if gilt; the Male hath a little Tuft on the Head, in which may be seen all the Colours which enamel this little Body, the Mira∣cle of this feathered Commonwealth is one of the rarest productions of Nature; he moves that lit∣tle Crown of Feathers at pleasure, and is more beautiful than the Female; as his Bulk and Plu∣mage is miraculous, so is the activity of his flight, making a noise with his wings as if a little whirl∣wind
were raised in the Air of a sudden, which surprizes them that hear him before they see him; he lives only on the dew which he sucks from the flowers of Trees with his Tongue, which is longer than his Beak, hollow as a Reed, and about the bigness of a small Needle; 'tis pleasant to look on him in that posture; for spreading abroad his lit∣tle Crest, one would think he had on his head a Crown of Rubies and all sorts of precious stones, animated, and flying in the Air: The Female com∣monly lays but two Eggs, which are oval, about the bigness of a Pea or small Pearl; and though he lose much of his Beauty when dead, yet there is so much left, that some Ladies have worn them for Pendants, and imagined they became them better than any other; its Smell is so odoriferous, that it is like the finest Musk and Amber. A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of MEVIS. THE Island of Nevis or Mevis lieth not far from St. Christo∣phers,Its Situation. as I have before noted, and in the Latitude of 17 degrees and 19 minutes north of the Line.
It is but small, being not above 18 Miles in Circuit;Its Circuit. and in the midst of the Isle there is but one only Mountain, which is of a great heighth, but of an easie access, and cloathed with Trees up to the very top; about which Mountains are the Plantations, which reach to the Sea-shoar. Here are divers Springs of fresh-water, whereof some are strong enough to make their way into the Sea; and one Spring is of a hot and mineral Water; not far from whose Spring-head are Baths made, found very beneficial for several Diseases. The English planted themselves in this Isle in 1628.Inhabitants. and are still pos∣sessors thereof, being now about three or four thousand Inhabitants, who live well and drive a very handsom Trade for such things as they have occasion for, by exchan∣ging such CommoditiesCommodities. as the Isle produceth, as, Sugar, Cotton, Gin∣ger, Tobacco, &c. which they exchange for other Conveniencies. Of all the Caribby-Islands, none is so well governed as this;Their Govern∣ment. Ju∣stice being administred with that impartiality, and all Debauchery and Immorality severely punished, by a Council of the most eminent and ancient Inhabitants. For the Service of God, there are three ChurchesTheir Churches. erected; and for its further security, and safety, it hath a Fort, whereon are mounted se∣veral great Guns, that command at a great distance, for the security of the Ships in the Road or Harbour; which likewise secure their Store-houses, into which all the Commodities imported
for the use of the Inhabitants, are disposed, and so distributed to them that have occasion for them. It is indifferent fruitful, and it hath great store of Deer,Its Fertility. with with several other sorts of Game for hunting. This Isle, as the rest of the Charibbies, is trou∣bled with Muschetoes, Chigoes, Murigoins, and there are Lizards five foot in length, and a foot about, their Skins of divers colours, according to the different Soil they are bred in; several of them have such glittering Scales and Skins, that at a di∣stance off, look like Cloth of Gold and Silver; they have four feet, each with five Claws, and very sharp Nails; they run exceeding fast, and climb trees dexterously; and whether they love men, or are stupid, they stand still looking on the Huntsmen, suffering them to put a Ginn with a running knot about their necks, which is fastened to the end of a Pole, whereby they get them off the trees where they rest themselves; they have wide Jaws, with exceeding sharp Teeth, their Tongues thick, and whatsoever they catch with their Teeth they hold very fast, which are not at all venomous; the Females lay Eggs about the bigness of Woodcocks, the shell being soft, which they lay deep in the Sands of the Sea-shoar to be hatched by the Sun; they are sometimes eaten, though not very well liked by many. The Annolis is another Creature very common in all the Plantations, about the bigness of a Li∣zard, but the Head longer, the Skin yellowish; and they are green on their backs, gray and blew streaks drawn from the very top of the Head to the end of the Tail; they live in holes under
ground, whence, in the night, they make a very loud and important noise; in the day they are continually wandring about Cottages for subsist∣ance. A Land-Pike is another strange Reptile, so called from its likeness to that Fish; but instead of Fins, it hath four Feet, which are so weak, that they only crawl on the ground, and wind their Bodies like Pikes newly taken out of the water; some of the longest are about fifteen inches, and propor∣tionably big; their Skin being covered with small scales, which shine extreamly, and are of a silver gray colour; they make a very hideous noise in the night from under the Rocks, and from the bot∣toms of hollow places where they are lodged; it is more sharp and grating to the Ear than Frogs or Toads, and they change their Notes accord∣ing to the variety of the place where they lurk; they are seldom seen but a little before night, and when met in the day, their strange motion on a sudden, is apt to affright the Spectator. There are in this Isle several Insects,Insects. as the flying Tyger is very observable, whose body is chequered with spots of several colours, as the Tyger's is, about the big∣ness of a horned Beetle, the head sharp, with two great eyes, as sparkling and green as an Emerald, his mouth being armed with two extreamly hard and sharp hooks, by which he holds fast his prey while he gets the substance, the whole body being covered with a hard and swarthy crustiness, serves him for Armour; Under his Wings, which are also of solid matter, are four less wings, as soft as silk; it hath six Legs, each whereof hath three joynts, and they are bristled with certain little prickles; He is continually catching Flies in the
day, with other small Animals, and sits singing on the trees in the night. The Horn-fly is another, which hath two Snouts like an Elephant, one turn∣ing upward, and the other down, about three Inches long, the Head is blew like a Grashopper, the Eyes green; the upper side of the Wings of a bright Violet, damaskt with Carnation, heightned by a small natural thred of Silver, the Colours drawn with such curiosity, that the most curious painting cannot reach it; insomuch as some at first sight have thought it to be Artificial, because of its lively Carnation colour and string of Silver; but having taken it into their hand, they have thought Nature to be in a gay kind of humour, and had a mind to divert herself when she be∣stowed such sumptuous Robes on this small Queen of Insects. There is likewise in this Island an Insect some∣what like a Snail, called a Soldier, but have no shells proper to themselves; therefore, to secure their weak bodies against the Air, and the assaults of other Creatures, they get shelter in such shells as they find most convenient, which, for the most part, is that of Perriwinkles, but as they grow big∣ger they shift their shells, and go into bigger; their Foot, or Instrument, is like a Crab's-claw, where∣with they close the entrance of their shells, for the security of their bodies: if they be set neer the fire, they forsake their Quarters, but if it be pre∣sented to them, to get it again, they go in back∣ward; when they design to change quarters, which they are very subject to do, there happens a furious Ingagement, managed with their clasping Instru∣ment, 'till the strongest gets possession, which he enjoys very peaceably during his pleasure.
There is likewise found in these parts a mon∣strous Spider, which when she spreads her legs, is so large, that she takes up above the breadth of a man's hand, whose body consists of two parts, one round, and the other flat, lesser at one end, like a Pigeons Egg, with a hole in the back, which is as it were their Navel; it is armed with two sharp Tushes, which are very solid, black, and shining; so that there are some that make use of them for Tooth-pickers, being first set in Gold, which are counted to have a power of preser∣ving from corruption and pain, rubbing the places therewith; when they come to be old, they are clothed with a swarthy Down, which is as soft as Velvet: they have about ten Feet, each having four joynts, and at the ends armed with a black, hard Horn. They shift their old Skins every Year, and also their Tushes; they feed on Flies, and such Vermin; and in some pla∣ces it hath been observed, that their Webs are of such a strength, that small Birds can hardly get themselves from it. There is also a very lovely Animal,Animals. called the Fly-catcher, it hath four Legs, and is of a very small size, some of them seeming to be covered with fine gold or silver Brocado, and several with a mixture of Green, Gold, with other very delightful Colours; they are so very familiar, that they will come boldly into Rooms, doing no mischief, but on the contrary, clear them of Flies, and such kind of Vermin, which they perform with such acti∣vity of flight, that the cunning of Huntsmen is not to be compared to it, for he generally lies down where he expects the Fly to come, keep∣ing his eye always fixed thereon, putting his
head into as many different postures, as the Fly removes places, and standing upon his fore-feet, gapes after it, his little mouth being half open, as if he had swallowed it in hope; and if one come near him, and make never so great a noise, it will not disturb him, and at last, having an op∣portunity, he goes direct on his prey, very rarely missing of it. They are so extraordinary tame, that they will come at Dinner time upon the very Table, and endeavour to catch Flies upon their Hands or Clothes, being extraordinary neat and clean things: the Eggs they lay are as big as Pease, which they leave to be hatched by the Sun, covering of it first with Sand: they are no sooner killed, but all their beauty vanisheth, and they become pale. It may be counted a sort of Camelion, partaking of the colour of those things on which it makes its ordinary residence, for being about Palm-Trees, it is green, and about Orange-Trees, yellow, and the like. The Palm-Worm is remarkable from its infinite number of Feet, which are like Bristles under his Body, which, if pursued, help him to creep with incredible swiftness. It's half a foot long, the upper part covered with swarthy Scales, which are hard, and joynted one within another, like the Tiles of a House; but the most danger in this Creature is, that he hath a kind of Claw, both in Head and Tail, wherewith he pierces so home, and poysons the wound he makes therewith, that for the space of 24 hours the party feels great pain. There was several years since brought from thence a Bird about the bigness and shape of a Swallow, only two large Feathers on the Tail, a little shorter, and the Beak turned down,
like a Parrot, and its Feet like Ducks; its only black under the Belly, something white, like our Swallows; in short, it is so very like them, that it may be called the Swallow of America. A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of ANTEGO. Its Situa∣tion.THE Island of Antego is seated in the Latitude of 16 Degrees, and 11 Minutes. Extent.It is in length about 6 or 7 Leagues, and much of the same breadth in several places; The Access to it is very dangerous for Shipping, by reason of the Rocks which incom∣pass it: It was conceived heretofore, that it was not to be inhabited, upon presumption that there was no fresh Water in it; but the English, who have planted themselves in it, have met with some few Springs of fresh Water; besides which, the Inhabitants, which are about 8 or 900 persons, have made several Ponds and Cisterns for the pre∣serving of Rain-water. The CommoditiesIts Commodities. of this Isle are Sugar, Indico, Ginger, and Tobacco, &c.
This Isle doth abound with Fish of all sorts,Their Fish. amongst which the Shark-fish deserves remark; it is a kind of Sea-Wolf, or Sea-Dog, the most devouring of all Fishes, and the most greedy of Mans-flesh, and therefore exceeding dangerous to those that swim; he lives altogether by prey, and generally follows Ships, to feed on the filth cast out of them into the Sea. These Monsters seem yellow in the water; some of them are of a vast length and bigness, insomuch that they are able to cut a man in two at one bite; their Skin so rough, that they pollish Wood with it, instead of Files; their Heads are flat, and the opening of their Mouths is under their Snout, so that they are forced to turn their Bellies almost upward when they seize their prey; their Teeth are very sharp and broad, jagged like a Saw, some having three or four ranks in each Jaw-bone, they lye within their Gums, but sufficiently appear when there is occasion. These cruel Sea-Dogs are attended by two or three small Fishes, and sometimes more, which go before them with such swiftness and ex∣actness, that they go either forward or stay as he doth: The Meat of him is not good, but the Brains are found to be good and profitable against the Stone and Gravel. There is likewise found another ravenous Sea-Monster, called the Becune, a dreadful enemy to Man-kind, in shape like a Pike, being about seven or eight foot long; he lives by prey, and furi∣ously fastens, like a Blood-hound, on the Men he perceives in the water. He carries away whatso∣ever he once fastens on, and his Teeth are so veno∣mous, that the least touch of them becomes mor∣tal, if some sovereign Antidote be not immediate∣ly
applied, to divert and abate the Poyson. There are another sort of Becunes, by some cal∣led Sea Wood-Cocks, their Beaks being somewhat like a Wood-Cock's Bill, only the upper part much longer than the lower, and moves both Jaws with like facility, some of them being four foot long, and twelve inches broad near the Head, which is somewhat like a Swines, with two large Eyes ex∣treamly shining; he hath two Fins on the sides, and under the Belly a large Plume, rising higher, like a Cock's Comb, reaching from Head to Tail: Be∣sides a long solid Beak, it hath two sorts of Horns, hard and black, and about a foot and a half in length, which hang down under his Throat, and are particular to this kind of Fish, and these he can easily hide in a hollow place under his Belly, which serves them for a sheath; it hath no Scales, but a rough, black Skin on the Back, and the Meat is eatable. Another Fish, found about these Islands, is called the Sea Ʋrchin, or Hedge-Hog, and rightly deserves that Name; it is round as a Ball, and full of ex∣ceeding sharp Prickles, which makes it to be fear∣ed, and by several it is called the Armed Fish; they are sent as Presents to those that are curious, to hang in their Closets. There is great plenty of most sorts of Wild Fowl, and not wanting in Venison and Tame Cattel. The Commodities this Island affords are Sugar, Indico, Ginger, and Tobacco, &c. The Sea-Parrots are very admirable, having ex∣traordinary sparkling and beautiful Eyes, the Ball whereof being as clear as Cristal, inclosed within a circle as green as an Emerald, of which colour are the Scales on their Backs; they have no Teeth, but Jaws above and below of a solid bone, very
strong, of the same colour with their Scales, and divided into little compartiments, very beautiful to the Eye; they live on Shell-fish, and they crush, as between two Milstones, with their hard Jaws, Oysters, Muscles, and other Shell-fish, to get out the Meat. They are an excellent sort of Fish to eat, and so great, that some of them have weigh∣ed upward of twenty pound. The Dorado, by some called the Sea-Bream, by others the Amber-fish, is also common in these parts; so called, because in the water the Head seems to be of a green guilt, and the rest of the Body as yel∣low as Gold. It takes great pleasure and delight in following of Ships, but being so swift, is very hard to take, being extraordinary well furnished for swimming, having the fore-part of the Head sharp; the Back bristles with prickles reaching to the Tail, which is forked; two Fins on each side the Head, and as many under the Belly, and the whole Body rather broad than big; all which give him a strange command of the water: he is as good Meat as a Trout or Salmon; they are caught only with a piece of white Linnen tyed to the Hook. This Island also abounds with divers sorts of Fowls and Birds;Fowls and Birds. those of more than an ordinary kind are the Canades, which some count the most beautiful Bird in the World, being under the Belly and Wings of a waving Aurora colour; the Back and one half of the Wings of a very bright Sky-colour; the Tail and greater Feathers of Wings are mixt with a sparkling Carnation, diversified with a Sky; upon the Back it is grass-green with shining black, which very much addeth to the Gold and Azure of the other Plumage; but the most beautiful part is the Head covered with a kind of
Murrey-down, chequered with green, yellow, and a pale blew, which reaches waving down to his Back, the Eye-lids being white, and the Apple of the Eye of a most excellent yellow, and red like a Ruby set in Gold; it hath upon the Head a Tuft, or Cap of Feathers, of a Vermilion red, spark∣ling like a lighted Coal, which is incompassed by other smaller Feathers of a Pearl colour. It is about the bigness of a Pheasant, and exceeding kind and familiar with its friends, but as severe to its enemies. The Flamot is an exceeding large and beautiful Bird, about the bigness of a wild Goose; his Beak is like a Spoon, his Legs and Neck very long, so that his Body is three foot from the ground, their Feathers being white when they are young, after Murrey, and when they come to be old, of a bright Carnation, being rarely seen but in great compa∣nies; and their hearing and smelling is so perfect, that they smell the Huntsmen and Fire-arms at a large distance, and therefore, for fear of surprize, they make their aboad in the midst of the Fens, one of them being always Continel while they are searching about the waters for a livelihood; as soon as he hears the least noise, or sees a man, he takes his flight, and makes a great cry, for a signal to the rest to follow him: when the Huntsmen take them, they get the wind of them, that they may not smell the Powder, and covering themselves with an Ox-hide, creep on their hands and feet 'till they get such an opportunity that they are sure of killing them.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of St. VINCENT. THE Island of St. Vincent lies in the latitude of 16 degrees North from the Line, and is about 24 Miles in length, and 18 in breadth,Situation. wherein are several high Mountains, having between them exceeding fruitful Plains, yielding good store of Sugar Canes, which grow naturally without plan∣ting: It is well water'd with Rivers, and hath se∣veral convenient Harbours and Bays for Shipping. The English have here some settlement, but are not very powerful, it being more populous of Caribeans, than of any possessed by them, who have here many fair Villages, where they dwell exceeding pleasant, without the least disturbance; and though they are jealous of those Strangers that live near them, and keep Guard when they come upon their Roads, yet they do not deny Cassavy Bread, Water, Fruits, and other Provi∣sions growing in their Country, to them that want them, taking in exchange Wedges, Hooks, and other Implements of Iron, which they much esteem. Their simplicity is very remarkable in several things, as in admiring our Fire-Arms, but
especially Fire-Locks, to which they see no fire put, as to Muskets, and therefore believe Maboya, or the Devil, sets them on fire; they believe when the Moon is Eclipsed, the Devil eats her; they daunce all night, making a noise with Gourds, wherein are many pebble stones; when they smell any evil scent, they cry, Maboya, or the Devil, is here, let us be gone from him. Some time since, most of the Caribeans were per∣swaded, that Gun-powder was the Seed of some Hearb, insomuch that some of them sowed it in their Gardens. They never make use of Salt, ac∣counting it very prejudicial to health, and when they see Christians use it, cry, Compere, thou hastneth thy own death; but instead thereof, they season all things with American Pepper: Neither do they eat Swines-flesh, for this simple reason, least they should have small Eyes like that Beast, which they judge the greatest deformity; nor Tortoise or Turtle, lest they should participate of its laziness and stupidity. They have no notion of a Deity, so that neither Prayers, Ceremonies, Sacrifices, or any Exercise or Assembly whatsoe∣ver, is to be found amongst them; but say, the Earth is their indulgent Mother, who furnishes them with all things necessary to Life. If any discourse to them about God, and the Mysteries of our Religion, they hearken attentively, but in the end, answer as it were in jest, Friend, thou art very eloquent and subtile, I wish I could talk as well as thee. Nay, they sometimes say, That if they should be perswaded by such Discourses, their Neighbours would laugh at them. A cer∣tain Caribean being at work on a Sunday, Moun∣sieur Montel said to him, Friend, He that made Heaven and Earth will be angry with thee for working
on this Day, for he hath appointed this Day for his Service: And I, replied the Savage very bluntly, am already very angry with him; for thou say'st he is Master of the World and the Seasons, He it is therefore that hath forborn to send Rain in due time, and by rea∣son of the great Drougth, hath caused my Manioc and my Potatoes to rot in the ground; now since he hath treated me so ill, I will work on every Sunday on pur∣pose to vex him: A pregnant Example of the Bru∣tality of this wretched People. They have a natural sentiment of some Divinity or Superior Power, that hath its Residence in Hea∣ven, which they say is content to enjoy quietly the delights of his own felicity, without being offen∣ded at the ill actions of Men; and is endued with so great goodness, as not to take any Revenge, even of his Enemies, from whence they render Heaven neither Honour nor Adoration, interpre∣ting its liberality and long-sufferance, an effect either of its weakness or indifference towards Man∣kind, believing that there are a number of Good and Evil Spirits, the Good being their Gods, and every one imagines he has one particularly design'd for his Conduct, yet will not acknowledge them Creators of the World: And when the Christians tell them, we adore that God who made Heaven and Earth, and causeth the Earth to bring forth Fruits and Herbs for our nourishment; they an∣swer, It is true, thy God hath made the Heaven and Earth, of France, (or some other Country which they name) and causes the Wheat to grow there; but our God has made our Country, and causes our Manioc to grow. This Manioc is a Root of a small Tree or Shrub, whereof the Cari∣beans make Bread. When they are recovered of some Disease, they set a little Table at the end of
their Hutts, and upon it their Offerings, but with∣out the least Adoration or Prayers; yet they in∣vocate their False Gods, when they desire his pre∣sence; but this is done by their Priests, and that upon four occasions. 1. To Demand Revenge. 2. To be Healed of Diseases. 3. To know the Event of their Wars. 4. To invocate them to carry away their Great Devil, or Maboya, for they never pray to him: His Invocation is by Singing some words, and burning Tobacco, the scent whereof is so pleasant, that it makes this little Devil appear. And when their several Priests call upon their several Gods together, as they speak, these Gods, or rather Devils, rail, quarrel, and seem to fight with each other. These Daemons shelter themselves sometimes in the Bones of dead Men, taken out of the Graves, and wrapt in Cot∣ton, and thereby give Oracles, saying, it is the Soul of the deceased Person; they make use of them to bewitch their Enemies, the Sorcerers wrapping up these Bones with something that be∣longs to the Enemy. These Devils do also sometimes enter into the Bodies of Women, and speak by them, clearly an∣swering all questions demanded: After the Boy or Priest is retir'd, the Devil stirs the Vessels, and makes a noise with his Jaws, as if he were eating and drinking the Presents prepared for him, but the next day they find he hath not medled with any thing. These poor Wretches complain that some∣times Maboya beats them severely, which though some impute to melancholy Dreams, yet other Persons of Quality and exquisite Knowledge, who have lived long in St. Vincent's Island, do affirm, that the Devils do effectually beat them, and they often shew on their Bodies the visible marks of the
blows they have received: Sometimes they make hor∣rid complaint of his Cruelty, saying, That of late he is mightily incensed against the Caribeans, accoun∣ting the Europeans happy that their Maboya doth not beat them. Those who have been very con∣versant with them, and have likewie been at their Assemblies, say, That notwithstanding their Ig∣norance and Irreligion, they fear, more than Death, the Evil Spirit whom they call Maboya, for he doth many times appear to them in most dreadful and hideous Shapes, and what is more remarkable, is, that this unmerciful and bloody Executioner, who is an insatiable Murtherer from the beginning of the World, most cruelly torments and wounds those miserable People, when they are not so for∣ward as he would have them to engage in War; so that when they are reproach'd with Blood-thir∣stiness, their answer is, They are forced thereto by Maboya against their Wills. It is this most cruel and bloody Spirit that cau∣ses them to act such barbarous Cruelty upon those they take in War, in relating which, I had need dip my Pen in Blood, being to draw such a Picture which must needs raise horror in the Beholder. In which there appears nothing but Inhumanity, Barbarism and Rage, to see Rational Creatures devouring those of the same kind with them, and filling themselves with their flesh and blood, a thing which Pagans heretofore thought so full of Execration, that they imagined the Sun withdrew himself, because he would not give light to such bloo∣dy Banquets. When these Cannibals, or Eastern Men, (here their proper Names) have brought home a Prisoner of War of the Arovagnes, he belongs of right to him who either seized him in Fight, or took him running away; being brought to
this Island, he keeps him safe in his House, and after he has made him fast four or five days, pro∣duces him upon some Solemn Day of Debauch, to serve for a Publick Sacrifice, to the mortal hatred of his Country-men toward that Nation. If any of their Enemies die on the place of Battel, they eat them there; they design only for Slavery the young Maids and Women taken in War; they have tasted of all the Nations that frequent them, and upon experience affirm, that the French are the most tender, and the Spaniards the hardest of digestion; but now they feed on no Christians at all. They abstain from several Cruelties formerly used before they killed their Enemies, for now they think it enough to dispatch them at a blow or two with a Club, and afterwards cut them into pieces, and having boyl'd them, they devour them: They heretofore put them to several torments be∣fore they gave them the mortal blow, which de∣plorable Relation they themselves have given to those who have been curious, from their own mouths. Those who have been so unfortunate in the time of War, to fall as Prisoners into their Hands, are not ignorant of the cruel torments they design against them, and therefore to arm themselves with constancy, and to express how generous a People the Arovagues are, march very chearfully to the place of Execution, being neither bound nor dragged thereto, but present them∣selves with a mild and steady countenance before the whole Assembly, which they know desire no∣thing so much as their Death, and expecting their abuses and bitter discourses, prevent them in these tetms I know well enough upon what account you have brought me to this Place, I doubt not
but you are desirous to fill yourselves with my blood, and that you are impatient to exercise your teeth upon my body; but you have not so much reason to triumph, to see me in this con∣dition, nor I much to be troubled, my Coun∣try-men having put your Predecessors to greater miseries than you are now able to invent against me, and I have done my part with them in mangling, massacring and devouring your Peo∣ple, your Friends, and your Fathers; besides this, I have Relations who will not fail to re∣venge my quarrel with advantage upon you, and upon your Children, for the most inhumane tor∣tures you intend against me; what torment soe-ever the most ingenious cruelty can dictate to you, for the taking away of my life is nothing in comparison of those which my generous Na∣tion prepares for you in exchange; therefore delay not the utmost of your cruelty any longer, and assure yourselves, I both slight and laugh at it. Somewhat of this nature is that brave and bloody Bravado which we read of, a Brasilean Prisoner, ready to be devoured by his Enemies, Come on boldly (said he to them) and feast yourselves upon me, for at the same time you seed on your Fathers and Grand-fathers, who served for nourishment for my Body; these Muscles, this Flesh, and these Veins, are yours; blind Fools as you are, you do not observe that the substance of the Members of your Ancestors are yet to be seen in them, tast them well, and you will find the tast of your own flesh. The Great Soul of our Arovagues was not only in his Lips, but likewise shewed it also in the effects which follow his Bravado; for after the Company had a while endured his arrogant defiance with∣out
out touching him, one amongst them came and burnt his Sides with a flaming Brand, another cut great gobbets of flesh out of him, and had cut big∣ger if the bones would have admitted it, and then they cast Pepper into his wounds; others diver∣ted themselves in shooting Arrows at the poor Pa∣tient, and every one took pleasure in tormenting of him; but he suffer'd with the same unconcer∣ned countenance, and expressed not the least sense of pain. After they had thus sported a long time with the poor wretch, and growing weary of insulting and out-braving by his constancy, which seemed still the same, one of them came, and with one blow dispatch'd him with his Club. This is the Usage wherewith the Caribeans heretofore treated their Prisoners of War, but now they think it enough to put them to a speedy death. As soon as this unfortunate person is thus laid dead upon the place, the young Men take the Body, and ha∣ving washed it, cut it in pieces, and then boyl some part, and broyl some upon wooden Frames, made for that purpose, like a Gridiron. When this detestable Dish is ready, and seasoned accor∣ding to their Palats, they divide it into so many parts as there are Persons present, and joyfully devour it, thinking the World cannot afford equal therewith, so that the Women lick the very sticks whereon the Fat dropped, not so much from the deliciousness they find in that kind of suste∣nance, as from the excessive pleasure they receive in being revenged in that manner on their chiefest Enemies; and to heighten this rage and hatred against the Aovagues, they save the Fat that comes from it, and preserve it very carefully to put some few drops thereof into their Sauces at their solemn Entertainments, so to perpetuate, as
much as lies in their power, the motive of Revenge. A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of DOMINICA. THE Island of Dominica is situated in the Latitude of 15 Degrees,Its Situa∣tion. 30 Mi∣nutes, and about 12 Leagues in length, and 8 in breadth. On the West-side is a very con∣venient Harbour for Ships. It is very mountainous in the midst, which incompasses an inaccessable bottom, where, from the tops of certain Rocks, may be seen an infinite number of Dragons, Vi∣pers, and other most venomous and dreadful creatures, whom none dares come near, yet there are many Fertile Villages, producing several Com∣modities, but chiefly Tobacco, which is planted by the English; but the Natives, which are Cani∣bals, and very barbarous, doth much hinder the coming of the English to settle there; for the Can∣ribeans are very populous in it, and have a long time entertained those who come to visit them with a story of a vast monstrous Serpent that fre∣quented that bottom; affirming, that there was on its Head a very sparkling Stone, like a Car∣buncle of inestimable price, which it commonly
covered with a thin moving skin, like a Mans eye∣lid, but when he drank or sported himself in that deep bottom, it was fully and plainly discovered, the Rocks and all about the place receiving a won∣derful lustre from the fire, issuing out of that pre∣cious Crown. They are generally very friendly with the French, and upon the approach of any of their Ships, several Canoes, with three or four Indians in each of them, immediately meet them and con∣duct them to the Havens, where they may safely Anchor. And having presented the Captain and others Officers with the choicest of those Country-Fruits, they commonly bring them, they offer the rest in exchange, for Fishing-hooks, and other such kind of trifles, which they account precious. But to the English they have a great aversion, concei∣ved, as is reported, upon this occasion: Some evil-minded English-men, under the Flags of other Na∣tions, having, by pretended kindness and little gifts, gotten divers of them on board their Ships, and made them merry with Aqua Vitae and Brandy, which they love extreamly, they suddenly hoisted up sail, and carried away those poor, innocent People, who expected no such Treachery, from such pretended Friends. And although the English have indeavoured to satisfie them, yet so impla∣cable is their temper, that they can't be perswaded to forget or forgive the injury; but, next to the Arovagues, a People on the Continent, they hate the English as their worst Enemies: and to such an height of envy hath this Action exasperated them, that they hate the very Language, and can't indure to hear it spoken, and if a French man, or any other at peace with them, happen, through for∣getfulness, to make use of an English Expression,
in discoursing with them, he runs the hazard of contracting his envy for ever upon himself. Nor do they fail, when they find opportunity, to make incursions into Montserrat, Antego, and other of our English Settlements, plundering and burning down their Houses, and carrying away such Men, Wo∣men and Children as they can get into their hands by surprise, but do not eat them as they do the Arovagues. They can't indure to be called Cannibals: they do eat the flesh of their enemies, which they say is to gratifie their revenge, and not out of any delicacy they find in the meat. They are for the most part of a good tractable disposition, and such enemies to severity, that those of them that fall into the hands of the Europeans, or any other Nation, if their Masters treat them with rigour, they die out of pure grief. They despise Riches, and often reproach the Euro∣peans for their avarice and excessive desire of Wealth, not only for themselves, but those that come after them too, since the Earth will find a sufficiency for all men, who will take pains to manure it; telling them, that they never per∣plex and torture themselves with cares for those things whereby their Lives are preserved; and yet, for any thing they can see to the contrary, they are fatter in flesh and much happier in the whole course of their Lives, than those that do always eat and drink of the best. And, to say the truth, they are a People that live without ambi∣tion, vexation, or disquieting themselves with a fruitless thoughtfulness about future Events; ha∣ving no desire of acquiring Wealth and Honour, slighting Gold and Silver as things not worth the valuing, protesting they can't but wonder we
should esteem, so much as we do, seeing we are so well furnished with things much more valuable and beautifuller, as they esteem Glass, Cristal, and the like to be. When they see any of the Christians are perplex'd, they cry, Compeer, which signifies Friend or Gossip, How miserable dost thou make thy Life, by exposing thy self to such long and dangerous Voyages, oppressing thy self with cares and the inordinate desire of getting Wealth, which puts thee to all this trouble, and is the occasion of the va∣rious inconveniencies thou every day meetest withal, from which we are wholly free. And that which yet seems to me much stranger, is, your being no less dis∣quieted about the Goods you have already gotten, than you are about those you desire to obtain. Thou art al∣ways in fear lest somebody should rob thee by Land or by Sea, or that thy Goods should suffer Shipwreck, or thou shouldest suffer dammage by their coming too late for the Market. And by this means thou growest old before thy time, thy Hair turns grey, thy Body waxes lean thy Forehead wrinkled, a thousand in∣conveniencies attend thy Person, and as many afflictions surround thy Heart, and hurries thee with the greater speed to thy Grave. What a strange thing 'tis, that thou canst not content thy self with what thy own Countrey produces, and contemn Riches, as thou seest us do. Or tell me, Doth that Wealth which you Chri∣stians pursue with so much eagerness, tend to your advancement in holiness? doth it prevent your dying, or can you carry any of it into that Eternity you some∣times talk of. Sometimes they will upbraid the Europeans with manifest injustice, in invading their Country; Ha∣ving driven us from Mevis, Montserrat, Antego, &c. none of all which did by any pretence of right belong to you, and threatning still to take away what is left;
What shall become of the poor Caribeans! Whither shall we fly next for Habitations? would you have us go and dwell in the Sea with the Fishes? Which kind of Discourses shew them not to be so Savage as those of St. Vincents. They are great enemies to thieving, and live without distrust of each other, frequently lea∣ving their Houses and Plantations without any to look to them; but if they chance to lose any thing, though but a little Knife, they will weep and grieve a Week after; and if any Christians live near, they presently suspect them, and say, Some Christian hath been here. And in their Com∣plaints to any of the French Governours, this is commonly the first: Thy Mariners (for so they call all strangers) have taken away a Knife (or some such small trifle) out of my Cottage. They are a People linked in one common intrest, and love each other extreamly, so that very rarely any difference ariseth amongst them; but if they are by chance offended, though it be by one of their own People, they seldom ever forget it, but study all imaginable ways of revenge, and when their Sorcerers tell them such an one hath done them the Mischief that happens to them, they watch all opportunities to kill him, crying out, He hath bewitched me, I will be revenged on him. They bear great respect to ancient people, the younger sort complying in all things with their sentiments and wills. Their Youths have no conversation either with their Maids or married Women, and are generally less amorous than those of the Female Sex, though both are very chast, a Vertue worthy admiration in a barbarous People that go naked. But, by the pernicious
Examples the Christians have set them, they are now grown somewhat more loose. They are great lovers of Neatness, which is not very usual among Savages, for if a man should but ease him∣self in their Garden where their Potatoes grow, they will forsake them. A DESCRIPTION OF NEW-JERSEY. NEW-JERSEY is part of the Province of New-Albion aforementioned, and is sub∣divided into East and West-Jersey. East-Jersey lies between 39 and 41 Degrees of North-Latitude,Its Situation. being about 12 Degrees more to the South than the City of London; it is bounded on the South-East by the main Sea; East, by that vast Navigable Stream, called Hudson's River; West, by a Line of Divi∣sion, which separates it from West-Jersey; and North, upon the main Land, and extends itself in length on the Sea-Coasts, and along Hudson's Ri∣ver One hundred English Miles and upward. The ProprietorsProprietors. of this Province, who in 1682. were William Penn, Robert West, Tho∣mas Rudyard, Samuel Groom, Thomas Hart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox,
Ambrose Rigg, John Heywood, Hugh Hartshorn, Clement Plumstead, and Thomas Cooper, have pub∣lished the following Account, for the information and incouragement of all Persons, who are in∣clined to settle themselves, Families, and Servants, in that Country, which may give sufficient sa∣tisfaction of the Situation, Conveniencies, and Product thereof. The conveniency of Situation, temperature of Air, and fertility of Soyl is such, that there is no less then seven considerable Towns, viz. Shrewsbury,Chief Towns. Middle-Town, Burgin, Newark, Elizabeth-Town, Woodbridge, and Piscataway: which are all inhabited by a sober and industrious People, who have necessary Provisions for themselves and Fa∣milies, and for the comfortable Entertainment of Strangers and Travellers. And this Colony is ex∣perimentally found generally to agree well with English Constitutions. For Navigation it hath these advantages,Its Advantanges for Navigation. not only to be si∣tuate along the Navigable part of Hudson's River, but lies also fifty Miles on the main Sea. And near the midst of this Province is that noted Bay for Ships, with∣in Sand-Hook, very well known not to be inferiour to any in America, where Ships not only har∣bour in greatest storms, but ride safe with all winds, and sail in and out thence, as well in Win∣ter as Summer. For Fishery, the Sea-banks there are very well stored with variety of Fish, not only such as are profitable for Transsportation, but fit for Food there; As Whales,Its Fish. Cod-fish, Cole, and Hake-fish, large Mackarel,
and many other sorts of flat and small Fish. The Bay also, and Hudson's River, are plentifully stored with Sturgeon, Great Basse, and other Scale-fish; Eels and Shell-fish, as Oysters, &c. in great plenty and easie to take. This Counrry is plentifully sup∣plied with lovely Springs,Waters. Rivulets, In-land Rivers, and Creeks which fall into the Sea, and Hudson's River, in which is much plenty and variety of fresh-Fish and Water-Fowl. There is also great plenty of Oak-Timber,Trees. fit for Shipping, and Masts for Ships, and other variety of Wood, like the adjacent Colonies; as, Chesnut, Walnut, Poplar, Cedar, Ash, Fir, &c. fit for build∣ing, within the Countrey. The Land or Soyl (as in other places) varies in goodness and rich∣ness,Its Fertility. but generally fertil, and with much smaller labour than in England, produceth plentiful Crops of all sorts of English Grain, be∣sides Indian Corn, which English Planters find not only to be of vast encrease, but very wholsome, and good in use. It also produceth good Flax and Hemp, which they now spin and manufacture in∣to Linnen Cloth. There's sufficient Meadow and Marish to their Up-lands; and the very Barrens there (as they are called) are not like some in Eng∣land, but produce Grass fit for grazing Cattel in Summer season. The Countrey is well stored with Wild Deer,Fruits & Fowls. Conies, and wild Fowl of several sorts; as, Tur∣keys, Pigeons, Partridges, Plover, Quails, wild Swans, Geese, Ducks, &c. in great plenty. It pro∣duceth
variety of good delicious Fruits; as, Grapes, Plums, Mulberries, Apricocks, Peaches, Pears, Ap∣ples, Quinces, Water-Melons, &c. which are here in England planted in Orchards and Gardens. These, as also many other Fruits which come to perfection in England, are the more natural pro∣duct of this Country. There are already great store of Horses, Cows, Hogs,Cattel. and some Sheep, which may be bought at reasonable prices, with English Money, or English Commodities, or Man's Labour, where Moneys and Goods are wanting. What sort of Mine or Minerals are in the Bowels of the Earth, after∣time must produce, the Inhabitants not having yet employed themselves in search thereof. But there is already a Melting-Furnace and Forge set up in this Colony, where is made good Iron, which is of great benefit to the Country. It is exceed∣ingly well furnished with safe and convenient HarboursHarbours. for Ship∣ping; which is of great advan∣tage to that Countrey, and affords already for Exportation great plenty of Horses; and also Beef, Pork, Pipe-staves, Boards, Bread, Flower, Wheat, Barley, Rie, Indian Corn, Butter and Cheese, which they export for Barbadoes, Jamaica, Mevis, and other adjacent Islands; as also to Portugal, Spain, the Canaries, &c. Their Whale-Oyl and Whale-Fins, Bever, Monkey, Racoon and Martin-Skins (which this Countrey produceth) they transport for Eng∣land. The Situation and Soyl of this Country may invite any who are inclined to transport them∣selves into those parts of America: For 1. It be∣ing considerably peopled, and situate on the Sea-coast,
with convenient Harbours, and so near ad∣jacent to the Province of New York and Long Island, being also well peopled Colonies, may be proper for Merchants, Tradesmen and Naviga∣tors. 2. It is likewise proper for such who are inclined to Fishery; the whole Coast and very Harbours-mouths being fit for it; which has been no small Rise to New-England People, and may be here carried on also with great advantage. 3. For its Soyl, it is proper for all industrious Husband∣men, and such who by hard Labour, here on Rack-Rents are scarce able to maintain themselves, much less to raise an Estate for their Children, may, with God's Blessing on their Labours, there live comfortably, and provide well for their Fa∣milies. 4. For Carpenters, Brick-layers, Masons, Smiths, Mill-wrights, Wheel-wrights, Bakers, Tan∣ners, Taylors, Weavers, Shoomakers, Hatters, and all or most Handicrafts, where their Labour is much more valued than in these parts, and Provi∣sions much cheaper. 5. And chiefly for such of the above-mentioned, or any other who upon so∣lid Grounds and weighty Considerations, are in∣clined in their minds to go into those parts, with∣out which, their going there cannot be comforta∣ble, or answer their expectation. The Indian Natives are but few,The Inhabitants. comparative to the neigh∣bouring Colonies; and those that are there, are so far from being formida∣ble or injurious to the Planters and Inhabitants, that they are really serviceable and advantageous to the English; not only in hunting and taking the Deer, and other wild Creatures, and catching of Fish and Fowl fit for Food in their Seasons, but in the killing and destroying of Bears, Wolves,
Foxes, and other Vermin and Poltry, whose Skins and Furs they bring the English, and sell at a less price than the value of Time an Englishman must spend to take them. As for the Constitutions of the Country, they were made in the time of John Lord Barclay and Sir George Carteret, the late Pro∣prietors thereof; in which such provision was made for Liberty in Matters of Religion, and Property in their Estates, that under the Forms thereof that Colony has been considerably peo∣pled, and that much, from the adjacent Coun∣tries, where they have not only for many years en∣joyed their Estates according to the Concessions, but also to an interrupted exercise of their parti∣cular Perswasions in Matters of Religion; and we the present Proprietors, so soon as any persons here in England, or elsewhere, are willing to be engaged with us, shall be ready and desirous to make such farther Additions and Supplements to the said Constitutions, as shall be thought fit for the encouragement of all Planters and Adventu∣rers, and for the said Colony with a sober and in∣dustrious People. Having with all possible brevity given an ac∣count of the Country, we shall say something as to the disposition of Lands there. 1. Our purpose is, with all convenient expe∣dition, to erect and build our principal Town; which by reason of Scituation, must in all proba∣bility be the most considerable for Merchandize, Trade, and Fishery, in those parts: It is design∣ed to be placed upon a Neck or Point of rich Land, call'd Ambo-Point, lying on Raritor-River, and pointing to Sandy-Hook Bay, and near adja∣cent to the place where Ships in that great Har∣bour commonly ride at Anchor; a Scheme where∣of
is already drawn, and those who shall desire to be satisfied therewith, may treat for a share thereof. 2. As for encouragement of Servants, &c. we allow the same Priviledges as were provided in the Concessions at first. 3. Such who are desirous to purchase any Lands in this Province, free from all charge, and to pay down their Purchase Moneys here, for any quan∣tities of Acres; or that desire to take up Lands there, upon any small quit Rents to be reserved, shall have Grants to them and their Heirs, on moderate and reasonable terms. 4. Those who are desirous to Transport them∣selves into those parts before they Purchase, if any thing there present to their satisfaction, we doubt not but the Terms of Purchase will be so moderate, equal and encouraging, that may engage them to settle in that Colony. Our purpose being with all possible Expedition to dispatch Persons thither, with whom they may Treat, and who shall have our full power in the Premisses. As for Passages to this Province, Ships are going hence the whole year about, as well in Winter as Summer: Sandy-hook-Bay being ne∣ver Frozen, the usual Price is 5 l. per Head,Passengers Prizes. as well Master as Servant, who are above ten years of Age; and under ten years (and not Chil∣dren at the Breast) pay 50 s. Sucking Children pay nothing. Carriage of GoodsFor Carriage of Goods. is ususally 40 s. per Tun, and some∣time less, as we can agree. The cheapest and chiefest time of the year for Passage, is, from Midsummer, till the later end of September, when many Virginia and Mary∣land
Ships are going out of England into those Parts; and such who take then their Voyage, ar∣rive usually in good time to Plant Corn-sufficient for next Summer. The Goods to be carried there, are first for Peo∣ples own use, all sorts of Apparel and Houshold∣stuff, and also Utensils for Husbandry and Building; and secondly, Linnen and Wollen Cloaths, and Stuffs sitting for Apparel, &c. which are fit for Merchandize and Truck there in the Country, and that to good advantage for the Importer. Last∣ly, Although this Country (by reason of its being already considerably inhabited) may afford many Conveniences for Strangers, of which Unpoepled Countries are destitute, as Lodging, Victual∣ling, &c. yet all Persons inclined unto those Parts, must know, that in their Settlements there, they will find they must have their Winter as well as Summer, they must Labour before they Reap, and till their Plantations be cleared (in Summer time) they must expect (as in all those Countries) the Musketo Flies, Gnats, and such like, may in hot and fair Weather give them some disturbance, where people provide not against them, which as the Land is cleared, are less troublesom. The South and West Part of New-Jersey lying on the Sea and Dela-ware River, is called West-Jersey,West-Jersey. of which Mr. Edward Billing is now Pro∣prietor; it hath all the Conveniencies and Excel∣lencies of the other Part afore-mention'd, and may be made one of the best Colonies in America, for the Situation, Air and Soil, the Ports, Creeks, good Harbours and Havens, being not Inferiour to any in that Part of the World, having no less than thirty Navigable Creeks, ranking themselves
at a convenient distance upon the Sea, and that stately River of Dela-ware, the Shores thereof are generally very deep and bold. The English that are settled here,Buying of Lands. buy the Lands of the Na∣tives, and give them real satis∣faction for the same, whereby they are assured of their love and friendship for ever, and the poor Creatures are never the worse, but much better, as themselves confess; being now supplied, by way of Trade, with all they want or stand in need of, Hunting and Fishing as they did before, ex∣cept in inclosed or planted Ground, bring home to the English seven or eight fat Bucks in a day. There is a Town called Burlington, which will quickly be a place of great Trade; their Or∣chards are so laden with Fruit, that the very Branches have been torn away with the weight thereof; it is delightful to the eye, and most de∣licious to the taste; Peaches in such plenty, that they bring them home in Carts; they are very delicate Fruit, and hang almost like our Onions tied upon Ropes: They receive forty Bushels of good English Wheat, for one Bushel sown. Cher∣ries they have in abundance, and Fowl and Fish great plenty, with several that are unknown in England. There are likewise, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, Rattle-Snakes, and several other Creatures, as I imagin, (saith my Author) because the Indians bring such Skins to sell; but I have travelled several hundred of Miles to and fro, yet never, to my knowledge, saw one of them, except two Rattle-Snakes, and killed them both; so that the fear of them is more than the hurt: neither are we troubled with the Muskto-fly in this place, our Land lying generally high and healthy, and they being commonly in
boggy ground. With common and reasonable care there may in a few years be Horses, Beef, Pork, Flour, Bisket and Pease to spare; yea, this Country will produce Honey, Wax, Silk, Hemp, Flax, Hops, Woad, Rapeseed, Madder, Pota-shes, Anniseed, and Salt, Hides, raw or tann'd; and there is a very large vast Creature, called a Moose, of whose Skins are made excellent Buff; besides the natural product of Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Tur∣pentine, &c. As for Furs, they are Beaver, black Fox, and Otter, with divers other sorts. The Tobacco is excellent upon the River Delaware. There may be very good fishing for Cod and Cush, as several have found by experience, who have caught great plenty of well-grown Fish. Upon the whole matter, this Province affords all that is either for the Necessity, Conveniency, Profit or Pleasure of Humane Life; and it may therefore be reasonably expected, that this Coun∣try, with the rest of America, may in a few Ages be throughly peopled with Christianity. And this shall suffice for New Jersey.
A DESCRIPTION OF PENSYLVANIA. IT is the Jus Gentium, or Law of Nations, that whatever waste or uncultivated Country is the discovery of any Prince, it is the Right of that Prince who was at the charge of that discovery: Now this Province is a Member of that part of America which the King of England's Ancestors have been at the charge of discovering, and which they and he have taken care to preserve and im∣prove; and his late Majesty, of happy Memory, upon the Petition of William Penn, Esq (wherein he set forth his Father's Service, his own Suffer∣ings, and his Losses, in relation to his Father's Estate; and lastly, his long and costly attendance without success) was pleased, in right and consi∣deration thereof, to make a grant to the said William Pen, of all that Tract of Land in Ame∣rica, which is expressed in the following Decla∣ration to the Inhabitants and Planters of the Pro∣vince of Pensylvania.
CHARLES R. WHereas His Majesty, in Consideration of the Great Merit and Faithful Services of Sir William Penn, deceased, and for divers other good Causes Him thereunto moving, hath been graciously pleased, by Letters Patents, bearing Date the Fourth Day of March, last past, To give and grant unto William Penn, Esq Son and Heir of the said Sir William Penn, all that Tract of Land, called by the Name of Pensylva∣nia, as the same is bounded on the East by Dela∣ware River, from Twelve Miles distance North∣ward of New-Castle Town, unto the three and fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, if the said River doth extend so far Northward, then by the said River so far as it doth extend: And from the Head of the said River, the Eastern bounds to be determined by a Meridian-Line, to be drawn from the head of the said River, unto the said three and fortieth Degree, the said Province to extend West∣ward, five Degrees in Longitude, to be computed from the said Eastern bounds; and to be bounded on the North by the beginning of the three and fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude; and on the South, by a Circle drawn at Twelve Miles distance from New-Castle Northwards; and West∣wards, unto the beginning of the fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and then by a strait Line Westward to the Limit of Longitude above-men∣tioned,
together with all Powers, Preheminen∣ces, Iurisdictions necessary for the Government of the said Province, as by the said Letters Pa∣tents, reference being thereunto had, doth more at large appear. His Majesty doth therefore hereby publish and declare His Royal Will and Pleasure, That all Persons settled or inhabited within the Limits of the said Province, do yield all due Obedience to the said William Penn, his Heirs, and Assigns, as Absolute Proprietors and Governors thereof; As also to the Deputy or Deputies, Agents or Lieutenants, lawfully Commissioned by him or them, according to the Powers and Authorities granted by the said Letters Patents; Wherewith His Majesty Expects and Requires a ready Compliance from all Persons whom it may concern, as they tender His Majesties Displeasure. Given at our Court at White-hall, the Second Day of April, 1681. in the Three and thirtieth Year of Our Reign. By His Majesties Command, CONWAY.
The Description of the Province cannot bet∣ter be given by any than by William Penn him∣self, who sent the following Account from off the place, in a Letter dated from Philadelphia, Aug. 16. 1683. For this Province, the general Condition of it take as followeth: THE Country itself in its Soil, Air, Water, Seasons, and Product, both Natural and Ar∣tificial, is not to be despised. The Land contains divers sorts of Earth; as Sand, yellow and black,Its Soil. poor and rich: Also Gravel, both loomy and dusty; and in some places a fast, fat Earth, like to our best Vales in England, especially by Inland-Brooks and Rivers; God, in his wisdom, hath ordered it so, that the Advantages of the Country are divided, the Back-Lands being gene∣rally three to one richer than those that lye by Navigable Waters; we have much of another Soil, and that is a black, Hasle-Mould, upon a stony or rocky bottom. The AirIts Air. is sweet and cleer, the Heavens serene, like the South-Parts of France, rarely over-cast, and as the Woods come by numbers of people to be more cleared, that itself will refine. The WatersIts Waters. are generally good, for the Rivers and Brooks have mostly gravel and stony bottoms, and in number hardly credible. We have also Mineral Waters, that operate in the same manner with Bar∣net
and North-hall, not two Miles from Philadel∣phia. For the Seasons of the Year, ha∣ving,Its Climate. by God's goodness, now lived over the coldest and hottest, that the oldest liver in the Province can remember, I can say something to an English understanding. First, Of the Fall, for then I came in: I found it from the 24th of October, to the beginning of December, as we have it usually in September, or rather like an English mild Spring. From December, to the beginning of the Month called March, we had sharp, frosty weather; not foul, thick, black weather, as our North-East Winds bring with them in England, but a Sky as clear as in Summer, and the Air dry, cold, piercing, and hungry; yet I remember not, that I wore more Clothes than in England. The reason of this cold is given from the great Lakes that are fed by the Fountains of Canada. The Winter before was as mild, scarce any Ice at all; while this for a few days froze up our great River Delaware. From that Month, to the Month called June, we enjoyed a sweet Spring, no Gusts, but gentle Showers and a fine Sky. Yet this I observe, that the Winds here, as there, are most inconstant Spring and Fall, upon that turn of Nature, than in Summer or Winter. From thence, to this present Month, which ended the Summer, (commonly speaking) we have had extraordinary heats, yet mitigated sometimes by cold Breezes. The Wind that rules the Summer-season, is the South-West; but Spring, Fall, and Winter, 'tis rare to want the wholesom North-Western seven days together; and whatever Mists, Fogs, or Va∣pours, foul the Heavens by Easterly or Southerly Winds, in two hours time are blown away; the
one is always followed by the other. A Remedy that seems to be a peculiar Providence in it to the Inhabitants; the multitude of Trees yet standing, being liable to retain Mists and Va∣pours, and yet not one quarter so thick as I ex∣pected. The natural product of the Coun∣try of Vegetables,Vegetables. is Trees, Fruits, Plants, Flowers; the Trees of most Note, are, the Black Walnut, Cedar, Cyprus, Chesnut, Poplar, Gum-wood, Hickery, Sassafras, Ash, Beech, and Oak of divers sorts, as Red, White and Black; Spanish Chesnut and Swamp, the most durable of all; of all which there is plen∣ty for use of Man. The FruitsFruits. that I find in the Woods, are, the white and black Mulberry, Ches∣nuts, Walnut, Plums, Strawberries, Cranberries, Hurtleberries, and Grapes of divers sorts, the great red Grape, (now Ripe) called by ignorance, the Fox-Grape (because of the relish it hath with unskilful palates) is in it self an ex∣traordinary Grape, and by art doubtless may be cultivated to an excellent Wine, if not so sweet, yet little inferiour to the Frontiniack, as it is not much unlike in taste, ruddiness set aside, which in such things, as well as Mankind, differs the case much. There is a white kind of Muskadel, and a little black Grape, like the cluster of Grapes in England, not yet so ripe as the other, but they tell me when ripe, sweeter, and that they only want skilful Vinerons to make good use of them; I in∣tend to venture on it with my French-Man this Season, who shews some knowledge in those things. Here are also Peaches, very good, and in great quantities, not an Indian Plantation without them;
but whether naturally here at first, I know not, however one may have them by Bushels for little; they make a pleasant Drink, and I think not infe∣riour to any Peach you have in England, except the true Newington. 'Tis disputable with me, whether it be best to fall to Fining the Fruits of the Country, especially the Grapes, by the care and skill of Art, or send for Forreign Stems and Sets already good and approved; it seems most reasonable to believe, that not only a thing grow∣eth best, where it naturally grows; but will hard∣ly be equall'd by another's Species of the same kind, that doth not naturally grow there. But to resolve this doubt, I intend (if God give me life) to try both, and hope the Consequences will be as good Wine as any European Countries of the same Latitude do yield. The artificial ProductIts Product. of the Coun∣try, is Wheat, Barley, Oats, Rye, Pease, Beans, Squashes, Pumkins, Water-Melons, Musk-Melons, and all Herbs and Roots that our Gardens in England usually bring forth. Of Living Creatures,Living Crea∣tures. as Fish, Fowl, and the Beast of the Woods, here are divers sorts, some for Food and Profit, and some for Pro∣fit only; for food as well as profit, the Elk, as big as a small Ox, Deer bigger than ours, Bea∣ver, Racoon, Rabbits, Squirrils, and some eat young Bear, and commend it. Of Fowls of the Land, there is the Turkey, (forty or fifty pound weight) which is very great; Pheasants, Heath-Birds, Pidgeons, and Patridges in abundance: Of the Water, the Swan, Goose, white and gray, Ducks, Teal, also the Snipe and Curloe, and
that in great numbers; but the Duck and Teal excel, nor so good have I ever eat in other Coun∣tries. Of Fish, there is the Sturgeon, Herring, Rock, Shad, Catshead, Eel, Smelt, Pearch, Roch; and in Inland Rivers, Trout, some say Salmon, above the Falls. Of Shell-fish, we have Oysters, Crabs, Cockles, Concks, Museta's; some Oysters six Inches long,; and one sort of Cockles, as big as the stewing Oyster; they make a rich Broth. The Creatures for profit only, by Skin or Furr, and that are natural to those Parts, are the Wild-Cat, Panther, Otter, Wolf, Fox, Fisher, Minx, Musk-Rat: And of the Water, the Whale for Oyl, of which we have good store; and two com∣panies of Whalers, whose Boats are built, will soon begin their work, which hath the appearance of a considerable improvement to nothing of our reasonable hopes, of good Cod in the Bay. We have no want of Horses, and some are very good, & shapely enough; two Ships have been fraighted to Barbadoes with Horses and Pipe-staves, since my coming in; here is also plenty of Cow-Cattel, and some Sheep; the People Plow mostly with Oxen. There are divers Plants,Plants. that not only the Indians tell us, but we have had occasion to prove, by Swellings, Burns, Cuts, &c. that they are of great virtue, suddenly curing the Patient; and for smell, I have observed several, especially one, the wild Mirtle; the other I know not what to call, but are most fragrant; the Woods are adorned with love∣ly Flowers, for colour, greatness, figure and va∣riety; I have seen the Gardens of London best sto∣red with that sort of beauty, but think they may be improved by our Woods; I have sent a few to a Person of Quality this year for a Tryal. Thus
much of the Country; next of the Natives or Ori∣gines. The Natives I shall consider in their Persons, Language, Manners, Religion and Government, with my sense of their Original. For their Persons,Their Persons. they are generally tall, streight, well built, and of singular proportion; they tread strong and cle∣ver, and mostly walk with a lofty Chin; of Complexion black, but by design, as the Gypsies in England; they grease themselves with Bear's Fat clarifi'd, and using no defence against Sun or Weather, there Skins must needs be swarthy; their Eye is little and black, not unlike a streight∣look'd Jew; the thick Lip and flat Nose, so fre∣quent to the East-Indians and Blacks, are not com∣mon to them; for I have seen as comely European-like Faces among them, of both, as on your side the Sea; and truly an Italian Complexion hath not much more of the White, and the Noses of several of them have as much of the Roman. Their LanguageTheir Language. is lofty, yet narrow, but like the Hebrew; in Signification full, like Short-hand in Writing; one word serveth in the place of three, and the rest are supplied by the understan∣ding of the Hearer; imperfect in their Tenses, wanting in their Moods, Participles, Adverbs, Con∣junctions, Interjections: I have made it my business to understand it, that I might not want an Inter∣preter on any occasion; and I must say, I know not a Language, spoken in Europe, that hath words of more sweetness or greatness, in Accent and Em∣phasis, than theirs; for Instance, Octorockon Rancocas, Oricton, Schakamazon, Poquesin, all which are Names of Places, and have grandeur in them of
words of sweetness: Anna is Mother, Issimus a Brother, Netap a Friend, Ʋsque oret very good, Poru Bread, Metse cat, Matta no, Hatta to have, Payo to come, Sepassen, Passejou, the Names of Pla∣ces; Tamane, Secane, Menanse, Secatereus, are the Names of Persons; if one ask them of any thing they have not, they will answer, Matta ne hotta, which to Translate, is, not I have, instead of, I have not. Of their Customs and MannersCustoms and Manners. there is much to be said. I will begin with Children: So soon as they are born, they wash them in Water; and while very young, and in cold Wea∣ther to chuse, they plunge them in the Rivers to harden and embolden them: Having wrapt them in a Clout, they lay them on a strait thin Board, a little more than the length & breadth of the Child, and swaddle it fast upon the Board, to make it streight; wherefore all Indians have flat Heads; and thus they carry them at their Backs. The Children will go very young, at nine Months com∣monly; they wear only a small Clout round their Waist till they are big; if Boys, they go a Fishing till ripe for the Woods, which is about fifteen; then they Hunt, and having given some proofs of their Manhood, by a good return of Skins, they may Marry, else it is shame to think of a Wife. The Girls stay with their Mothers, and help to Hoe the Ground, Plant Corn, and carry Burthens; and they do well to use them to that Young, which they must do when they are Old; for the Wives are the true Servants of their Husbands; other∣wise the Men are very affectionate to them. When the young Women are fit for Marriage, they wear something upon their Heads for an Advertisement,
but so as their Faces are hardly to be seen, but when they please: The Age they Marry at, if Women, is about thirteen and fourteen; if Men, seventeen and eighteen; they are rarely elder: their Houses are Mats, or Barks of Trees, set on Poles, in the fashion of an English Barn, but out of the power of the Winds, for they are hardly higher than a man; they lie on Reeds or Grass. In travel they lodge in the Woods about a great fire, with the Mantle-Duffils they wear by day, wrapt about them, and a few Boughs stuck round them. Their Diet is Maiz or Indian-Corn, divers ways prepa∣pared; sometimes roasted in the Ashes, sometimes beaten and boiled with Water, which they call Homine; they also make Cakes, not unpleasant to eat; they have likewise several sorts of Beans and Pease, that are good nourishment; and the Woods and Rivers are their Larder. If an European comes to see them,Their Enter∣ment. or calls for Lodging at their House or Wigwam, they give him the best place and first cut. If they come to vit us, they salute us with an It ah, which is as much as to say, Good be to you, and set them down, which is mostly on the ground, close to their Heels, their Legs upright; may be they speak not a word more, but observe all passages: If you give them any thing to eat or drink, well, for they will not ask; and be it little, or much, if it be with kindness, they are well-pleased, else they go away sullen, but say nothing. They are great concealers of their own resent∣ments; brought to it, I believe, by the revenge that hath been practised among them; in either of these they are not exceeded by the Italians. A Tragical Instance fell out since I came into the
Country; A King's Daughter, thinking herself slighted by her Husband, in suffering another Women to lie down between them, rose up, went out, pluckt a Root out of the ground, and eat it, upon which she immediately died; and for which, last Week, he made an Offering to her Kindred, for Atonement, Liberty, and Marriage, as two others did to the Kindred of their Wives, that died a natural death: for till Widowers have done so, they must not Marry again. Some of the young Women are said to take undue li∣berty before Marriage for a Portion; but when Married, chaste: when with Child, they know their Husbands no more, till delivered; and, during their Month, they touch no Meat they eat, but with a stick, lest they should defile it; nor do their Husbands frequent them, till that time be expired. But in LiberalityTheir Liberality they excel, nothing is too good for their Friend; give them a fine Gun, Coat, or other thing, it may pass twenty hands, before it sticks; light of heart, strong affections, but soon spent; the most merry Creatures that live, Feast and Dance perpetually; they never have much, nor want much: Wealth circulateth like the Blood, all parts partake; and though none shall want what another hath, yet exact observers of Property. Some Kings have sold, others pre∣sented me with several Parcels of Land; the Pay or Present I made them, were not hoarded by the particular owners, but the neighbouring Kings and their Clans being present when the Goods were brought out, the parties chiefly concerned consulted, what and to whom they should give them; to every King then, by the hands of a per∣son
for that work appointed, is a portion sent, so sorted and folded, and with that gravity, that it is admirable; then that King subdivideth it in like manner among the dependants, they hardly leaving themselves an equal share with one of their Subjects: and be it on such occasions as Festivals, or at their common Meals, the Kings distribute, and to themselves last; they care for little, and the reason is, a little contents them: In this they are sufficiently revenged on us; if they are ignorant of our pleasures, they are also free from our pains. They are not disquieted with Bills of Lading and Exchange, nor perplexed with Chancery-Suits and Exchequer-Reckonings; we sweat and toil to live, their pleasure feeds them, I mean their Hunting, Fishing and Fowling, and this Table is spread every where; they eat twice a day, Morning and Evening; their Seats and Tables are the Ground. Since the Europeans came into those parts, they are grown great lovers of strong Liquors, Rum especially; and for it they exchange the richest of their Skins and Furs: If they are healed with Li∣quors, they are restless till they have enough to sleep; and this is their cry, Some more, and I will go to sep; but, when drunk, one of the most wretched'st spectacles in the world. In sickness, impatient to be cured; for it, give any thing, especially for their Children, to whom they are extreamly natural; they drink at those times a Teran or Decostion of some Roots, in Spring-water; and if they eat any flesh, it must be of the Female of any Creature: if they die, they bury them with their Apparel, be they Men or Women, and the nearest of Kin slings in something precious with them, as a token of their love: their mourn∣ing is blacking of their faces, which they continue
for a Year: they are choice of the Graves of their dead; for, lest they should be lost by time, and fall to common use, they pick off the Grass that grows upon them, and heap up the fallen Earth with great care and exactness. These poor people are under a dark Night in things relating to Religion,Their Religion. to be sure the Tradi∣tion of it; yet they believe a God and Immorta∣lity without the helps of Metaphysicks; for they say there is a great King that made them, who dwells in a glorious Country to the Southward of them, and that the Souls of the good shall go thi∣ther, where they shall live again. Their Wor∣ship consists of two parts, Sacrifice and Cantico: Their Sacrifice is their first Fruits, the first and fattest Buck they kill, goes to the Fire, where he is all burnt with a mournful Ditty of him that performs the Ceremony, but with such marvellous fervency and labour of Body, that he will even sweat to a Foam; the other part of their Cantico, is performed by round Dances, sometimes Words, sometimes Songs, then Shouts; two being in the middle that begin, and by singing and drumming on a Board, direct the Chorus; their Postures in the Dance are very antick and differing, but all keep measure. This is done with equal earnest∣ness and labour, but great appearance of Joy. In the Fall, when the Corn comes in, they begin to feast one another; there have been two great Fe∣stivals already, to which all come that will: I was at one my self; their entertainment was a great Seat by a Spring, under some shady Trees, and twenty Bucks, with hot Cakes of new Corn, both Wheat and Beans, which they make up in a square form, in the Leaves of the Stem, and bake them
in the Ashes; and after that, they fell to dance; but they that go, must carry a small Present of their Money, it may be six pence, which is made in the Bone of a Fish; the black is with them as Gold, the white Silver; they call it all Wam∣pum. Their GovernmentGovernment. is by Kings which they call Sachema, and those by succession, but always of the Mothers-side; for instance, the Children of him that is now King, will not succeed, but his Bro∣ther by the Mother, or the Children of his Sister, whose Sons (and after them the Children of her Daughters) will reign; for no Woman inherits: the Reason they render for this way of Descent, is, that their Issue may not be spurious. Every King hath his Council, and that consists of all the old and wise men of his Nation, which perhaps is two hundred People: Nothing of moment is un∣dertaken, be it War, Peace, selling of Land, Traffick, without advising with them; and which is more, with the young men too. 'Tis admirable to consider how powerful the Kings are, and how they move by the Breath of the People. I have had occasion to be in Council with them upon Treaties of Land, and to adjust the Terms of Trade: Their Order is thus; The King sits in the middle of a half-Moon, and hath his Council, the old and wise on each hand; behind them, or at a little distance, sit the younger Fry in the same Figure; having consulted and resolved their Busi∣siness, the King ordered one of them to speak to me, and he in the Name of his King saluted me; then took me by the hand, and told me, That he was ordered by his King to speak to me; and that now it was not he, but the King that spoke; be∣cause
what he should say, was the King's Mind. He first prayed me to excuse them that they had not complied with me the last time, he feared there might be some fault in the Interpreter, being nei∣ther Indian nor English; besides it was the Indian custom to deliberate, and take up much time in Council before they resolve; and that if the young People and Owners of the Land had been as ready as he, I had not met with so much delay. Ha∣ving thus introduced this Matter, he fell to the Bounds of the Land they had agreed to dispose of, and the Price (which now is little and dear, that which would have bought twenty Miles, not buy∣ing now two.) During the time that this Person spoke, not a man of them was observed to whisper or smile; the Old grave, the Young reverent in their deportment: They do speak little, but fervently and with elegancy; I have never seen more natural sagacity, considering them without the help of Tradition; and he will deserve the Name of wise, that out-wits them in any Treaty about a thing they understand. When the Purchase was agreed, great Promises passed between us of Kindness and good Neigh∣bourhood, and that the Indians and English must live in Love as long as the Sun gave Light; which done, another made a Speech to the Indians, in the Name of all the Sachamakers or Kings, first to tell them what was done; next, to charge and command them to love Christians; and particularly to live in peace with me, and the People under my Government: That many Governors had been in the River, but that no Governor had come himself to live and stay here before; and having now such a one that had treated them well, they should ne∣ver do him or his any wrong. At every Sentence
of which, they shouted, and said, Amen, in their way. The JusticeTheir Justice. they have is pecuni∣niary; in case of any wrong or evil fact, be it Murder itself, they atone by Feasts and Presents of their Wampum, which is proportioned to the quality of the Of∣fence, or Person injur'd, of the Sex they are of: For in case they kill a Woman, they pay double; and the reason they render, is, That she breedeth Children, which men cannot do. 'Tis rare that they fall out, if sober; and if drunk, they for∣give it; saying, it was the Drink, and not the Man, that abused them. We have agreed, that in all differences between us, six of each side shall end the Matter. Don't abuse them, but let them have Justice, and you win them: The worst is, they are the worse for the Christians, who have propagated their Vices, and yielded them Tradi∣tion for ill, and not for good things. But as low an Ebb as they are at, and in as glorious as their con∣dition looks, the Christians have not out-liv'd their sight with all their Pretensions to an higher mani∣festation. What Good then might not a good People graft, where there is so distinct a Know∣ledge left between good and evil? I beseech God to encline the hearts of all that come into these parts, to out-live the Knowledge of the Natives, by a fixt obedience to their greater Knowledge of the Will of God; for it were miserable indeed for us to fall under the just censure of the poor Indian Conscience, while we make profession of things so far transcending. For their Original,Their Original. I am ready to believe them of the Jewish Race; I mean of the stock of the
Ten Tribes; and that for the following Reasons: First, They were to go to a Land not planted or known; which to be sure Asia and Africa were, if not Europe; and he that intended that extraordinary Judgment upon them, might make the Passage not uneasie to them, as it is not unpossible in itself, from the Eastermost; parts of Asia, to the Westermost parts of America. In the next place, I find them of like countenance, and their Children of so lively resemblance, that a man would think himself in Dukes-Place or Berry-Street in London, when he seeth them. But this is not all; they agree in Rites, they reckon by Moons, they offer their first Fruits, they have a kind of Feast of Tabernacles, they are said to lay their Altar upon twelve Stones, their mourning a year, Customs of Women, with many things that do not now occur. So much for the Natives; next, the old PlantersThe old Planters. will be consider'd in their Relation, before I come to our Colony, and the Concerns of it. The first Planters in these parts, were the Dutch, and soon after them the Swedes and Finns. The Dutch ap∣plied themselves to Traffick, the Swedes and Finns to Husbandry. There were some Deputies be∣tween them some years, The Dutch looked upon them as intruders upon their Purchase and Posses∣sion; which was finally ended in the surrender made by John Rizeing, the Swedes Governor, to Peter Styresant, Governor for the States of Hol∣land, Anno 1655. The Dutch inhabit mostly those parts of the Province that lye upon or near the Bay, and the Swedes the Freshes of the River Dela∣ware. There is no need of giving any description of them, who are better known there than here,
but they are a plain, strong, industrious People, yet have made no great progress in Culture, or propagation of Fruit-trees; as if they desired rather to have enough, than Plenty or Traffick. But I presume the Indians made them more care∣less, by furnishing them with the means of Profit, to wit, Skins and Furs for Rum, and such strong Liquors. They kindly received me as well as the English, who were few, before the People con∣cerned with me, came among them. I must needs commend their respect to Authority, and kind behaviour to the English; they do not degenerate from the old Friendship between both Kingdoms. As they are People proper and strong of Body, so they have fine Children, and almost every house full; rare to find one of them without three of four Boys, and as many Girls; some six, seven and eight Sons: And I must do them that right, I see few young men more sober and laborious. The Dutch have a Meeting-place for Religious Wor∣ship, at Newcastle; and the Swedes three, one at Christina, one at Tenecum, and one at Wicoco, with∣in half a Mile of this Town. There rests, that I speak of the Condition we are in, and what settlement we have made; in which I will be as short as I can; for I fear, and not without reason, that I have tired your Patience with this long Story. The Coun∣trey lieth bounded on the East,Its Scituation. by the River and Bay of Delaware and Eastern Sea; it hath the ad∣vantage of many Creeks, or Ri∣versIts Rivers. rather, that run into the main River or Bay; some navigable for great Ships, some for small Craft: Those of most emi∣nency, are, Christina, Brandy-wine, Shilpot and
Skulkil; any one of which have room to lay up the Royal Navy of England, there being from four to eight fathom water; the lesser Creeks or Rivers, yet convenient for Sloops and Ketches of good Burden, are, Lewis, Mespilon, Ceda, Dover, Cran∣brook, Feversham, and Georges below, and Chiche∣ster, Chester, Toacawry, Pemmapecka, Fortquessin, Neshimene, and Pennberry in the Freshes, many les∣ser, that admit Boats and Shallops. Our People are mostly setled upon the upper Rivers, which are pleasant and sweet, and generally bounded with good Land. The planted part of the Pro∣vince and Territories, is cast into six Counties,Their Counties. Philadelphia, Bucking∣ham, Chester, Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, con∣taining about four thousand Souls. Two Gene∣ral Assemblies have been held, and with such Con∣cord and Dispatch, that they sate but three weeks, and at least seventy Laws were past without one Dissent in any material thing. But of this more hereafter, being yet raw and new in our Geer: However, I cannot forget their singular respect to me in this Infancy of things; who, by their own private expences so early considered mine for the certain Goods imported and exported: which, af∣ter my acknowledgement of their Affection, I did as freely remit to the Province and the Traders to it. And for the well-government of the said Counties, Courts of JusticeCourts of Ju∣stice erected. are establish'd in every County, with proper Officers, as, Justices, Sheriffs, Clerks, Constables, &c. Which Courts are held every two Months. But to prevent Law-suits,
there are three Peace-makers chosen by each Coun∣ty-Court, in the nature of common Arbitrators, to hear and end Differences between man and man; and Spring and Fall there is an Orphans-Court in each County, to inspect and regulate the Affairs of Orphans and Widows. Philadelphia,Philadelphia. the Expectation of those that are concerned in this Pro∣vince, is at last laid out to the great content of those here that are any ways interessed therein: The Situation is a Neck of Land, and lieth between two navigable Rivers, Delaware and Skulkil, whereby it hath two Fronts upon the Wa∣ter, each a Mile, and two from River to River. Delaware is a glorious River, but the Skulkil being an hundred Miles Boatable above the Falls, and its Course North-East towards the Fountain of Sus∣qitahannah (that tends to the heart of the Province, and both sides our own) it is like to be a great part of the Settlement of this Age, in which those that are Purchasers of me, will find their Names and Interest. But this I will say for the good Pro∣vidence of God, That of all the many Places I have seen in the world, I remember not one better seated; so that it seems to me, to have been a∣pointned for a Town, whether we regard the Ri∣vers, or the conveniency of the Coves, Docks, Springs, the loftiness and soundness of the Land and the Ayr, held by the People of those Parts, to be very good. It is advanced within less than a Year to about fourscore Houses and Cottages, such as they are; where Merchants and Handicraftsmen are following their Vocations as fast as they can, while the Countrey-men are close in their Farms: Some of them got a little Winter-Corn in the Ground last Season, and the generality have had
a handsom Summer-Crop, and are preparing for their Winter-Corn. They reaped their Barley this Year in the Month called May, the Wheat in the Month following; so that there is time in these parts for another Crop of divers things be∣fore the Winter-Season. We are dayly in hopes of Shipping to add to our Number; for blessed be God there is both room and accommodation for them; the Stories of our Necessity being ei∣ther the Fear of our Friends, or the Scare-crows of our Enemies; for the greatest hardship we have suffered hath been Salt-Meat, which by Fowl in Winter, and Fish in Summer, together with some Poultry, Lamb, Mutton, Veal, and plenty of Veni∣son the best part of the Year, hath been very pas∣sable I bless God, I am fully satisfied with the Country and Entertainment I can get in it; for I find that particular content which hath always attended me, where God by his Providence hath made it my Place and Service to reside. You can∣not imagine, my Station can be at present free of more than ordinary an ordinary Business; and as such, I may say it is a troublesom Work; but the Method things are putting in, will facilitate the Charge, and give an easier motion to the Administration of Affairs. However, as it is some mens Duty to plow, some to sow, some to water, and some to reap, so it is the Wisdonm, as well as Duty of a man, to yield to the Mind of Providence, and chearfully, as well as carefully, embrace and follow the Guidance of it. The City of Philadelphia,The Extent of Philadelphia. as now laid out, extends in length, from River to River, two Miles, and in breadth near a Mile; and the Go∣vernour, as a further manifestation of his kindness
to the Purchasers, hath freely given them their re∣spective Lots in the City, without defalcation of any of their Qualities of Purchased Lands; and as it is now placed and modelled between two Na∣vigable Rivers upon a neck of Land, and that Ships may ride in good Anchorage, in six or eight fathom Water in both Rivers, close to the City, and the Land of the City level, dry and wholsom; such a situation is scarce to be parallell'd. The City is so ordered now, by the Governour's Care and Prudence, that it hath a Front to each River, one half at Delaware, the other at Skulkil; and though all this cannot make way for small Purchasers to be in the Fronts, Yet they are placed in the next Streets, contiguous to each Front; viz. all Pur∣chasers of one thousand Acres and upwards, have the Fronts, (and the High-Street) and to every five thousand Acres purchase in the Front, about an Acre, and the smaller Purchasers about half an Acre in the backward Street; by which means the least hath room enough for a House, Garden, and a small Orchard, to the great content and satisfa∣ction of all here concerned. The City consists of a large Front-Street to each River, and a High-Street, (near the middle) front (or River) to front, of one hundred foot broad, and a broad Street in the middle of the City, from side to side, square of ten Acres; at each Angle are to be Houses for Publick Affairs, as a Meeting-House Assembly or State-House, Mar∣ket-House, School-House, and several other Build∣ings for other concerns. There are also in each Quarter of the City, a Square of eight Acres to be for the like uses, as the Moor-fields in London, and eight Streets (beside the High-Street) that run from Front to Front, and twenty Streets (be∣sides
the broad Street) that run cross the City, from side to side, all these Streets are of fifty foot breadth. After he had continued there above a Year, from the time or giving this Relation, he came for England, upon the account of some Qarrels that arose between him and the Lord Baltamore, who claimed the Lands of Delaware; but after several Hearings before the Lords of the Committee, the Matter was decided, after which he published a further Account of the Progress they made in that Plantation, which is as followeth: 1. We have had about Ninety Sail of Ships, with Passengers,Its Passen∣gers. since the beginning of the Year 1682, and not one Vessel, designed to this Province, through God's mercy, hitherto miscarried. The Estimate of the People may be thus made; Eighty to each Ship; which comes to Seven thou∣sand two hundred Persons: at least a Thousand there before, with such as from other places in our neighbourhood are since come to reside among us: and, I presume, the Births at least equal to the Burials; for having made our first Settlement high in the Freshes of the River, we do not find our selves subject to those seasonings that affect some other Countries upon the same Coast. The People are a Collection of divers Nations in Europe:Its Inhabitants. As French, Dutch, Germans, Swedes, Danes, Finns, Scotch, Irish, and Englsh; and of the last, equal to all the rest, and which is admi∣rable, not a reflection upon that account: But as they are of one kind, and in one place, and under one Allegiance, so they live like People of one Country: which civil union has had a consi∣derable
Influence towards the prosperity of that place. 2. Philadelphia,Philadelphia farther de∣scrib'd. and our intend∣ed Metropolis, as I formerly writ, is two Miles long, and a Mile broad, and at each end it lies that Mile, upon a Navigable Ri∣ver; the Situation high and dry, yet replenished with running streams; besides, the High-Street, that runs in the middle, from River to River, and is an hundred foot broad, it has eight Streets more, that run the same course, the least of which is fifty foot in breadth; and, besides Broad-street, which crosseth the Town in the middle, and is also an hundred Foot wide, there are twenty Streets more, that run the same course, and are also fifty foot broad. The Names of those Streets are mostly taken from the things that spontaneously grow in the Countrey; As Vine-street, Mulberry-sreet, Chesnut-street, Walnut-street, Strawberry-street, Cranberry-street, Plum-street, Hickery-street, Pine-street, Oak-street, Beach-street, Ash-street, Pop∣ler-street, Sassafras-street, and the like. 3. I mentioned in my last Ac∣count,Increase of Building. that from my arrival in 1682, to the date hereof, being ten Months, we had got up four∣score Houses at our Town, and that some Villages were settled about it; from that time, to my coming away, which was a Year, within a few weeks, the Town advanced to 357 Houses, di∣vers of them large, well built, with good Cel∣lars, three Stories, and some Balconies. 4. There is a fair Key,A fair Key. of a∣bout 300 foot square, built by Samuel Carpenter, to which a Ship
of 500 Tuns may lay her broad-side: and others intend to follow his example. We have also a Rope-walk, made by B. Wilcox, and Cordage for Ships already spun at it. 5. There inhabits most sorts of useful Tradesmen; As Carpenters,Their Trades. Joyners, Bricklayers, Masons, Plai∣sterers, Plummers, Smiths, Glasiers, Taylors, Shoe-maker, Butchers, Bakers, Brewers, Glovers, Tan∣ners, Felmongers, Wheel-rights, Mill-rights, Ship-rights Boat-rights, Rope-makers, Sail-makers, Block-makers, Turners, &c. 6. There are two Markets eve∣ry Week,Their Markets and Fairs. and two Fairs every Year. In other places Markets also, as at Chester, and New-castle. 7. Seven OrdinariesTheir Ordina∣ries. for the entertainment of Strangers, and Workmen, that are not House-keepers, and a good Meal to be had for Six-pence, Sterling. 8. The Hours for Work,Hours for Work. and Meals to Labourers are fixt, and known by ring of Bell. 9. After Nine at Night, the Of∣ficers go the Rounds, and no per∣son, without very good cause, suffered to be at any Publick-house, that is not a Lodger.Hours for Lodgers. 10. Though this Town seem∣ed at first contrived for the Pur∣chasers of the first hundred shares,An Addition for Improvement. each share consisting of 5000 Acres, yet few going, and that their absence might not check the Improvement of the Place, and Strangers, that flockt to us, be thereby ex∣cluded,
I added that half of the Town, that lies on the Skulkil, that we might have room for pre∣sent and after-comers, that were not of that num∣ber, and it hath already had great success to the Im∣provement of the place. 11. Some VesselsVessels built. have been here built, and many Boats, and by that means, a ready conveniency for passage for People and Goods. 12. Divers BrickeriesDivers Bricke∣ries. going on, many Cellars already stoned, or bricked, and some Brick-Houses going up. 13. The Town is well furnish∣ed what with convenient Mills;Convenient Mills. and what with their Garden-Plots, (the least half an Acre) the Fish of the River and their Labour, to the Coun∣try-man, who begins to pay with the Provi∣sions of his own growth, they live comfor∣tably. 14. The ImprovementIts Improve∣ment. of the place is best measured by the ad∣vance of value upon every man's Lot, I will venture to say, that the worst Lot in the Town, without any improvement upon it, is worth four times more than it was when it was laid out, and the best forty; and though it seems unequal, that the absent should be thus be∣nefited by the improvement, of those upon the place, especially when they have served no Office, run no Hazard, nor as yet defrayed any Publick Charge, yet this Advantage doth certainly re∣dound to them, and whoever theyare they are great Debtors to the Country; of which I shall now speak more at large.
Of Country-Settlement. 1. We do settle in the way of Townships or Villages,Their Settle∣ments. each of which contains 5000 Acres in square, and at least ten Famlies, the regulation of the Country, being a Family to each 500 Acres; some Townships have more, where the interest of the People is less than that quantity, which often falls out. 2. Many that had right to more Land, were at first covetous to have their whole quantity, with∣out regard to this way of settlement, though by such Wilderness-Vacancies they had ruined the Country, and their own Interest, of course. I had in my View, Society, Assistance, easie Com∣merce, Instruction of Youth, Government of Peoples Manners, Conveniency of Religious assembling, En∣couragement of Mechanicks, distinct and beaten Roads, and it was answered in all these respects, I think, to an universal content. 3. Our Townships lie square, generally the Village in the centre; The Houses either oppo∣site, or else opposite to the middle, betwixt two Houses over the way, for nearer neighbourhood. We have another method, that through the Village be in the centre, yet after a different manner: five hundred Acres are alotted for the Village, which, among ten Families, comes to fifty Acres each: this lies square, and on the outside of the Square stands the Houses, and their fifty Acres run∣ning back, whose ends meeting, make the centre of the 500 Acres as they are to the whole. Before the Doors of whole Houses, lies the Highway, and cross it every man's 450 Acres of Land, that
makes up his Complement of 500; so that the conveniency of Neighbourhood is made agreeable with that of the Land. 4. I said nothing in my last, of any number of Townships, but there were at least Fifty settled, before my leaving those Parts, which was in the Month called August 1684. 5. I visited many of them, and found them much advanced in their Improvements; Houses over their heads, and Garden-plots, Coverts for their Cattle, an encrease of Stock, and several Enclo∣sures in Corn especially, the first Commerce: And I may say of some poor men, even to the begin∣nings of an Estate, the difference of labouring for themselves and for others; of an Inheritance, and a Rack-Lease being never better understood. The Product of the Earth. 1. The Earth, by Gods Blessing, has more than answered our expecta∣tion;The Earths Product. the poorest places in our Judge∣ment, producing large Crops of Garden stuff, and Grain; and though our Ground has not generally the Symptoms of the fat Necks that lie upon Salt Waters in Provinces Southern of us, our Grain is thought to excel, and our Crops to be as large. We have had the mark of the good Ground amongst us, from thirty to sixty-fold of English Corn. 2. The Land requires less Seed; three Pecks of Wheat sows an Acre; a Bushel at most, and some have had the encrease I have mentioned. 3. Upon Trial, we find that the Corn and Roots that grow in England, thrive very well there; as, Wheat, Barley, Rye, Oats, Buck-Wheat, Pease,
Beans, Cabbages, Turneps, Carrots, Parsneps, Colli∣flowers, Asparagus, Onions, Charlots, Garlick, and Irish Potatoes; we have also the Spanish, and very good Rice, which do not grow here. 4. Our Low-Lands are excellent for Rape, and Hemp and Flax. A Trial hath been made, and of the two last there is a considerable quantity dres∣sed yearly. 5. The Weeds of our Woods feed our Cattel, to the Market as well as Dairy: I have seen fat Bullocks brought thence to Market before Midsum∣mer. Our Swamps or Maarshes yield us course Hay for the Winter. 6. English Grass-Seed takes well; which will give us fatting Hay in time. Of this I made an Experiment in my own Court-Yard, upon Sand that was digg'd out of my Cellar, with Seed that had lain in a Cask, open to the Weather two Winters and a Summer; I caus'd it to be sown in the beginning of the Month called April, and a fortnight before Midsummer it was fit to mow; it grew very thick; but I ordered it to be fed, being in the nature of a Grass-Plot, on purpose to see if the Roots lay firm; and though it had been meer Sand cast out of the Cellar, but a year before, the Seed took such Root, and held the Earth so fast, and fastened it self so well in the Earth, that it held and fed like old English Ground. I mention this, to confute the Objections that lie against those Parts; as if that, First, English Grass would not grow; next, not enough to mow; and lastly, not firm enough to feed, from the levity of the Mould. 7. All sorts of English Fruits that have been tri∣ed, take mighty well for the time; the Peach ex∣cellent; on Standers; and in great quantities:
They Sun-dry them, and lay them up in Lofts, as we do Roots here, and stew them with Meat in Winter-time. Musk-Melons and Water-Melons are raised here, with as little care as Pumpkins in Eng∣land; the Vine especially prevails, which grows every where; and upon Experience of some French People from Rochel, and the Isle of Rhee. Good WineWine may be made there, especially, when the Earth and Stem are fined and civi∣lized by Culture. We hope that good skill in our most Southern parts will yield us several of the Streights-Commodities, especially, Oyl, Dates, Figs, Almonds, Raisins and Currans. Of the Product of our Waters. 1. Mighty Whales rowl upon the Coast,The Waters near the Mouth of the Bay of Delaware; eleven caught and work'd into Oyl in one Season. We justly hope a considerable Profit by a Whalery, they being so numerous, and the Shore so sutable. 2. Sturgeons play continually in our Rivers in Summer; and though the way of curing them, be not generally known, yet by a Receipt I had of one Collins, that related to the Company of the Royal Fishery, I did so well preserve some, that I had of them good there three Months of the Summer, and brought some of the same so for England. 3. Alloes, as they call them, the Jews, Alice, and our Igrorants, Shades, are excellent Fish, and of the bigness of our largest Carp; they are so plentiful, that Captain Smith's Overseer, at the Skulkil, drew six hundred and odd at one Draught; three hundred is no wonder, one hundred famili∣arly: They are excellent pickled or smoked, as
well as boyled fresh; they are caught by Nets only. 4. Rocks are somewhat rounder and larger, also a whiter Fish, little inferior in relish to our Mal∣let; we have them almost in the like plenty. These are often Barrell'd like Cod, and not much inferior for their spending. Of both these, the Inhabi∣tants increase their Winter-Store: These are caught by Nets, Hooks and Spears. 5. The Sheepshead, so called, from the resem∣blance of its Mouth and Nose to a Sheep, is a Fish much preferred by some; but they keep in Salt Water; they are like a Roch in fashion, but as thick as a Salmon, not so long. We have also the Drum, a large and noble Fish, commended equal to the Sheeps-head, not unlike to a New-found-land Cod, but larger of the two. 'Tis so called from a noise it makes in its Belly when it is taken, resembling a Drum. There are three sorts of them, the Black, Red, and Gold-colour; the Black is fat in the Spring, the Red in the Fall, and the Gold-colour, believed to be the Black grown old, because it is observed that young ones of that colour have not been taken. They generally take them by Hook and line, as they do Cod, and they save like it, where People are skilful. There are abundance of lesser Fish to be caught at pleasure, but they quit not cost, as those I have mentioned, neither in magni∣tude nor number, except the Herring, which swarms in such shoals, that it is hardly credible; in little Creeks, they almost shovel them up in Tubs. There is the Cat-fish, or Flat-head, Lamprey, Eel, Trout, Perch, black and white Smelt, Sun-fish, &c. Also Oysters, Cockles, Conks, Crabs, Muscles, Ma∣nanoses.
Of Provision in general. 1. It has been often said, we are starved for want of Food;Provision. some were apt to sugest their Fears, others to insinuate their Prejudice, and when this was contracted, and they assured we had plenty, both of Bread, Fish and Flesh, then 'twas objected, we were forced to fetch it from other places at great Charges: But neither is all this true, though all the World will, think we must either bring Provi∣sion with us, or get it of the Neighbourhood till we had gotten houses over our heads, and a little Land in tillage. We fetched none, nor were we wholly kept by Neighbours; the old Inhabitants supplied us with most of the Corn we wanted, and a good share of Pork and Beef: 'Tis true, New-York, New-England, and Road-Island, did with their Provisions fetch our Goods and Money, but at such Rates, that some sold for almost what they gave, and others carried their Provisions back, expecting a better Market nearer; which shewed no scarcity, and that we were not totally destitute in our own River. But if my Advice be of any value, I would have them buy still, and not weaken their Herds, by killing up their young Stock too soon. But the right measure of Information must be the proportion of value of Provision there, to what they are in more planted and mature Colo∣nies. Beef is commonly sold at the rate of two pence per pound; and Pork for two pence halfpeny, Veal and Mutton at three pence, or three pence halfpeny of that Countrey Money; an English Shilling goes for Sixteen pence. Grain sells by the Bushel; Wheat at four shillings, Rye, and ex∣cellent
good, at three shillings; Barley, two shil∣lings six pence, Indian Corn two shillings six pence, Oats, two shillings, in that Money still, which in a new Countrey, where Grain is so much wanted for Seed, as well as Food, cannot be called dear; and especially if we consider the consumption of the many new Comers. 3. There is so great an encrease of Grain, by the diligent application of People to Husbandry, that within three years, some Plantations have got twenty Acres in Corn, some forty. 4. They are very careful to increase their Stock, and get into Dairies as fast as they can. They al∣ready make good Butter and Cheese. A good Cow and a Calf by her side, may be worth three pounds Sterling, in Goods at first cost. A pair of work∣ing Oxen eight pound, a pair of fat ones little more, and a plain breeding Mare about five pounds sterling. 5. For Fish, it is brought to the door, both fresh and salt, six Alloes or Rocks for twelve pence, and salt-fish at three farthings per pound, Oysters at two shillings per Bushel. 6. Our Drink has been Beer and Punch, made of Rum and Water; Our Beer was mostly made of Molosses, which well boyled with Sassafras or Pine, infused into it, makes very tolerable Drink; but now they make Malt, and Malt-Drink begins to be common, especially at Ordinaries, and the houses of the more substantial people. In our great Town there is an able man that has set up a Brew-house in order to furnish the people with good Drink, both there and up and down the River. Having said this of the Country, for the time I was there, I shall add one of many Letters that have come to my hand, because brief and full,
and that he is known to be a Person of an extra∣ordinary Caution as well as Truth, in what he is wont to write or speak. Philadelphia, the Third of the Sixth Month, (August) 1685. Governour, HAving an opportunity by a Ship from this Ri∣ver (out of which several have gone this year) I thought fit to give a short account of Pro∣ceedings, as to Settlement here, and the Improve∣ment both in Town and Countrey: As to the Countrey, the Improvements are large, and Set∣tlements very much thronged, by way of Town∣ship and Villages, great inclination to planting Orchards, which are easily raised, and some brought to perfection, much Hay-seed sown, and much planting of Corn this year, and great product said to be, both of Wheat, Rye and Rice; Barly and Oats prove very well; besides Indian Corn and Pease of several sorts; also Kidney-Beans, and English Pease of several kinds, I have had in my own Ground, with English Roots, Turnips, Pars∣nips, Carrots, Onions, Leeks, Radishes and Cabbages, with abundance of Herbs and Flowers: I know but of few Seeds that have miss'd, except Rose∣mary Seed, which being English, might be old. Al∣so I have such plenty of Pumkins, Musk-Melons, Wa∣ter Melons, Squashes, Coshaws, Bucks-hens, Cucum∣bers and Simnels of divers sorts, admired at by new comers, that the Earth should so plentifully cast forth, especially the first years breaking up, and
on that which is counted the worst sort of Sandy Land. I am satisfied, and many more, that the Earth is very fertil, and the Lord hath done his part, if man use but a moderate diligence: Grapes, Mulberries, and many wild Fruits, and natural Plums in abundance this year have I seen and eat of. A brave Orchard and Nursery have I planted, and they thrive mightily, and bear Fruit the first year; I endeavour to get choice of Fruits and Seeds from many parts; also Hay-Seed, and have sowed a Field this Spring for Trial. First, I burned the Leaves, then had it grubb'd, not the Fields, but the small Roots up, then sow'd great and small Clovers, with a little old Grass-Seed, and had it only raked over, not plowed nor harrowed, and it grows exceedingly: Also, for Experience, I sowed some Patches of the same sort in my Garden, and dunged some, and that grows worst; I have planted the Irish Potatoes, and hope to have a brave encrease to transplant next year. Captain Rapel (the Frenchman) saith, he made good Wine of the Grapes of the Coun∣try last year, and transplanted some, but intends to make more this year; also a Frenchman in this Town intends the same; for Grapes are very plentiful. Now as to the Town of Philadelphia, it goes on in Planting and Building to admiration, both in the Front and backward, and there are about 600 Houses in three years time; and since I built my Brick-House, the Foundation of which was laid at my going, which I design after a good manner, to encourage others, and that from building with Wood; it being the first, many take example; and some that built wooden Houses, are sorry for it; Brick Building is said to be as cheap: Bricks
are exceeding good, and better than when I built, more makers fallen in, and Bricks cheaper; they were before at 16 s. English, per Thousand, and now many brave Brick houses are going up with good Cellars. Arthur Cook is building him a brave Brick House near William Frampton's, on the Front; for William Frampton hath since built a good Brick House, by his Brew-house and Bake-house, and lett the other for an Ordinary. John Wheeler from New-England, is building a good Brick House by the Blew Anchor, and the two Brick-makers a dou∣ble Brick House and Cellars; besides several other going on. Samuel Carpenter has built another House by his. I am building another Brick House by mine, which is three large Stories high, besides a good large Brick Cellar under it of two Bricks and a half thickness in the Wall, and the next Story half under ground; the Cellar has an arched Door for a Vault to go (under the Street) to the River, and so to bring in Goods, or deliver out. Humphrey Murry, from New-York, has built a large Timber-House with Brick Chimneys. John Test has almost finished a good Brick House, and a Bake-house of Timber; and N. Allen a good House next to Thomas Wynn's Front-Lot. John Day a good House after the London fashion, most Brick with a large Frame of Wood in the Front, for Shop-windows; all these have Balconies. Thomas Smith and Daniel Pge are Partners, and set to ma∣king of Brick this year, and they are very good: Also Pastours, the German Friend; Agent for the Company at Frankford, with his Dutch People, are preparing to make Bricks next year. Samuel Car∣penter is our Lime-burner on his Wharf. Brave Lime stone is found here, as the Workmen say, being proved. We build most Houses with Balco∣nies.
Lots are much desired in the Town; great buying one of anothe. We are now laying the Foundation of a large plain Brick House for a Meeting-House, in the Center (sixty foot long, and about forty foot broad) and hope to have it soon up, there being many hearts and hands at work that will do it: A large Meeting-house, fifty foot long, and thirty eight broad also going on the front of the River, for an Evening-Meeting, the Work going on apace; many Towns-people setling their Liberty-Lands. I hope the Society will rub off the Reproaches some have cast upon them. We now begin to gather in something of our many great Debts. I do understand three Companies for Whale-catching, are designed to fish in the Rivers-mouth this Season, and find through the great plenty of Fish, they may begin early. A Fisherman this year found a way to catch Whitings in this River; and it is expected, many sorts of Fish more than has been yet caught, may be taken by the skilful. Fish are in such plenty, that many sorts on Tryal, have been taken with Nets in the Winter-time. The Swedes laughing at the English for going to try, have since tried themselves. The River is so big, and full of several sorts of brave Fish, that its be∣lieved, except frozen over, we may catch any time in the Winter. It is great pity, but two or three experienced Fishermen were here to ply this River, to salt, and serve, fresh Fish to the Town. A good way to pickle Sturgeon is wanting; such abun∣dance being in the River, even before the Town: many are catcht, boyled, and eaten. Last Winter great plenty of Deer were brought in by the Indi∣ands and English from the Country. We are general∣ly very well and healthy here, but abundance dead in Maryland this Summer.
The Manufacture of Linnen by the Germans goes on finely, and they make fine Linnen. Samuel Car∣penter having been lately there, declares, They had gathered one Crop of Flax, and had sown the se∣cond, and saw it come up well, and, they say, might have had forwarder and better, had they had old Seed, and not stayed so long for the growth of the new Seed to sow again. I may believe it, for large has my experience been this year, though in a small piece of ground, to the admiration of many. I thought fit to signifie thus much, knowing thou wouldst be glad to hear of the People and Provin∣ces welfare: The Lord preserve us all, and make way for thy return, which is much desired, not only by our friends, but all sorts, I am, &c. thy truly Loving Friend, Robert Turner. Of further Improvements for Trade and Com∣merce. These things that we have in Prospect for Sta∣ples of Trade,Trade and Com∣merce. are Wine, Linnen, Hemp, Pot-ashes and Whale-oyl; to say nothing of our Provisions for the Islands, our Saw-Mills, Sturgeon, some Tobacco, and our Furrs and Skins, which of themselves are not contemptible: I might add Iron (perhaps Copper too) for there is much Mines, and it will be granted us, that we want no Wood, though I must confess, I cannot know how to help preferring a Domestick or Self-subsistence to a life of much profit, by the extream toyl of Foreign Traffick.
Advice to Adventurers how to imploy their Estates with fair profit. It is sit now that I give some Advertisement to Adventurers,Advice to Ad∣venturers. which way they may lay out their money to best advan∣tage, so as it may yield them fair returns, and with content to all concerned, which is the last part of my present task; and I must needs say so much wanting, that it has perhaps given some occasion to ignorance and prejudice to run without mercy, measure or distin∣ction, against America, of which, Pensylvania to be sure has had its share. 1. It is agreed on all hands, that the poor are the hands and feet of the rich. It is their labour that improves Countries, and to encourage them, is to promote the real benefit of the Publick. Now as there are abundance of these People in many parts of Europe, extreamly desirous of going to America, so the way of helping them thither, or when there, and the return thereof to the Disbur∣sers, will prove what I say to be true. 2. There are two sorts, such as are able to trans∣port themselves and Families, but have nothing to begin with there, and those that want so much as to transport themselves and Families thither. 3. The first of these may be entertained in this manner. Say I have five thousand Acres, I will set∣tle ten Families upon them in way of Village, and build each an House, an out-House for Cattel, fur∣nish every Family with stock; as four Cows, two Sows, a couple of Mares, and a yoke of Oxen, with a Town-horse, Bull and Boar. I find them with Tools, and give each their first Ground-seed;
they shall continue seven years, or more, at half increase, being bound to leave the Houses in repair, and a Garden and Orchard, I paying for the Trees, and at least twenty Acres of Land within Fence, and improved to Corn and Grass. The charge will come to about sixty pounds English each Family; at the seven years end, the improvement will be worth, as things go now, one hundred and twenty pounds, besides the value of the encrease of the Stock, which may be near as much more, allowing for casualties, especially if the People are honest and careful, or a man be upon the Spot himself, or have an Overseer sometimes to inspect them. The charge in the whole is eight hundred thirty and two Pounds. I think I have been modest in my Computation. These Farms afterwards are sit for Leases at full Rent, or how else the owner shall please to dispose of them; also the People will by this time be skilled in the Country, and well pro∣vided to settle themselves with Stock upon their own Land. 4. The other sort of poor People may be very beneficially transported upon these terms. Say I have five thousand Acres, I should settle as before, I will give to each Family one hundred Acres, which in the whole makes one thousand, and to each Fa∣mily thirty Pounds English, half in hand and half there, which in the whole comes to three hundred Pounds, after four days are expired, in which time they may be easie, and in a good condition; they shall each of them pay 5 l. and so yearly for ever, as a Fee-farm-rent, which in the whole comes to fifty Pounds a year. Thus a Man that buys five thousand Acres may secure and settle his four thou∣sand by the gift of one, and in a way that hazard and interest allowed for, amounts to at least ten
per Cent. upon Land security, besides the value it puts upon the rest of the five thousand Acres. I propose that there be at the least two working hands besides the Wife, whether Son or Servant, and that they oblige what they carry; and for fur∣ther security, bind themselves as Servants for some time, that they will settle the said Land according∣ly: And when they are once seated their improve∣ments are security enough for the Rent. 5. There is yet another expedient, and that is, to give ten Families one thousand Acres for ever, at a small acknowledgment, and settle them in way of Village, as afore; by their seating thus, the Land taken up is secured from others, because the method of the Country is answered, and the value such a settlement gives to the rest reserved, is not inconsiderable, I mean the four thousand Acres, especially that which is contiguous, for their Chil∣dren when grown up, and Handicrafts, will soon covet to fix next them, and such and such after set∣tlements to begin at an improved rent in Fee, or for long Leases, or small acknowledgments, and good improvements must advance the whole consi∣derably. I conceive any of these methods to issue in a sufficient advantage to Adventurers, and they all give good encouragement to feeble and poor Fa∣milies. 6. That which is most advisable for People in∣tended thither, to carry with them, is, in short, all things relating to Apparel, Building, Houshold-stuff, Husbandry, Fowling and Fishing, some Spice, Spirits, and double Beer, at first, were not amiss. But I advise all to proportion their Estates thus, one third in Money, and two thirds in Goods. Up∣on Pieces of Eight there will be almost a third gotten, for they go at six shillings; and by Goods
well bought, at least fifty Pounds Sterling for every hundred Pounds, so that a Man worth four hundred Pounds here, is worth six hundred Pounds there, without sweating. Of the Natives. 1. Because many stories have been Prejudicially progagated, as if we were upon ill terms with the Natives,The Natives. and some∣times, like Job's Kindred, all cut off but the Messenger that brought Tidings; I think it requisite to say thus much, that as there never was any such Messenger, so the dead People were alive at our last advices, so far are we from ill Terms with the Natives, that we have lived in great friendship. I have made several Purchases, and in Pay and Presents they have received at least twelve hundred Pounds of me. Our humanity has obliged them so far, that they generally leave their Guns at home, when they come to our Settle∣ments; they offer us no affront, not so much as to one of our Dogs; and if any of them break our Laws, they submit to be punished by them: And to this they have tyed themselves by an Obligation under their Hands. We leave not the least indignity to them unrebuked, nor wrong unsatisfied; Justice gains and awes them. They have some great Men amongst then, I mean, for Wisdom, Truth and Justice. I refer to my for∣mer Account about their Laws, Manners and Re∣ligious Rites.
Of the Government. The GovernmentTheir Govern∣ment. is, according to the words of the Grant, as near to the English as conveniently may be; in the whole we aim at Du∣ty to the King, the preservation of Right to all, the suppression of Vice, and encouragement of Vertue and Arts; with liberty to all People to Worship Almighty God, according to their Faith and Perswasion. Of the seasons of Going, and usual time of Passage. 1. Though Ships go hence all times of the Year,The seasons of the Ships Passage. it must be ac∣knowledged, that to go so as to arrive at Spring or Fall, is best: For the Summer may be of the hottest for fresh Comers; and in the Winter the Wind that prevails, is the North-West, and that blows off the Coast; so that sometimes it difficult to enter the Capes. 2. I purpose therefore, that Ships go hence about the middle of the Months call'd February and August, which (allowing two Months for Passage) reaches time enough to plant in the Spring such things as are carried hence to plant; and in the Fall, to get a small Cottage, and clear some Land against the next Spring. I have made a discovery of about a hundred Miles West, and find those back-Lands richer in Soil, Woods and Fountains, than that by Delaware, especially upon the Sasque∣hanah River.
3. I must confess, I prefer the Fall to come thi∣ther, as believing it most healthy to be followed with Winter than Summer; though (through the great goodness and mercy of God) we have had an extraordinary portion of Health for so new and numerous a Colony, notwithstanding we have not been so regular in time. 4. The Passage is not to be set by any Man, for Ships will be quicker and slower; some having been four Months, and some but one: and as often generally between six and nine Weeks: One Year, or four and twenty Sail, I think, there was not three above nine, and there was one or two under six Weeks in Passage. 5. To render it more healthy; it is good to keep as much upon Deck as may be, for the Air helps against the offensive smells of a crowd, and a close place. Also to scrape often the Cabbins, under the Beds; and either carry store of Rue and Wormwood, and some Rosemary, or often sprinkle Vinegar about the Cabbin. Pitch burnt is not amiss sometimes, against faintness and infectious Scents. I speak my experience, for their benefit and direction that may need it. And because some has urged my coming back, as an argument against the place, and the proba∣bility of its improvement; adding, that I would for that reason never return: I think fit to say, That next Summer (God willing) I intend to go back, and carry my Family and the best part of my personal Estate with me. And this I do not not only of Duty, but Inclination and Choice. God will bless and prosper poor America. I shall conclude with this further notice, That to the end such as are willing to embrace any of the foregoing Propositions, for the improvement
of Adventurers Estates, may not be discouraged from an inability to find such Landlords, Tenants, Masters and Servants, if they intimate that desire to my Friend Philip Ford, living in Bow-lane in London, they may in all probability be well accom∣modated; few of any quality or capacity, de∣signed to the Province, that do not inform him of their inclination and condition. Now for you that think of going, thither, I have this to say, by way of Caution. If an hair of our heads fall not to the ground, without the Provi∣dence of God, remember your removal is of greater moment. Wherefore have a due reve∣rence and regard to his good Providence, as becomes a People that profess a Belief in Provi∣dence. Go clear in yourselves, and of all others. Be moderate in Expectation, count on Labour before a Crop, and Cost before Gain; for such Persons will best endure difficulties, if they come and bear the success, as well as find the com∣fort that usually follows such considerate under∣takings. Worminghurst-place, the 12th. of the 10th. Month, 1685. William Penn.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of MONTSERRAT. MOntserrat is a Island of a small extent,Its Extent. being not above Ten Miles long, and Nine broad. It was so called by the Spaniards, at their discove∣ry of it, from a Mountain therein, which resem∣bles that of Montserrat, near Barcelona, in Spain. It is Situated in the Latitude of seventeen degrees on this side the Line.Its Situation. 'Tis very much inclined to Mountains, which for the most part are very well cloathed with Cedar and other useful Trees; the Valleys and Plains being likewise very pleasant and fruitful. 'Tis chiefly Inhabited by Irish,Inhabitants. intermixed with some English, making together about seven Hun∣dred Persons. There is in it a very fair Church, of a delightful Structure, built by the liberal con∣tributions of the Governour and Inhabitants; the Pulpit, Seats, and all the rest of the Carpen∣ters and Joyners Work, being framed of the most precious sweet-sented Wood of its own Pro∣duct.
There is sometimes taken upon the Coast of this Island, a strange kind of Mon∣ster,A strange Monster. about four Foot long, and pro∣portionable in bulk, having on its Head a great bunch like an Hedghog; his Skin hard and rough, like that of a Sea-Dog; of a black colour,; his Head is flat, having on the upper part of it many little risings, and a∣mong them two very small black Eyes; his Mouth is very wide, his Teeth sharp, and two of them crooked like a Boars; he has two Finns, and a broad forked Tail; all which renders him of so terrible a look, that they call him the Sea-Devil; which Name was given it chiefly upon his having two liltle black Horns, growing above the Eyes, turning towards his Back like a Rams; his Flesh is soft, full of strings, and of a poysonous quality, causing strange Vomitings and Swoonings, which prove mortal, if not timely prevented by a spe∣cifick Antidote. Another, called the Sea-Ʋnicorn,Sea-Ʋnicorn. is no less wonderful; some of them being eighteen Foot long, of a cu∣rious Vermilion colour; the Body covered with blew Scales, (intermix'd in some places with white) about the bigness of a Crown piece; it hath six large Finns, like the end of Galley Oars; a Head like a Horse, and a fair streight Horn, about nine Foot long, issuing out of the fore-part of it, wax∣ing smaller and smaller to the very point; which is so exceeding hard and sharp, that it will pierce through the hardest Bodies; its Fesh is delicate Meat, and its Body so large, that three Hundred Persons are reported to have fed upon one taken in those Parts.
But none of those Sea Monsters, that are eata∣ble, are so much in esteem as a certain Fish, called by the French, Lamantine, or Manaty; some where∣of are eighteen Foot long, having a Head like a Cow, and is therefore called the Sea-Cow; it hath a thick dark coloured Skin, somewhat hairy, which when dried, serves for a defence against the Arrows of the Indians; instead of Finns they have two short Feet, which seem much too weak for the sup∣porting so heavy a Body; he lives upon what grows on the Rocks, and in shallow places. where there is not much Water. Upon this Coast likewise are often seen great numbers of Fishes which Fly fifteen or twenty Foot above Water,Flying Fish. and near one Hundred Paces in length, but no more, in regard their Wings are dried by the Sun; they are somewhat like Herrings, but of a rounder Head and broader Back; their Wings like a Bats; in their flight they often strike a∣gainst the Sails of Ships, and fall, even in the day time, upon the Decks, and some report them to be very good Meat; the occasion of their flying, is, to avoid danger from greater Fishes; but they meet with Enemies in the Air, as well as Water, having open hostility with certain Sea-Fowl, which living only upon prey, seize them as they fly. The Sword-FishThe Sword-Fish. is worth ob∣serving, as well as the Flying-Fish; it hath at the end of the upper Jaw a defensive weapon, about the breadth of a great broad Sword, which hath sharp hard Teeth on both sides; several of these Swords are five Foot long, and about six Inches broad towards the lower end; with seven and twenty white solid Teeth in each rank, and the bulk of their Bo∣dies
answering thereto; the Head of this Monster is flat, and hideous to behold, being in form of a Heart, having near their Eyes two vents, at which they cast out the Water they have swallowed; they have no Scales, but a grayish Skin on the Back, and white under the Belly, which is rough like a File; they have seven Finns, two on each Side, two on the back, and one which serves them for a Tail: Some call them Saw-Fishes, and others Emperours; because there is always open War be∣tween them and the Whale, which is very often wounded to death by their terrible weapon. A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of ANGƲILLA. THhis Isle of Anguilla, sometimes called Snake-Island, from its shape, seated in the Lati∣tude of 18 deg. and 21 min. on this side the Equinoctial,Situation. is a long Tract of Land, and extendeth itself length about ten Leagues, and in breadth about three. The Inhabi∣tantsInhabitants. are English, which are compu∣ted to amount unto two or three Hundred; which Plant Tobacco, which is highly esteemed by those who are good Judges in that Commadity.
Before the discovery of America, there were not found in these Parts any Horses, Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Swine, or Dogs; but for the better conveniency of their Navigations, and supply of their Ships, in case of necessity, they left some of these Creatures in several Parts of this New-found World; where they have since multiplied and be∣come so numerous, that they are more common than in any Part of Europe. But besides these Forreign kind of Cattel, there were before in these Islands cer∣tain sorts of strange four footed Beats;Their Beasts and Cattel. as, the Opassum, about the bigness of a Cat, with a sharp Snout, the neither Jaw being shorter than the up∣per, like a Pigs; it hath very sharp Claws, and climbs Trees easily, feeding upon Birds, and (in want thereof) upon Fruit; it is remarkable for a purse or bag of its own Skin, folded together under its Belly, wherein it carries its Young, which he lays upon the ground at pleasure, by opening that natural purse; and when he would depart, he opens it again, and the Young ones get in, and he carries them with him where-ever he goes; the Female suckles them without setting them on the ground, for her Teates lie within that purse; they commonly bring six Young ones; but the Male, who hath such another natural purse under his Belly, takes his turn to carry them, to ease the Female. There is also in some of these Islands a kind of wild Swine, with short Ears, almost no Tail, and their Navels on their Backs; some of them are all black, others have certain white spots; their strange grunting is more hideous than that of Swine; they are called Javaris; the flesh is of taste
good enough, but very hardly taken, in regard the Boar is in a manner unwearied, by reason of a vent or hole he hath on his Back, by which his Lungs are mightily refreshed; and if he be forced (when he is pursued by Dogs) to stop, he is arm∣ed with such sharp and cutting Tushes, that he tearts to pieces all that set upon him. The Tatous is another strange Creature, armed with a hard scaly coat, wherewith they cover and secure themselves, as with armour; having a Head and Snout like a Pig, wherewith they turn up the ground; they have also in each Paw five very sharp Claws, which help them to thrust out the Earth with the more ease, and pull up the Roots whereupon they feed in the night time; they have in their Tail a small bone, which is repor∣ted to help deafness, and noise, and pains in the Ears; they are about the bigness of a Fox, and their flesh is accounted delicate Meat; when they are pursued or sleep, which is usually in the day time, they close themselves close up together like a Bowl, and get in their Feet, Head and Ears with so much dexterity under their hard Scales, that their whole Body is by that natural armour secured against all the attempts of Huntsmen and Dogs; and when at any time they come near any preci∣piece, or steep hill, they roul down without get∣ting any harm. There is likewise the Agouty, another Creature of a dark colour, with a little Tail, without Hair, having two Teeth only in each Jaw; it holds its meat in the two fore-Claws like a Squirrel, and its usual cry is, as if it distinctly pronounced the word Covey; when it is hunted, it gets into hollow Trees, out of which it is not to be forced but by smoak, making a hideous cry before they will
leave the holes in which they are gotten; if taken while young, they are easily tamed; but if old, with exceeding difficulty; when they are angry, they strike the ground with their hind-feet like a Rabbet, being about the same bigness and shape, only their Ears are short and round; 'tis a fierce Creature, and its hair (when angry) stands per∣fectly upright. There is likewise Musk-Rats, which live in holes and boroughs like Rabbets; there comes from them a scent like Musk, which causes melancholly, and so strongly perfumes their boroughs, that it is easie to find them out. But of all the Creatures which this Island pro∣duces, the Alegator is the most remarkable; it keeps near the Sea, and in Rivers, and Islands un-inhabited, and sometimes likewise on shore, a∣mong the Reeds; it is a Creature very fearful to behold, and grows to the very last day of its life; so that many of them are eighteen Foot long, and as big about as a Hogshead; their lower Jaws are immoveable, but their Mouth is so wide, and their Teeth so exceeding sharp, that they can with ease bite a Man in two: Those that are bred in fresh Water smell of Musk, and that so strongly, that they perfume the very Air an hundred Paces round about them, and scent the very Water in which they live; those of them that live in the Sea have not so strong a scent, however both kinds are exceeding dangerous to such as swim in those Parts; they are always very sly, and make use of a cunning slight for the seizing Horses and Cows, it being their custom to lye lurking at the places where usually they come to drink, watching his advantage; and having half shut his eyes, sloats upon the top of the Water like a piece of rotten
Wood, by which means he gets by small degrees still nearer to the poor Beast, and while he is drinking, without the least dread of such an Enemy, suddenly seizes him by the lips, dragging him un∣der Water until he is drown'd, after which he eats him. He likewise sometimes surprizes Men by the same slight; for one who was a Servant to the Consul of Alexandria, going to take up one of them, thinking it had been a piece of Wood, was suddenly seized on, and drawn by it to the bottom of the River, and never seen more. A DESCRIPTION Of the ISLAND of BARBADA, or BARBƲDA. BArbada is situated in 17 degrees and a half of Northern Latitude;Situation. of no great extent, not exceeding fifteen Miles in length, and of no great account to the English, who are the Possessors of it; yet it is found to be of a fertile Soyl, well stored with Cattel and Sheep, and might produce several good Commo∣dities were it well manag'd, to the advantage of the Inhabitants. But it is subject to one great in∣conveniency, as well as some others of those Islands, viz. the Caribeans of Dominica, and other places,
make frequent Incursions, and commit great Spoils in it; the enmity and aversion which those Cani∣bals have received against the English Nation in ge∣neral, be so great & irreconcilable, that there seldom passeth a Year wherein they do not make an Erupti∣on into some one or other of these Islands; and if not presently discovered, and vigorously opposed at their first Landing, do much mischief, destroying all before them with Fire and Sword, except the Women and Children, which, together with the Spoil and Plunder, they carry off to their own Territories. The Caribeans, who Inhabit divers of those Islands, are generally thought to have been former∣ly driven by their Enemies from the Continent of America, and forced to take shelter here, having amongst themselves various and very different Opinions, Customs and Ceremonies; such as live near, and converse with the Christians, have re∣linquish'd many of their ancient barbarous Usages, and have very much civiliz'd their Conversations; which gave occasion to two ancient Caribeans to entertain some of the European Christians with this or the like Discourse. Our People are now quite degenerated from what they formerly were, and in a manner become just like yours; and so dif∣ferent are we now grown from what we were before, that we find it a matter of some difficul∣ty, for us to know ourselves. To which dege∣neracy of ours, attribute those furious Hurricanes which happen now more frequently, than they were wont to do in the Days of Old. The Inhabitants are handsom, well-propor∣tioned, of a smiling Countenance, their Eyes and Hair are black, their Foreheads and Noses flat, being crushed down by their Mothers, at the
time of their Birth, and all the time of their Sucking, because they imagine that flatness to be a kind of beauty and perfection: Their Feet are large and thick, and so exceeding hard, that al∣though they go bare-foot, neither shall you see any of them blind, lame, crook-back'd, bald, or having any other natural infirmity. Such Scars and Deformities as they get in the Wars, they glory in, as evident demonstrations of their Va∣lour. Their Hair is strait and long, the Women attributing the highest excellency to that which exceeds in blackness; both Men and Women tye up their Hair behind, which they bind so hard, that it stands up upon their Heads like a horn, but hangs loose upon the top; it falls down again on each side of their Heads. The Men, so soon as their Beards begin to grow, pluck them up by the roots, accounting it a great deformity to the Europeans to wear any: both Men and Women go naked, and if any should so much as endea∣vour to touch their Privy-Parts, all the rest will deride them: and those who converse amongst the Christians, though they are much civilized, and have forsaken many of their odd and barbarous Customs, yet no perswasion can prevail with them to relinquish this. They generally say, they came naked into the World, and it will be a madness for them to hide the bodies nature has bestowed upon them; not∣withstanding which they change the natural co∣lours of their skins, by dying them with a red Composition, which they make for that purpose, and wherewith they always anoint themselves after washing; and many times, to make themselves ap∣pear the more gallant, as they imagine, they draw black Circles about their Eyes with the Juyce of Ju∣niper-Apples;
and when they would appear more gal∣lant than ordinary, put on a Crown of Feathers of different colours, and hang Fish-bones, or Buck, made of Gold, Siver, or Tin, in their Ears, and some of them make holes through their Lips, or in the space between their Nostrils, wherein they hang Rings, Fish-bones, or some such Toys, to in∣crease their gallantry; and some of the better sort wear Necklaces of Amber, Coral, Cristal, or some such kind of glittering stuff. There grows in this Island great store of excellent Fruits,Their Fruits. viz. Oranges, Pomegranates, Ci∣trons, Raisins, Indian-Figgs, and Coco-Nuts, that famous Fruit whereof some Historians tell such Miracles; the Nut grows upon the very trunk or top of the Tree, which is never found without Fruit, for it bears new every Month: when the Nut is broke, which is very large, (many of them weighing above ten pound) the Fruit appears as white as Snow, extreamly nourishing, and in taste much like an Almond, in the middle whereof there lies a clear Liquor, so exceeding pleasant and de∣licious in taste, that many prefer it before the best Florence-Wine. One of them affords Meat enough to fill a good large Dish withal. Besides which, there are divers excellent Trees and Woods,Their Commo∣dities. as Brazil, Ebony, and the like; Cassia, Cinna∣mon, Cotton, Pepper, Tobacco, In∣dico, Ginger, Potatoes, Pine-Apples, and Sugar-Canes, grow likewise there in great plenty; and a certain living or sensible Plant, esteemed one of the admirablest rarities in the World, which, as soon as touch'd with the hand, falls down, and the Leaves run together, as if they were suddenly wi∣thered;
but, so soon as the hand is removed, and the party gone, it presently rises up and flourish∣eth again; from whence it is called, by some, The Chaste Plant, in regard it will not endure to be touched, without expressing its resentments of its injury. There are not many venomous CreaturesVenomous Crea∣tures. to be found in this Island, nor in any of the Carib∣bees, but yet there are many Snakes and Serpents of many colours and forms, some whereof are nine or ten foot long, and near as big as a Man's thigh; one whereof being kil∣led, a whole Hen, feathers and all, were found in her belly, besides a dozen Eggs, upon which the Hen was sitting when the Serpent seized her, which shews them to be very large; notwith∣standing they are not poysonous, but pleasure the inhabitants by freeing their Houses from Rats and other such like Vermine, which they kill and de∣vour. There is another sort of Serpent, above an Ell long, and not above an Inch about, which feed upon Frogs and Birds, and are in co∣lour of so lovely green, that they are very delightful to the eye. But there are two sorts of Snakes that are very hurtful and dangerous; the first is gray on the back, and feels soft like Velvet; the other is either yellow or red, very dreadful to look on, their heads being flat and broad, and their jaws exceeding wide, and armed with eight or ten teeth as sharp as Needles, from whence they produce their poyson, which lies in little purses near the roots of their teeth; they do not chew their Food, (but swallow it down whole) for if they should, the inhabitants say, they would poyson themselves: they are so exceeding veno∣mous,
that if a man chance to be hurt by them, if help be not immediately had, the wound in two hours proves incurable: nor have they any other vertue, that deserves commendation, but this, they never hurt any man, which doth not first mo∣lest them. A DESCRIPTION OF THE Islands of BERMƲDAS, OR THE SUMMER-ISLANDS. EAst of Virginia and Carolina, which is a part of Florida, lies the Isles of Bermudas, so called from John Bermudas, by whom they were first discovered, or the Summer-Islands, as they are likewise sometimes called, from the Shipwreck which Sir George Summers, an English-man, suffered upon that Coast; they are a great multitude of Isles, being no less than 400 in number, as some affirm, that lie distant 1600 Leagues from England, from Madera 1000, from Hispaniola 400, and from Carolina, which is the nearest part of land, about 300 Leagues.
map of Bermuda AESTIVARUM INSULAE  BARMUDAS Lat. 32D 25m 3300 miles from London 500 from Roanoke in Virginia by R. Morden A. Sands Fort B. Warwick Fort C. Davers Fort D. Cavandish F. E. Pagets Fort F. Smiths Fort G. Pembrak F. H. Kings Castle I. Charles F. K. Tuckers Tom. L Smiths I. Circasoltitium aestirum Anno 166 solvere ex his Insulis quinque viri in Schapha superne aperta trium doliorum majorum capacitatis, et post septem hebdomadarum navigationū omnes incolumes in Hiberniam appule∣runt, quale ab hominum memoria vix accidiss creditur.
The biggest of these Isles is called St. Georges,St. Georges. and is about five or six Leagues long, and in the broadest place not a League broad, all the rest being much less. The whole cluster do together form a body much like a Crescent, and inclose se∣veral very good Ports, the chief whereof are those of the Great Sound, Harrington's Inlet, South∣hampton, and Pagets, which, with their Forts of Dover and Warwick, take their names from the se∣veral Noblemen that have been concerned as Ad∣venturers. The Earth in those Isles is exceeding fertile, yielding two Crops every Year,Fertility. which they generally gather in about the Months July and December. They have several sorts of excellent Fruits,Fruits. as Oranges, Dates, Mulberries both white and red, (in the Trees whereof breed abundance of Silk-worms, which produce great plenty of that Commodity) and Tobacco: there has been found some Pearl and Am∣ber-grease. They have likewise there plenty of Tortoise, their flesh being counted there very deli∣cious: they have good store of Hogs, and great variety of Fowls and Birds, amongst which are Cranes, and a sort of Sea-Fowl, which breeds in holes, like our Rabits; and such is the fruitfulness and the delightful verdure wherein these Isles al∣ways appear, that Summers seemed to take plea∣sure in his Shipwreck, and, neglecting his return for England, endeavoured, with the assistance of Sir Thomas Gates, to settle a Plantation there. At their first coming ashore they found themselves sup∣plied by a vast variety of Fowl, which were taken without difficulty, no less than one thousand of
one kind, somewhat bigger than a Pigeon, being caught by them in two or three hours space: this sort of Fowl lay speckled Eggs, as large as Hens, on the Sand, and this they do every day, without being frighted, though Men sit down by them. The greatest inconveniency that attends the place, is their want of fresh Water; there is none for their occasions, but what is to be found in Wells Pits, there being neither Fountain nor Stream in all these Isles. The Sky is almost continually serene and clear, and the AirAir. so exceeding temperate and healthy, that it is rare to hear of a Man's dying of any other distemper than that of Old Age, which has occasioned many to remove from England thither, barely for the en∣joyment of a long and healthful Life, and when they have continued there for any considerable time, they are exceeding fearful of removing out of so good an Air, lest it should hasten their re∣moval to the grave: However, when the Sky is at any time darkened with Clouds, it Thunders and Lighten, and the Weather proves exceeding stormy and tempestuous, the Wind sometimes rather thundering than blowing from every quar∣ter, for forty eight hours together. The North and North-West Winds cause Winter in Decem∣ber, January, and February, which is however so very moderate, that young Birds and Fruits, and other Concomitants of the Spring are seen there in those Months. The Isle of St. Georges, which is the biggest and of more fame than all the rest, and to which the name of Bermudas is more gene∣rally given, is situated in thirty two Degrees and thirty Minutes of North-Latitude.
No venomous BeastsBeasts. are to be found in this Island, neither will they live, if brought thither; their Spiders are no way poysonous, but are of sundry and various co∣lours, and in hot weather make their Webs so exceeding strong that the small Birds are some∣times entangled and caught therein. There grows in this Island a sort of Ceder-trees,Trees. which differ from all other in the World, in several respects, the Wood whereof is very sweet and well sented. The English, who settled themselves upon this Isle in the Year 1612, are the only ProprietorsProprie∣tors. thereof, having now established a powerful Colony there, wherein are about five thousand Inhabitants. The Island is exceeding strong, and defended as it were with a kind of natural Fortification, being so fenced about with Rocks, that without know∣ledge of the Passages, a Boat of ten Tun cannot be brought into the Haven, although, by the as∣sistance of a skilful Pilot, there is entrance for Ships of the greatest burden. And, besides the natural strength of those Islands, the English have, since their settling there, added such artificial helps, and so strongly fortified the approaches, by Block∣houses and Forts, as renders it impregnable. In the Year 1616, which is four Years after the first settling there, Captain Tucker is sent over with a new Supply, whereupon they applied themselves the more earnestly to the planting of Corn, To∣bacco, and other Commodities, so that, in about three Years, those Isles began to gain so much re∣pute in England, that the improving them became a publick business, many great Lords and Persons of Quality interesting themselves therein, as Ad∣venturers,
whereupon Captain Buttler, was di∣spatched thither with a new Supply of 500 Men, about which time the Isle was divided into Tribes or Counties, and the whole reduced to a settled Go∣vernment, both in Church and State; after which, things succeeded so well, that it has been ever since growing to greater perfection. A DESCRIPTION OF CAROLINA. CAROLINA, so called from his late Majesty King Charles the Second, of eternal Memo∣ry, is a new Colony not long since settled by the English in that part of Florida adjoyning to Vir∣ginia, which makes its Northern bounds in the Latitude of thirty six Degrees,Situation. and extends its self to the Latitude of 29 Degrees, which terminates its extream Sou∣thern bounds; It is on the East washed with the Atlantick Ocean, and is bounced on the West by Mare Pacificum of the South-Sea. This Tract of Land is beyond all controversie the most fertile and plea∣sant place of Florida,Fertility. upon which the Spanish Authors have bestowed such large Enco∣miums; and which is so highly commended by an
map of Carolina A New Map of CAROLINA By Robt. Morden
English Gentleman, who has lived there, and was concerned in the settlement thereof. This Province of Carolina (saith he) was in the Year 1663. granted by Letters Patents from his late Majesty, in propriety to Edward, Earl of Clarendon; George, Duke of Albemarl; William, Earl of Craven; John, Lord Berkley; Anthony, Lord Ashly, since Earl of Shaftsbury; Sir George Carteret, and Sir John Coleton, Knights and Baronets; and Sir William Berkley, Knight: By which Letters Patents the Laws of England are always to be in force in Carolina, only the Lords Proprietors have power, with the consent of the Inhabitants, to make such By-laws as may be thought necessary for the better government of the Province. So that no Money can be raised, or Law made, without the consent of the Inhabitants or their Represen∣tatives. They are likewise thereby indued with a right to appoint and impower Governours and other Magistrates, to grant Liberty of Consci∣ence, make Constitutions, with many other great Priviledges, &c. as will sufficiently appear by the Letters Patents. And the said Lords Proprietors have there settled a Constitution of Government, whereby is granted Liberty of Conscience, and wherein all possible care is taken for the equal ad∣ministration of Justice, and for the lasting secu∣rity of the Inhabitants both in their Bodies and Estates. And by their Care and Endeavours, and at their very great charge, two Colonies are likewise settled in that Province, one at Albemarl, in the most Notherly part, and the other at Ashly-River, which is in the Latitude of thirty two De∣grees and some odd Minutes.
Albemarl,Albemarl. which borders upon Vir∣ginia, only exceeds it in Health, Ferti∣lity, and Mildness of Winter, being in the Growths, Productions, and other things much of the same nature with it, and therefore I shall not trouble my self nor the Reader with a particular Description of that part, but apply my self principally to discourse of the Colony settled at Ashly-River. This Colony was first settled in the Month of April, 1670. by the Lords Proprietors, who did, at their sole charge, furnish out three Ships with a considerable number of able Men, and eighteen Months Provision, together with Cloth, Tools, Ammunition, and whatsoever else was thought necessary for this new Settlement; and continued for several years after to supply the place with all things necessary, until the Inhabitants were, by their own industry, able to live of themselves; in which condition they have now been for divers years past, and are arrived to a very great degree of plenty, so that most sorts of Provi∣sions are cheaper there than in any other of the English Colonies. Ashly-River,Ashly-River. about seven Miles from the Sea, divides itself into two branches, the Southermost still retains the name of Ashly, but the North branch is called Cooper-River. Upon the Point of Land, which divides those two Rivers, the Proprietors, in the Year 1680. ordered the Port-Town, that should serve for them both, to be built, calling it Charles-Town, which is since considerably advan∣ced, to the number of near two hundred Houses, more being daily raising by persons of all sorts, that repair thither from the more Northern English
Colonies in the Sugar-Islands, besides those that go from England and Ireland; many persons who like∣wise went thither Servants, having, since their times were out, gotten good stocks of Cattel and Ser∣vants of their own, built themselves Houses, and exercise their Trades. Many that went thither in that condition, being now worth several hundred Pounds, living in a very plentiful condition, and continually adding to, and increasing their Estates; so that Land is already become of that value, near the Town, that it is sold for twenty Shillings per Acre, though pillaged of all its valuable Timber, and not cleared of the rest. And the Land that is cleared and fitted for planting, and fenced, is let for ten Shillings per Annum, the Acre, though twenty Miles distance from the Town; and six Men will, in six Weeks time, fell, clear, fence in, and fit it for planting. At this Town, as soon as its Foundations were well laid, there Rode, at one time, sixteen Sail of Ships, (some whereof car∣ried above two hundred Tun) that came from divers Parts of the King's Dominions, to traf∣fick there, which great concourse of Shipping will undoubtedly make it a considerable Town of Trade. It's a Country blessed with a tem∣perate and wholsom Air,Temperature. neither the heat in Summer, nor the cold in Winter, being the least troublesom or offensive, the latter being so exceeding moderate, that it doth not so much as check the growth and flourish∣ing of the Trees and Plants; which is occasioned either by reason of its having the great Body of the Continent to the Westward of it, and by con∣sequence the North-West Wind, which always blows contrary to the Sun, and is the freezing
Wind, as the North-East is with us in Europe, or else from the frozen Lakes which lie beyond Ca∣nada, or from the uncultivated Earth, which being for the most part covered with large, shading Trees, or from all those reasons together; but certain it is, much more moderate both in heat and cold than any other place that lies in the same Latitude; December and January, which are the coldest Months, are much of the same tempera∣ture as the latter end of March or beginning of April in England, which small Winter causes a Fall of the Leaf, and doth as it were adopt the Coun∣try-Production of all the Grains and Fruit that grow with us in England, as well as those that re∣quire a greater degree of heat, so that the Apple, the Pear, the Plum, the Quince, the Apricock, the Peach, the Walnut, the Mulberry, and the Chesnut, thrive very well in the same Garden, with the Orange, the Limon, the Pomgranate, the Figg, and the Almond. Nor is the Winter subject to Clouds and Fogs, but the Rain, though it fall often in the Winter Months, usually comes in quick Show∣ers, and are no sooner past, but the Sun presently shines out again. The Summer is not so hot as in Vir∣ginia,Climate. which is chiefly occasioned, as I said before, from those Briezes which constantly rise about Eight of the Clock in the Morning, and blow from the East, till about Four in the Afternoon, about which time it ceaseth, and a North-wind riseth, which blowing all Night, keeps it exceeding fresh and cold. Such as are seated near Marshy places, are some∣what inclined to Agues, but in other places 'tis so exceeding healthy, that in the first nine years there died but one of those Masters of Families
that went over, and he was seventy five years of Age before he came their; insomuch that divers from the Bermudas removed thither, though they could never be prevailed upon to forsake that for any other Countrey than Carolina; where there is a fairer Prospect both of Health, Pleasure and Profit than in any other place in all the West-In∣dies; several persons who went out of England sickly and consumptive, having presently upon their Arrival there, recovered their health. The Soyl is generally very fruitful,Its Fertility. and besides what is pro∣per to the Climate, produces good Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats and Pease, Turnips, Carrots, Parsnips and Potatoes, and near twenty sorts of Pulse which we have not in England, so that our Garden-Bean is not regarded there. Near the Sea, the TreesThe Trees. are not very large, but further up they are bigger, and grow further asunder, and so free from Under-wood, than you may see near half a Mile between the Bodies of those Trees, whose tops meeting, make a pleasing shade without hindering the Grass, Mirtle, and other sweet-sented Shrubs from growing under them. There grow besides the Cedar, Cypress and the like, the Oak, Ash, Elm, Poplar, Beech, and all other useful Timber. Their Woods likewise abound with Hares, Squirrels, Racoons,Beasts and Cattel Co∣nies and Deer, which last are so plen∣tiful, that an Indian Hunter killed nine fat ones in a day, and the considerable Plant∣ers have one of those Indian Hunters for less than twenty shillings a year, who will find the Family, consisting of thirty People, with as much Veni∣son
and Fowl as they can well eat; their Woods and Fields being likewise stored with great plenty of wild Turkeys, Partridges, Doves, Paraquetes, Pigeons, Cranes, and divers other Birds whose flesh is delicate Meat. They have likewise plenty of Sheep and Hogs, both which increase wonderfully there. Carolina doth so well abound with Rivers,Its Rivers. that within fifty miles of the Sea, you can scarcely place your self seven miles from one that is navigable; and some of them are navigable for big Vesels above three hundred miles up into the Countrey. Their Rivers and Brooks abound with great variety of excellent Fish, and near the Sea with good Oysters, in some whereof Pearls are often found. The English have a perfect Friendship with the Natives, and the Proprietors have taken care that no injustice shall be done them; a particular Court of Judicature compos'd of the soberest and disinter∣ested Persons being established by their order, to determine all differences that shall happen between the English and them. They are a People of a ready wit, and though illiterate, are generally found to be of a good understanding. For their keeping an account of Time, they make use of Hieroglyphicks, and instruct their Children in such matters as relate to their Family and Coun∣trey, which is so preserved from one generation to another. Where a Battel hath been fought, or a Colony setled, they raise a small Pyramid of Stones, consisting of the number of the slain, or those setled at the Colony; and for Religious Rites, as Sacrifices, Burials, and the like, they make round Circles with Straws or Reeds, by the differing placing whereof, it is known for
what it is made; and to meddle with any of those Circles, is accounted by them no better than Sa∣crilege. They are generally well proportioned, and so well affected to the English, that they are ready upon all occasions to contribute their Assistance to them; they are generally of a good and honest meaning, being no ways addicted to Vice or any Extravagancies, and always content themselves with a mean Diet and Apparel for their present subsistance, without taking much care for the time to come. They are much addicted to Mirth and Dancing, and to Acts of Courage and Valour, which they prefer above all other Virtues, and are therefore almost continually engaged in War, one Town or Village against another; their Govern∣ments generally being of no greater extent; and that side which Fortune crowns with Victory, re∣joyce with triumphant Jollities: By which means several Nations have been in a manner quite de∣stroyed since our first Settlement at Ashley River; which keeps them so thin of People, and so divi∣ded among themselves, that were they less affected to the English, yet they would have no reason to entertain the least apprehensions of Danger from them, being already too strong for all the Indians that inhabit within five hundred miles of them, if they were perfectly united; which the Indians know so well, that they will never adventure to fall out with them, nor offer the least injury to any of thy English Nation. They worshipTheir Worship. one God, as the cre∣ator of all things, whom they call Okee, and to whom their High Priest offers Sacrifice, but believes he hath some∣thing else to do than to mind humane affairs;
which they fancy he commits to the Government of less Deities, that is, to good and evil Spirits, to whom their inferior Priests make their Devoti∣on and Sacrifices. They believe the transmigration of Souls; and when any of them die, their Friends inter with their Corps Provisions and Houshold-stuff for their Elizium Shades, which they imagine to be beyond the Mountains from the Indian Oce∣an. They are very superititious in their Marri∣ages, and from a strange kind of Belief which is entertained amongst them, that from four Wo∣men only all Mankind sprang: They divide them∣selves into the like number of Tribes, and have four Burying-places; believing it to be a wicked and ominous thing to mingle their Bodies even when dead. The Lords Proprietors do immediately grant to all persons that come thither to inhabit, the fol∣lowing terms; for each Master or Mistress of a Family, fifty Acres of Land, and for every able Son or Man-servant that they carry, or cause to be carried thither, fifty Acres more, and the like for each Daughter and Woman-Servant that is marriageable, and for every Child or Man or Wo∣man-Servant under the Age of Sixteen, forty Acres, and fifty to each Servant so soon as their Time with their Master is expired; which Land is to be enjoyed by them and their heirs for ever, upon pay∣ing only one penny an Acre as a Quit-Rent to the Lords Proprietors, which is not to commence neither till two years after their first taking up their Land. And in regard some who have already setled themselves at Carolina, and others that intend to go thither, are desirous to secure to themselves large convenient Tracts of Land, without being com∣pelled
to carry over a great number of Servants at one time, or being cumbred with the payment of a yearly Rent, the Lords Proprietors have been prevailed upon to enter into an agreement to sell Land outright to such who have a mind to buy it at the rate of fifty pounds for a thousand Acres, reserving to themselves only a Pepper-corn, when demanded. The way of a man's taking up Land there,Their way of taking up Land. due to him either by carrying himself or Servants into the Countrey, or by Purchase from the Lords Proprietors, is after this manner; Having found a place to his Liking, which is not already possessed by another, he applies himself to the Governor, and the Proprietors Deputies, to shew what Right he hath to it by Purchase or o∣therwise; who thereupon immediately issue out their Warrant to the General Surveyor to mea∣sure them out a Plantation containing such a num∣ber of Acres, as he hath proved to be his Right; which being presently done, the Surveyor makes a Certificate that he hath measured out the Land, and determined the Bounds of it: Where∣upon, a Deed is prepared, and signed by the Go∣vernour and the Deputies; which being sealed with the Proprietor's Seal, and registred, is there accounted a good Conveyance in Law, the Estate being thereby assured and confirmed to him and his Heirs for ever: For the improving whereof, he ought to carry with him from England as many Axes, Bills, broad Hoes, and grubbing-Hoes as he designs to have men in his Plantation, together with a Saw or two, a Set of Wedges, Frames and Beetle-rings, some reaping-hooks, Scythes, Hooks, Hinges, Bolts, Locks, and Nails of all sorts;
and if his Stock will reach it, such Commodities as are the best Merchandize, and will yield him ready Money there; which are, Linnen and Wool∣len Cloth, and all other Stuffs to make Cloaths with; together with Thred, Silk, Buttons, Ri∣bonds, Hats, Stockings, Shoes, and the like; which go off there at very good rates, and for which a man may purchase whatsoever Provision he hath need of. Ships are generally going thither at all times of the Year, and the Passage of a Man or Woman is generally five pounds. The CommoditiesCommodities. which this Countrey produceth, for the Pro∣fit as well as the subsistence of the Inhabitants, are several sorts of Wines; five seve∣ral sorts of Grapes growing naturally there; and there is care taken to plant the Rhenish, Canary, Claret, Muscat, Madera and Spanish Grapes; of all which are already Vineyards compleated, and Wine made, which proves very good both in co∣lour and taste, the Countrey having gentle rising Hills, of a fertil sandy Earth, proper for the production of Vines; and further from the Sea several Gravel-Rocks, whereon they naturally grow, being indifferent large, and luscious in taste; so that several French Protestants, that inhabit there, doubt not but in a little time to produce great quantities of good Wine. Oyl Olive, which being carried thither from Portugal and Bermudas, flourish and increase exceedingly, and will in all probability produce as large quantities of Oyl, that it will very much conduce to the enriching of the Inhabitants; Cotton, Indigo, Silk, Ginger, To∣bacco, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Jallop, Sassapa∣rilla, Turmerick, Sassafras, Snake-root, and the like.
There are in this Countrey seve∣ral sorts of strange and monstrous Creatures;Creatures. for an English Gentle∣man travelling with some Indians, they met with a Rattle-Snake two yards and a half long, and as big as a mans Arm, which by the greatness of its Belly, they imagined to be big with young; but having killed and opened her, they found there on∣ly a small Squirrel, which she had swallowed whole; the Indians affirming, that those Serpents use to lie under Trees upon which they see any Squirrels, and fixing their Eyes stedfastly upon them, the little Creature is so frighted thereby, that he falls down,, and tumbles into the Jaws of his Enemy. Travelling through a Wood, a Deer seized by a wild Cat, crossed their way, almost spent with the Burden and Cruelty of his Rider, who having fastned upon his Shoulder, conti∣nued sucking his Blood till the poor Beast fell down under her; which one of the In∣dians perceiving, shot an Arrow at the wild Cat, which wounding her under the Belly, made her leave her Prey, which was already slain, and run towards them with a fierce and dreadful Look; but her wound being mortal, her strength and spirits failed before she reached them; whereby they escaped her revenge, which peradventure otherwise some of them might have felt. This Creature is somewhat larger than a Fox, of a kind of a reddish gray Colour, and in figure every way like an ordinary Cat, but exceeding fierce, raven∣ous, and so cunning, that knowing the Deer, up∣on which they chiefly prey, to be two swift for them, they lurk upon Branches of Trees, and as the Deer walk and feed under them, suddenly jump down upon their backs. Their Fur is greatly
esteemed, and their Flesh, though as rank as that of a Dog, is eaten by the Indians. They saw daily great Herds of Red and Fallow Deer, Bears, Leopards and Wolves, but no Lions. The Wolves were to exceeding ravenons, that they were in great fear lest their Horses should have been devoured; for in the night-time they got to∣gether in clusters, and howled so near them, that it was impossible to have saved them, had not the Fires which they kept continually burning in the night-time, terrified them, and frighted them a∣way: The Woods were likewise full of Bears, Otters and gray Foxes: And arriving at length to the Appalatean Mountains, which were so high and steep, that they were a whole day before they could gain the Top; from whence the next Morn∣ing they had a beautiful prospect of the Atlantick Ocean, which washes the Virginian Shores; but to the North and West other Mountains prevented their sight, and the exceeding Coldness prevented further Discovery, and compelled them to a spee∣dy return. The same Gentleman, at another time, when he went to make what Discovery he could of the Countrey, met with another sort of Indians, who were Enemies to the Christians; yet venturing a∣mongst them, and presenting them with some small Trifles of Glass and Metals, found them very kind to him, and would fain have obliged him to have setled amongst them, by proposing a Match between him and their King's or some other Great Man's Daughter, whom he should best fancy; nor could he wave their Courtesie, nor obtain leave to depart, without a Promise of returning again within six Months. And South-west from them, he found a Nation differing in Government from
all the other Indians that inhabit those Parts, being rather Slaves than Subjects to their King, who was a very grave Man, and courteous to Strangers, yet horrid barbarous in his Supersti∣tion; that whilst this Gentleman was there, he sent three Youths to kill as many young Wo∣men of their Enemies as they could meet withal, to serve his Son (who was then newly dead) in the other World. They were not long before they returned with Skins torn off the Head and Faces of several young Girls, which they laid at the Feet of their King, who received them as the most acceptable Presents. CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. Whereas by Our Letters Patents, bearing date the Twenty Fourth Day of March, in the Five and Twentieth Year of Our Reign, We were graciously pleased to give unto our right Trusty and right Well-beloved Couzen and Counsellor, Edward, Earl of Clarendon, Our High Chancellour of England; Our right Trusty & right entirely Beloved Couzen & Counsellour,. George, Duke of Albemarl, Master of Our Horse; Our right Trusty and Well-beloved William, now Earl of Craven; Our right Trusty and Well-beloved Councellour, Anthony, Lord Chan∣cellour of our Exchequer; Our right Trusty and Well-beloved Counsellour, Sir George Carte∣ret, Knight and Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain of Our Houshold; Our right Trusty and Well-beloved, Sir John Colleton, Knight and Barronet;
and Sir William Berkley, Knight, all that Terri∣tory Province, or Tract of Ground, called Ca∣rolina, situate, lying and being within our Do∣minions of America; extending from the North end of that Island called Luke-Island, which lyeth in the Southern Virginia Seas, within six and thirty deg. of Northern Latitude; and to the West, as far as the River of St. Matthias, which Bordereth upon the Coast of Florida, and within one and thirty deg. of Southern Latitude; and so West, in a direct Line, as far as the South Seas aforesaid. Now know ye, that We, at the humble Request of the said Grantees in the aforesaid Letters Patents named, and as a farther mark of Our particular Favour towards them, We are graciously pleased to enlarge Our said Grant unto them, according to the Bounds and Limits hereafter specified; and in Favour to the Pious and Noble purpose of the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. of Our especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and meer Motion, have Gi∣ven, Granted, and Confirmed; and by this Our present Charter, for Us, Our Heirs and Succes∣sors, do Give, Grant, and Confirm unto the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, at that Province, Territories, or Tract of Land, situate, lying and being within Our Dominions of America aforesaid; extending North and Eastward as far as the North end of Carah-Tuck River or Inlett, upon a straight Westerly Line, to Wianoacke Creek, which lyeth within or about thirty six deg. thirty min. of Northern Latitude; and so West, in a direct Line, as far as the South-Seas; and South and Westward, as far as thirty nine deg. inclusive Northern Latitude, and so West in a direct Line
as far as the South Seas; together with all and singular Ports, Harbours, Bays, Rivers and Islets, belonging unto the Province and Terri∣tory aforesaid; and also all the Soil, Lands, Fields, Woods, Mountains, Fenns, Lakes, Ri∣vers, Bays, Islets, situated or being within the Bounds or Limits last before mentioned; with the Fishing of all sorts of Fish, Whales, Stur∣geons, and all the Royal Fishes in the Seas, Bays, Islets and Rivers, within the Premises; and the Fish therein taken, together the Royalty of the Sea upon the Coast, within the Limits aforesaid. And moreover, all Veins, Mines and Quarries, as well discovered as not discovered, of Gold, Silver, Gems, and Precious Stones, and all other whatsoever, be it of Stones, Marble, or any other thing whatsoever, found or to be found within the Province, Territory, Isles and Limits aforesaid. And furthermore, the Patro∣nage and Advowsons of all the Churches and Chappels, which (as Christian Religion shall encrease within the Province, Territory, Isles, Islets and Limits aforesaid) shall happen hereaf-to be Erected; together with Licence and Pow∣er to Build and Found Churches, and Chappels, and Oratories, in convenient and fit places within the said Bounds and Limits, and to cause them to be dedicated and consecrated according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of our Kingdom of England; together with all and singular the like, and as ample right, Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Prerogatives, Royalties, Liberties, Immunities and Franchises, of what kind soever, within the Territories, Isles, Islets, and Limits aforesaid, to have Use, Exercise, and enjoy the same as amply and fully, and in as ample manner as any
Bishop of Durham, in our Kingdom of England, ever heretofore had, held, used or enjoyed, or of right, ought or could have, use or enjoy; and them, the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, we do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, make, create and consti∣tute the true and absolute Lords and Proprietors of the said Province or Territory, and of all other the Premisses, saving always the Faith, Allegiance, and Sovereign Dominions, due to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for the same, to have, hold, possess and enjoy the said Pro∣vince, Territories, Isles, Islets, and all and sin∣gular of them the Premisses, unto them the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, for ever, to be holden of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as of our Manor of East∣green, within Our County of Kent, in free and common Soccage, and not in Capite, nor by by Knight-Service, yielding and paying a parly to Us, Our Heirs and Successors for the same, a fourth part of all Gold and Silver Or, which (within the Limits hereby granted) shall from time to time happen to be found over and be∣side the yearly Rent of twenty Marks, and the fourth part of the Gold and Silver Oar in and by the said recited Letter Patents reserved and payable. And that the Province or Territory hereby granted and described, may be dignified with as large Titles and Priviledges, as any other Part of our Dominions and Territories in that Region, Know ye, that We of our further Grace, certain Knowledge, and meer Motion, have thought fit to annex the same Tract, Ground and Territory unto the said Province of Carolina, and out of the fulness of our Royal
Power and Prerogative, so do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, annex and unite the same to the said Province of Carolina. And for as much as we have made and ordained the afore∣said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, the ame Lords Proprietors of all the Province or Territory aforesaid, Know ye therefore moreover, that We reposing especial Trust and Confidence in their Fidelity, Wis∣dom, Justice, Prudence and Circumspection, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Do Grant full and absolute Power, by virtue of these Presents, to them the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, and their Heirs and Assigns, for the good and hap∣py Government of the said whole Province or Territory, full Power and Authority to Erect and make several Counties, Baronies and Colo∣nies of and within the said Province, Territo∣ries, Lands and Hereditaments, in and by the said Rented Letters Patents, and these Presents Granted or mentioned to be Granted as afore∣said, with several and distinct Jurisdictions, Powers, Liberties and Priviledges; and also to make, ordain and enact, and under their Seals to publish any Laws and Constitutions whatsoe∣ver, either appertaining to the Publick State of the said whole Province or Territory, or of any distinct or particular County, Barony or Colo∣ny of or within the same, or to the private Uti∣lity of particular Persons, according to their best direction, by and with the Advice, Assent and Approbation of the Free-men of the said Province or Territory, or of the Free-men of the County, Barony or Colony for which such Laws or Constitutions shall be made; or of the greater part of them, or of their Diligates or
Deputies, whom for enacting of the said Laws, when and as often as need shall require, We will that the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. and their Heirs or Assigns shall from time to time Assemble in such manner and form as to them shall seem best; and the same Laws duly to execute upon all Persons within the said Pro∣vince, Territory, County, Barony or Colony, or the Limits thereof, for the time being, or which shall be constituted under the Power and Government of them, or any of them, either sayling towards the said Province or Territory of Carolina, or returning from thence towards England, or any other of our Foreign Domi∣nions, by Imposition of Penalty, Imprisonment, or any other Punishment; yet if it shall be need∣ful, and the quality of the offence require it, by taking away Member and Life, either by them the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. and theirs, by them or their Deputies, Lieutenants, Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Officers and Mi∣nisters, to be ordained and appointed according to the Tenor and true Intention of them Pre∣sents; and likewise to Erect or make any Court or Courts whatsoever of Judicature, or other∣wise, as shall be requisite; and to appoint or establish any Judges, Justices, Magistrates or Officers whatsoever, as well within the said Province as at Sea, in such manner and form as unto the said Edward, Earl of Clarendom, &c. or their Heirs, shall seem most convenient; also to remit, release, pardon and abolish (whether be∣fore Judgement and after) all crimes and offences whatsoever against the said Laws; and to do all and every other thing & things, which unto the compleat establisment of Justice unto Courts,
Sessions and forms of Judication, and manner of proceedings therein do belong, although in these Presents express mention is not made there∣of, and by Judges, by him or them deligated, to award, press, hold, please and determine in all the said Courts, Places of Judicature, all Actions, Suits and Causes whatsoever, as well Criminal as Civil, Real, Mixt, Personal, or any other kind or nature whatsoever, which Laws so as aforesaid to be published, Our Pleasure is, and we do enjoyn, require and Command, shall be absolute, firm and available in Law; and that all the liege People of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, within the said Province or Ter∣ritory, do observe and keep the same inviolably in those Parts, so far as they concern them, un∣der the Patents or Penalties therein expressed, or to be expressed, provided nevertheless that the said Laws be consonant to Reason, and as near as may be conveniently agreeable to the Laws and Customs of this our Kingdom of England; and because such Assemblies of Free∣holders cannot be so suddenly called, as there may be occasion to require the same, We do therefore by these Presents, Give and Grant unto the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns by themselves and their Magistrates in that behalf, lawfully authorized, full power and authority from time to time, to make and ordain fit and wholsom Orders and Ordinances within the Province or Territory aforesaid, or any County, Barony or Province of or within the same, to be kept and observed, as well for the keeping of the Peace, as for the better Government of the People there abiding, and to publish the same to all whom it may con∣cern;
which Ordinances we do by these Presents streightly Charge and Command to be inviola∣bly observed within the same Province, Terri∣tory, Counties, Baronies and Provinces, under the Penalty therein expressed, so as such Ordi∣nances reasonable, and not repugnant and con∣trary, but as near as may be agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of this our Kingdom of Eng∣land, and so as the same Ordinances do not ex∣tend to the bringing, charging, or the taking away of the Right of any Person or Persons in their Free-hold, Goods or Chattels whatsoever; and to the end the said Provinces or Territories may be the more happily encreased by the mul∣tude of People resorting thither, and likewise be the more strongly defended from the Incur∣sion of Savages and other Enemies, Pirates and Robbers, therefore We, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Give and Grant by these Presents, Power, Licence and Liberty to all the Leige People, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, in Our Kingdom of England, or elsewhere, within any other Our Dominions, Islands, Colonies or Plantations, excepting those who shall be ex∣presly forbidden to Transport themselves and Families into the said Province or Ter∣ritory with convenient Shipping, and fitting Provision, and there to settle themselves to dwell and inhabit, any Law, Act, Statute, Ordi∣nance, or any thing to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And We do also of Our more special Grace, for Us, Our Heirs and Suc∣cessors, streightly Enjoyn, Ordain, Consti∣tute and Command, that the said Province or Territory shall be of our Allegiance; and that all and singular the Subjects and Liege Peo∣ple
of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, Transported or to be Transportcd into the said Province, and the Children of them, or such as shall descend from them, there born, or hereafter to be born, be and shall be Denizens and Lieges of Us, Our Heirs and Successors of this Our Kingdom of England, and be in all things held, treated and imputed as the Liege faithful People of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, born within this Our King∣dom, or any other of Our Dominions; and may inhabit, or otherwise purchase and receive, take, have, hold, buy and possess any Lands, Tene∣ments or Hereditaments within the said places, and then may Occupy and Enjoy, Give, Sell, Alien and Bequeath; as likewise Liberties, Fran∣chises, Priviledges of this Our Kingdom of Eng∣land, and of other Our Dominions aforesaid, may freely and quietly Have, Possess and Enjoy, as our Liege People born within the same, with∣out the least molestation, vexation, trouble or grievance of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, any Statute, Act, Ordinance or Provision to the con∣trary notwithstanding. And farthermore, That Our Subjects of this Our Kingdom of England, and other Our Dominions, may be rather encou∣red to undertake this Expedition with ready and chearful minds, Know ye, that We of Our espe∣cial Grace, certain Knowledge and meer Motion, do Give and Grant by vertue of these Presents, as well to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, &c. and their Heirs, as unto all others as shall from time to time repair unto the said Province or Territory, with a purpose to Inhabit there, and to Trade with the Natives thereof, full Liberty and Licence, to Lade and Freight in any Ports whatsoever of Us, Our Heirs and Successors and
into the said Province of Carolina, by them, their Servants and Assigns, to Transport all and singu∣lar their Goods, Wares and Merchandizes; as likewise all sorts of Grain whatsoever, and any other things whatsoever, necessary for their Food and Cloathing, not Prohibited by the Laws and Statutes of Our Kingdoms and Dominions, to be carried out of the same without any Lett or Molestation of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, or of any other Our Officers and Ministers whatso∣ever: Saving also to Us, Our Heirs and Succes∣sors, the Customs, and other Duties and Pay∣ments due for the said Wares and Merchandizes, according to the several Rates of the Places from whence the same shall be Transported. We will also, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Give and Grant, Licence by this Our Charter, unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, and to all the Inhabitants or Dwellers in the Province or Territory aforesaid, both present and to come, full Power and absolute Authority to Import or Unlade, by themselves or their Servants, Factors or Assigns, all Merchandize and Goods whatsoe∣ver, that shall arise of the Fruits and Commodities of the said Province or Territory, either by Land or by Sea, into any the Ports of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland; or otherwise to dispose of the said Goods in the said Ports: And if need be, within one year after the Unlading, to Lade the same Merchandize or Goods again into the same or other Ships, and to Export the same into any other Countries, either of Our Dominions or Foreign, being in Amity with Us, Our Heirs and Successors, so as they pay such Customs, Subsi∣dies
and other Duties, for the same, to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as the rest of Our Subjects of this Our Kingdom, for the time being, shall be bound to pay; beyond which, We will not that the Inhabitants of the said Province or Ter∣ritory shall be any way charged, provided never∣theless. And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We have farther, for the Considerations aforesaid, of Our special Grace, certain Knowledg, meer Motion, Given and Granted, and by these Pre∣sents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Give and Grant unto the said Edward Earl of Claren∣don, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, full and free Licence and Liberty, and Power and Authority, at any time or times, from and after the Feast of St. Michael the Arch-Angel, which shall be in the Year of our Lord Christ, 1667. as well to Im∣port and bring into any of Our Dominions, from the said Province of Carolina, or any parts there∣of, of the several Goods and Commodities here∣in after mentioned; that is to say, Silks, Currans, Raisons, Capers, Wax, Almonds, Oyl and Olives, without paying or answering to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, any Customs, Imposts, or other Duty, for on in respect thereof, for or during the term or space of seven years to come, and be accounted or from and after the first Importation of four Tuns of any the said Goods, in any one Bottom, Ship or Vessel, from the said Province or Territory, unto any of Our Dominions: As also, to Export and carry out of any of Our Do∣minions, into the said Province or Territory, Custom-free, all sorts of Tools which shall be useful and necessary for the Planters there, in the accommodation and improvement of the Premi∣ses, any thing before in these Presents contained,
or any Law, Act, Statute, Prohibition, or other matter or thing heretofore Had, Made, Enacted or Provided, or hereafter to be Had, Made, En∣acted or Provided to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And furthermore, of our more ample and especial Grace, certain Know∣ledge and meer Motion, We do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Grant unto the said Ed∣ward Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and As∣signs, full and absolute Power and Authority to Make, Erect and Constitute, within the said Province or Territory, and Islet or Islets afore∣said, such and so many Sea-Ports, Harbours, Creeks, and other places for Discharge and Un∣lading of Goods and Merchandizes out of Ships, Boats and other Vessels, and for Lading of them in such and so many places, as with such Jurisdi∣ctions, Priviledges and Franchises, unto the said Ports belonging, as to them shall seem most expedient; and that all and singular the Ships, Boats, and other Vessels which shall come for Merchardize, and Trade into the same Province or Territory, or shall depart out of the same shall be laden and unladen at such Ports, only as shall be erected and Constituted by the said Ed∣ward Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and As∣signs, and not elsewhere any Use, Custom or any thing to the contrary in any wise notwithstand∣ing. And We do furthermore Will, Appoint and Ordain, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Grant unto the said Ed∣ward Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and As∣signs, that they the said Edward Earl of Claren∣don, &c. and their Heirs and Assigns, may from time to time for ever, have and enjoy the Cu∣stoms and Subsidies in the Ports, Harbours,
Creeks, and other places within the Province aforesaid, payable for Goods, Merchandizes and Wares, there Laden or Unladen, the said Cu∣stoms to be reasonably Assessed upon any occasi∣on by themselves, and by and with the consent of the free People there, or the greater part of them as aforesaid, to whom we give Power by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for just Cause, and in due Proportion, to Assess and Impose the same. And furthermore, of Our especial Grace, cer∣tain Knowledge and meer Motion, We have Gi∣ven, Granted and Confirmed, and by these Pre∣sents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Grant and Confirm unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute Licence, Power and Authority, that they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, from time to time here∣after, for ever, at his and their Will and Pleasure, may Alien, Grant, Demise or Enfeoff the Premi∣ses, or any part or parcel thereof, to him or them that shall be willing to Purchase the same, and to such Person or Persons as they shall think fit, To have and to hold to them the said Person or Persons, their Heirs of Assigns, in the Fee-simple or Fee-tail, or for term of Life, or Lives, or Years, to be held of them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, and not immediately of Us, Our Heirs and Suc∣cessors. And to the same Person or Persons, and to all and every of them, We do Give and Grant by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Succes∣sors, Licence and Authority and Power, that such Person or Persons, may have and take the Premises, or any parcel thereof, of the said Earl
of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, and the same to hold to themselves, their Heirs or Assigns, in what estate of Inheritance soever, in Fee-simple or in Fee-tail, or otherwise, as to them and the said Earl of Clarendon, their Heirs and Assigns, shall seem expedient. The Statute of the Parliament of Edward, Son of King Henry, heretofore King of England, Our Predecessor, commonly called the Statute of Quia Emptores Terrarum, or any other Statutes, Act, Ordinance, Use, Law, Customs, or any other Matter, Cause or Thing, heretofore Published or Provided to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding; and because many Persons born or Inhabiting in the said Province, for their Deserts and Services, may expect to be capable of marks of Honour and Favour, which in respect of the great di∣stance cannot be conferred by Us; Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and We do by these Presents, Give and Grant unto the said Edward Earl of Cla∣rendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, full Power and Authority, to give and confer unto, and upon such of the Inhabitants of the said Province or Territory, as they shall think do or shall merit the same, such Marks of Favour and Titles of Honour as they shall think fit, so as those Titles of Honour be not the same as are enjoyed by and conferred upon any of the Subjects of this Our Kingdom of England. And further also, We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Succes∣sors, Give and Grant by these, to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, full Power, Liberty and Licence, to Erect, Raise and Build, within the said Province and Places aforesaid, or any other part or parts thereof, such and so many Forts, Fortresses,
Castles, Cities, Boroughs, Towns, Villages and other Fortifications whatsoever, and the same or any of them, to fortifie and furnish with Ord∣nance, Powder, Shot and Arms, and all other Weapons, Ammunition, and Habiliments of War, offensive and defensive, as shall be thought fit and convenient for the welfare and safety of the said Province or places of any parts thereof, and the same, or any of them, from time to time, as occasion shall require, dismantle, disfurnish, demolish, and put down, and also to place, con∣stitute and appoint in, or over all, or any of the said Castles, Forts, Fortifications, Cities, Towns, or Places aforesaid, Governours, De∣puty-Governours, Magistrates, Sheriffs, and other Officers, Civil and Military, as to them shall seem meet, and to the said Cities, Towns, Boroughs, Villages, or any other place or places within the said Province or Territory, to grant Letters or Charters of Incorporation, with all Liberties, Franchises and Priviledges, requisite and usual, or to be within any Corporation within this Our King of England, granted or belonging: And in the same Cities, Boroughs, Towns, and other places, to constitute, erect, and appoint, such and so many Markets, Marts, and Fairs, as shall in that behalf be thought fit and necessary. And further also, to make and erect, in the Province or Territory aforesaid, or any parts thereof, so many Mannors, with such Seignories as to them shall seem meet and convenient, and every of the said Mannors to hold and to have a Court-Baron, with all things whatsoever which to a Court-Baron doth belong, and to have and to hold Views of Frank-pledge and Courts-Leet, for the conservation of the peace and better
government of those Parts, with such Limits, Jurisdictions, Precincts, as by the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c, or their Heirs shall be appointed for that purpose, with all things what∣soever, which to a Court-Leet or a View of Frank-pledge belong, the same Courts to be holden by Stewards to be deputed and authorized by the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. or their Heirs, or by the Lords, other Mannors and Leets for the time being, when the same shall be erected, and because that in so remote a Country, and situate among so many Barbarous Nations, the Invasion as well of Savages as other Enemies, Pirates and Robbers may probably be seared, Therefore we have, as for Us, our Heirs and Successours, given power by these presents unto the said Ed∣ward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, by themselves or their Captains or other Officers, to Levy, Muster and Train all sorts of Men of what condition soever, born whether in the said Province or elsewhere, for the time being, and to make War, and to pur∣sue the Enemies aforesaid, as well by Sea as by Land, yea even without the Limits of the said Province, and, by God's assistance, to vanquish and take them, and, being taken, to put them to death, by the Laws of War, and to save them at their pleasure, and to do all and every thing which to the Charge and Office of a Captain-General of any Army belongs, or hath accustom∣ed to belong, as fully and freely as any Captain-General of an Army hath ever had the same. Also Our Will and Pleasure is, and by this Our Charter We do give unto the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, full Power and Authority, in cause of Rebellion,
Tumults, or Sedition, if any should happen, (which God forbid) either upon the Land, with∣in in the Province aforesaid, or upon the main Sea, in making a Voyage thither, or returning from thence, by him and themselves, their Captains, Deputies, or Officers, to be authorized under his or their Seals for that purpose, to whom also for Us, Our Heirs and Successours, We do give and grant by these presents, full power and au∣thority to exercise Martial Laws against muti∣nous and seditious persons of these parts, such as shall refuse to submit themselves to their Go∣vernment, or shall refuse to serve in the Wars, or shall flie to the Enemy, or shall forsake their Colours or Ensigns, to be loyterers or straglers otherwise howsoever offending against Law, Custom, or Discipline Military, as freely and in as ample manner and form as any Captain-General of an Army, by vertue of his Office might or hath accustomed to use the same. And Our further pleasure is, and by these presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successours, We do grant unto the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, and to the Tenents and Inhabitants of the said Province or Territory, both present and to come, and to every of them the said Province or Territory, and the Tenents and Inhabitants thereof shall not from hence∣forth be held or reputed any member or part of any Colony whatsoever in America, or elsewhere now transported or made, or hereafter to be transported or made, nor shall be depending on or subject to their Government, but be abso∣lutely divided and separated from the same. And Our Pleasure is, that they be separated, and that they be subject immediately to our Crown of
England, as depending thereof, for ever, and that the Inhabitants of the said Province or Territory, nor any of them, shall hereafter be compelled or compellable, or be any ways sub∣ject or liable to appear or answer to any Matter, Suit, Causes or Plaints whatsoever, out of the Province or Territory aforesaid, in any other of our Islands, Colonies or Dominions in Ame∣rica, or elsewhere, other than in Our Realm of England or Dominion of Wales, and because it may happen, that some of the People and In∣habitants of the said Province cannot in their Private Opinions conform to the Publick Exer∣cise of Religion, according to the Liturgy, Forms and Ceremonies of the Church of Eng∣land, or take or subscribe the Oaths and Articles made and established in that behalf. And, that the same, by reason of the remote distance of those places, will (as we hope) be no breach of the Unity and Uniformity established in this Na∣tion, Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and We do by these presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successours, give and grant unto the said Ed∣ward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, full and free License, Liberty and Autho∣rity, by such ways and means as they shall think fit to give and grant to such person or persons inhabiting and being within the said Province and Territory hereby, or by the said recited Let∣ters Patents mentioned to be granted, as afore∣said, or any part thereof, such Indulgences and Dispensations, in the behalf for and during such time and times, and with such limitations and restrictions as the said Edward, Earl of Claren∣don, &c. their Heirs or Assigns, shall in their direction think fit and reasonable. And that no
person or persons, unto whom such liberty shall be given, shall be any way molested, punished, disquieted, or called in question, for any dif∣ference in Opinion, or practises in Matters of Religious Concernment, who do not actually disturb the Civil Peace of the Province, County or Colony, that he or they shall make their abode in, but all and every such person and persons may from time to time and at all times freely and quietly have and enjoy their Judgment and Consciences in Matters of Religion throughout the whole Province or Colony, they behaving themselves peaceably, and not using this Liberty to Licentiousness, nor to the Civil Injury or out∣ward disturbance of others, any Laws, Statutes or Clause contained or to be contained, Usage or Custom of Our Realm of England, to the con∣trary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. And in case it shall happen, that any Doubts or Que∣stions should arise concerning the true sence and understanding of any Word, Clause or Sentence contained in this Our present Charter, We Will, Ordain and Command, that at all times and in all things, such Interpretations be made thereof, and allowed in all and every of Our Courts whatsoever, as lawfully maybe adjudged as most advantagious and favourable to the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. their Heirs and Assigns, although express mention of the true yearly value or certainty of the Premises, or of any of them, or of any other Gifts or Grants by Us, or by any of Our Progenitors or Prede∣cecessors heretofore made to the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, &c. in these presents is not made, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation or Restriction heretofore had,
made, enacted, ordnined or provided, or any other Matter, Cause or Thing whatsoever to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents. Witness Ourself at Westminster, the Thirtieth Day of June, in the Seventeenth Year of Our Reign. By the KING. Copia Vera. VYNER. A DESCRIPTION OF VIRGINIA. THis Country of Virginia, now so called, hath for its Southern limits, Carolina; for its Ea∣stern, the Atlantick Ocean; for its Northern,Its Situation. Mariland; and for its Western, that vast; Tract of Land which runneth into the South-sea.
map of Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New Jersey A New Map of VIRGINIA. MARYLAND. PENSILVANIA. NEW YARSEY. By Robt. Morden. B. Baltimore C A Arundelton C Cal. Calerton C Ch. Charles C M Mary C Cae Caecil C F Talhot C D Dorelister C K Kent C We Westmorland No Northumberland La Lancaster Mi Middlesex Gl Glocester C Charles C Y York C W Warck E Elizabeth I. N Lower Norfolk Na Nantimond Co Corratuck N Northampton Ac Accomo Ar. ridia
This Country was first discovered in the Year 1497.Its Discovery. by Sebastian Ca∣bot, a Portuguese, but his Mariners were all English, and therefore may justly be claim∣ed by us. But it was more fully discovered, toge∣ther with all that Tract of Sea-Coast, by Sir Fran∣cis Drake, and was called Virginia by Sir Walter Rawleigh, who visited it soon after in honour of his Virgin Mistris, Queen Elizabeth. In the Year 1603. divers persons, who obtained the Propriety of it from Sir Walter, made a Voyage thither, who discovered Whitson-Bay in forty one Degrees. The People used Snake-skins of six Foot long for Girdles, and were exceedingly ravished with the Musick of a Gittern, a Boy dancing in a Ring about him; they were more afraid of two English Ma∣stives than of twenty Men. There being much time spent in the discovery of this Country, and not without vale Expences, in the setting forth of Ships, and that not without the loss of several Mens lives before it could be brought to perfection, but at length, in the Year 1607. Sir John Popham, and others, settled a Plan∣tation at the Mouth of the River Saghadoc, but Captain James Davis having chosen a small place, almost an Island, to set down in, where, having heard a Sermon, read their Patent and Laws, and, after he had built a Fort, sailed further up the River and Country, where, finding an Island that had a great fall of Water, and having haled their Boat over with a Rope, they came to ano∣ther fall, which, by reason of its being very shallow and swift, proved unpassable; the Head of the River lying in about forty five Degrees: They all their Fort, St. George, Captain George Popham be∣ing President; and the People seemed much affect∣ed
with our mens devotion, and would say, King James is a good King, and his God a good God, but our God Tanto a naughty God, which is the Name of the evil Spirit that haunts them every new Moon, and makes them worship him for fear; he commanded the Indians not to converse, nor come near the English, threatning to kill some of them, if they did, and inflict sickness upon others, if they disobey'd him, beginning with two of their Saga∣mores or King's Children, affirming he had power to do the like against the English, and would the next new Moon execute it on them. In January, in the space of seven hours, they had Thunder, Light∣ning, Rain, Frost and Snow, all in very great abundance: There is likewise found a Bath so hot for two Miles about, they cannot drink of it. One of the Indians, for a Straw-hat and Knife, stript himself of his cloathing, which was Beaver∣skins, worth in England 50 s. or 3 l. to present them to the President, only leaving himself a piece to cover his Nudities. About this time, by the industry of Capt. Gos∣nold and Capt. Smith, James-Town was built,James-Town built. the Indians supplying their Necessities, which were sometimes very extream; the Winter approach∣ing, the Rivers afforded them very great plenty of Cranes, Swans, Geese, Ducks, wherewith they had Pease and wild Beasts, &c. But in the discovery of Chickahamine-River, George Casson was surprised, and Smith, with two others, beset with two hun∣dred Savages, his Men slain, and himself taken Prisoner; but in about a Months time he pro∣cured not only his liberty, but was in great favour among them, being extraordinary well pleased with his Discourses of God, Nature and Art, so
that he had a most noble Entertainment from Pow∣hatan, one of their Emperours, who sate in state upon his Bed of Mats, Pillow of Leather, im∣broidered with Parl and white Beads, attired with Robes of Skins, as large as an Irish-Mantle; at his Head sate a handsom young Woman, and another at his Feet, and on each side the Room twenty others, their Heads and Shoulders painted red, with a great Chain of white Beads about their Necks, and a Robe of Skins, large like an Irish-Mantle; before these sate his chiefest Men, in their orders: In his Palace or Arbour, one Newport, who accompanied Captain Smith, gave the Emperour a Boy, in requital whereof Powhatan bestowed upon him Namontack his Servant, who was afterwards brought into England; yet after this Powhatan treacherously contrived the Murder of sixteen of of our Men, which was happily prevented by Captain Smith, who seized another of their Kings, and thereby obtained Peace with them upon his own Terms. This Emperour had about thirty Kings under him, his chief Treasure consisting of Skins, Cop∣per, Pearls, Beads, and the like, all which were kept in store against his Burial, being reserved on purpose against that time; his House being fifty or sixty Yards long, frequented only by Priests; at the four Corners stood four Images, as Centi∣nels, one of a Bear, another a Dragon, the third a Leopard, and the fourth a Giant: He hath as many Women as he pleases, whom, after he is grown weary of, he bestows upon his Favorites. His Will, with the Custom of the Country, are his Laws, punishing his Malefactors by broiling to death, inclosed about with fire, with several other Tortures. About ten Miles from James-Town one
of their Kings made a Feast in the Woods, the people being most monstroully painted, some like black Devils, with Horns, and their Hair loose, of variety of colours; they continued two days dancing in a Circle of a quarter of a Mile about, four in a rank, in two companies, exercising seve∣ral Antick Tricks, the King leading the Dance; all in the midst had black Horns on their Heads, and green Boughs in their Hands; next whom were four or five principal Men, differently paint∣ed, who with Clubs beat those forward that tired in the Dance, which held so long, that they were scarce able either to go or stand; they made a hellish noise, and throwing away their Boughs, ran clapping their Hands up into a Tree, and tearing down a Branch, fell into their order again. After this, fifteen of their proper Boys, between ten and fiften years old, painted white, were brought forth to the people, who spent the Forenoon in sporting and dancing about them with Rattles; then, the Children being fetched away, the Women wept, and passionately cried out, providing Moss, Skins, Mats and dry Wood, making Wreaths for their Heads, and decking their Hair with Leaves; after which, they were all cast on a heap in a Valley as dead, where a great Feast was made for all the company for two hours; they then fell again into a Circle, and danced about the Youths, causing a Fire to be made on an Altar, which our Men thought was designed to sacrifice them to the Devil, but it was a mistake, and the Indians deluded our Men by false stories, one denying, and another af∣firming the same thing, being either ignorant or unwilling to discover the devilish Mysteries of their Religion; but a King being demanded the mean∣ing of this Sacrifice, answered, That the Children
were not all dead, but the Okee, or the Devil, did suck the Blood from their left Breast, till some of them died, but the rest were kept in the Wilderness, till nine Moons were expired, during which they must not converse with any; of these were made Priests and Conjurers. They think these Sacrifices so necessary, that if o∣mitted, they believe their Okee or Devil, & their other Gods would hinder them from having any Deer, Turkies, Corn or Fish, and would likewise make a great Slaughter among them. They imagine their Priests after Death, go beyond the Moun∣tains toward the Sun-Setting, and remain there continually in the shape of their Okee, having their Heads painted with Oyl, and finely trimmed with Feathers, and being furnised with Beads, Hatchets, Copper and Tobacco, never cease to dance and sing with their Predecessors; yet they suppose the common People shall die like Beasts, and never live after Death: Some of their Priests were so far convinced, that they declared our God exceeded theirs, as much as our Guns did their Bows and Arrows, and sent many Presents to the President, intreating him to pray to his God for Rain, for their God would not send them any. By Break of Day, before they eat or drink, the Men, Women and Children above ten years old, run into the Water, and there wash a good space, till the Sun arise; then they offer Sacrifice to it, strewing Tobacco on the Land and Water, re∣peating the same Ceremony at Sun-Set. George Casson aforementioned, was sacrificed, as they thought, to the Devil, being stript naked, and bound to two stakes, with his Back against a great Fire; after which they ript up his Belly, and burnt his Bowels, drying his Flesh to the Bones, which
they kept above ground in a Room; many other Englishmen were cruelly and treacherously executed by them, though perhaps not sacrificed, and none had escaped if their Ambush had succeeded. Pow∣hatan invited one Captain Ratcliff and thirty others to trade for Corn, and having brought them with∣in his Ambush, murdered them all. Virginia, after its discovery, cost no small pains before it was brought to perfection, with the loss of many Englishmens Lives. In the Reign of King James the First, a Patent was granted to several Persons as a Corporation, and called the Company of Adventurers of Virginia. But upon several Mis∣demeanors and Miscarriages in 1623. the Patent was made null; since which, it hath been free for all his Majesties Subjects to Trade into these Parts. This Countrey is blest with a sweet and wholsom Ayr,Temperature. and the Climate so agreeable to the English, since the clearing it from Woods, that few die of the Countrey-Disease, called Seasoning. It is every where interlaced with delectable Hills and rich Vallies,Its Fertility. and of a Soil so fertile, that an Acre of Ground commonly yieldeth 200 Bushels of Corn, and produceth readily the Grain, Fruits, Plants, Seeds and Roots which are brought from England, besides those that are natural to this Countrey and the rest of America. Here are excellent Fruits in great abundance,Its Fruits. which may be compared to those of Italy or Spain; as, Apri∣cocks, Peaches, Melons, Apples, Pears, Plums, Cher∣ries, Grapes, Figs, Quinces, Marrocks, Punchamins, Chesnuts, Walnuts, Olives, Strawberries, Rasberries,
Gooseberries, and Mulberries in great abundance. Of their Apples they make Sider, of their Pears Perry, and of their Grapes Wine. They have several sorts of Roots, as, Potatoes, Carrots, Turnips,Their Roots. Arti∣chokes, Onions, Cabbages, Colliflowers, Asparagus, &c. with most sorts of Garden-Herbs known to us, in great plenty. They have great plenty of Fowl; as, wild Turkeys,Their Fowl. which usually weigh six Stone, or forty eight pound; Partridges, Swans, Geese, Ducks, Teal, Wigeons, Dotterels, Heath-cocks, Oxe-eyes, Brants, Pigeons, Cranes, Herons, Eagles, and several sorts of Hawks, and for small Birds, innumerable quantities of sun∣dry sorts; as, Black-birds, Thrushes, Red-birds, and above all, the Mock-bird, which counterfeits the Noise of all Birds. They have great store of wild Beasts; as, Lions, Bears, Leopards,Wild Beasts. Tygers, Wolves, and Dogs like Wolves, but bark not; Buffeloes, Elks, whose Flesh is as good as Beef, Rosconnes, Ʋtchunquois, Deer, Hares, Bevers, Otters, Foxes, Martins, Polcats, Wesels, Musk-Rats, Flying Squirrels, &c. And for tame Cattel, Cows, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, and Horses in great plenty. There is great plenty of excellent Fish, as well in the Sea,Their Fish. and Bay of Chesopeack, as in the Rivers; viz. Cods, Thornback, Sturgeon, Crampusses, Por∣pusses, Drums, Cat-Fish, Basses, Sheeps-heads (which makes Broth like that of Mutton) Coney-fish, Rock-fish, Cray-fish, White Salmons, Soals, Plaice, Mullets, Makarel, Trouts, Perches, Conger-Eels, Herrings, Oysters, Shrimps, Cockles, Muscles, &c.
The CommoditiesCommodities. which the Countrey doth or may produce, are, Hemp, Flax, Hops, Rape-seed, An∣nise-seed, Woad, Madder, Pot-Ashes, Honey, Wax, Silk, if they would make it, since Mulberry-leaves grow in so great plenty, several sweet Gums and excellent Balsoms of sovereign Vertues; several sorts of Plants and Woods used by Dyers; Here are Veins of Allum, Iron and Copper, together with sundry sorts of rich Furs, Elk-Skins (which ma∣keth excellent Buff) and other Hides; Pitch, Tar, Rozen, Turpentine, Butter, Cheese, salted Fish and Flesh, which find vent at Barbados and other Cha∣ribby-Islands; but above all, Tobacco, which is their principal Commodity, and the Standard whereby all the rest are prized. There grows a kind of Flax, called Silk-grass, of which the Indians make Thred and Strings, and is good to make Linnen Cloth and Shifts, and and would make excellent strong Cables. Here all Tradesmen, especially Handicrafts find good encouragement; and for those Commodities aforesaid, the English (who have the sole Trade) bring them all sorts of Apparel, all manner of U∣tensils belonging to Houshold-stuff, or necessary for their Plantations, or otherwise; also Wine, Bran∣dy, and other strong Drinks; likewise all Silks, Stuff, and Cloth, both Linnen and Woollen, which they convert to several Uses according to their slancies, being now supplied with Taylors. Here groweth likewise sundry sorts of Trees;Their Trees. as, the red and white Oak, black Walnut, Cedar, Pine, Cy∣press, Chesnut, Poplar, Ash, Elm, &c. many of which are very good for the building of Ships, and other Uses.
This Countrey is well watered with several great and swift Rivers,Their Rivers. which lose themselves in the Gulph or Bay Chesopeak, which gives entrance for Ship∣ping into this Countrey, and also to Maryland, next adjoyning, which said Bay is very large, ca∣pacious, and commodious for Shipping, being said to run up into the Countrey Northwards 75 Leagues; in breadth in many places being 5, 6, or 7 Leagues, and sometimes more, and 6 or 7 fathom deep; and its opening to the South, be∣tween Cape Henry, which beginneth Virginia, and Cape Charles on the other side opposite, being about 10 or 12 Leagues wide. The principal of these Rivers beginning at Cape Henry, are Pawhonan, now called James's Ri∣ver, being found navigable about 50 Leagues. Pamaunke, now York-River, also large and naviga∣ble about 20 Leagues. Rapahanock, or Topahanock, likewise a good River, and navigable about 40 Leagues, which is the last River of Virginia north∣wardly, that falls into the Bay of Chesopeak. Upon, or near these Rivers, for the conveni∣ency of Shipping, the English are seated, which at present do amount unto the number of about thirty or forty thousand, and have some Towns; the chief amongst which is James-Town, or rather James-City, commodiously seated on James-River; the Town is beautified with many fair and well-built Brick Houses; and as it is the chief Town of the Countrey, here are kept the Courts of Ju∣dicatory, and Offices of publick Concern. Next to James-Town, may be reckoned that of Elizabeth, seated at the bottom of the said River, a well built Town. Also Dales-Gift, Wicocomeco, Bermuda, and others.
The Governour is sent over by His Majesty; who at present is the Right Honourable the Lord Howard of Effingham, and the Countrey is govern∣ed by Laws agreeable with those of England, for the decision of all Causes both Civil and Criminal; which said Laws are made by the Governour, with the consent of the General Assembly, which doth consist of his Council, and the Burgesses chosen by the Freeholders. And for the better Government, the Countrey possessed by the English, is divided into several Counties, in each of which are She∣riffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, which are from time to time appointed by the Go∣vernor. The Names of the Counties, are those of Carotuck,Their Coun∣ties. Charles, Glocester, Hartford, Henrico, James, New-Kent, Lancaster, Middlesex, Nan∣semund, Lower-Norfolk, Northampton, Northum∣berland, Rappahanock, Surrey, Warwick, Westmor∣land, Isle of Wight, and York, and in each of these Counties are held petty Courts every Month; from which there may be Appeals to the Quarter-Court held at James-Town. The Virginians are not born so swarthy as they appear;Their Com∣plexion. their hair is generally black and flaggy, which they wear long; few men have Beards, because they pluck out the Hairs that would grow; their oyntments and smoaky houses do in a great measure cause their Blackness, where∣by they look like Bacon; they are of a ready wit, very subtle and treacherous, not much addicted to Labour, being too great lovers of their ease, and much given to hunting. They have one Wife, many Concubines, and are likewise Sodomites; the
ancient Women are used for Cooks, Barbers, and other Services, the younger for Dalliance; they are modest in their Carriage, and seldom quarrel, in entertaining a Stranger, they spread a Mat for him to sit down, and then dance before him; they wear their Nails long to flea their Deer, and put Bows and Arrows into the hands of their Chil∣dren before they are six years old. In each Ear they have generally three great holes, wherein they commonly hang Chains, Bracelets, or Cop∣per; some wear a Snake therein, coloured green and yellow, near half a yard long, which crawls about their necks, and offers to kiss their Lips; others have a dead Rat tied by the Tail. The wo∣men raze their Bodies, Legs and Thighs with an Iron incurious knots and shapes of Fowls, Fishes, and Beasts, and rub a painting therein which will never come out. The Queen of Apometica was attired with a Cornet beset with many white bones, with Copper in her Ears, and a Chain of the same, six times encompassing her Neck. The Sasqucha∣nocks are a Giant-like People, very monstrous in proportion, behaviour and attire; their Voice sounds as out of a Cave, their Garments are Bear-skins, hanged with Bears Paws, a Wolfes Head, and such odd Jewels, their Tobacco-pipes three quarters of a yard long, with the Head of some Beast at the end, so weighty, as to beat out the Brains of a Horse. The Calf of one of their Legs was measured three quarters of a yard about, their other Limbs being proportionable. They have se∣veral ridiculous Conceits concerning their Origi∣nal; as that a Hare came into their Countrey, and made the first men, and after preserved them from a great Serpent; and two other Hares came thi∣ther, the first killed a Deer for their entertain∣ment,
which was then the only Deer in the world, and strewing the hairs of that Deer, every hair became a Deer. In the Reign of King James the First, one Toma∣cona, an Indian, and Councellor to one of their Kings, came into England; who landing in the West, was much surprized at our plenty of Corn and Trees, imagining we ventured into their Coun∣trey to supply those defects; he began then to number the Men he met with, but his Arithmetick soon failed him. He related that Okee their God, did often appear to him in his Temple; to which purpose four of their Priests go into the House, and using certain strange words and gestures, eight more are called in, to whom he discovers what his Will is; upon him they depend in all their Pro∣ceedings; as in taking Journeys, or the like: sometimes when they resolve to go a hunting, he by some known token will direct where they shall find Game; which they with great chearfulness acknowledging, follow his Directions, and many times succeed therein; he appears like an handsom Indian, with long black Locks of Hair; after he has staid with his twelve Confederates for some time, he ascendeth into the Ayr from whence he came. The Natives think it a disgrace to fear Death, and therefore when they must die, they do it resolutely; as it happened to one that robbed an Englishman, and was by Pawhatan (upon com∣plaint made against him) fetched sixty miles from the place where he lay concealed, and by this To∣mocomo executed in the presence of the English, his Brains being knockt out, without the least shew of fear or terror.
Their ApparelTheir Apparel. is but mean, on∣ly contenting themselves with something to cover their naked∣ness; and for the better defending themselves from the Weather, they anoint their bodies with cer∣tain Oyles mixt with Bears-Grease. Their HousesTheir Houses. are no better than our English Hogsties, being made of Boughs, and covered with Barks of Trees, and in the midst thereof is placed their Chimney, or Fire-place. Their DietTheir Diet. in meanness, is an∣swerable to their Houses not en∣deavouring to please their Palats, with curious Sauces, or pampering their Bodies with provocative Meats. A DESCRIPTION OF MARY-LAND. THE Province of Mary-Land is situated between the degrees of 37 and 50 min. or thereabouts,Situation. and 40 deg. of Northern Latit. It is bounded on the North with Pennsylvania, New-England, and New-York, formerly part of New-England; on the East, the Atlantick Ocean, and Delaware Bay; on the South,
by Virginia; from whence it is parted by the Ri∣ver Patowmeck, whose Southern Banks divide the Province from Virginia. The Bay of Chesopeack, giving entrance to Ships, both into this Countrey and Virginia, pas∣sing through the heart of this Province, being found near 200 miles in the Land, into which falls several considerable River;Its Rivers as, Patowmeck, Patuxent, Ann-A∣rundel, (alias Severn) and Sasque∣sahanough, lying on the West-side of the Bay; and to the East of the said Bay, those of the Choptanke, Nantecoke, Pocomocke, and several other Rivers and Rivulets, to the great improvement of the Soyl, and Beauty of the Province. The ClimateThe Climate. of late is very a∣greeable to the English Constitu∣tion, especially since the felling of the Woods, and the People accustoming them∣selves to English Diet, is very healthful and agree∣able to the constitution of the English, few now dying at their first coming, of the Country Dis∣ease or seasoning; neither is the Heat extream in Summer, being much qualified by the cool and gentle Briezes of winds from the Sea, and refresh∣ing Showers of Rain, and the Cold in Winter, be∣ing of so little durance, that the Inhabitants can∣not be said to suffer by either. The Countrey is generally plain and even, yet rising in some places into small and pleasant Hills, which heighten the Beauty of the adjacent Val∣lies. The Soyl is rich and fertil, naturally producing all such Commodities as are particularly set down to its neighbouring Colony, Virginia; as, all sorts of Beasts and Fowl, both tame and wild;
Fish, Fruits, Plants, Roots, Herbs, Gums, Trees, Balsoms, &c. as likewise all Commodities produ∣ced by Industry, are here found in as great plenty and perfection. But the chief Trade of Mary-Land depends upon Tobacco, which is esteemed better for a foreign Market than that of Virginia, finds greater vent abroad; which Trade is not inconsiderable, since a hundred Sail of Ships have in one year traded thither from England, and the neighbouring English Plantations. There is a com∣petent stock of ready Money in this Province, both of English and Foreign, and his Lordships own Coin; yet their chief way of Commerce is by way of Barter or Exchange of Commodi∣ties. The Natives,The Natives. as to their Com∣plexion, Stature, Customs, Dis∣positions, Laws, Religion, Appa∣rel, Diet, Houses, &c. are much the same with those of Virginia, already treated of, being like∣wise many different Tribes or sorts of People, and each governed by their particular King. There are many strange Rites and Ceremonies used by the Na∣tive Indians;Their Religion. they believe there are several Gods, which they call Mantaac, but of different sorts and degrees; yet there is but one absolute God from all eternity, who, when he made the World, created other Gods, to be as a Means and Instrument used in the Creation, and that the Sun, Moon and Stars are petty Gods; out of the Waters they affirm all the variety of Crea∣tures were made; for Mankind, that Woman was made first, who, by the assistance of one of the Gods, conceived and brought forth Children, but know not how long it was since this was done,
having no Arithmetick nor Records, but only Tradition from Father to Son; they make the I∣mages of their Gods in the shape of Men, placing one at least in their Houses or Temple, where they worship, sing, pray and make Offerings. They believe, that after this Life, the Soul shall be disposed of according to its Works here, either to the habitation of the Gods, to enjoy perpetual happiness, or to a great Pit or Hole in the furthest part of their Countrey toward Sun∣set (which they count the furthermost part of the World) there to burn continually; which place they call Popogusso; and relate, that one that was buried, was the next day seen to move upon his Grave; whereupon his Body was taken up again, who, when he was revived, declared, that his Soul was near entring into Popogusso, had not one of the Gods saved him, and suffered him to return, and warn his Friends to avoid that terrible place: another being taken up, related, that his Soul was alive while his Body was in the Grave, and had been travelling in a long broad way, on both sides whereof, grew delicate Trees, bearing excellent Fruits, and at length arrived at most curious houses, where he met his Father, that was dead before. who charged him to go back, and shew his Friends what good they were to do to enjoy the pleasures of this Place, and then to return to him again: Whatever Tricks or Subtilty the Priests use, the Vulgar are hereby very respectful to their Govern∣ors, and careful of their actions, though in crimi∣nal Causes they inflict punishments according to the quality of the Offence; they are great Negro∣mancers, and account our Fire-works, Guns and Writing to be the works of God rather than Men. When one of their Kings was sick, he sent to the
English to pray for him: Some of them imagine that we are not mortal men, nor born of Women, but say we are an old Generation revived, and believe that there are more of us yet to come to kill their Nation, and take their places, who are at present invisible in the Air without Bo∣dies, and that at their intercession they cause those of their Nation to die who wrong the English. Their Idol they place in the innermost Room of the House, of whom they relate incredible Stories, they carry it with them to the Wars, and ask counsel thereof, as the Romans did of their Oracles; they sing Songs as they march towards Battel, in∣stead of Drums and Trumpets; their Wars are exceeding bloody, and have wasted the people ve∣ry much. Once a year they hold a great Festival, meeting together out of several Villages, each ha∣ving a certain Mark or Character on his Back, whereby it may be discerned whose Subject he is; the place where they meet is spacious, and round about are Posts carved on the top like a Nuns Head; in the midst are three of the fairest Virgins lovingly embracing and clasping each other; about this living Image and artificial Circle they dance in their savage manner. Their chief Idol, called Ki∣wasa, in made of wood four foot high, the Face resembling the Inhabitants of Florida, painted with flesh-colour, the Breast white, the other parts black, the Legs only sported with white, with Chains and Strings of Beads about his neck. This Idol is the Keeper of the dead Bodies of their Kings, which are advanced on Scaffolds nine or ten foot high, this Kiwasa or Guardian being placed near them, and underneath liveth a Priest, who there mumbles his Devotions night and day.
This Province of Mary-Land, His Majesty King Charles the First, in Anno 1632. granted by a Pa∣tent to the Right Honourable Caecilius Calvert, Lord Baltemore, and to his Heirs and Assigns, and by that Patent created him and them the true and absolute Lords and Proprietors of the same (sa∣ving the Allegiance and Sovereign Dominion due to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors;) thereby likewise granting to them all Royal Jurisdictions both military and Civil; as, Power of enacting Laws, martial Laws, making of Warand Peace, Par∣doning Offences, conferring of Honours, coyning of Money, &c. and in acknowledgment thereof, yielding and paying yearly to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, two Indin Arrows at Windsor-Castle in the County of Berks, on Easter-Tuesday, toge∣ther with the fifth part of all the Gold and Silver-Oar that shall be found there. The Lord Baltemore hath his Residence at Mat∣tapany, about eight miles distance from St. Maries, where he hath a pleasant Seat, though the gene∣ral Assemblies and Provincial Courts are kept at St. Maries; and for the better inviting of People to settle here, his Lordship by the Advice of the General Assembly of that Province, hath long since established a Model of good and wholsom Laws, for the ease and benefit of the Inhabitants, with toleration of Religion to all sorts that profess the Faith of Christ, which hath been a principal mo∣tive to many to settle under that Government, rather than in another, where Liberty of Consci∣ence was denied them. This Province, where it is peo∣pled with English,Its Counties. is divided into ten Counties, to wit, five Eastwards of Chesopeak-Bay, as, Cecil, Dorchester, Kent, So∣merset,
map of New England, New York NEW ENGLAND And NEW YORK by Rob, Morden i Charles Towne k Cambridg l Water town m Naton n Dabham o Medfeild p Chensford q Ballerica r Sudbury a Roxbury b Debyster c Miltem d ymouth e Bbry f Malden g Wisunt h Farmington
and Talbot; and five Westwards of the said Bay; as, Anne-Arundel, Baltemore, Calvert, Charles, and St. Maries. Here are likewise certain Magistrates appointed by his Lordship in each County, as, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, &c. The Inhabitants (being in number about 16000) have begun the building of several Towns, which in few years 'tis hoped may come to some perfe∣ction; as, Calverton, Herrington, and Harvey-Town, all commodiously seated for the benefit of Trade, and conveniency of Shipping; but the principal Town is St. Maries, seated on St. Georges River, being beautified with divers well-built Houses, and is the chief Place, or Scale of Trade for the Province. A DESCRIPTION Of NEW-YORK. ADjoyning to Mary-Land Northwards, is a Colony called New-York, from our present Gracious Sovereign, when Duke of York, the Pro∣prietor thereof by Grant from His Majesty, and is that part of New-England which the Dutch once possessed; it was first discovered by Mr. Hudson,Its Discovery. and sold presently by him to the Dutch without
Authority from his Sovereign the King of England, in 1608. The Hollanders in 1614. began to plant there, and called it New-Netherland; but Sir Samuel Argal, Governour of Virginia, routed them; after which, they got leave of King James to put in there for Fresh-Water in their Passage to Brazile, and did not offer to plant till a good while after the English were setled in the Countrey. In 1664. His late Majesty King Charles the Second sent over four Commissioners to reduce the Colony into bounds, that had been encroached upon by each other; who marched with three hundred Red-Coats to Manhadees, and took from the Dutch the chief Town, then called New-Amsterdam, now New-York; and Aug. 29. turned out their Governour with a Silver Leg, and all the rest but those who acknowledged Subjection to the King of England; suffering them to enjoy their Houses and Estates as before. Thirteen days after, Sir Robert Car took the Fort and Town of Aurania, now called Albany, and twelve days after that, the Fort and Town of Arasapha, then Delaware-Castle, manned with Dutch and Swedes; so that now the English are Ma∣sters of three handsom Towns, three strong Forts and a Castle, without the loss of one man. The first Governour of these Parts for the King of Eng∣land was Colonel Nicols, one of the Commissio∣ners. It is a Countrey of a rich and fertil Soyl,Its Fertility. well watered with Ri∣vers, as in Mary-Land, already spoken of; and is found to produce the same Beasts, Birds, Fish, Fruits, Commodities, Trees, &c. and in as great plenty; and it is reported that one Bushel of European Wheat has yielded an hundred in one year.
The most considerable Town is that of New-York;Its Situation. being well seated both for Trade, Security, and Pleasure, in a small Isle called Manahatan, re∣garding the Sea, made so by Hudson's River, which severeth it from Long-Island, which said River is very commodious for Shipping, being about two Leagues broad. The Town is large, containing about five hundred well-built Houses, built with Dutch-Brick, and the meanest not valued under one hundred Pounds; to the landward it is encom∣passed with a Wall of good thickness, and forti∣fied at the entrance of the River, so as to com∣mand any Ship which passeth that way, by a Fort, called James-Fort: and for Civil Government, it hath a Mayor, Alderman, Sheriff, and Justices of the Peace for their Magistrates. The Inhabitants are most English and Dutch, who have a very con∣siderable Trade with the Indians, for the Skins of Elks, Deer, Bears, &c. also for those of Beaver, Otter, Racoon-skins, with other rich Furs, and are supplied with Venison and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer, by the Indians, at an easie price. This Province formerly contained all that Land which is seated in the North part of Ame∣rica, betwixt England and Mary-Land, the length toward the North being not fully known; the breadth is about 200 Miles: The chief Rivers are Hudson-River, Raritan River, and Delaware-Bay; and the principal Islands are the Manahatan-Island, Long-Island, and Stater-Island. Manahatan-Island, so called by the Indians, lieth within land, betwixt forty one and forty two Degrees of North Lati∣tude, and is in length about fourteen Miles, and two broad. New-York is seated on the West-end of
this Island, having a small Arm of the Sea, which divides it from Long-Island on the South. Long-Island runs Eastward above a hundred Miles, and in some places eight, twelve and fourteen Miles broad, inhabited from one end to the other, ha∣ving a rich Soil for all English-Grain; the Fruits, Trees and Herbs very good; in May you may see the Woods and Fields so richly bedecked with Roses, and variety of other delightful Flowers, as equal, if not excel, many Gardens in Eng∣land. This Country is also possessed with sundry sorts of People,Its Inhabitants. not much unlike the Indians of Vir∣ginia, being well-proportioned, swarthy, black∣haired, very expert in their Bow and Arrows, which are their chief Weapons of War; they are very serviceable and courteous to the English, being of a ready Wit and very apt to recieve In∣struction from them; but there are now but few Indians upon the Island, being strangely decreased since the English first settled there, for not long ago there were six Towns full of them, which are now reduced to two Villages, the rest being cut off by Wars among themselves, or some raging, mortal Diseases. They live principally by Hunt∣ing Fowling and Fishing, their Wives tilling the Land and planting the Corn; they feed on Fish, Fowl and Venison, likewise Pol-cats, Turtles, Racoon and the like: they build small moveable Tents, which they remove three times a year, chiefly quar∣tering where they plant their Corn, besides their Hunting and Fishing-Quarters. Their principal Recreation are Foot-ball and Cards, at which they will play away all they have, except a Flap to co∣ver their nakedness: they are very great lovers of
Strong-drink, so that without they have enough to be drunk, they care not to drink at all; if their company be so great, that they have not enough to make them all drunk, they usually chuse so many as are proportionable to that quantity, and the rest must be spectators; if any happen to be drunk, before he has taken his share, which is ordinarily a quart of Brandy, Rum or Strong-wa∣ters; to shew their Justice, they will pour the rest down his Throat: in which debauches they often kill one another, which the Friends of the dead re∣venge upon the Murtherer, unless he purchase his Life with Money, which is made of Periwinkle-shell, both black and white, strung like Beads. They observe several Ceremo∣nies in their Reigious Rites,Their Religion. and are said to Worship the Devil, which usually they perform once or twice a Year, unless upon some extraordinary occasion, as the making of War, or the like, when their Corn is ripe, which is usually about Michaelmas; The day being appointed by their Chief Priest, or Pawaw, most of them go a Hunting for Venison; when they are all assembled, if the Priest wants Money, he then tells them, their God will accept no Offer∣ing, but Money; which the People believing, eve∣ry one gives according to his ability: the Priest takes the Money, and putting it into some Dishes, sets them upon the top of their low, flat-roofed Houses, and so falls a calling upon their God, to come and receive it, which, with many loud hol∣lows and out-crys, striking the ground with sticks, and beating themselves, is performed by the Priest, and seconded by the People. After, being thus wearied, a Devil, by his conjuration, appears amongst them, sometimes in the shape of a Fowl,
a Beast, or a Man, which so amazeth the people, that they dare not stir; the Priest improves the opportunity, and stepping out, makes sure of the Money, and then returns to lay the Spirit, who is often gone before he comes back, having taken some of the company along with him; but if at such times any English come among them, it puts a period to their proceedings, and they will desire his absence, saying, Their God will not come, till they are departed. They are much addicted to go to War against one another, but they sight no pitch'd Bat∣tel, but upon their Enemies approach, (having first secured their Wives and Children in some Island, or thick Swamp) armed with Guns and Hatchets, they way-lay their Enemy, and it's counted a great Fight when seven or eight are slain; they seldom give quarter to any, but the Women and Children, whom they reserve and make use of for the increa∣sing their strength. When an Indian dies, they bury him upright,Their way of Burial. sitting upon a Seat, with his Gun, Money, and Goods, to furnish him in the other World, which they believe to be Westward, where they shall have great store of Game for Hunting, and live at ease; at his Funeral, his Relations paint their Faces black, making, at his Grave, once or twice every day, sad Lamentations; thus continu∣ing till the blackness is wore off their Faces; and after that, once a Year they mourn afresh for him, visiting and trimming up the Grave, not suffering any Grass to grow near it, fencing it with a Hedge, and covering it with Mats for a shelter from the Rain. Notwithstanding all this bustle, when an Indian is dead his Name dies with him, none da∣ring ever after to mention his Name, it being not
only a breach of their Law, but an affront to his Friends and Relations, as if done on purpose to renew their grief. And every person, bearing the same Name, instantly changes it for another, which every one invents for himself; some call themselves Rattlesnakes, others Buckshorn, or the like; yea, if a person die, whose Name is some Word used in common Speech, they change that Word, and invent a new one, which makes their Lan∣guage very troublesom. When any one is sick, after his Friends have used all possible means, eve∣ry one pretending skill in Physick, but all proving ineffectual, they send for a Pawaw, or Priest, who, sitting down by the sick person, without the least inquiring after the Distemper, expects a Fee or Gift, according to which he proportions his work, beginning with a low voice to call some∣times upon one God, and then on another, still raising his vice, beating his naked breasts and sides till the sweat runs down, and his breath is al∣most gone, and what remains, he breaths upon the face of the sick person three or four times together, so takes his leave. Their Weddings are performed without any Ceremony,Their Mar∣riages. the Match being first made by Money, which being agreed on, and given to the Woman, makes a Consummation of the Marriage, if we may so call it; after which, he keeps her du∣ring pleasure, and, upon the least dislike, turns her away and takes another. It is no offence for their married Women to lie with another Man, provi∣ded she acquaint her Husband, or some of her nearest Relations therewith; but if not, they ac∣count it such a fault as is sometimes punishable by death. When any Woman finds herself quick with
Child, she keeps herself chaste, or untouched by Man, until her delivery, the like she observeth in her giving such, a strange Custom which our Euro∣pean Ladies would not well relish. An Indian may have two or three or more Wives if he please; but it is not now so much used, as before the Eng∣lish came, they being inclined to imitate them in things both good and bad. Any Maid, before she is married, lies with whom she pleases for Money, without the least scandal or aspersion, it being not only customary, but lawful. They are extream charitable to one another, for if any one has to spare, he freely imparts to his friends, and whatever they get by Gaming, or otherwise, they share one with another, leaving commonly the least part to themselves. When their King or Sachen sits in Council, he hath a company of armed Men to guard his person, great respect being shewed him by the people, which chiefly appears by their silence; after he has declared the cause of their convention, he de∣mands their Opinions, ordering who shall first be∣gin, who, having delivered his mind, tells them, he hath done, for no man interrupts him, though he makes never so many long stops and halts, till he says, he hath no more to say; the Council ha∣ving all delivered their Opinions, the King, after some pause, gives the definitive Sentence, which is commonly seconded by a shout from the people, thereby signifying their assent or applause. If any person be condemned to die, which is seldom, but for Murder, or Incest, the King himself goes out in person, (for they have no Prisons, and the guil∣ty person flies into the Woods) to seek him out, and having found him, the King shoots first, though at never such a distance, and then happy is the
man that can shoot him down, who, for his pains, is made some Captain or Military Officer. Their ClothingTheir Clothing. is a yard and a half of broad Cloth, which they hang on their Shoulders, and half a yard of the same, being put between their Legs, is tied up before and behind, and fastened with a Girdle about their middle, and hangs with a slap on each side; they wear no Hats, but commonly tye either a Snakes-skin about their eads, a Belt of their Money, or a kind of Ruff, made with Deers-hair, and dyed of a Scarlet-colour, which they esteem very rich, they grease their Bodies and Hair very often, and paint their Faces with divers Colours, as Black, White, Red, Yellow, Blew, which they take great pride in, every one being painted in a several manner. Thus much for the Customs of the Indians, and the Colony of New-York. Hudson's River runs by New-York Northward into the Country, towards the head of which is seated New-Albany, a place of a very considerable Trade with the Natives, betwixt which and New-York, being above an hundred Miles distance, is as good Corn-land as the World affords; it was re∣duced to his Majesties obedience by Col. Nicholas, and a League of Friendship concluded between the Inhabitants and the Indians, by whom they have never been since disturbed, but every man hath sate under his own Vine, and hath peaceably reaped and enjoyed the Fruits of his own Labour, which God continue.
A DESCRIPTION OF NEW ENGLAND. Its Discovery. NEw-England was first discovered, as well as the other Northern-Coasts of America, by Sebastian Cabot, in the Year 1497. and in 1584. Mr. Philip Amadas, and Mr. Arthur Barlow, were the first Christians that took possession thereof for Queen Elizabeth. The Year following Sir Richard Greenvile conveyed an English Colony thither, under the government of Mr. Ralph Lane, who continued there till the next Year, but, upon some extraordinary occasion, re∣turned with Sir Francis Drake into England, being accounted by some the first discoverer thereof. It is seated on the North of Mary-Land,Its Situation. and on the South Virginia, lying about 40 and 41 Degrees of North-Latitude, and it is reported to have 70 Miles of Sea-Cost, where are found divers good Havens, several of which being capable to harbour five hundred Sail of Ships from the rage of the Sea and Winds, by reason of the interpo∣sition of several Isles (to the number of about 200) which lie about this Coast. The Account of the Worship and Ceremonies of the Indians hath been
much perfected by the Industry and Voyages of Capt. Gosnold, Capt. Hudson, Capt. Smith, and others, the last of which gives a very large Ac∣count, this Captain being taken Prisoner by the Natives, and while he stayed among them obser∣ved their Magical Rites, three or four days after his being seized, seven of their Priests, in the House, where he lay, each with a Rattle, (making him sit down by them) began about Ten in the Morning to sing about a fire, which they encom∣passed with a Circle of Meal, at the end of every Song (which the Chief Priest begun, the rest fol∣lowed in order) they laid down two or three Grains of Wheat, then the Priest disguised with a great Skin, his Head hung round with little Skins of Weasles, and other Vermine, and a Cor∣net of Feathers, painted as ugly as the Devil, at the end of every Song he used strange and vehe∣ment Gestures, throwing great Cakes of Deer-Suet and Tobacco into the fire, thus these howl∣ing Devotions continued till Six a Clock at Night, and held so three days. This they pretended was to know of their God, whether any more English should arrive, and what they intended to do in that Country. They sed Capt. Smith so high, that he much doubted they would have sacrificed him to their Chief Deity, the Image of whom is so deformed, that nothing can be more monstrous, the Women likewise, after he was freed and Presi∣dent of the Company made him a very odd En∣tertainment, thirty of them came out of the Woods, only covered before and behind with a few green Leaves, their Bodies painted of diffe∣rent colours the Commander of these Nymphs had on her Head a large pair of Stag's Horns, and a Quiver of Arrows at her Back, with Bow and
Arrows in her hand; the rest followed with Horns and Weapons all alike; they rushed through the Streets with hellish shouts and crys, dancing about a fire, which was there made for that purpose, for an hour together; then they solemnly invited him to their Lodging, where he was no sooner come, but they all surrounded him, and crying, Love you not me? after which they feasted him with great variety, cook'd after their mad fashion, some singing and dancing all the while, and at last lighted him home with a Firebrand, instead of a Torch, to his Lodgings. And although this Country is seated in the midst of the Temperate Zone, yet is the Clime more uncertain,Temperature. as to the heat and cold, than those European Kingdoms, which lie Parallel with it; and, as to Virginia, this may be compared as Scotland is to England. The AirThe Air. is found very healthful, and agreeable to the English, which makes them possess many Potent Colonies, being very numerous and pow∣erful. When they design to make War, they first con∣sult with their Priests and Conjurers, no People be∣ing so Barbarous almost, but they have their Gods,Their Religion. Priests, and Re∣ligion; they adore as it were all things that they think may unavoidably hurt them, as Fire, Water, Lightning, Thunder, our Great Guns, Muskets and Horses; yea, some of them once see∣ing an English Boar, were struck with some terror, because he bristled up his Hairs and gnashed his Teeth, believing him to be the God of the Swine, who was offended with them. The chief God they
Worship is the Devil, which they call Okee; they have conference with him, and fashion themselves into his shape: In their Temple they have his Image ill-favouredly Carved, Painted and Adorned with Chains, Copper and Beads, and covered with a Skin. The Sepulchre of their Kings is common∣ly near them, whose Bodies are first Imbowelled, dried on a Hurdle, adorned with Chains and Beads, and then wrapped in white Skins, over which are Matts; they are afterwards Intombed orderly in Arches made of Matts, their Wealth being placed at their feet: But for their common Burials, they dig a hole in the Earth with sharp Stakes, and the Corps being wrapped in Skins and Matts, they lay them in the Ground, placing them upon sticks, and then cover them with Earth; the Burial ended, the Women having their Faces painted black with Cole and Oyl, sit Mourning in the House twenty four hours together, howling and yelling by turns. The Natives are cloathed with loose Mantles made of Deers Skins, and Aprons of the same round their Middle,Their Cloathing. all else being naked; of Stature like to us in England: They Paint themselves and their Children, and he is most Gallant who is most deformed. The Women Imbroider their Legs, Hands, and other Parts, with several Works, as of Serpents, and the like, making black spots in their Flesh. Their Houses are made of small Poles, round, and fastened at the top in a circle like our Arbours, covered with Matts twice as long as broad; they are exact Archers, and with their Arrows will kill Birds flying, or Beasts running full speed: One of our Men was with an Arrow shot through the Body and both the Arms at once. Another Indian shot an Arrow of an Ell long through a Target,
that a Pistol Ballet could not pierce; their Bows are of tough Hazle, and their Strings of Leather; their Arrows of Cane or Hazle, headed with Stones or Horn, and Feathered Artificially: They soon grow heartless, if they find their Arrows do no ex∣ecution. They say there is Men among them of above two hundred years of Age. Though the Planting of this Country was de∣signed by several of the English, yet it lay much neglected, 'till a small company of Planters, under the Command of Captain George Popham, and Cap∣tain Gilbert, was sent over at the charge of Sir John Popham, in 1606. to begin a Colony upon a Tract of Land about Saga de hoch, the most Northernly part of New-England, but that design within two years expired with its Founder. Soon after, some Honourable Persons of the West of England, com∣monly called the Council of Plymouth, being more certainly informed of several Navigable Rivers, and Commodious Havens, with other places sit either for Planting or Traffick, newly discovered by many skilful Navigators, obtained of King James the First, a Patent under the Great Seal, of all that part of North America, called New-England, from forty to forty eight Degrees of North Latitude. This vast Tract of Land, was in 1612. Cantoned, and divided by Grant into many lesser Parcels, ac∣cording as Adventurers presented; which Grants being founded upon uncertain and false Descripti∣ons, and reports of some that Travelled thither, did much interfere one with another, to the great disturbance of the first Planters, so that little profit was reaped from thence: Nor was any greater Improvement made of those Grand Portions of Land, saving the erecting some few Cottages for Fishermen, and a few inconsiderable Buildings for
the Planters; yea, for want of good Conduct, they were by degrees in a manner quite destitute of Laws and Government, and left to shift for them∣selves This was the beginning of New-England, when, in the Year 1610. one Mr. Robinson a Presbyterian, or rather Independent Preacher, and several other English, then at Leyden in Holland, though they had been courteously entertained by the Dutch as Strangers; yet foreseeing divers inconveniences might follow, and that they could not so well pro∣vide for the good of their Posterity under the Go∣vernment of a Foreign Nation, they resolve to in∣treat so much Favour of their Sovereign Prince, King James, as to grant them Liberty, under the Protection of his Royal Authority, to place them∣selves in some place of New-England. Having therefore obtained a Patent or Grant for some place about Hudsons River, they set Sail from Ply∣mouth, in September, for the Southern Parts of New-England; but as they intended their Course thi∣ther-ward, they were through many dangers, at last, about November the eleventh, cast upon a bo∣som of the South Cape of the Massachusets Bay, called Cape Cod. When, Winter approached so fast, that they had no opportunity to remove, and finding some encouragement from the hopefulness of the Soyl, and courtesie of the Heathen, they resolved there to make their aboad, laying the Foundation of a new Colony, which from the last Town they Sailed from in England, they called New-Plymouth, containing no considerable Tract of Land, scarce extending one hundred Mile in length through the whole Cape, and not half so much in breadth, where broadest.
From this time, to the Year 1636. things were very prosperously and successfully carried on in New-England, which was much increased in Build∣ings and Inhabitants; at which time, the Naragan∣set Indians, who are the most Warlike and Fierce, and much dreaded by all the rest, committed divers outrages upon several of them, and likewise upon the English and Dutch, as they came occasionally to Trade with them, barbarously murthering Capt. Stone, Capt. Oldham, with several others: Where∣upon the Inhabitants of all the Colonies unani∣mously falling upon them, in 1637. they were easi∣ly suppressed, about seven hundred of them being destroyed, and the rest cut off by their neighbour Indians. Upon which, Miantonimoh, the chief of the Magchins, expecting to be sole Lord and Ruler over all the Indians, committed many Insolencies upon some others, who were in Confederacy with the English as well as himself; and he being sent for to the Massacusets Court, at Boston, endeavour∣ed to clear himself, but was clearly convicted by one of his fellows, named Ʋncas: In revenge of which, after his return home, he made War upon Vncas, by whom being taken Prisoner, by the Ad∣vice and Counsel of the English, he cut off his Head, it being justly feared no firm Peace could be conclu∣ded while he was alive. This happened in 1643. from whence, to 1675. there was always an ap∣pearance of Amity and good Correspondence on all sides, only in 1671. one Matoonas, being vexed that an intended Design against the English did not take effect, out of meer malice against them, slew an Englishman on the Road; the Murtherer was a Nipnet Indian, and under the Command of the Sa∣chem of Mount-Hope, the Author of all the mischief against the English in 1675.
Upon a due inquiry therefore of all the Transa∣ctions between the Indians and English, from their first setling on these Coasts, there will appear no ground of quarrel or provocation given by the English. For when Plymouth Colony was first Plan∣ted in 1620. within three months after, Massasoit, the chief Sachem or Commander of all that side of the Country, repairs thither to the English, and entred solemnly into a League upon the following Articles. 1. That neither he nor any of his should injure or do any hurt to any of their People. 2. If any of his hurt the English, he should send them the offender to punish. 3. If any thing should be taken away by his, he should see it restored, and the English to do the like to them. 4. If any made War unjustly against him, they were to aid him, and he likewise them. 5. That he should certifie his neighbour Con∣federates hereof, that they might be likewise compri∣sed in the Peace. 6. That when his men should come to the English they should leave their Arms behind; which were then Bows and Arrows, and were then their only Weapons, though now they have learn- the use of Guns and Swords as well as the Christi∣ans. This League the same Sachem confirmed a lit∣tle before his death, in 1630. coming with his two Sons, Alexander and Philip, to Plymouth, and renewing the same for Himself, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors; yet it is apparent this Massasoit never loved the English, and would have ingaged them never to have attempted to draw away any of his People from their old Pagan Superstition and De∣vilish Idolatry, to the Christian Religion: But finding they would make no Treaty with him upon such Conditions, he urged it no further. But this was a bad Omen, that whatever kindness he pre∣tended to the Englijh, yet he hated them for being
Christians; which strain was more apparent in his Son that succeeded him, and all the People: Inso∣much, that some discerning Persons of that Juris∣diction, were afraid that that part of the Indians would be all rooted out, as it is since come to pass. Neither was Passaconaway, the great Sagamore or Sachim of Merimack River, insensible of the fatal consequence of opposing the English; for a Person of Quality relates, that being invited by some Sa∣chims to a great Dance, in 1660. Passaconaway in∣tending at that time to make his last and farewel Speech to his Children and People, that were then all gathered together: He addressing himself to them in this manner. I am now going the way of all flesh, or ready to die, and not like to see you meet together any more; I will now leave this word of Coun∣sel with you, that you take heed how you quarrel with the English, for though you may do them much mis∣chief, yet assuredly you will all be destroyed and root∣ed off the Earth if you do: For I was as much an Enemy to them, at their first coming into these Parts, as any one whatsoever, and tryed all ways and means possible to have destroyed them, at least to have pre∣vented them sitting down here, but could no way ef∣fect it, therefore I advise you never to contend with the English, nor make War with them. And accor∣dingly, his eldest Son, assoon as he perceived the Indians were up in Arms, withdrew himself into some remote place, that he might not be hurt ei∣ther by the English or Indians. But to proceed, after this digression; After the death of Massasoit, his eldest Son Alexander suc∣ceeded, about twenty years since, who, notwith∣standing the League he had entred into with the English with his Father, in 1639. had no affection
to them nor their Religion, but was Plotting to Rise against them; whereupon a stout Gentleman was sent to bring him before the Council of Ply∣month, who found him and eight more in a Hunting-House, where they were just come in from Hunt∣ing. leaving all their Guns without doors, which being seized by the English, they then entred the Wigwam, and demanded Alexander to go along with them before the Governor. At which Message he was much appalled, but being told that if he stirred or refused to go, he was a dead man, he was persuaded by one of the chief Confidents to go; but such was the Pride of his Spirit, that his very In∣dignation for this surprizal, cast him into a Feaver, whereof he soon after died. After his death, Phi∣lip his Brother, nick-named King Philip, for his haughty Spirit, came in his own Person, in 166. with Sausaman his chief Secretary and Counsellor, to renew the former League that had been made with his Predecessors; and there was as much cor∣respondence betwixt them, for the next seven years, as had ever been in former times; and yet without any kind of provocation, this treacherous Man, in 1676. harboured mischievous thoughts against them, Plotting a general Insurrection in all the English Colonies, all the Indians being to rise as one man against the Plantations which were next them. Which being discovered by John Sausaman, Philip thereupon caused him to be murthered; the Murtherers being apprehended, were Executed, and Philip fearing his own Head, got openly into Arms, killing, burning and destroying the English, and their Habitations, with all manner of Barba∣rity and Cruelty. Which Troubles continued al∣most two years, 'till at length, after several De∣feats given to Philips and his Forces, the loss of his
Friends, bereavement of his dear Wife and beloved Son, whom in his haste he was forced to leave Pri∣soners to save his own life, his Treasurers taken, and his own Followers Plotting against his life, Divine Vengeance overtook him for causelesly breaking his League. For having been Hunting like a Savage Beast through the Woods, about a hundred Miles backwards and forwards, at last he was driven to his own Den upon Mount Hope, retiring himself, with a few of his best Friends, in a Swamp, which proved now a Prison to secure him 'till the Messenger of death came. For such was his hatred against the English, that he could not hear any thing should be suggested to him about Peace, insomuch that he caused one of his Confederates to be kill'd for propounding it; which so provoked some of his Company, not altogether so desperate as himself, that one of them (that was near Kin to him that was killed) fled to Road-Island, and informed Captain Church where Philip was, offering to lead him thither: Upon this welcome news, a small Party of English and Indians came very early in the Morning and surrounded his Swamp, from whence (as he was endeavouring to make his escape) he was shot through the Heart by an Indian of his own Nation; for Capt. Church having appointed an Englishman and an Indian to stand at such a place of the Swamp, where it happen'd that Philip was breaking through; the Morning being very wet and rainy, the Englishman's Gun would not fire; the Indian having an old Musket, with a large Touch-hole, it took fire the more readily; which when Philip was dispatch'd, the Bullet passing directly through his heart, soon after several of his Confederates and Counsellors were taken, and suffered deserved
punishment, and in a short time most of the Mur∣therers received their condign rewards. It can∣not be altogether impertinent, but may discover much of the temper and management of the Indians in this War, to insert an account of one Stockwell, of Deerfield, concerning his Captivity and Re∣demption, with other notable occurrences during his continuance among them, written with his own Hand, and are as follow in his own Words, viz. September 19. 1677. About Sun-set, I and ano∣ther Man being together, the Indians with great shouting and shooting came upon us, and some other of the English hard by, at which we ran to a Swamp for refuge; which they perceiving, made after us, and shot at us, three Guns being dischar∣ged upon me; the Swamp being mine, I slipt in, and fell down; whereupon an Indian stept to me, with his Hatchet lifted up to knock me on the head, supposing I was wounded, and unfit for Travel: It happened I had a Pistol in my Pocket, which (though uncharged) I presented to him, who presently stept back, and told me, if I would yield I should have no hurt, boasting falsely, that they had destroyed all Hatfield, and that the Woods were full of Indians; whereupon I yielded myself, and fell into the Enemies Hands, and by three of them was led away to the place whence I first fled; where two other Indians came running to us, and one lifting up the But-end of his Gun to knock me on the head, the other with his hand put by the blow, and said I was his Friend. I was now near my own House, which the Indians burnt last year, and I was about to build up again, and there I had some hopes to escape from them; there was a Horse just by, which they bid me take, I did so, but attempted no escape, because the Beast was
dull and slow, and I thought they would send me to take my own Horses; which they did, but they were so frighted, that I could not come near them, and so fell again into the Enemies Hands, who now took me, bound me, and led me away. Soon after, I was brought to other Captives, who were that day taken at Hatfield, which moved two contrary Passions, Joy, to have Company; and Sorrow, that we were in that miserable Conditi∣on: We were all pinion'd and led away in the Night over the Mountains, in dark and hideous ways, about four Miles further, before we took up our place of rest, which was a dismal place of a Wood on the East-side of that Mountain; we were kept bound all that night, the Indians watch∣ing us, who, as they Travell'd, made strange noi∣ses, as of Wolves, Owls, and other Birds and Beasts, that they might not lose one another; and if followed, might not be discover'd by the English. About break of day we marched again, and got over the great River Pecompt uck; there the Indians marched out upon Trays, the number of their Captives and Slain, as there manner is: Here I was again in great dange0r, a quarrel arising whose Captive I was, and I was afraid I must be killed to end the controversie; they then asked me whose I was, I said three Indians took me; so they agreed to have all a share in me: I had now three Masters, but the Chief was he that first laid hands on me, which happened to be the worst of the company, as Ashpelon the Indian Captain told me, who was always very kind to me, and a great comfort to the English, In this place they gave us Victuals which they had brought away from the English, and ten Men were again sent out for more
Plunder, some of whom brought Provision, others Corn out of the Meadows, upon Horses; from hence we went up above the Falls, where we crost that River again, when I fell down-right Lame of my old Wounds received in the War; but the appre∣hension of being killed by the Indians, and what cruel death they would put me to, soon frighted away my pain, and I was very brisk again. We had eleven Horses in that company? which car∣ried Burthens and the Women; we travell'd up the River till night, and then took up our Lodg∣ings in a dismal place, being laid on our Backs and staked down, in which posture we lay many nights together; the manner was, our arms and legs being stretched out, were staked fast down, and a Cord put about our necks, so that we could not possibly stir; the first night (being much tired) I slept as comfortably as ever; the next we lay in the Saquahog-Meadows; our Provision was soon spent, and whilst we were there, the Indians went a Hunting, and the English Army came out after us. Then the Indians moved again, dividing them∣selves and the Captives into many companies, that the English might not follow their Track; at night, having crossed the River, we met again at the place appointed; the next day were pas∣sed it, where we continued a long time, which be∣ing about thirty Miles above Squag, the Indians were quite out of fear of the English, but much afraid of the Mo-hawks, another sort of Indians, Enemies to them. In this place they built a strong Wigwam, and had a great Daunce, as they call'd it, where it was concluded to burn three of us; having pro∣vided Bark for that purpose, of whom (as I heard afterwards) I was to be one, Serjeant Plumpton
another, and the Wife of Benjamin Wait the third; I knew not then who they were, yet I understood so much of their Language, that I perceived some were designed thereto; that night I could not sleep for fear of the next day's work, the Indians (weary with dancing) lay down and stept soundly. The English were all loose, whereupon I went out for Wood, and mended the fire, making a noise on purpose, but none awaked; I thought if any of the English should wake, we might kill them all sleeping; to which end I removed out of the way all the Guns and Hatchets, but my heart failing, I put all things where they were again. The next day (when they intended to burn us) our Master and some others spoke for us, and the evil was prevented at this time: We lay here about three Weeks, where I had a Shirt brought me to make; one Indian said it should be made this way, another a different way, and a third this way, whereupon I told them I would make it according to my chief Master's order; upon this an Indian struck me on the face with his fist, I suddenly rose in anger to return it again, which raised a great Hubbub; the Indians and English coming about me, I was fain to humble my self to my Master, which ended the matter. Before I came to this place, my three Masters were gone a Hunting, and I was left with only one Indian (all the company being upon a march) who fell sick, so that I was fain to carry his Gun and Hatchet, whereby I had opportunity to have dispatched him, but did not, because the English Captives had engag'd the contrary to each other, since if one should run away, it would much endanger the remainder: Whilst we were here, Benjamin Stebbins, going with some Indians to Wachuset Hills, made his escape, the tydings where∣of
caused us all to be called in and bound. One of the Indians Captains, and always our great Friend, met me coming in, and told me Stebbins was run away, and the Indians spoke of burning us; some were only for burning our fingers, and then biting them off; he said there would be a Court, and all would speak their minds, but he would speak last, and declare, That the Indian, who suffered Stebbins to make his escape, was only in fault; and bid us not fear any hurt should happen to us, and so it prov'd accordingly. Whilst we lingered here-about, Provision grew scarce, one Bear's Foot must serve five of us a whole day; we began to eat Horse-flesh, and de∣voured several Horses, three only being left alive. At this time the Indians had fallen upon Hadley, where some of them being taken, were released, upon promise of meeting the English on such a Plain, to make further Terms: Captain Ashpalon was much for it, but the Sachins of Wachuset, when they came, were against it; yet were willing to meet the English, only to fall upon and destroy them. Ashpalon charged us English not to speak a word of this, since mischief would come of it. With these Indians from Wachuset, there came above fourscore Squaws, or Women and Chil∣dren, who reported the English had taken Ʋncas and all his Men, and sent them beyond the Seas; whereat they were much enraged, asking us if it were true; we deny'd it, which made Ashpalon angry, saying he would no more believe English∣men. They then examin'd every one apart, and dealt worse with us for a time, than be∣fore; still Provision was scarce; at length we came to a place called Squaro-Maug-River, where we hoped to find Salmon, but came too late; this
place I reckon two hundred Miles above Deer-field, then we parted into two companies, some went one way, and some another; we passed over a mighty Mountain, being eight days in travelling of it, though we marched very hard, and had eve∣ry day either Snow or Rain; we observed that on this Mountain all the Water ran Northward. Here we likewise wanted Provision, at length we got over and came near a Lake, where we staid a great while to make Canoes, wherein to pass over. Here I was frozen, and here again we were like to starve; all the Indians went a Hunting, but could get nothing several days; they Pawawed, or Con∣jured, but to no purpose; then they desired the English to pray, confessing they could do nothing, and would have us try what the Englishmans God could do: I prayed, so did Serjeant Plumpton in another place, the Indians reverently attending Morning and Night; next day they killed some Bears, then they would needs make us desire a Blessing, and return Thanks at Meals; but after a while they grew weary of it, and the Sachim forbid us; when I was frozen, they were very cruel to me, because I could not do as at other times. When we came to the Lake, we were again sad∣ly streightned for Provision, and forced to eat Touch-wood fried in Bear's Grease; at last we found a company of Racoons, and then we made a Feast, the Custom being that we must eat all; I perceived I had too much for one time, which an Indian that sate by observing, bid me to slip away some to him under his Coat, and he would hide it for me till another time; this Indian, as soon as he had got my meat, stood up and made a Speech to the rest, discovering what I had done, whereat
they were very angry, and cut me another piece, forcing me to drink Racoons Grease, which made me sick and vomit; I told them I had enough, after which they would give me no more, but still told me I had Racoon enough, whereby I suffered much, and (being frozen) was in great pain, sleeping but little, and yet must do my task that was set me; as they came to the Lake, they kil∣led a great Moose, staying there till it was all eaten, and then entered upon the Lake; a Storm arose, which endangered us all, but at last we got to an Island, and there the Indians went to Pawawing, or Conjuring; the Pawaw declared, that Bejamin Wait and another were coming, and that Storm was raised to cast them away: This afterwards appeared to be true, though then I believed it not; upon this Island we lay still several days, and then set out again, but a Storm took us, so that we continued to and fro upon certain Islands about three weeks; we had no Provisions but Racoons, that the Indians themselves were afraid of being starved; they would give me nothing, whereby I was several days without any Victuals: At length we went upon the Lake on the Ice, having a little Slead, upon which we drew our Loads; before Noon I tired, and just then the Indians met with some Frenchmen: One of the Indians, who took me, came and called me all manner of ill Names, throw∣ing me on my back; I told him I could do no more, then he said he must kill me, which I thought he was about to do, for pulling out his knife, he cut off my Pockets and wrapt them about my Face, and then he helped me up, and took my lead and went away, giving me a bit of Bisket like a Wal∣nut, which he had of the Frenchman, and told me he would give me a Pipe of Tobacco; when my
Slead was gone, I ran after him, (but being tired) soon fell to a foot-pace, whereby the Indians were out of sight; I followed as well as I could, having many falls upon the Ice; at length I was so spent, I had not strength enough to rise again, but crept to a Tree that lay along, upon which I continued all the cold night, it being very sharp weather. I now counted no other but I must here die, which whilst I was ruminating of, an Indian hol∣lowed, and I answered; he came to me and called me bad Names, telling me if I would not go, he must knock me on the head; I told him he must then do so, he saw how I had wallowed in the Snow, but could not rise, hereupon he wrapt me in his Coat, and going back, sent two Indians with a Slead; one said he must knock me on the head, the other said no, they would carry me away and burn me; then they bid me stir my Instep, to see if that were frozen, I did so; when they saw that, they said there was a Chirurgeon with the French that could cure me; then they took me upon a Slead and carried me to the fire, making much of me, pulling of my wet, and wrapping me in dry Cloaths, laying me on a good Bed, they had kil∣led an Otter, and gave me some of the Broth, and a bit of the Flesh; here I slept till towards day, and was then able to get up and put on my Cloaths; one of the Indians awaked, and seeing me go, shouted, as rejoycing at it. Assoon as it was light, I and Samuel Russel went afore on the Ice upon a River, they said I must go on foot as much as I could for fear of freezing; Russul slipt into the River with one foot, the Indians called him back and dried his Stockins, and sent us away with an Indian Guide; we went four or five Miles before the rest of the Indians overtook us; I was pretty
well spent, Russel said he was faint, and wondred how I could live, for he said he had had ten Meals to my one; I was then laid on the Slead, and they ran away with me on the Ice; the rest and Russel came softly after, whose face I never after saw more, nor knew what become of him. About midnight we got near Shamblee, a French Town, where the River was open; when I came to travel, I was not able, whereupon an Indian who staid with me would carry me a few Rods, and then I would go as many, telling me I would die if he did not car∣ry me, and I must tell the English how kind he was. When vve came to the first house, there vvas no Inhabitants; the Indian and I were both spent and discouraged, he said vve must novv both die; at last he left me alone, and got to another house, from vvhence came ioms French and Indians, vvho brought me in; the French vvere very kind, put∣ting my hands and feet in cold Water, and gave me a dram of Brandy, and a little Hasty-Pudding and Milk; vvhen I tasted Victuals, I vvas very hungry, but they vvould not suffer me to eat too much; I lay by the sire vvith the Indians that night, yet could not sleep for pain; next morning the In∣dians and French fell out about me, the Indians saying, that the French loved the English better than the Indians: The French presently turned the Indians out of doors, being very careful of me, and all the Men in the Tovvn came to see me: Here I continued three or four days, and vvas invited fom one house to another, receiving much civility from a young Man, vvho let me lie in his Bed, and vvould have bought me, but the Indians demanded a hundred Pounds; vve travell'd to a place called Srril, vvhither this young Man accompanied me to prevent my being abused by the Indians; he car∣ried
me on the Ice one day's Journey, for novv I could not go at all; vvhen vve came to the place, the People vvere kind. Next day, being in much pain, I asked the Indians to carry me to the Chirurgeon, as they had promised; vvhereat they vvere angry, one taking up his Gun to knock me dovvn, but the French vvould not suffer it, falling upon them and kicking them out of doors; vve vvent avvay from thence to a place tvvo or three Miles of, vvhere the Indians had Wigwams; some of them knevv me, and seemed to pity me: While I vvas here, vvhich vvas three or four days; the French came to see me, and (it being Christmas time) they brought me Cakes and other Provision, the In∣dians tried to cure me, but could not; then I asked for the Chirurgeon, at vvhich one of them in anger struck me on the face vvith his sist; a Frenchman being by, vvho spoke to him some vvords, and vvent his vvays; soon after came the Captain of the place to the Wigwam, vvith about tvvelve armed Men, and asked vvhere the Indian vvas that struck the Englishman, and seizing him, told him, he should go to the Bribocs, and then be hanged: The Indians vvere much terrified at this, as appeared by their countenance and trembling; I vvould have gone avvay too, but the Frenchman bid me not fear, the Indians durst not hurt me. When that Indian vvas gone, I had tvvo Ma∣sters still, I asked them to carry me to that Cap∣tain, that I might speak in behalf of the Indian; they ansvvered, I vvas a Fool, did I think the Frenchmen vvere like the English, to say one thing and do another? they vvere Men of their Words; but at length I prevailed vvith them to help me thi∣ther,
and speaking to the Captain by an Interpre∣ter, told him, I desired him to set the Indian free, de∣claring hovv kind he had been to me; he replied, he vvas a Rouge, and should be hanged; then I private∣ly alledged, that if he vvere hanged, it might fare the vvorse vvith the English Captives; the Captain said, that ought to be consider'd, vvhereupon he set him at liberty, upon condition he should never strike me more, and bring me every day to his house to eat Victuals; I perceived the common People did not approve of vvhat the Indians acted against the English: When he vvas free, he came and took me about the middle, saying, I vvas his Brother, I had saved his life once, and he had sa∣ved mine (he said) thrice; he then called for Bran∣dy, and made me drink, and had me avvay to the Wigwam again; vvhen I came there, the Indians one after another shook hands vvith me, and vvere very kind, thinking no other but I had saved the Indian's life. Next day he carried me to the Captain's house, and set me dovvn; they gave me my Victuals and Wine, and being left there avvhile by the Indians, I shevved the Captain and his Wife my Fingers, vvho vvere assrighted thereat, and bid me lap it up again, and sent for the Chirurgeon, vvho vvhen he came, said, he vvould cure me, and dressed it: That night I vvas full of pain, the French vvere afraid I vvould die, five Men did vvatch me, and strove to keep me chearful, for I vvas sometimes ready to faint; oft-times they gave me a little Brandy. The next day the Chirurgeon came again and dressed me, and so he did all the while I was among the French, wich was from Christmas till May. I continued in this Captain's House till Benjamin Wait
came, and my Indian Master (being in want of Money) pawned me to the Captain for fourteen Beavers, or the worth of them, by such a day; which if he did not pay, he must lose his Pawn, or else sell me for one and twenty Beavers; but he could get no Beaver, so I was sold, and (in Gods good time,) set at liberty, and returned to my Friends in New-England again. This Country is possessed by divers sorts of Peo∣ple, who are judged to be of the Tartars, called Samoids, bordering upon Muscovia, being divided into Tribes; those to the East and North-East are called Churchers, Tarentines, and Monhegans: To the South are the Pequets and Naragansets: West∣wards, Connecticuts and Mow-hacks: To the North, Aberginians, which consist of Mattachusets, Wippa∣naps and Tarentines: The Pocanets live to the West∣ward of Plymouth. Not long before the English came into the Country, happened a great Morta∣lity among them, especially when the English af∣terwards planted. The East and Northern Parts were sore smitten, first by the Plague, after, when the English came, by the Small-Pox; the three Kingdoms, or Sagamorships of the Mattachusets, being before very populous, having under them seven Dukedoms or petty Sagamorships, but were now by the Plague reduced from 30000 to 300. There are now many to the Eastward, the Pequods were destroyed by the English, the Mow-hacks are about five Hundred, their Speech is a Dialect of the Tartars, they are of Person tall, and well Limbed, of a pale and lean Visage, black Ey'd, which is counted strongest for sight; and black Hair'd, both smooth and curled, generally wearing it long; they have seldom any Beards, their Teeth very white, short and even, which they account
the most necessary and best part of Man; and as the Austrians are known by their great Lips, the Ba∣varians by their Pokes under their Chins, the Jews by their goggle Eyes, so the Indians are remarka∣ble for their flat Noses. The Indesses, or young Women, are some very comely, with round plump Faces, and generally plump of their Bodies (as well as the Men,) soft and smooth like a Mole-skin, of a reasonable good Complexion, but that they dye themselves Tawny; yet many pretty Brow∣netto's and small finger'd Lasses are found amongst; them; the Vetuala's, or old Women, are lean and ugly, yet all of a modest demeanour, considering their savage breeding; and indeed they shame our English Rusticks, whose rudeness in many things exceeds theirs. The Natives are of a very inconstant, crafty and timorous disposition, but are very ingenious and quick of apprehension, soon angry, and so ma∣licious, that they seldom forget injury; and bar∣barously cruel, witness their direful revenge upon each other; prone to injurious violence and slaugh∣ter, both Men and Women being very theevish, and great haters of Strangers; all of them Cani∣bals, or Eaters of humane Flesh ; and so were for∣merly the Heathen Irish, who us'd to feed upon the Buttocks of Boys, and the Paps of Women. The Spanish Relation gives an account, that the Na∣tives would not eat a Spaniard, till they had kept him two or three days dead, to grow tender, be∣cause their flesh was hard. At Martins Vineyard, an Island that lies South of Plymouth, in the way to Virginia, certain Indians seized upon a Boat that put into a by Cove, killed the Men, and in a short time eat them up before they were discovered.
Wives they have two or three, according to their ability and strength of body; the Women have the easiest labour of any in the World, for when their time is come, they go out alone, car∣rying a Board with them two Foot long, and a Foot and an half broad, bored full of holes on each side, having a foot beneath, and on the top abroad strap of Leather, which they put over their Fore∣head, the Board hanging at their Back; when they come to a convenient Bush or Tree, they lay them down, and are delivered in an instant, without so much as one groan; they wrap the Child up in young Beaver Skin, with his Heels close to his Buttocks, and laced down to the Board upon his Back, his Knees resting upon the foot beneath; then put the strap of Leather upon their Forehead, with the Infant hanging at their Back, home they trudg, and dye the Child with a liquor of boil'd Hemlock-Bark, and then throw him into the Wa∣ter, if they suspect it gotten by any other Nation; if it will swim, they acknowledg it for their own; they give them Names when they are Men grown, and love the English, as Robbin, Harry, Philip, and the like; they are very indulgent to their Children, as well as Parents; but if they live so long as to be burthensom, they either starve or bury them alive, as it was supposed an Indian did by his Mother at Casco, in 1669. Their Apparel,Their Apparel before the English came among them, was the Skin of wild Beasts, with the hair on; Buskins of Deer Skins, or Moose, drest, and drawn with lines into several works, the lines being coloured with yellow, blew or red; Pumps too they have, made of tough Skins, without soles. In the Winter, when Snow will bear them, they
fasten to their Feet Snow-Shoes, made like a large Racket for Tennis Play, laced on before, and behind they wear a square piece of Leather, tied about their Middle with a string, to hide their Se∣crets. But since they have had to do with the English, they buy of them a Cloth called Trading-Cloth, of which they make Mantles, Coats with short Sleeves, and Caps for their Heads, but the Men keep their old Fashion. They are very proud, as appears by decking themselves with white and blew Beads of their making, and painting their Faces with variety of Colours, and sometimes weave curious Coats with Turkey Feathers for their Children, &c. This Countrey is well watered with Rivers, the chief among which, are Agamentico, Conecticut, Kinebequy, Merrimick, Mishum, Mistick, Neragan∣sat, Pascataway, Pemnaquid, Tachobacco, &c. And in these Rivers, together with the Sea, are taken excellent Fish, as Cod, Thorn-back, Sturgeon, Porpusses, Haddock, Salmons, Herrings, Macka∣rel, Oysters, Crab-fish, Tortoise, Cockles, Mus∣cles, Clams, Smelts, Eels, Lamprons, Alewives, Basses, Hallibuts, Shacks, Scales, Grampus and Whales. Here are great variety of Fowls, as Pheasants, Patridges, Heath-Cocks, Turkeys, Geese, Ducks, Herons, Cranes, Cormorants, Swans, Widgeons, Sheldrakes, Snipes, Doppers, Black-birds, the Humbird, Loor, &c. The wild Beasts of chief note, are Lions, Bears, Foxes, Rackoons, Mooses, Musquashs, Otters, Beavers, Deer, Hares, Coneys, &c. and for tame Beasts, Cows, Sheep, Goats, Swine and Hor∣ses.
Amongst the hurtful things in this Countrey, the Rattle-Snake is most dangerous. Here is also several sorts of stinging Flies, which are found very troublesom to the Inhabitants. Here are several sorts of Trees, as the Oak, Cy∣prus, Pine, Chesnut, Cedar Walnut, Firr, Ash, Asp, Elm, Alder, Maple, Birch, Sassaphras, Su∣mach; several Fruit-Trees, as Apples, Pears, Plums, with several others that are growing in Virginia and Mary-Land, which hath already been taken notice of. This Countrey affordeth several sorts of rich Furrs, Flax Linnen, Amber, Iron, Pitch, Tarr, Cables, Masts, and Timber to build Ships; also se∣veral sorts of Grain, wherewith they drive a con∣siderable Trade to Barbadoes, and other English Plantations in America, supplying them with Flower, Bisket, Salt, Flesh and Fish, &c. and in return, bring Sugars, and other Commodities. They also drive a considerable Trade with Eng∣land for wearing Apparel, Stuffs, Cloth, Iron, Brass, and other Utensils for their Houses, and such like things that are useful to Man, and not found amongst them. As to the Coins, Weights and Measures of New-England, and the rest of the American Plantations belonging to his Majesty, are the same with those of England; but as to Coins, they are not much made use of in Trade, their way being Bartering of one Commodity for another, &c. The English, now Inhabiting in New-England, are very numerous and powerful, possessing many Potent Colonies, and are governed by Laws of their own making, having having several Courts of Judicature, where they assemble together once a Month, as well for the making of new Laws, abolish∣ing
of old, hearing and determining of Causes: As for the Electing of a Governor, Deputy-Gover∣nor, Assistants, Burgesses, and other Magistrates, (every Town having two Burgesses) each County annually Electing such like Officers. The Govern∣ment, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, is in the hands of Independents or Presbyterians. The Military part of their Government, is by one Major-Gene∣ral and three Serjeant-Majors, to whom belong the four Counties of Suffolk, Middlesex, Essex and Norfolk. Here are several fine Towns, as Boston, the Me∣tropolis of New-England, commodiously seated for Traffick on the Sea-shore; it is at present a very large and spacious Town, or rather City, compo∣sed of several well-ordered Streets, and graced with several fair and beautiful Houses, which are well Inhabited by Merchants and Tradesmen, who drive a considerable Trade for such Commodities as the Country affordeth, to Barbadoes and other Caribbee Isles; as also to England and Ireland, taking in exchange such Commodities as each place affordeth, or are found useful to them. It is a place of good strength, having two or three Hills adjoyning, on which are raised Fortifications, with great Pieces mounted thereon, which are well guarded. Charles-Town, seated on and between the Rivers Charles and Mistick; it is beautified with a large and well-built Church, and near the River-side is the Market-place, from which runneth two Streets, in which are several good Houses. Dorchester, situated near the Sea, where there falls two Rivulets; an indifferent Town. Cambridge, formerly New-Town, seated on the River Merrimick: This Town consists of several
Streets, and is beautified with two Colledges, and divers fair and well-built Houses. St. Georges Fort, seated on the mouth of the Ri∣ver Sagadebock. New-Plymouth, seated on that large Bay of Pa∣tuxed. Reading, commodiously seated above a great Pond, and well Watered and Inhabited. In this Town are two Mills, one for Corn, and the other for Timber. Salem, pleasantly seated between two Rivers. Other Towns placed Alphabetically. Berwick, Braintree, Bristol, Concord, Dartmouth, Ded∣ham, Dover, Exeter, Falmouth, Glocester, Greens-Har∣bour, Hampton, Hartford, Haverhil, Hingham, Hull, Ipswich, Lin, Mulden, New-bury, New-Ha∣ven, Northam, Norwich, Oxford, Rowley, Roxbury, Salisbury, Sandwich, Southampton, Springfield, Sud∣bury, Wenham, Weymouth, Woburne and Tarmouth. Most of these having their Names from some Towns in England, many of them being of good account, and commodiously seated, either on the Sea Shore, or on Navigable Rivers, and are well Inhabited. And most of these Towns are known to the Indians by other Names. The present Go∣vernour for his Majesty, is Henry Cranfield, Esq
A DESCRIPTION OF NEW-FOƲND-LAND. NEw-found-land is an Island, in ExtentIts Extent. equal to England, from whence it is distant little above six hundred Leagues, lying near half way between Ireland and Virginia. It is situated between 46 and 53 Degrees North Latitude;Its Situation. the North part being better Inhabited than the South, though fitter for Habitation; and it is only severed from the Continent of America, by an Arm of the Sea, like that which separates England from France. Its Bays, Rivers, Fish, Fowls, Beasts, &c. It is famous for many spacious and excellent Bays and Harbours; and within the Land, for the variety of fresh Springs, whose Waters are excel∣lent delicious. It is enriched by Nature with plenty of Fish, Land and Water Fowl, and sufficiently stocked with Deer, Hares, Otters, Foxes, Squirrels, and other Beasts, which yield good Furrs; Cod-Fish,
Herrings, Salmons, Thorn-back, Oysters, Muscles, &c. And though not over-run generally with Woods, it doth afford (besides store of Fewel) abundance of stately Trees fit for Timber, Masts, Planks, and sundry other uses. The Soyl in most places is re∣puted fertile,Its Fertility. the Climate whol∣som, though the rigour of the Winter season, and the excels of Heats in Summer, doth detract something from it due praise. The Island of New-found-land was first discovered by Sebastian Cabot;The first Disco∣verer. likewise Fabian gives an account, that in the time of Henry the Seventh, three men being taken in New-found-land were brought to the King: And Robert Thorn writes, that his Father, and one Mr. Eliot, were the Discoverers of the New-found-land, in 1530. Mr. Hore sets out for a further Discovery, but was brought to such extremity by Famine, that many of his Company were killed and eaten by their fel∣lows; and those which returned, were so altered, that Sir William Butts, a Norfolk Knight, could not know his Son Thomas, who was one of this starved number, but only by a Wart that grew upon one of his knees. After the first Discovery, the business of Tra∣ding thither was laid aside for many years. In the mean time, the Normans, Portugals, and Brittains of France, resorted to it, and changed the Names which had been given by the English to the Bays and Promontories; but the English would not so soon relinquish their Pretensions: And therefore, in 1583. Sir Humphrey Gilbert took Possession thereof, in the Name, and by the Commission, of Queen Elizabeth, forbidding all other Nations to
use Fishing, and intending to have setled an English Colony there, but being wrack'd in his return, the setling of the Colony was discontinued till 1608. and then undertook by John Guy, a Merchant of Bristol, who in twenty three days failed from thence to Conception Bay in New-found-land. In 1611. they had scarce six days of Frost in October and No∣vember, which presently thawed, the rest of the Months being warmer and dryer than in England, neither were the Brooks frozen up three nights together with Ice able to bear a Dog: They had Filberds, Fish, Mackerel and Foxes in the Winter, White Patridges in the Summer, larger than ours, who are much afraid of Ravens. They kill a Wolf with a Mastiff and a Greyhound. In 1612. they found some Houses of the Natives, which were nothing but Poles set round, and meeting on the top, ten foot broad, the fire in midst, covered with Deer-skins. The People are of a reasonable Stature, Beardless, Broad-faced, their faces covered with Oker: Some of them went naked, only their Privities covered with a Skin. They believe in one God, who Created all things, but have many whimsical Notions, and ridiculous Opinions; for they say, That after God had made all things, he took a number of Arrows, and struck them in the Ground, from whence Men and Women first sprung up, and have multiplied ever since. A Sagamore or Governour being asked concerning the Trinity, answered, There was only one God, one Son, one Mother, and the Sun, which were four, yet God was above all. Being questioned if they or their Ancestors had heard that God was come into the World, he said, That he had not seen him. Some among them speak visibly to the Devil, and he tells them what they must do, as well in War as other matters.
One Samuel Chaplain, in 1603. gives an acconnt of a Feast made by one of their Great Lords in his Cabbin; eight or ten Kettles of Meat were set on several Fires, some yards asunder: The men sate on both sides the Room, each of them having a Dish of the Bark of a Tree, one of which was ap∣pointed to give every man his Portion. Before the Meat was boyled, one took his Dog and Danced about the Kettles, and when he came before the Sagamore, threw the Dog down, and then another succeeded in the like Exercise: After the Feast, they Danced with the Heads of their Enemies in their hands, singing all the while. Their Canoes are of the Bark of Birch, strengthned with little Wooden Hoops, they have many Fires in their Cabbins, ten Housholds sometimes live together, lying upon Skins one by another, and their Dogs with them, which are like Foxes. At another Feast, the Men cause all the Women and Maids to sit in Ranks, themselves standing behind Singing; suddenly all the Women threw off all their Mantles of Skins, and strip themselves stark naked, being not at all ashamed; their Songs ended, they cryed with one Voice, Ho, Ho, Ho, and then covered themselves with their Mantles, and after a while renewed their former Songs? and Nakedness. When a Maid is fourteen or fifteen years of Age, she hath many Lovers, and uses her Pleasure with as many of them as she pleases, for five or six years, and then takes whom she likes for a Husband, providing he be a good Hunter, living Chastly with him all her life after, except for Barrenness he forsakes her. When any dies, they make a Pit, and therein put all his Goods with the Corps, covering it over with Earth,Their Iurials. and setting many pieces of Wood over
it, and a stake Painted red. They believe the im∣mortality of the Soul, and that the Dead go into a far Country, to make merry with their Friends. If any fall sick, they send to one Sagamon Member∣ton, a great Conjurer, who made Prayers to the Devil, and blowed upon the Party, and cutting him, sucks the Blood; if it be a Wound, he heals it after the same manner, applying a round slice of Beaver Stones, for which they make him a Present of Venison or Skins. If they desire News of things absent, the Spirit answers doubtfully, and some∣times false. When the Savages are hungry, they consult with this Oracle, and he tells them the place where they shall go; if they find no Game, the excuse is, the Beast hath wandered and chan∣ged his place, but most times they speed, which makes them to believe the Devil to be God, though they do not Worship him. When these Conju∣rers consult with the Devil, they fix a staff in a Pit, to which they tie a Cord, and putting their Head into the Pit, make Invocation in an unknown Language, with so much stirring and pains, that they sweat again; when the Devil is come, the Wizard persuades them he holds him fast with his Cord, forcing him to answer before he lets him go: Then he begins to sing something in praise of the Spirit, who hath discovered where there are some Deer, and the other Savages answer in the same Tune; they then Dance and Sing in a strange Tongue: After which they make a Fire, and leap over it, putting an half Pole-out of the top of the Cabbin, wherein they are, with something tied thereto, which the Devil carrieth away. Memberton wore about his neck the mark of his Profession, which was a Triangle Purse, with something within it like a Nut, which he said was his Spirit. This Of∣fice
is Hereditary, they teaching this Mystery of Iniquity to their Sons by Tradition. In 1613. fifty four English-men, six Women, and two Children, Wintered there; they killed Bears, Otters and Sables, sowed Wheat, Rye, Turnips and Coleworts. Their Winter was dry and clear, with some Frost and Snow: Several had the Scurvey, against which, their Turnips proved a sovereign Remedy. There are Musk-Cats and Musk-Rats, and near the Coasts, is great killing of Marses, or Sea-Oxen; a small Ship, in a small time, slew fif∣teen hundred of them: They are bigger than an Ox, the Hide dressed, is as thick again as a Bull's; they have Teeth like Elephants, about a foot longer, growing downwards out of the upper Jaw, and therefore less dangerous: It is sold dearer than Ivory, and by some thought ns great an Antidote as the Ʋnicorn's Horn. The young ones eat like Veal, which the old will defend to the utmost, holding them in their Arms or Fore-feet; out of the Bellies of five of these Fishes (which live both on the Land and Water) they make an Hogshead of Train-Oyl: They sleep in great Companies, and have one Centinel, or Watchman, to wake the rest upon occasion. Their Sins are short-haired like Seals, theirfaces resembles a Lion's, and may therefore more justly be called Sea-Lyons than Sea-Oxen or Horses. East of New-found-land, over against Cape-Ray, at the distance of about 70 Miles from that Shore, lies a Bank or Ridge of Ground, extending about 300 Miles in length, and not above 75 in breadth, where broadest. This great Bank is covered with Water when the Sea is high, and uncovered and dry on the Ebb, on all sides whereof the Sea is 200 fathom deep, so that ships of a considerable Burthen
may ride over it. And about this Bank lies disper∣sed several small Isles, called by St. Sebastian Cabot (the first Discoverer) Los Boocaloos, or the Isles of Cod-Fish, from that Prodigious quantities of Cod-fish there found, which were said to obstruct the passage of his Vessels. It is almost incredible how ma∣ny Nations yearly Trade thither,Their Trade. amounting to between three or four hundred Sayl of Ships, that are assured to find sufficient Freight of Cod and Poor John, one man catching an hundred in an hour; they Fish with Hooks, which are no sooner thrown into the Sea, but the greedy Fish snapping the Bait, is ta∣ken, and drawn on Ship-board, where they lay him on a Plank, one cutting off his Head, another guts and takes out its biggest Bones, another salts and barrels it; which being thus ordered, is hence transported by the European Nations to all parts of Christendom, and through most other parts of the World: They fish only in the Day, the Cod not biting in the Night; nor doth the Fish last all Seasons, but begins towards Spring, and ends in September; for in Winter they retire to the bot∣tom of the Sea, where Storms and Tempests have no power. Near these Coasts is another kind of Fishing for Cod, which the call Dried, as the other Green-Fish. The Fishermen retire into some Harbour, and eve∣ry Morning send out their Shallops two or three Leagues into the Sea, who fail not of their Load by Noon or soon after, which they bring to Land, and order as the other: After this Fish has lain some days in Salt, they take it out, and dry it in the Wind, laying it again in heaps, and exposing it daily to the open Ayr till it be dry, which ought
to be good and temperate, to make the Fish sale∣able; for Mists moisten it and make it rot, and the Sun causes yellowness. At this their Fishing, the Mariners have like∣wise the pleasure of taking Fowl without going out of their Vessels; for baiting their Hook, with the Cod's Livers, these Fowls are so greedy that they come by Flocks, and fight who shall get the Bait first, which soon proves its Death; and one being taken, the Hook is no sooner thrown out, but another is instantly catcht. And were the English diligent to inspect the ad∣vantage that might accrue to this Nation by set∣ling Plantations on the Island, and raise Fortifica∣tions for the security of the Place, we might give Laws to all Foreigners that come to Fish there, and in few years engross the whole Fishery to our selves; the greatest Ballance perchance of Foreign Trade. In the Year 1623. Sir George Calvert Knight, and Principal Secretary of State, and afterwards Lord Baltemore, obtained a Patent of part of New-found-Land, which was erected into a Province, and cal∣led Avalon; where he caused a Plantation to be setled, and a stately House and Fort to be built at Ferryland, and afterwards transported himself and Family thither, and continued the Plantation by his Deputy, till by Descent (after his Lord∣ships Decease) it came to his Son and Heir, the right Honourable Caecilius, now Lord Baltemore, who by Deputies from time to time was no less careful to preserve his interest there; which tho' during the last Troubles in England, was by Sir David Kirk's means, for some years discontinued; he was soon re-invested in the same by His Maje∣sties most happy Restauration.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of TOBAGO. THis Island of Tobago is situa∣ated in 11 degrees,Iss Situation. 30 mi∣nutes North Latitude, and in 53 degrees 6 minutes Longitude, West from the Li∣zard, and about 40 League distance from Barba∣dos, its extent not exceeding 32 Miles in Length, and about 11 in Breadth. It is a Countrey blest with a temperate and wholesom Air,Its Tempera∣ture. by reason of a warm and temperate heat; being moderated by a con∣tinual Brieze of Wind; so that here is no Sum∣mer spent on purpose for Winter-provisions, be∣cause all the year long both Herbage and Fruit bud up by a perpetual Spring. And the Island is so well stored with Materials for Building, that pro∣vided you bring dextrous Hands, and good Arti∣ficers, you may in a short time with little Charge, build both Houses, Towns, and Fortifications. The Soyl doth naturally pro∣duce Indian-Corn,Corn & Grain. such as grows at Virginia, New-York, Carolina, &c. But no English Grain grows here: however
there are English Pease of divers sorts, and Beans and Pulse enough; likewise there is Guinea-Corn, Bonevis, the French-Pea, the Kidney-Pea, the Pi∣geon-Pea, the French-Bean, &c. Here are excellent Fruits in great abundance;Its Fruits. as, the Cushen-Apple, which are both Meat and Drink, only made distinguishable by the Art of Boyling; whose Nut if preserved, you may eat, and of the Rinds while green, make an excellent Lamp-Oyl, which by small Labour is easily obtained. Here is a Fruit called a Bonano, which may be eaten raw, or bettered by an easie decoction of Fire. Here is also the Fig-tree, such as is that in Spain and Portugal and several parts in America. Then there is the Prickle-Apple, the Pomegranate, the Pine-Apple, Pome Citrons, Oranges of three sorts; the sower for Sawce, and the Flowers for Essences, the sweet ones are eaten for Recreation. But the China-Orange, that grows here in America, super-excels those in Europe beyond expression. Of Limons here are two sorts; the sower one for Limonadoes; and the sweet one for Delectation. So of Limes also, here are sweet and sower; with the last of which, they make Limeads and Punch. Guavers is a Fruit that is exceeding stony; there is the White and the Red; but they differ in vir∣tue; and if baked or boyled green, if you pick out the stones, you have then a Basis for Marma∣lade to equalize Quinces. Tamarinds grow here naturally; but the Plantin, of all Fruit the Negroes love best, which is a nourishing, sovereign, whol∣som Food. Here are Grapes great store, but are eaten off the Cluster; for the Planter has another Prospect
more profitable than Wine. Then there's the Custard-Apple, the Sowr-Soap, the Papaw-Apple, the Mamme-Apple, the Yellow-Plum. There are Cher∣ries also (which bear the year about) whose Fruit is somewhat of a sharpish taste; but the Coco-Nut-Tree, and the Fruit that hangs upon it, the Indians idolize, and call it Gods-Tree, because it produces both Meat, Drink and Cloaths; it is true beyond dispute, that the Nut of it self is a Sweet beyond the sweetest Almond; the Shell serves for Cups, Spoons and Dishes, &c. Of the Maccaw-Nut shell the Indians make the Bowls of their Tobacco-Pipes; the Kernel is eatable, the Nut makes an excel∣lent Lamp-Oyl. Then there is the Physick-Nut; also two sorts of Melons, the one is called Musk, the other Water-Melon. Also there are Penguins, Cucumbers, Pumpkins. Then there's two sorts of Gourds, the sweet are those which the Planter boyls to make Broth Medicinal; and the Wild Gourd, for Instruments, and Vessels to contain Li∣quors. They have several sorts of Roots; as, Potatoes, Eddies, Yanis:Their Roots. These and Potatoes are their natural Bread, if not improper to call it so; however it is Food, if not Bread of another fashion: Then there are Carrots, Turnips, Parsnips, Onions, Cassado-Root: Likewise Tea grows naturally, Tobago-Cinamon, Long-Pepper, Cod-Pepper, Bell-Pepper, and Round Pepper, some red, and some green, that grows naturally without Cultivation; also Jamaica-Pepper, with great plenty of other Fruits and Roots. They have great store of Wild Beasts; as, the Wild-Hog,Wild Beasts. of which sort of Cattel their Numbers are
innumerable, when yearly the People cut off at least twenty Thousand, and yet they increase at such a prodigious rate, that neither Gun, nor any other Artifice can be found to destroy them. The Pickery is a Beast much resembling a Hog, save only he draws his Breath at his Ventricle; which for the most part concentrates on the mid∣dle of his Back. Then here is great quantities of the Armadil∣laes, which the Hollanders call Tattoos. Likewise here is two sorts of Guanoes, the one of a green, but the other of a grey colour, which is shaped like a Lizard, somewhat resembling the Allegator; some of them being four or five foot in length; they live upon Herbs, Insects and Fruits, and burrough like a Coney in the hollow Pits in Sand. The Indian Coney is much taller and larger than ours, and their Skins smell of Musk. Then there is the Apostum, much like our English Badger (but his Legs are equal) and most of all assimilates the Racoon, and naturally, because so affected with Mankind in general, that he follows him, comes to him, and delights to gaze on him. Then there are Horses, Cows, Ass-Negroes, Sheep, Deer, Hogs, Goats, Rabbets, &c. Likewise there is the Land-Tortoise, also Land-Crabs (viz.) the red, the black and white Crab; and there is the Land-Shell-Souldier, whose Claws resemble the Claws of a Crab, but is of himself a very little Creature; some say they are eatable; their Fat is a sovereign Oyl, and of that singular virtue and excellency, as to blunt the venom of a poysoned Dart. Here is great plenty of excellent Fish; as, the Groper, the grey Porgo, the red Porgo, the Cavallus, the green and the grey; the last we call Horse-Eye,
of the size of a Salmon, and scaled much alike; of the Mullet here are plenty, from the size of a Ma∣karel, to the extent of a Pickerel. The Manatee, or Sea-Cow, is of an amphibious nature, it eats Grass like an Oxe, and swims like an Otter, that swims sometimes under water, and grows to a prodigious greatness; for some of them have weighed ten and twelve hundred pound weight; they are struck with harping-Irons, or other Engines, and so taken; whose Flesh of Fish necessity only extols it. There are various sorts of Turtles; the Hawks-Bill, the Vandorus, the Loggerhead, and the green Turtle; which last the Natives think sacred; for they call its Gods-fish, by reason of that extraordinary virtue that is found therein, it being found a very great Anti∣dote against Poyson, and for the Gonorhaea, the Yaws, and the French Pox, there is not in nature a Food more effectual; she lives in the Water, and without it, it swims like a Fish, and yet in the Sand lays Eggs like a Fowl; whose Fish is Flesh, and admits of various tastes, as, of Veal, of Beef, but the Fat is green, and eats like Marrow, and their Eggs undistinguishable from those of a Hen, &c. And also there is Barracooto, and they are of two sorts, and some about two foot in length, they have a long Beak or Snout filled full of Teeth. The white-mouth'd Barracooto is the wholsomest Fish, but the black-mouth'd Fish his Teeth are ve∣nomous. Likewise there is the Great Garr, which the Spaniards call Needle-fish, the Pilchard, the An∣chovy, much smaller than a Pilchard, the Hedg-hog-fish, the Coney-fish, the Dolphin, the Indian Sturgeon, the Flying-fish, the Parrot-fish, the Amber-fish, the Albacore, the Boneto, the Lobster or Craw-fish, the Sea-Souldier, the Crunk, the Horn-fish, the Orney,
the Shallop-fish, Cockles, the Sea-Snail, the Rock-Oyster, the Mangrove-Oyster; the Sea-Egg is of two sorts, some black, and some grey; but the grey Eggs are the Oysters, because resembling them in taste, and are eaten raw, with Vinegar and Pepper, but better stewed with Wine and Shel∣lots, &c. Here is great plenty of Fowl;Their Fowl. as, the Bill-bird, whose Bill or Beak shews as big as his Body; the Black-bird, about the bigness of a Crow, whose flesh is nothing inferior to a Pigeon; but the smaller Black-bird resembles ours in England, save only it hath a longer Bill. Then there is the Booby-bird, the blew-headed Parrot, the Macaw, the Flamin∣go, Ducks, the Sea-gull, the Sea-mew, the Plover, the Turtle-Dove, the Man of War-bird, the Bird of Paradise, or the King-fisher, the Pelican, the Coc∣kerrico, the Indians Name for the Tobago-Pleasants; the Carlew, the Wood-Pigeon, &c. Here are sundry sorts of Trees,Their Trees. as, the Cedar, Green-Hart, Locust, of two several sorts, the one white, and the other red, Mastick, Mohogony, Man-grove, White-wood, yellow Sanders, Bay, Box, Brazil, Bully, Crocus, Cassia, Callabosh, Lignum vitae, Ebony, with several others. CommoditiesCommodities. which the Country doth or may produce, are, Cacao-Nut, Sugar, Tobacco, Indico, Gin∣ger, Sarsaparilia, Semper-vivum, Bees-Was, Vinil∣lioes, Natural Balsam, Balm, Silk-Grass, Green Tar, Soap-Earth, &c. with many curious Shells, Stones, Markasites and Minerals found up and down the Island of Tobago, whose Virtue and Worth is yet unknown.
DIRECTIONS For Improvement of the Island of TOBAGO. SUppose a man that has an Hundred Pound Sterling, is minded to transport himself and Family, consisting of Eleven in number, to this Island of Tobago and suppose their Passage cost him fifty pound, and Manuals, with other things requisite and necessary for Planting, as also Provi∣sion for the first Twelve Months, together with the Charge of Houshold-stuffs, and all other Ne∣cessaries, may stand him in forty seven pound ten shillings more; suppose also this man takes a Lease of fifty Acres of Land for a Thousand Years at the rate of Twelve pence an Acre annually, it amounts but to Two pound Ten shillings a Year (except otherwise he purchase the Fee simple of the Pro∣prietors) which compleats the Hundred pound. This is the first Money laid out, nor need he be at any more Charge for in twelve Months time, he will have Ground-provision enough, and in all probability two Crops of Tobacco.
The next thing to consider of, is the ImprovementIts Improve∣ment. of the said Land, which is as followeth: After your arrival in the Island of Tobago, the first six Months may be spent to clear fifteen Acres of Land, and to put Provisns into the Ground; to build Conveniencies to accommodate your self and Family; to adapt and fit Ground for planting a Nursery of Cacao-Nuts; as also a Bed sowed with Tobacco-seeds, and be sure to keep your Nur∣sery clear from Weeds: then, about a Months time after, you have sown your Tobacco-seed, (pro∣vided the Season be good) you may then draw your Tobacco-Plants, and plant them about some four foot distance one from another, regularly and in rows, which said Tobacco, Tobago produces, is nothing inferiour to Spanish Trinidado, that lies about seven Leagues distance from the said Island of Tobago, who sell their Trinidado-Tobacco at the rate of Two Shillings a Pound, which said To∣bacco the Spaniards transport from thence to Old Spain, and sell it there for considerable advantage. Now among your Tobacco-Plants, you may plant your Cacao, and transplant them, when about six Months old, into new Ground, at ten or twelve foot distance, and be sure to keep them clear from Weeds, in which latter six Months time, you may have on your cleared Ground two Crops of To∣bacco. Now admitting you make but Eight thou∣sand Weight of Neat Tobacco on the said Ground, yet in all probability (provided your People be healthy) it may double the number to Sixteen thousand. But if it do not, and put the case your Tobacco sell but for an eighth part of what the Spaniards sell for in Trinidado, (which is but three Pence per Pound, sold here in our Island) yet will
this Crop yield you One hundred Pound sterling, which is your Money gained the very first Year, and in six Months time all Charges being born. Now suppose at the beginning of the second Year, the said sixteen Acres be all cleared, and Provision enough put into the Ground, sufficient for double your number of hands, you may ra∣tionally then expect four Crops in twelve Months time, when as formerly you made two Crops in the last six Months; so that with the Hundred Pounds you gained last Year, you may now purchase seven or eight Slaves, or Servants, which may in all probability treble the first Year. But put the case, it but only double, yet at the worst, it may yield you (and all Charges born) Two hundred Pounds sterling. Now we cannot otherwise conclude, (if things succeed well) but the third Year will double the second by improvement, as is above expressed; and if so, your Crop will amount to Four hundred Pounds sterling, and the fourth Year double the third, by reason of the Cacao that was planted the first Year on the fifteen Acres of Land, may produce to the value of Thirty Pounds sterling an Acre, besides the encrease of Tobacco, and clearing of more ground, together with your encrease of Ser∣vants ana Slaves, and planting of more Cacao-Trees, which at least will arise to Eight hundred Pounds sterling the fourth Year; the fifth Year, in all pro∣bability, doubles the fourth Year; the sixth Year you may very well clear Six thousand Pounds ster∣ling, and all Charges born, by reason the Cacao, planted the first Year, is now come to perfection, and at its full height of bearing; which in this Latitude may yield One hundred Pounds sterling an Acre, viz. the first fifteen Acres which were planted
the first Year; and the second years Plants, planted the second Year, will yield you Sixty Pounds ster∣ling; and the third years Plants, as by the same Calculation, may yield you Thirty Pounds sterling an Acre: So that by purchasing the more Servants and Slaves, you may, if you please, decline so much planting of Tobacco, as formerly you did. The seventh Year you will have all your Land planted with Cacao, and that increasing, you need not plant above ten or fiften Acres of Tobacco this Year amongst your Cacao; but you may plant Pro∣visions amongst them, for support and maintenance of your self and Family. So that from that In∣crease of your seventh Year's Crop, you may hope and expect, by a modest computation, to clear from the said fifty Acres of Land, at least Five thou∣sand Pounds sterling a Year. And now we come to the Rea∣sons for this great Improvement;The Reasons for Improvement. You must consider, that the Spa∣niards in Trinidado, &c. give a∣mong themselves One hundred Pounds sterling, for a Negro-Slave, and yet the said Slave will not stand his Master in one single Penny at the Year's end for his purchase; and all the labour and service the Spaniard imploys him in the Year about, is only in Cacao and Spanish-Tobacco, in this our Lati∣tude. Now pray consider, that we can have Negro-slaves brought and delivered to us at Fifteen Pounds sterling a head, by reason we have an open Trade, and the Spaniards allows not of a free Trade. Where note, the Spaniard pays Six-pence or more for every thing he wants, when we have the same for a single Penny. That's one Reason.
The second Reason is, The Spaniard cannot have any Tunnage for Goods from Old Spain to the West-Indies, and home again, for less than Forty or Fifty Pounds sterling per Tun; besides, the Du∣ties run very high: And we can have, Freight for Five or Six Pounds per Tun, and no Duties from us to a tree Port. When therefore, to consider and compute the Charge on either side, we profit by what we transport six to one; which makes the Spaniard generally so poor in the Indies, and we generally to flourish so much the more. The third Reason is, That in a Ship of Three hundred Tun, the Spaniards have seldom less than two hundred Men belonging to her, and the Wages each Man comes to at least Fifty Shilling sterling per Month, which, in the whole, amounts to Five hundred Pounds a Month, barely for Wages; then you are to consider the Monthly Provisions, to accommodate these Men, cannot come to less than One hundred and fifty Pounds sterling; and Ten Months, at Six hundred and fifty Pounds per Month, amounts to Six thousand and five hundred Pounds sterling for Ten Months. Moreover, this Ship of Three hundred Tun, seldom carries less than Forty Pieces of Ordnance, which with their Provisions, &c. by modest computation, takes up no less room than One hundred and fifty Tun; so that the Ship, in all probability, cannot bring home more than One hundred and fifty Tun of Merchants Goods, and the Freight of these Goods comes to Forty Pounds sterling a Tun, to pay Ware and Tare of the Ship and Mens Wages; so that for the Ship's Ware and Tare, it comes barely but to One hundred and fifty Pounds sterling clear. Now admit an English Ship of Three hundred Tun, be bound for Jamaica, and suppose the
Freight of this Ship be at Six Pounds sterling per Tun, this Ship shall make her Voyage better in Eight Months time than the Spaniard shall in Ten Months; now the Freight of the English Ship comes to One thousand eight hundred Pounds ster∣ling, and the Wages and Victuals of the said Ship, at Sixty Pounds per Month, comes to Four hundred and eighty Pounds sterling; so that you see the Ship clears, for her Ware and Tare, the sum of One thousand three hundred and twenty Pounds sterling. See here therefore the great difference. The fourth and last reason is this; The King of Spain contracts with a body of Merchants, to fur∣nish the West-Indies with Four thousand Negroes every Year, and the Nigrilloes, or Merchants, there engage to pay the King one hundred Pieces of Eight Custom for each Negro-slave brought unto them; which comes to Four hundred thousand Pieces of Eight by the Year, which is paid to the said King; the King therefore prohibits all Merchants and others, for bringing Negroes to the West-Indies; and each Piece of Eight is valued at Five Shillings sterling in Barbadoes, but in the Leeward Islands it goes for six.
The Proposals lately made by Cap∣tain John Poyntz, for Himself and Company, to all such People as are minded to Transport or Concern themselves in the Island of To∣bago. WHereas his late Majesty, Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, hath given and granted unto James, Duke of Courland, his Heirs and Successours, the said Island of Tobago, on condition that none shall inhabit the said Island, save only the Subject of the King of England, and the Duke of Courland, their Heirs and Suc∣cessours, on the said condition, I have contracted with the said Duke, that my self and Company settle One hundred and twenty thousand Acres of Land in the said Island, and to have several great and large Priviledges, some of which are here in∣serted, viz. Imprimis, That one hundred and twenty thou∣sand Acres of Land, in the said Island of Tobago, is given and granted to my self and Company, and our Heirs for ever, and seven Years to be free from the payment of any Rent, and after the expiration of seven Years, each for himself is to pay Two-pence per Acre every Year, to the Duke, his lawful Heirs and Successours.
Secondly, That my self and Company, and all the Inhabitant, shall enjoy Liberty of Conscience, without interruption, Roman-Catholicks only ex∣cepted. Thirdly, That my self and Company, &c. are to be governed by a Governour, Deputy-Gover∣nour, and Assembly, to be yearly chosen by the majority of Freeholders Votes, of the People in the Island, to make good and wholsom Laws for the good Government and Defence of the said Island; and all Controversies in the Promises to be decided by the majority of Voices. Note, These are but Breviates and part of the Heads of the Grant from the Duke of Courland, and ratified to my self and Company, whereby we hold and enjoy our Land; for that end I do refer all People to the Grant, as more at large, as also them that have been on the skirt or body of the said Island, to confirm the truth of what is before spoken of the Products of the said Island.
Proposals for further Encou∣ragement. First, THose that are desirous to concern themselves in the said Island, shall and may have as much Land as they themselves please, either by Lease or Purchase, only they are to put upon every Fifteen Acres of Land, one White Man, and so in proportion to the rest; and this to be done in three Years time. Secondly, All Persons that are desirous to tran∣sport themselves to the said Island, in the quality of Servants, shall have better Encouragement from my self and Company than has been yet pro∣pounded by any of his Majesties Subjects in any Settlement in the American Plantations. Thirdly, And, for a further encouragement, all those Persons and Planters that are any way con∣cerned in the Premises, shall have Credit given unto them from Crop to Crop, as the Factory is stored, for what they shll stand in need of; for which the said Company will erect a Bank or Fa∣ctory of Credit in the said Island, the Debtor al∣lowing only two and a half per Cent. Fourthly, All Merchants and others, that shall import any Negroes, or other Merchandize, into the said Island, shall have their Goods and Debts insured, and disposed of for two and a half per Cent. with Factoage Storage, Wharfage, &c. and exported again for two and a half per Cent. more.
And all Tradesmen and others, that contract any Debts against themselves, shall have Credit given them out of the Bank or Factory, from Crop to Crop, for two and a half per Cent. And the Proprietors to engage their whole Interest for the true performance of the foresaid Pre∣mises. Fifthly, All Merchants and others, that have Goods fit to accommodate the said Island, and have not ready Money to purchase Land, nor to pay for their own or servants Passage, such may Barter with Goods in lieu of Money: Always this implies only such Persons as Contract with the Proprietors, or some of them, before the first Shipping departs out of the River of Thames, to Ship off, as above, their proportion of Goods or People, as is already sufficiently above ex∣pressed. FINIS.
ASTRONOMICAL TABLES, SHEWING The Rising and Setting of the Sun; with the Length of the Days and Nights in all the Principal English Plantations in the West-Indies. ALSO, Tables of the New and Full Moons in every Month, from the Year 1686, to 1700, in the Meridian of London, and from thence referred to the Meridians of the Principal Plantations abovesaid. The which Tables will serve as a constant Diary or Calendar, for the Use of the English Inhabitants in those Ilands. ALSO, A Table by which, at any Time of the Day or Night here in England, you may know what Hoar it is in any of those Islands. AND How to make Sun-Dials fitting for all those Remote Parts.
A Table shewing the Prime or Golden Number, the Dominical (or Sunday Letter,) and the Moveable Feasts from the Year 1686, to the Year 1700. Years of our Lord. Pr. or Go. Nu. Dom. or Sun. Let. Shrove Sunday. Easter Day. Ascension Day. Whit-Sunday. Advent Sunday. 1686 15 C Feb. 14 Apr. 4 May 13 May 2 No. 28 1687 16 B 6 Ma. 27 5 15 27 1688 17 A C 25 Ap. 15 24 Jun. 3 Dec. 2 1689 18 F 10 Ma. 31 9 May 19 1 1690 19 E Mar. 2 Ap. 20 29 Jun. 8 No. 30 1691 1 D Feb. 22 12 21 May 3 29 1692 2 C B 6 Ma. 27 5 15 27 1693 3 A 26 Ap. 16 25 Jun. 4 Dec. 3 1694 4 G 18 8 17 May 27 2 1695 5 F 3 Ma 24 2 12 1 1696 6 E D 22 Ap. 12 21 31 No. 29 1697 7 C 14 4 13 23 28 1698 8 B Mar. 6 24 Jun. 2 Jun. 12 27 1699 9 A Feb. 19 9 May 28 May 18 Dec. 3 The Vse of this Table. TO find the Moveable Feasts for any Year, seek the Year in the first Row (or Column) of the Table, and in the same Line you shall have your desire. — Example; In the Year 1686, find 1686 in the first Column, and against it in the same Line you have 15 for the Epact. C for the Dominical (or Sunday Letter.) February 14 for Shrove Sun∣day. April 4 for Easter-day. May 13 for Ascersion-day. May 23 for Whit-Sunday. November 28 for Ad∣vent-Sunday. And so for any other Year, till 1700.
A Description of the following Tables. 1. IN the first Column of each Table towards the Left Hand, you have the Day of the Month. 2. In the second, you have the Day of the Week noted with A, B, C, D, E, F G, for the seven Days of the Week; and these Letters continue in this or∣der, from the First of anuary, beginning with A, to the Thirty First of December, ending with A also — And here it is to be noted, that which soever of these Letters is Domical (or Sunday Let∣ter) for any Year, all those Days in the Calendar, which have that Letter standing against them, are Sundays for that Year. As for Example: In the Year 1686 you found (by the former Table) that C was Dominical (or Sunday Letter,) wherefore all the Days that have C standing against them, were Sundays that Year; as in the Month of January, C stands against the 3, the 10, the 17, the 24, and the 31 Days, all which Days were Sundays — Again, by the former Table, you may find in the Year 1690, the Dominical Letter will be E; where∣fore, that Year, all the Days that have E standing against them, in any Month, are Sundays; as in the Month of March, E stands against the 2, the 9, the 16, the 3, and the 30, all which Dys will be Sundays in the Year 1690. But if there be two Dominicl Letters in one Year, (as in the Year 1688, 1692, &c.) then the first of those two Lerters is Sunday Letter till the 25 of February, and the other of them to the end of the Year. 3. The Third Colum contains the Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting at London, &c. 4. The other part of each Page, is divided into five parts or spaces;
The 1 2 3 4 5 Shews the Rising and Setting- of the Sun, with the Length x The Vof the Da vs and Nights for) every fisth Day, accordi ngs 5 to the Titles, at New-England. Virginia. Carolina & Bermudas. Barbadoes. Jamaica. 5. On the other Page are Tables, shewing the time of the New and Full Moon in every Month of the Year, from 1686, to 1700, in the Meridian at London (in Old-England.) By help whereof, and the little Table following, the time of the New or Full Moon, in any of the Places mentioned in this Book, may be easily attained.   h. m.     If to the time of the New or Full Moon at Lond. you add 4 40 You shall have the time of the New or Full Moon, at New-England. 5 12 Virginia. 5 45 Carolina. 5 4 Jamaica. 3 53 Barbadoes. 4 58 Mary-Land. 4 52 New-Jearsey. 4 56 Transilvania. 4 48 New York. 3 20 New-Found-Land. Example. In the Month of January, 1687, I find that it is New Moon upon the 3d. Day, 56 m. after 7 at Night. Now to know what time it will be New Moon at Virginia upon that Day, look in this Table, and against Virginia you will find 4 h. 40 m. which added to 7 h. 56 m. the Sum will be 12 h. 36 m. at which time it will be New Moon at Vir∣ginia upon the 3d. of January, 1687.   d. h. m.   New Moon at London. Jan. 03 07 56 at Night. Add to it for Virginia — 00 04 40   The Sum is 03 12 36 at Night.
JANƲARY. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Days. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 A New-years d At New-England on the 1 7 25 4 35 09 10 14 50 2 B   6 7 23 4 37 09 14 14 46 3 C Sun rise 4 8 11 7 18 4 42 09 24 14 36 4 D Sun set 3 57 16 7 13 4 47 09 34 14 26 5 E Day 8 h. 2 m. 21 7 9 4 51 09 42 14 18 6 F Twelfth-day 26 7 1 4 59 09 48 14 2 7 G   At Vir∣ginia on the 1 7 11 4 49 09 38 14 22 8 A Lucian 6 7 7 4 43 39 26 14 14 9 B   11 7 4 4 40 09 20 14 8 10 C Sun rise 7 54 16 7 0 5 0 10 0 14 0 11 D Sun set 4 8 21 6 53 5 7 10 14 13 46 12 E Day 8 h. 18 m. 26 6 50 5 10 10 20 13 40 13 F Hilary               14 G   At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 7 1 4 59 9 58 14 2 15 A Sun rise 7 46 6 6 58 5 2 0 4 13 56 16 B Sun set 4 15 11 6 55 5 5 10 10 13 50 17 C Day 8 h. 34 m. 16 6 52 5 8 10 16 13 44 18 D Prisca 26 21 6 46 5 14 10 28 13 32 19 E   26 6 43 5 17 10 34 13 26 20 F Fabian At Bar∣badoes on the 1 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 21 G Agnes 6 6 20 5 40 11 20 12 40 22 A Vincent 11 6 19 5 41 11 22 12 38 23 B Day 8 h. 54 m. 16 6 17 5 43 11 26 12 34 24 C Sun set 7 31 21 6 16 5 44 11 28 12 32 25 D Conv. S. Paul 26 6 15 5 45 11 30 12 30 26 E Sun set 7 27 At Ja∣maica on the 1 6 28 5 32 11 4 12 56 27 F   6 6 26 5 34 11 8 12 52 28 G Day 9 h. 12 m. 11 6 23 5 37 11 14 12 46 29 A   16 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 30 B K. Cha. I. Mar. 21 6 20 5 40 11 20 12 40 31 C   26 6 8 5 42 11 24 12 36
JANƲARY. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of January; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred tot he Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.     Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon the 3 at 7 and 56 Night Full Moon the 18 at 0 and 27 Morn. 1688 New Moon the 22 at 10 and 12 Night Full Moon the 7 at 1 and 12 Aftern 1689 New Moon the 11 at 10 and 10 Morn. Full Moon the 25 at 10 and 12 Morn. 1690 New Moon the 30 at 8 and 17 Morn. Full Moon the 15 at 3 and 38 Morn. 1691 New Moon the 19 at 10 and 8 Morn. Full Moon the 4 at 11 and 40 Morn. 1692 New Moon the 8 at 9 and 52 Morn. Full Moon the 23 at 2 and 3 Aftern. 1693 New Moon the 26 at 5 and 38 Morn. Full Moon the 12 at 4 and 0 Morn. 1694 New Moon the 15 at 1 and 14 Aftern. Full Moon the 31 at 3 and 34 Morn. 1695 New Moon the 5 at 3 and 5 Morn. Full Moon the 20 at 5 and 41 Morn. 1696 New Moon the 24 at 5 and 36 Morn. Full Moon the 9 at 6 and 36 Morn. 1697 New Moon the 12 at 9 and 0 Night Full Moon the 27 at 1 and 53 Morn. 1698 New Moon the 2 at 8 and 48 Morn. Full Moon the 16 at 7 and 7 Morn. 1699 New Moon the 21 at 4 and 0 Morn. Full Moon the 5 t 7 and 0 Night
FEBRƲARY M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Day. Sun Rises. h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 D   At New-England on the 1 6 52 5 8 10 16 13 44 2 E Candlemas d. 6 6 48 5 12 10 24 13 36 3 F Blase 11 6 38 5 22 10 44 13 16 4 G Sun rise 7 10 16 6 32 5 28 10 56 13 4 5 A Agathy 21 6 24 5 36 11 12 12 48 6 B   26 6 16 5 44 11 28 12 32 7 C Sun set 4 56 At Vir∣ginia on the 1 6 43 5 17 10 34 13 26 8 D   6 6 37 5 23 10 46 13 14 9 E Day 10 h. 11 6 31 5 29 10 58 13 2 10 F Scholastica 16 6 27 5 33 11 6 12 54 11 G   21 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 12 A Sun rise 6 54 26 6 15 5 45 11 30 12 30 13 B               14 c Valentine At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 6 37 5 23 10 46 13 14 15 D   6 6 32 5 28 10 56 13 8 16 E Iulian 11 6 26 5 34 11 8 12 52 17 F Sun set 5 16 16 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 18 G   21 6 18 5 42 11 24 12 36 19 A Sabine 26 6 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 20 B Day 10 h. 44 m. At Bar∣badoes on the 1 6 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 21 c 69 Martyrs 6 6 11 5 49 11 38 12 22 22 D   11 6 9 5 51 11 42 12 18 23 E Sun rise 6 31 16 6 8 5 52 11 44 12 16 24 F St. Matthias 21 6 6 5 54 11 48 12 12 25 G Sun set 5 33 26 6 5 5 55 11 50 12 10 26 a Day 11 h. 10 m. At Ja∣maica on the 1 6 15 6 45 11 30 12 30 27 B Augustine 6 6 14 6 45 11 32 12 28 28 c   11 6 13 6 47 11 34 12 26       16 6 11 6 49 11 38 12 22       21 6 8 6 52 11 44 12 16       26 6 6 6 54 11 48 12 12
FEBRƲARY. A Table shewing the day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old England, in the Month of February; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.     Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon the 2 at 6 and 13 Morn. Full Moon the 17 at 7 and 26 Morn. 1688 New Moon the 21 at 8 and 24 Morn. Full Moon the 6 at 7 and 4 Morn. 1689 New Moon the 9 at 11 and 21 Night Full Moon the 24 at 2 and 12 Morn. 1690 New Moon the 28 at 11 and 4 Night Full Moon the 13 at 8 and 29 Morn. 1691 New Moon the 28 at 4 and 28 Morn. Full Moon the 2 at 9 and 51 Night 1692 New Moon the 7 at 4 and 31 After. Full Moon the 21 at 11 and 48 Night 1693 New Moon the 24 at 10 and 50 Night Full Moon the 10 at 3 and 52 After. 1694 New Moon the 14 at 2 and 50 Morn. Full Moon         1695 New Moon the 3 at 1 and 52 After. Full Moon the 19 at 0 and 13 Morn. 1696 New Moon the 21 at 3 and 20 After. Full Moon the 8 at 2 and 10 Morn. 1697 New Moon the 11 at 9 and 34 Morn. Full Moon the 25 at 8 and 10 Night 1698 New Moon the 1 at 2 and 18 Morn. Full Moon the 14 at 10 and 2 Night 1699 New Moon the 19 at 7 and 52 Night Full Moon the 4 at 2 and 49 Morn.
MARCH. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Days. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Rises h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 D David B. At New-England on the 1 6 12 5 42 11 24 12 24 2 E Chad 6 6 5 5 55 11 50 12 10 3 F   11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 4 G Sun rise 6 13 16 5 51 6 9 12 18 11 42 5 A Sun set 5 49 21 5 43 6 17 12 34 11 26 6 B   26 5 37 6 23 12 46 11 14 7 C Perpetua At Vir∣ginia on the 1 6 9 5 51 11 42 12 18 8 D   6 6 3 5 57 11 54 12 6 9 E Day 11 h. 56 m. 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 10 F Sol in Aries 16 5 54 6 6 12 12 11 48 11 G Sun rise 5 58 21 5 48 6 12 12 24 11 36 12 A Gregory 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 13 B   At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣las on the 1 6 8 5 52 11 44 12 16 14 C Sun set 6 9 6 6 3 5 57 11 64 12 5 15 D   11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 16 E   16 5 55 6 5 12 10 11 50 17 F Day 12 h. 30. m. 21 5 50 6 10 12 20 11 40 18 G Edward 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 19 A   At Bar∣badoes on the   6 3 5 57 11 54 12 6 20 B Sun rise 5 41 6 6 1 5 59 11 58 12 2 21 C   11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 22 D   11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 22 E Sun set 6 27 16 5 58 6 2 12 4 11 56 23 E Sun set 6 27 21 5 56 6 4 12 8 11 52 24 F   At Ja∣maica on the 26 5 54 6 6 12 12 11 48 25 G Lady Day 1 6 4 5 51 11 48 12 8 27 B   6 6 2 5 58 11 56 12 4 28 C Dorothy 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 29 D   16 5 53 6 2 12 4 11 56 30 E Day 13 h. 24 m. 21 5 56 6 4 12 8 11 50 31 F   26 5 53 6 7 12 14 11 46
MARCH. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of March; from Anno 1686. to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.   Day Hour Min     1687 New Moon Full Moon the 3 at 4 and 3 After.   the 19 at 0 and 17 Morn.   1688 New Moon Full Moon the 21 at 5 and 15 Night   the 21 at 2 and 0 Morn.   1689 New Moon Full Moon the 11 at 10 and 0 Morn.   the 26 at 4 and 4 Morn.   1690 New Moon Full Moon the 30 at 10 and 8 Morn.   the 14 at 10 and 14 Night   1691 New Moon Full Moon the 19 at 7 and 52 Night   the 4 at 8 and 25 Morn.   1692 New Moon Full Moon the 7 at 10 and 30 Night   the 22 at 8 and 53 Morn.   1693 New Moon Full Moon the 26 at 4 and 2 Aftern   the 12 at 1 and 32 Morn.   1694 New Moon Full Moon the 15 at 5 and 41 Aftern   the 1 at 4 and 13 Aftern   1695 New Moon Full Moon the 5 at 1 and 21 Morn.   the 20 at 2 and 50 Aftern   1696 New Moon Full Moon the 23 at 1 and 0 Morn.   the 8 at 7 and 51 Night   1697 New Moon Full Moon the 12 at 5 and 14 Aftern   the 27 at 1 and 23 Aftern   1698 New Moon Full Moon the 31 at 8 and 13 Night   the 16 at 4 and 18 Aftern   1699 New Moon Full Moon the 21 at 8 and 54 Night   the 5 at 7 and 14 Night T
APRIL. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Day. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 G Theodore At New-England on the 1 5 28 6 32 13 4 10 56 2 A   6 5 22 6 38 13 16 10 44 3 B Sun rise 5 10 11 5 16 6 44 13 28 10 32 4 C Sun set 6 52 16 5 9 6 48 13 36 10 18 5 D Day 13 h. 48 m. 21 5 0 7 0 14 0 10 0 6 E   26 4 56 7 8 14 16 9 52 7 F Perpetua At Vir∣ginia on the 1 5 36 6 24 12 48 11 12 8 G Sun rise 5 0 6 5 29 6 31 13 2 10 58 9 A Sun set 7 2 11 5 23 6 37 13 14 10 46 10 B Day 14 h. 8 m. 16 5 17 6 43 13 26 10 34 11 C Leo P. 21 5 13 6 47 13 34 10 26 12 D   26 5 7 6 53 13 46 10 14 13 E Sun rise 4 50             14 F Sun set 7 11 At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 5 39 6 21 12 42 11 18 15 G Day 14h. 26 m. 6 5 34 6 26 12 52 11 8 16 A   11 5 28 6 32 13 4 10 56 17 B Cosmie 16 5 23 6 37 13 14 10 46 18 G Edward 21 5 20 6 40 13 20 10 40 19 D Sun ris 4 39 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 20 E Sun set 7 22 At Bar∣badoes on the 1 5 53 6 7 12 14 11 46 21 F Day 14h. 48m. 6 5 53 6 7 12 18 11 42 22 G   11 5 49 6 11 12 22 11 38 23 A S. George 16 5 47 6 13 12 26 11 34 24 B Sun rise 4 30 21 5 46 6 14 12 28 11 32 25 C S. Mark Evan. 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 26 D Sun set 7 33 At Ja∣maica on the 1 5 51 6 9 12 18 11 42 27 E Anestasius 6 5 48 6 12 12 24 11 36 28 F   11 5 46 6 14 12 28 11 32 29 G Day 15h. 16 m. 16 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 30 A   21 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24       26 5 41 6 19 12 38 11 22
APRIL. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of April; from Anno 1686. to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.   Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon Full Moon the 2 at 2 and 8 Morn. the 17 at 2 and 18 Night. 1688 New Moon Full Moon the 20 at 3 and 27 After. the 5 at 6 and 4 Night. 1689 New Moon Full Moon the 9 at 6 and 3 Night the 24 at 11 and 0 Foren 1690 New Moon Full Moon the 28 at 7 and 0 Night the 14 at 9 and 34 Morn. 1691 New Moon Full Moon the 18 at 10 and 40 Morn.   the 2 at 7 and 22 Night 1692 New Moon Full Moon the 6 at 3 and 6 After. the 20 at 5 and 49 After. 1693 New Moon Full Moon the 25 at 8 and 20 Night   the 9 at 9 and 44 Morn. 1694 New Moon Full Moon the 14 at 9 and 6 Night the 29 at 10 and 13 Morn. 1695 New Moon Full Moon the 3 at 1 and 41 After. the 19 at 2 and 0 Morn. 1696 New Moon Full Moon the 21 at 11 and 0 Foren the 7 at 11 and 10 Foren 1697 New Moon Full Moon the 11 at 1 and 32 Morn. the 26 at 5 and 27 Morn. 1698 New Moon Full Moon the 30 at 2 and 14 Morn. the 15 at 6 and 19 Morn. 1699 New Moon Full Moon the 19 at 6 and 46 Night the 4 at 8 and 50 Morn.
MAY. M. Days W. Days. The fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Days. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 B S. Phil. & Jac. At New-England on the 1 4 51 7 9 14 18 9 42 2     6 4 46 7 14 14 28 9 32 3 D Sun rise 4 15 11 4 42 7 18 14 36 9 2 4 E un set 7 46 16 4 36 7 12 14 24 9 36 5 F Day 15 h. 36 m. 21 4 33 7 6 14 12 9 24 6 G Ioh. Po. Lat. 26 4 30 7 30 15 0 9 0 7 A   At Vir∣ginia on the 1 5 3 6 57 13 54 10 6 8 B Sun rise 4 8 6 5 0 7 0 14 0 10 0 9 Sun set 7 53 11 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 10 D Day 15 h. 48 m 16 4 53 7 7 14 14 9 46 11 E Sun in Gem. 21 4 49 7 11 14 22 9 38 12 F   26 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 13 G Sun rise 4 2             14 A Sun set 8 0 At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 5 11 6 49 13 38 10 22 15 B Day 16 h. 2 m. 6 5 8 6 52 13 44 10 16 16 C   11 5 5 6 55 16 50 10 10 17 D Dunstan 16 5 2 6 58 13 56 10 4 18 E Sun rise 3 56 21 4 59 7 1 14 2 9 58 19 F   26 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 20 G Ellen Q. At Bar∣badoes on the 1 5 43 6 17 12 34 11 26 21 A Iulian 6 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 22 B   11 5 41 6 19 12 38 11 22 23 C Sun set 8 10 16 5 40 6 20 12 40 11 20 24 D Adelm B. 21 5 39 6 21 12 42 11 18 25 E   26 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 26 F Day 16 h. 26 m. At Ja∣maica on the 1 5 40 6 20 12 40 11 20 27 G Sun rise 3 46 6 5 39 6 21 12 41 11 18 28 A German 11 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 29 B   16 5 37 6 23 12 46 11 14 30 C Sun set 8 16 21 5 35 6 25 12 50 11 10 31 D Day 16 h. 34 m. 26 5 35 6 25 12 50 11 10
MAY. A Table shewing the Day, Hour and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of May; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.     Day Hour Min.     1687 New Moon the 1 at 0 and 41 Noon   Full Moon the 17 at 2 and 4 Morn.   1688 New Moon the 19 at 4 and 10 After.   Full Moon the 5 at 9 and 36 Morn.   1689 New Moon the 9 at 1 and 34 After.   Full Moon the 24 at 2 and 19 Morn.   1690 New Moon the 28 at 2 and 31 Morn.   Full Moon the 13 at 3 and 19 Morn.   1691 New Moon the 17 at 6 and 19 Night   Full Moon the 31 at 8 and 0 Night   1692 New Moon the 6 at 4 and 48 After.   Full Moon the 20 at 3 and 40 Morn. 1693 New Moon the 24 at 11 and 7 Night   Full Moon the 9 at 5 and 37 After.   1694 New Moon 14 day 41 min. after Mid- night. Full Moon the 28 at 5 and 56 After.   1695 New Moon the 3 at 3 and 3 Morn.   Full Moon the 18 at 11 and 8 Fore.   1696 New Moon the 20 at 9 and 52 Night   Full Moon the 6 at 11 and 45 Night   1697 New Moon the 10 at 9 and 39 Fore.   Full Moon the 25 at 7 and 13 Night   1698 New Moon the 29 at 9 and 10 Morn.   Full Moon the 14 at 9 and 55 Night   1699 New Moon the 19 at 2 and 43 Morn.   Full Moon the 3 at 11 and 13 Night  
JƲNE. M. Days W. Days. The fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Dayes. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 E Sun rise 3 42 At New-England on the 1 4 28 7 32 15 4 8 56 2 F 6 4 27 7 33 15 6 8 54 3 G Erasmus 11 4 26 7 34 15 8 8 52 4 A   16 4 26 7 34 15 8 8 52 5 B Sun set 8 19 21 4 27 7 33 15 6 8 54 6 C Claudius 26 4 29 7 31 15 2 8 58 7 D   At Vir∣ginia on the 1 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 8 E Day 16 h. 38 m. 6 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 9 F   1 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 10 G Margaret 16 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 11 A Barnabas Ap 21 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 12 B Sun in Canc. 26 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 13 C               14 D Sun rise 3 41 At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 15 E Vitus 6 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 16 F   11 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 17 G Sun set 8 19 16 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 18 A Marcelline 21 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 19 B   26 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 20 C Day 16 h. 36 m. At Bar∣badoes on the 1 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 21 D   6 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 22 E Albany 11 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 23 F   16 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 24 G St. John Bapt. 21 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 25 A   26 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 26 B Sun rise 3 46 At a∣maica on the 1 5 33 6 27 12 54 11 6 27 C Sun set 8 13 6 5 32 6 28 12 56 11 4 28 D   11 5 31 6 29 12 58 11 2 29 E St. Peter Ap. 16 5 31 6 29 12 58 11 2 30 F Day 16 h. 20 m. 21 5 31 6 29 12 58 11 2       26 5 32 6 28 12 56 11
JƲNE. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of June; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.     Day Hour Min.     1687 New Moon the 29 at 1 and 29 Aftern   Full Moon the 15 at 10 and 30 Foren.   1688 New Moon the 17 at 8 and 5 Night   Full Moon the 3 at 9 and 56 Night   1689 New Moon the 7 at 10 and 8 Foren.   Full Moon the 22 at 4 and 18 Aftern   1690 New Moon the 26 at 9 and 29 Morn.   Full Moon the 11 at 4 and 13 Aftern   1691 New Moon the 16 at 2 and 38 Morn.   Full Moon the 30 at 10 and 26 Foren.   1692 New Moon the 4 at 4 and 28 Aftern   Full Moon the 18 at 2 and 22 Aftern   1693 New Moon the 23 at 11 and 56 Foren.   Full Moon the 8 at 1 and 36 Morn.   1694 New Moon the 12 at 3 and 22 Aftern   Full Moon the 26 at 11 and 52 Night   1695 New Moon the 1 at 4 and 56 Aftern   Full Moon the 16 at 6 and 17 Night   1696 New Moon the 1, 9 at 10 and 32 Morn.   Full Moon the 5 at 9 and 48 Morn.   1697 New Moon the 8 at 6 and 36 Night   Full Moon the 24 at 7 and 0 Morn.   1698 New Moon the 27 at 5 and 0 Aftern   Full Moon the 13 at 12 and 40 Aftern   1699 New Moon the 17 at 9 and 32 Morn.   Full Moon the 2 at 0 and 12 Aftern  
JƲLY. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Day. Sun Rises. h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 G   At New-England on the 1 4 32 7 28 14 56 9 4 2 A Visit. Mary 6 4 36 7 34 14 48 9 12 3 B   11 4 40 7 20 14 40 9 20 4 C   16 4 45 7 10 14 30 9 30 5 D Anselm 21 4 50 7 10 14 20 9 40 6 E   26 4 55 7 5 14 10 9 50 7 F Sun rise 3 57 At Vir∣ginia on the 1 4 49 7 11 14 22 9 38 8 G Sun set 8 2 6 4 53 7 7 14 14 9 46 9 A Day 16 h. 2 m. 11 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 10 B 7 Brethren 16 5 0 7 0 14 0 10 0 11 C   21 5 3 6 57 13 54 10 6 12 D Sun rise 4 3 26 5 7 6 53 13 46 10 14 13 E Sun in Leo At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 5 59 7 1 14 2 9 58 14 F Sun set 7 54 6 5 2 6 58 13 56 10 4 15 G S. Swythin 11 5 5 6 55 13 50 10 10 16 A Day 15 h. 44 m. 16 5 8 6 52 13 44 10 16 17 B   21 5 11 6 49 13 38 10 22 18 C Sun rise 4 11 26 5 14 6 46 13 32 10 28 19 D Sun set 7 48             20 E Margaret At Bar∣badoes on the 1 5 39 6 21 12 42 11 18 21 F   6 5 40 6 20 12 40 11 20 22 G Mary Magd. 11 5 41 6 19 12 38 11 22 23 A Day 15 h. 24 m. 16 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 24   21 5 43 6 17 12 34 11 26 25 C . James. Ap. 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 26   At Ja∣maica on the 1 5 33 6 27 12 54 11 6 27 Martha 6 5 35 6 25 12 50 11 10 28 F Sun rise 4 27 11 5 37 6 23 12 46 11 14 9 un set 7 32 16 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 30 A Day 15 h. 21 5 39 6 21 12 42 11 18 1 B   26 5 41 6 19 12 38 11 22
JƲLY. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of July; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.   Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon Full Moon the 29 at 4 and 4 Morn. the 14 at 6 and 24 Night 1688 New Moon Full Moon the 14 at 6 and 24 Night the 14 at 6 and 24 Night 1688 New Moon Full Moon the 17 at 7 and 47 Night the 3 at 8 and 38 Morn. 1689 New Moon Full Moon the 6 at 5 and 28 After. the 22 at 4 and 58 Morn. 1690 New Moon Full Moon the 25 at and 42 After. the 11 at 9 and 28 Foren. 1691 New Moon Full Moon the 15 t 9 and 49 Morn. the 30 at 1 and 29 Morn. 1692 New Moon Full Moon the 3 at 4 and 25 Morn. the 18 at 3 and 9 Morn. 1693 New Moon Full Moon the 22 at 11 and 7 Night the 7 at 10 and 40 Foren 1694 New Moon Full Moon the 12 at 6 and 6 Night the 26 at 8 and 50 Morn. 1695 New Moon Full Moon the 30 at 10 and 52 Night the 16 at 1 and 10 Foren 1696 New Moon Full Moon the 18 at 11 and 52 Night the 4 at 6 and 56 Night 1697 New Moon Full Moon the 8 at 4 and 58 Morn. the 23 at 5 and 1 After. 1698 New Moon Full Moon the 27 at 1 and 51 Morn. the 13 at 2 and 20 Morn. 1699 New Moon Full Moon the 16 at 4 and 3 After. the 31 at 7 and 15 Night.
AƲGƲST. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feats, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Days. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 C Lammas day At New-England on the 1 5 1 6 59 13 58 10 2 2 D Stephen 6 5 8 6 52 13 44 10 16 3 E Sun rise 4 38 11 5 15 6 45 13 30 10 30 4 F Sun set 7 20 16 5 21 6 39 13 18 10 42 5 G Day 14 h. 34 m. 21 5 29 6 31 13 2 10 58 6 A Trans. Christ 26 5 34 6 26 12 52 11 8 7 B   At Vir∣ginia on the 1 5 13 6 47 13 34 10 26 8 C   6 5 17 6 43 13 26 10 34 9 D Sun rise 4 48 11 5 23 6 37 13 14 10 46 10 E Sun set 7 10 16 5 29 6 31 13 2 10 58 11 F Day 14 h. 16 m. 21 5 36 6 24 2 48 11 2 12 G   26 5 39 6 21 12 42 11 18 13 A Sun in Virgo At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 5 20 6 40 13 20 10 40 14 B Sun rise 4 58 6 5 23 6 37 13 14 10 46 15 C Sun set 7 0 11 5 28 6 32 13 4 10 56 16 D Day 13 h. 56 m. 16 5 34 6 26 12 52 11 8 17 E   21 5 39 6 21 12 42 11 28 18 F Helen 26 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 19 G               20 A Sun rise 5 10 At Bar∣badoes on the 1 5 46 6 14 12 28 11 32 21 B Sun set 6 48 6 5 47 6 13 12 26 11 34 22 C Day 13 h. 32 m. 11 5 49 6 11 12 22 11 38 23 D   16 5 51 6 9 12 18 11 42 24 E S. Barthol. Ap. 21 5 53 6 7 12 14 11 46 25 F   26 5 54 6 6 12 12 11 48 26 G Sun rise 5 22 At Ja∣maica on the 1 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 27 A Sun set 8 36 6 5 45 6 15 12 30 11 30 28 B Augustine 11 5 47 6 13 12 26 11 34 29 C   16 5 49 6 11 12 22 11 38 30 D Day 13 h. 21 5 23 6 7 12 14 11 46 31 E Adran 26 5 55 5 5 12 10 11 50
AƲGƲST. A Table shewing the Day, Hour and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of August; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Bardadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.   Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon Full Moon the 27 at 8 and 0 Night the 13 at 3 and 11 Morn. 1688 New Moon Full Moon the 15 at 9 and 10 Night the 1 at 5 and 40 After. 1689 New Moon Full Moon the 5 at 3 and 21 Morn. the 20 at 4 and 17 After. 1690 New Moon Full Moon the 24 at 1 and 21 Morn. the 9 at 11 and 45 Night 1691 New Moon Full Moon the 13 at 4 and 50 After. the 25 at 5 and 16 After. 1692 New Moon Full Moon New Moon the 1 at 11 and 48 Night the 16 at 5 and 55 After. the 3 at 1 and 45 After. 1693 New Moon Full Moon the 21 at 9 and 26 Morn. the 5 at 9 and 50 Night 1694 New Moon Full Moon the 10 at 7 and 27 Night the 24 at 6 and 30 Night 1695 New Moon Full Moon the 29 at 2 and 13 After. the 14 at 8 and 33 Morn. 1696 New Moon Full Moon the 17 at 3 and 10 After. the 3 at 1 and 31 Morn. 1697 New Moon Full Moon the 6 at 5 and 27 After. the 22 at 1 and 54 Morn. 1698 New Moon Full Moon the 25 at 0 and 52 After. the 11 at 2 and 25 After. 1699 New Moon Full Moon the 13 at 0 and 29 Morn. the 30 at 10 and 22 Morn.
SEPTEMBER. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing ad Setting.   Days. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Nights long h. m. 1 F Giles Ab. At New-England on the 1 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 2 G Sun rise 5 37 6 5 50 6 10 12 20 11 40 3 A Sun set 6 21 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 4 B   16 6 7 5 53 11 46 12 14 5 C Day 13 h. 34 m. 21 6 15 5 45 11 30 12 30 6 D Magnus 26 6 20 5 40 11 20 12 40 7 E   At Vir∣ginia on the 1 5 48 6 12 12 24 11 36 8 F Nat. V. Mary 6 5 54 6 6 12 12 11 48 9 G   11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 10 A Nicholas 16 6 6 5 54 11 48 12 12 11 B   21 6 9 5 51 11 42 12 18 12 C Day 12 h. 26 6 14 5 46 11 32 12 28 13 D Sun in Libra At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 5 50 6 10 12 20 5 40 14 E   6 5 55 6 5 12 10 5 55 15 F   11 6 0 6 0 12 0 6 0 16 G Sun rise 6 6 16 6 5 5 55 11 50 12 10 17 A   21 6 8 5 52 11 44 12 16 18 B Sun set 5 49 26 6 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 19 C               20 D   At Bar∣badoes 1 5 56 6 4 12 8 11 52 21 E St. Matthew 6 5 58 6 2 12 4 11 56 22 F Day 11 h. 22 m. 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 23 G   16 6 2 5 58 11 56 12 4 24 A Samuel 21 6 3 5 57 11 54 12 6 25 B   26 6 5 5 55 11 60 12 10 26 C Sun rise 6 27 At Ja∣maica on the 1 5 56 6 4 12 8 11 52 27 D Cos. & Dam. 6 5 58 6 2 12 4 11 56 28 E   11 5 59 6 1 12 2 11 58 29 F Sun set 5 27 16 6 2 5 58 11 56 12 4 30 G Day 10 h. 50 m. 21 6 5 5 55 11 50 12 10       26 6 6 5 54 11 48 12 12
SEPTEMBER. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of Septemb. from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.   Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon Full Moon the 26 at 0 and 29 Aftern the 11 at 9 and 30 Morn. 1688 New Moon Full Moon the 14 at 0 and 49 Aftern the 29 at 11 and 0 Foren. 1689 New Moon Full Moon the 3 at 3 and 39 Aftern the 19 at 5 and 46 Morn. 1690 New Moon Full Moon the 22 at 0 and 32 Aftern the 8 at 1 and 42 Aftern 1691 New Moon Full Moon the 12 at 1 and 13 Morn. the 27 at 9 and 8 Morn. 1692 New Moon Full Moon the 30 at 2 and 24 Morn. the 15 at 10 and 26 Foren. 1693 New Moon Full Moon the 19 at 6 and 57 Night the 4 at 11 and 34 Foren. 1694 New Moon Full Moon the 9 at 8 and 10 Morn. the 23 at 7 and 8 Morn. 1695 New Moon Full Moon the 28 at 4 and 55 Morn. the 12 at 5 and 30 Aftern 1696 New Moon Full Moon the 16 at 7 and 46 Morn. the 30 at 5 and 52 Aftern 1697 New Moon Full Moon the 5 at 8 and 17 Morn. the 20 at 10 and 10 Foren. 1698 New Moon Full Moon the 24 at 2 and 29 Morn. the 10 at 1 and 30 Morn. 1699 New Moon Full Moon the 13 at 10 and 29 Morn. the 29 at 2 and 10 Morn.
OCTOBER. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing ad Setting.   Days. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Nights long h. m. 1 A   At New-England on the 1 6 27 5 33 11 6 12 54 2 B Sun rise 6 46 6 6 34 5 26 10 52 13 8 3 C   11 6 40 5 20 10 40 13 20 4 D Francis 16 6 45 5 15 10 30 13 30 5 E   21 6 53 5 7 10 14 13 46 6 F Faith 26 7 0 5 0 10 0 14 0 7 G Sun set 5 10 At Vir∣ginia on the 1 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 8 A Victor 6 6 27 5 33 11 6 12 54 9 B   11 6 34 5 26 10 52 13 8 10 C Day 10 h. 8 m. 16 6 40 5 20 10 40 13 20 11 D Trans. Ed. 21 6 43 5 17 10 43 13 26 12 E   26 6 50 5 10 10 50 13 40 13 F Sun in Scorpio             14 G Sun rise 7 4 At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the 1 6 18 5 42 11 24 12 36 15 A Sun set 4 54 6 6 24 5 36 11 12 12 48 16 B   11 6 29 5 31 11 2 12 58 17 C Florence 16 6 34 5 26 10 52 13 8 18 D S. Luke. Evan. 21 6 37 5 23 10 46 13 14 19 E Day 9h. 32 m. 26 6 43 5 17 10 34 13 26 20 F   At Bar∣badoes on the 1 6 6 5 54 11 48 12 12 21 G Vrsula 6 6 8 5 52 14 44 12 16 22 A   11 6 10 5 50 11 40 12 20 23 B Sun rise 7 25 16 6 12 5 48 11 36 12 24 24 C   21 6 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 25 D Sun set 4 35 26 6 15 5 45 11 30 12 30 26 E   At Ja∣maica on the 1 6 8 5 52 11 44 12 16 27 F Day 9h. 6 m. 6 6 11 5 49 11 38 12 22 28 G S. Sim. & Jud. 1 16 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 29 A   16 6 16 5 44 11 28 12 32 30 B Sun rise 7 34 2 16 18 5 42 11 24 12 36 31 C   26 6 19 5 41 11 22 12 38
OCTOBER. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of October; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.   Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon Full Moon the 25 at 10 and 50 Night the 10 at 6 and 49 Night 1688 New Moon Full Moon the 14 at 6 and 40 Morn. the 28 at 8 and 12 Night 1689 New Moon Full Moon the 3 at 6 and 55 Morn. the 18 at 0 and 40 Aftern 1690 New Moon Full Moon the 22 at 1 and 10 Morn. the 8 at 2 and 26 Morn. 1691 New Moon Full Moon the 11 at 1 and 4 Aftern the 26 at 12 and 29 Night 1692 New Moon Full Moon the 29 at 0 and 36 Aftern. the 15 at 3 and 52 Morn. 1693 New Moon Full Moon the 19 at 4 and 17 Morn. the 4 at 3 and 41 Morn. 1694 New Moon Full Moon the 8 at 7 and 32 Night the 22 at 10 and 34 Night 1695 New Moon Full Moon the 27 at 6 and 57 Night the 12 at 4 and 45 Morn. 1696 New Moon Full Moon the 15 at 11 and 36 Night the 30 at 4 and 30 Morn. 1697 New Moon Full Moon the 19 at 7 and 44 Night the 19 at 7 and 44 Night 1698 New Moon Full Moon the 23 at 7 and 24 Night the 9 at 0 and 2 Aftern 1699 New Moon Full Moon the 12 at 10 and 41 Night the 28 at 0 and 26 Aftern.
NOVEMBER. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Days. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h m. 1 D All Saints At New-England on the 1 7 8 4 52 9 44 14 16 2 E All Souls 6 7 13 4 47 9 34 14 26 3 F   11 7 18 4 42 9 24 14 36 4 G Sun rise 7 42 16 7 22 4 38 9 16 14 44 5 A Powder Treas. 21 7 25 4 35 9 10 14 50 6 B   26 7 29 4 31 9 2 14 58 7 C Sun set 4 13 At Vir∣ginia on the 1 6 57 5 3 10 6 13 54 8 D   6 7 0 5 0 10 0 14 0 9 E Day 8h. 18m. 11 7 4 4 56 9 52 14 8 10 F   16 7 7 4 53 9 46 14 14 11 G Sun rise 7 54 21 7 11 4 49 9 38 14 22 12 A Sun in Sagit. 26 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 13   At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the           14 C Sun set 4 2 1 6 49 5 11 10 22 13 38 15 D Leopold 6 6 52 5 8 10 16 13 44 16 E   11 6 55 5 5 10 10 13 50 17 F Day 7h. 54m. 16 5 58 5 2 10 4 13 50 18 G   21 7 1 4 59 9 58 14 2 19 A Sun rise 8 5 26 7 4 4 56 9 52 14 8 20 B Edmund R. At Bar∣badoes on the 1 6 17 5 43 11 26 12 34 21 C   6 6 18 5 42 11 24 12 36 22 D Cicely V. 11 6 19 5 41 11 25 12 38 23 E S set 3 50 16 6 20 5 40 11 20 12 40 24 F   21 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 25 G Day 7h. 36m. 26 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 26 A Conrade At Ja∣maica on the 1 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 27 B   6 6 23 5 37 11 14 12 40 28 C Sun rise 8 14 11 6 25 5 35 11 10 12 50 29 D Sun set 3 45 16 6 27 5 33 11 6 12 54 30 E S. Andrew Ap. 21 6 28 5 32 11 4 12 56       26 6 29 5 31 11 2 12 58
NOVEMBER. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of Novemb. from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.   Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon Full Moon the 24 at 8 and 38 Night the 9 at 6 and 26 Morn. 1688 New Moon Full Moon the 12 t 12 and 54 Night the 27 at 9 and 5 Morn. 1689 New Moon Full Moon the 1 at 12 and 35 Night the 16 at 10 and 30 Night 1690 New Moon Full Moon the 20 at 7 and 34 Night the 6 at 0 and 5 After. 1691 New Moon Full Moon the 9 at 12 and 15 Night the 25 at 2 and 30 After. 1692 New Moon Full Moon the 27 at 11 and 48 Night the 13 at 9 and 46 Night 1693 New Moon Full Moon the 17 at 2 and 9 After. the 2 at 9 and 16 Night 1694 New Moon Full Moon the 7 at 6 and 20 Morn. the 21 at 4 and 42 After. 1695 New Moon Full Moon the 26 at 4 and 7 Morn. the 10 at 7 and 0 Nigh 1696 New Moon Full Moon the 14 at 5 and 12 After. the 25 at 5 and 22 After. 1697 New Moon Full Moon the 3 at 7 and 46 Night the 18 at 5 and 51 Morn. 1698 New Moon Full Moon the 22 at 2 and 10 After. the 7 at 10 and 0 Night 1699 New Moon Full Moon the 11 at 2 and 43 After. the 26 at 12 and 3 Nigh
DECEMBER. M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Ri∣sing and Setting.   Days. Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h m. 1 F   At New-England on the 1 7 31 4 29 8 58 15 2 2 G Sun rise 8 16 6 7 33 4 27 8 54 15 6 3 A Lucius 11 7 34 4 26 8 52 15 8 4 B   16 7 33 4 27 8 54 15 6 5 C Sun set 3 43 21 7 30 4 30 9 0 15 0 6 D Nicholas 26 7 28 4 32 9 4 14 56 7 E   At Vir∣ginia on the 1 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 8 F Cencept. Ma. 6 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 9 G   11 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 10 A Day 7h. 22m. 16 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 11 B Sun in Capric. 21 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 12 C   26 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 13 D Lucy Virg. At Caro∣lina and Bermu∣das on the           14 E   1 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 15 F   6 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 16 G O Sapientia 11 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 17 A   16 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 18 B Sun rise 8 18 21 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 19 C Sun set 3 42 26 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 20 D   At Bar∣badoes on the 1 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 21 E St Tho. Ap. 6 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 22 F   11 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 23 G Day 7h. 30m. 16 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 24 A   21 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 25 B Christ Nat. 26 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 26 C St. Stephen At Ja∣maica on the 1 6 30 5 30 11 0 13 0 27 D St. John Ev. 6 6 30 5 30 11 0 13 0 28 E Innocents 11 6 2 5 31 11 2 12 58 29 F   16 6 29 5 31 11 12 58 30 G Sun rise 8 10 21 6 29 5 31 11 2 12 58 31 A Silvester 26 6 29 5 31 11 2 12 58
DECEMBER. A Table shewing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London, in Old-England, in the Month of Decemb. from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise described. Viz. New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensilvania, Mary-Land, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, &c.   Day Hour Min.   1687 New Moon Full Moon the 24 at 10 nd 30 Foren the 8 at 8 and 31 Night 1688 New Moon Full Moon the 12 at 6 nd 58 Night the 26 at 7 nd 42 Night 1689 New Moon Full Moon New Moon the 1 at nd 4 After. the 16 at 10 and 2 Foren. the 31 at 3 and 2 After. 1690 New Moon Full Moon the 20 at 2 and 42 After. the 6 at 1 and 11 Morn. 1691 New Moon Full Moon the 9 at 1 and 21 After. the 25 at 3 and 9 Morn. 1692 New Moon Full Moon the 27 at 1 and 35 After. the 13 at 1 and 50 After. 1693 New Moon Full Moon the 16 at 11 and 17 Night the 2 at 5 and 16 Night 1694 New Moon Full Moon the 6 at 4 and 43 After. the 21 at 0 and 8 After. 1695 New Moon Full Moon the 25 at 6 and 11 Night the 10 at 12 and 0 Noon 1696 New Moon Full Moon the 14 at 8 and 4 Morn. the 28 at 8 and 49 Morn. 1697 New Moon Full Moon the 3 at 2 and 0 After. the 17 at 5 and 31 After. 1698 New Moon Full Moon the 22 at 9 and 37 Morn. the 7 at 7 and 54 Morn. 1699 New Moon Full Moon the 11 at 8 and 51 Morn. the 26 at 10 and 58 Morn.
How these Islands and Plantations are seated upon the Globe of the Earth; and of other things rela∣ting thereunto: And, I. Of Virginia, at James Town. IT is situate in 37 deg. 15 min. of North Latitude. The Sun rises there upon their longest Day at 45 min. after 4 in the Morning; and sets 15 min. after 7 at Night. Their longest Day is 14hou. 30 min. Their shortest Day is 9 hou. 30 min. The Sun rises upon their longest Day 30 deg. 4 min. distant from the East towards the North, and sets as many deg. from the West Northwards. The greatest Altitude that the Sun hath at Noon, is 76 deg. 15 min; and the lealt Altitude at Noon, 29 deg. 15 min. It bears from London N. N. W. It is distant from thence 3420 miles. Its length from N. to S. is 116 miles; and its breadth from E. to W. 80. It differeth in Longitude from London Westward 75 deg. 40 min. or (in Time) 5 hou. 12 min. II. Of Boston, in New-England. It lieth in 42 deg. 32 min. of North Latitude. It differs in Longitude West ward 68 deg. 30 min. or (in Time 4 hou. 40 min. The Sun riseth there, upon their longest day, at 28 min. after 4 inthe morning; and sets 32 min. after 7 at Night.
The length of their longest Day, is 15 hou. 4 min. The length of their shortest Day 8 hou. 56 min. The Sun rises upon their longest day 32 deg. 45 min. distant from the East Northward; and sets as many deg. from the West towards the North. The greatest Altitude that the Sun hath at Noon on their longest day, is 71 deg. and the least Meridian Al∣titude that they have, is 24 deg. It bears from London N. W. by W. It is distant from London 47 deg. or 2820 miles. The length of New-England from N. to S. is un∣known; and its breadth E. and W. from Maschussets Bay, to Hudsons River, is 158 miles. III. Of Port-Royal, in Jamaica. It is situate in 18 deg. 51 min. of Northern Latitude. It differs in Longitude from London Westward 75 deg. 30 min. or (in Time) 5 hou. 4 min. The Sun riseth there upon the longest day (viz. June 11) at 26 min. ufter 5 in the Morning; and sets 34 min. after 6 at Night. The length of their longest day is 13 hou. 8 min. The length of their shortest day is 10 hou. 52 min. The Suns Amplitude or place of Rising upon the long∣est day, is 24 deg. 53 min. from the East Northward, and his setting as many deg. from the West Northward. Their Meridian Altitude upon their longest day, is 85 deg 21 min. from the North part of the Horizon; and 94 deg. 39 min. from the South part thereof. The Sun is in their Zenith, that is, it passeth just over their heads, upon the Fifth of May, and the Fif∣teenth of July. It bears from London W. by N. It is distant from London 70 deg. or 4200 miles. Its length is 150 miles, and breadth above 60.
IV. Of Barbadoes. It is situate in 13 deg. 10 min. of North Latitude. It differs in Longitude from Londn West ward 58 deg. 25 min. or (in Time) 3 hou. 53 min. The sun rises upon their longest day at 37 min. after 5 in the morning; and sets 23 min. after 6 at night. The length of their longest day is 12 hou. 46 min. The length of their shortest day is 11 hou. 14 min. The Sun rises 24 deg. from the East Northwards, and sets as many from the West; towards the North. The Meridian upon their longest day, is 100 deg. 20 min. from the South part of the Horizon; and 79 deg. 56 min. from the North part thereof. The Sun is in their Zenith, or passeth just over their heads, upon the Fourth of May, and the Eighteenth of July. It beats from London W. by S. It is distant from London 61 deg. or 3660 miles. Its length from N. to S. is 24 miles. Its breadth from E. to W. is 5 Leagues, or 15 Miles. V. Of Charles Town, in Carolina. It is situate in 33 deg. 10 min. of North Latitude. It differs in Longitude from London Westward 78 deg. 30 min. or (in Time) 5 hou. and 3 quarters. The Sun riseth, upon their longest day, 50 min. after 4 in the morning; and sets 10 min. after 7 at night. The length of their longest day is 14 hou. 20 min. The length of their shortest day is 9 hou. 40 min. The Sun rises upon their longest: day 28 deg. 27 min. from the East Northward; and sets as many from the West towards t he North also. The Meridian Altitude, upon the longest day, is 80
deg. 20 min. and upon the shortest day 33 deg. 20 min. It bears from London W. N. W. It is distant from London 60 deg. or 3600 miles. Its length is from N. to S. 540 miles, and its breadth from E. to W. 230 miles. VI. Of Bermudas. It is situate in 32 deg 25 min. of North Latitude. It differs in Longitude from London 63 deg. 30 min. or (in Time) 4 hou. 14 min. Upon the longest day there, the Sun rises 4 min. before 5 in the morning; and sets 4 min after 7 at. night. The length of their longest day, is 14 hou. 8 min. The length of their shortest day, is 9 hou. 52 min. The Amplitude of the Suns rising, upon their longest day, is 28 deg. 11 min. from the East towards the North; and his setting, as many from the West Northwards; And, on the shortest day, it rises and sets as much from the East and West Southwards, as, on the longest day, it doth Northward. It bears from London W. by. N. It is distant from London 49 deg. or 2940 miles. Its length is 17 miles. Its breadth not above 3 miles in the breadest place.
A Table, by which (knowing what Hour of the Day it is at London) you may know what Hour of the Day or Night it is any of these Plantations.   James Town in Virginia. Boston in New-England. Port-Roy∣al in Jamaica. In Barbadoes Charles Town in Carolina. In Bermudas   H.   M. H.   M. H.   M. H.   M. H.   H. M.   M. XII Noon 6 Morning 48 7 Morning 20 6 Morning 56 8 Morning 7 6 Morning 16 7 Morning 46 When it is at London I of the Clock in the Mor. it is at 6 48 8 20 7 56 9 7 7 16 8 46 II 8 48 9 20 8 56 10 7 8 16 9 46 III 9 48 10 20 9 56 11 7 9 16 10 46 IV 10 48 11 20 10 56 XII Noon 10 16 11 46 V 11 48 XII Noon 11 56 1 After-Noon 7 11 16 XII Noon VI XII Noon 1 After-Noon 20 XII Noon 2 7 XII Noon 1 After-Noon 46 VII 1 After-Noon 48 2 20 1 After-Noon 56 3 7 1 After-Noon 16 2 46 VIII 2 48 3 20 2 56 4 7 2 6 13 46 IX 3 48 4 20 3 56 5 7 3 16 4 46 X 4 48 5 20 4 56 6 7 4 16 5 56 XI 5 48 6 20 5 56 7 7 5 16 6 46 XII Noon 6 48 7 20 6 56 8 7 6 16 7 46 When it is at London I of the Clock in the Mor. it is at 7 48 8 20 7 56 9 7 7 16 8 46 II 8 48 9 20 8 56 10 7 8 16 9 46 III 9 48 10 20 9 56 11 7 9 16 10 46 IV 10 48 11 20 10 56 XII Nigh 10 16 11 46 V 11 48 XII Nigh 11 56 1 Morning 7 11 16 XII Nigh VI XII Nigh 1 Morning 20 XII Nigh 2 7 XII Nigh 1 Morning 46 VII 1 Morning 48 2 20 1 Morning 56 3 7 1 Morning 16 2 46 VIII 2 48 3 20 2 56 4 7 2 16 3 46 IX 3 49 4 20 3 56 5 7 3 16 4 46 X 4 48 5 20 4 56 6 7 4 16 5 46 IX 5 48 6 20 5 56 7 7 5 16 6 46 The Ʋse of this Table. IF at Eight of the Clock in the Morning at Lon∣don, you would know what it were a Clock in all the above-named Places, you shall find it then to be at Virginia 2 hou. 48 min. Morning. At New-England 3 hou. 20 min. Morn. At Jamaica 2 hou. 56 min. Morn. At Barbadoes 4 hou. 7 min. Morn. At Carolina hou. 16 min. Morn. And at Bermudas 3 hou. 46 min. Morn.
A Table of the true Hour-distances, for Horizon∣tal Dials, for all these Plantations following; with their Halves and Quarters, ready Calcu∣lated. Hours, Halves and Quarters. New-Eng∣land, for Boston. Barbadoes Jamaica, for Port-Royal. Virginia, for James Town. Bermudas or Carolina.   D. M. D. M. D. M. D. M. D. M. XII. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 32 0 45 1 11 2 17 2 2 2 5 5 1 42 2 27 4 33 4 3 3 7 39 2 35 3 41 6 51 6 5 XI I 10 17 3 30 4 57 9 13 8 11 1 13 0 4 24 6 17 11 38 10 21 2 15 40 5 22 7 39 14 3 12 30 3 18 20 6 24 9 3 16 37 14 48 X II 21 19 7 29 19 34 19 16 17 12 1 24 10 8 36 11 11 22 1 19 38 2 27 20 9 52 13 55 24 50 22 14 3 30 24 10 19 15 49 27 58 25 11 IX III 34 4 12 50 17 54 31 11 28 12 1 37 50 14 30 20 30 44 40 31 35 2 40 56 16 35 22 50 37 35 35 15 3 45 2 18 49 25 48 42 10 38 45 VIII IV 49 28 21 32 29 19 46 21 42 52 1 53 50 24 48 33 10 50 55 48 52 2 58 28 28 45 37 57 55 40 52 35 3 63 6 33 52 46 25 60 43 58 39 VII V 68 43 44 22 50 21 66 7 63 27 1 73 40 49 0 58 28 71 52 70 34 2 78 55 59 55 67 50 77 45 76 48 3 84 25 73 56 78 32 83 49 83 2 VI 90 00 90 0 90 0 90 00 90 00 Stiles heigh 42 32 13 10 18 51 37 15 32 25
How to Set any of these Dials, or any other, tru∣ly upon a Post in a Garden, or elsewhere. LET the Square in the Figure at the end of this Book, noted with A B C D, be the top of a Post (or other level Plain or Window) upon which you would six your Dial. About the middle thereof, as at O, describe a Circle, as E G F, and upon O (the Centre) erect a small Pyn or Wire, as O S, exactly perpendicular, and in the Fore∣noon observe when the point of the shadow of the top of the Pyn or Wire touches the Circle, which suppose to be at the point E, (which point mark.) Then again (in the Afternoon of the same day) observe when the sha∣dow touches the same Circle, (which (in the Afternoon) let be at the point F. These two Observations being made, divide the Cir∣cle between E and F, into two equal parts, which will be at G; so a line drawn from G through O (as the line G O H) shall be a true Meridian line; upon which the Hour line of XII of your Dial must be placed, and the Dial so fixed, (truly Horizontal) shall constantly give you the true Hour. You may make more Circles than one upon the Plain, lest the Sun upon the same day should not be seen exactly at the same time of both parts of the day, as the Figure plainly shews.
sun's position Place this at the end of the Astronomicall Tables
Books Printed for, and Sold by Dorman New-man, at the Kings-Arms in the Poultrey. Folio. POol's English Annotations, 2 Vol. Causin's Holy Court. Clelia, a Romance. Reynolds, of Murther and Adultery. Bentivoglio's Wars of Flanders. Sir Robert Stapleton's Translation of Juvenal. Hugh's Exposition on Genesis and Exodus. Viguola's Architecture. Davis, of Uniformity in Churches. The Exact Polititian, or Compleat Statesman. Ambroses, his Looking to Jesus. — War with Devils. — Communion with Angels. Bentevolio and Ʋrania. Bishop Reynold's Works. Rea's Flora, Cemes and Pomona. Sir James Melvil's Memoirs. Esq Marvil's Poems. The State and Wars of New-England; in 3 Parts. Bailii Operis Historici & Chronologici. Twiss de Scientia Media. Scotiae Illustrata, per Dom. Robert Sibbald. Tryal of Henry, Baron Delamere. Bachanalia, or a Discription of a Drunken Club. Lower's Relation of the King's Voyage to Holland. Collection of Loyal Addresses. Quarto. GAles Court of the Gentiles. Sir Henry Vanes Meditations. Crofton, of Infant Baptism.
Caryl, on Job. Durham, on the Canticles. — On the Commandments. Brook's Golden Key. —Paradice Opened. Case's Mount Pisgah. Firmin's Real Christian. Leybourn's Penorganon. Alexander's Jesuitico-Quakerism. Burrough's Gospel Remission. Baxter's Apology for the Nonconformists. Northern Lass, a Comedy. Rollo, or the Bloody Brothers, a Tragedy. Scornful Lady, a Comedy. Elder Brother, a Comedy. Dutchess of Malfey, a Comedy. Leslii Historia Scotorum. Flavel's Husbandry spiritualiz'd. Strangii de Voluntate Dei. Mather, on the Types. Dr. Owen, On Justification. Baxter's Saints Rest. The Man of Sin. Light foot in Lucam. Dr. Charlton's Enquiry into Human Nature. Boy's Sermons. Behn's Remains. Manly, of Usury. Brown, against the Quakers. Quaker's Spiritual Court Proclaim'd. Warning to Souls to beware of Quakerism. Answer to Mr. Read's Case. Call to the Shepherds of Israel. Seven Champions. Poor Robin's Perambul. from Saffronwalden to Lond. Dr. Beyfields Treatise of Consumptions, and Rules for Health.
Sermons. Dr. Meggot, before the Artillery Company. Mr. Ryther, at Mr. Janeway's Funeral. Mr. Williams, on the Fifth of November. — On the Late Rebellion. Mr. Grey, on the Rebellion. Mr. Blake, at Mr. Sharp's Funeral. Mr. Nicholet, at Mr. Bernard's Funeral, a Sermon Preach'd at Sea. Dr. Sudbury, before the King. Mr. Pearson, at Dr. Hatfield's Funeral. Mr. Claget's Assize Sermon, at Bury. Mr. Hollingsworth, before the Lord Mayor. The Case of Lay-Communion. Case of Hearing Scandalous Ministers. Roma Mendax. Discourse of the East-India Company. Trade of England Revived. Quakerism Subverted. Sea Mirrour. Derbishire Damosel. Large Octavo. BIshop Taylor's Contemplations. Duty of Man, 2d. Part. Turenne's Life and Actions. Smith's Gramatica Quadrilinguis. Doctrine of Devils. Nalton's twenty Sermons. Ferguson's Interest of Reason in Religion. Heywood's Life in God's Favour. Derridon, agninst Atheism, Engl. Tesmarii Rhetorica. Ryther's Morning Seeker. Swinock, of Sins, of Omissions. Esq Polhil against Dr. Sherlock. Present State of Russia. Basil Valentine, of Antimony. History of the Treaty at Nimuegen.
Conold, of Schism. Homer Burlesque. Dr. Manwaring, of Health and long Life. Synopsis of Vocal Musick. Pool's Nullity of the Romish Faith. Wilson, of right Interpretation of Scripture. Durham, of Scandal. Dr. Trapham's State of Jamaica. Sclater, of Grace. Flavels two Treatises of Fear, &c. Janeway's Works. Dr. Duveile's Explanation on the Acts. Brucher's Rudiments of Latine Grammar. Dr. Bates's Sermon on the Sovereignty of God's Grace. Marirner's Everlasting Almanack. Synopsis of Quakerism. Quakers Cannons. Robert's Tree of Life. Lockier's Sermons. Catalines Conspiracy. Small Octavo and Twelves. COrahs Doom, in Answer to the Contempt of the Clergy. Janeway's Legacy. Guthry's Tryal of a Saving Interest in Christ. London Jests. Helvicus Colloquies. Quintus Curtius. Flavel's Saint Indeed. — Token for Mourners. Simpson's Philosophical Dialogue. —Medela Medicorum. —Treatise of Feavers. Diversity of Salts and Spirits maintained, by Mat∣thew Mackaile, of Aberdeen. Ness, his Christian Walk.
Sherly, of the Gout. Tachmas, Prince of Persia, a Novel. Adamite, or Loves of Father Rock, a Novel. Amours of the Pallas-Royal, Viz. Madam de la Val∣liere, Madam de Ollonne, Madam de Chastillion. Madam de Savigny, &c. Madam Lavallier's Devotions. Baysied Exercitationes Annatomici. Trimmer, or Life and Death of Moderation. Life and Death of the Queen-Mother. Wits, or various Poems. Dutch Grammar and Dictionary. Call to Prayer. Smith's Weaned Christian. Sir George Downing against the Dutch. Dr. Rebotham's Sermons. Seven Wise Masters. History of St. Patrick. History of the Twelve Apostles. History of Jewels. Roma Restituta. Curious Distillatory. Manly's History of Jopan and Syam. Looking-glass for Children. Hugh's Disputationes Grammatica. Vertues of Tunbridge-Wells. Morland's Doctrine of Interest. Miltoni Logica. Sydenham's Works. Soloman's Remenbrancer. Manning's Catholick Religion. Golden Chain. Du Moulin's Devotions. Whip for the Devil. Protestant Prayer book. Protestants Resolution. Shelton's Zeiglography. —Tachygraphy.
Present State of Scotland. Rapin's Observations on Homer, Virgil, Plato, &c. Frambesarius's Art of Physick. Engl. Scotch Psalms. Starr, of the Eastern Sages. Bunnian's Holy War. Doolittle's Call. Dr. Beyfield, on the Spaw Waters. Mercury-Gallant, or French-Mercury. Blood for Blood. Small Twelves and Twenty-fours. JAneway's Token for Children, in two Parts. Wadsworth's Legacy. Crown and Glory of a Christian. Milk for Babes. Likewise the Pictures of King Charles II. his Statue on the Royal-Exhange. Sir Roger L'Estrange. Count Staremberg. Method of His Majesties Curing the Evil. The Elephant. The Spanish Inquisition. The late Blazing-Star. Where is also to be had (in large quantities or small) the following Medicines, rightly Prepared by the first Authors. Viz. Daffey's Elixir Salutis. Bateman's Spirit of Scurvy-Grass, Golden and Plain. Matthew's Pills. Dr. Fletcher's Powder. Thomson's Pill. Spirit of Salt. Pearse's Lozenges. Natures Familiar Balm. An Excellent Balsom for Wounds. Balsomum Apoplecticum. The Extract of Liquoras. FINIS.
