B5307 07912105 40371
THE HISTORY of the Life and Reigne of RICHARD The Third. Composed in five Bookes By GEO: BUCK Esquire. Honorandus est qui injuriam non fecit, sed qui alios eam facere non patitur, duplici Honore dignus est. Plato de legibus. Lib. 5. Qui non repellit a proximo injuriam si potest, tam est in vitio quam ille qui infert. D. Ambros. offic. Lib. 3. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, and are to be sold by VV. L. H. M. and D. P. 1647.
The true Portraiture of Richard Plantagenest, of England and of France King Lord of Ireland the third King Richard
TO THE FAVOVRABLE ACCEPTANCE Of the Right Honourable PHILIP Earle of Pembrooke and Mountgomery, &c. Sir, HAving collected these papers out of their dust, I was bold to hope, there might be somthing in them of a bet∣ter fate (if mine obscure pen dar∣ken not that too.) Please your Lordshipp to let your name, make them another witnesse of your noblenesse, it may re∣deeme and improve them, to a clearer opinion and ac∣knowlegedment of these times, in which I am to meet every Critick, at his owne weapon, who will chal∣lenge the Book at the very Title: The Malicious and Malevolent, with their blotted Coments; the Capti∣ous & Incredulous, with their jealous praecisiansines, whose inclinations shewes them of envious perplexed natures, to looke at other mens actions and memory by the wrong end of the perspective, and (me thinks) I fancy them to our shaddowes, which at noone creepe behind like Dwarfes, atevening, stalke by like Gy∣ants; they will haunte the noblest merits and en∣deavors to their Sun-set, then they monster it▪ but to the Common-rout, they are another kind of Genius, or
ignis fatuus; leades them into darke, strange, wan∣derings, there they stick: for to perswade the opiniona∣ted vulgar out of their ignorant selves, is of as high a beliefe to me, as to transpeciate a Beast into a man; I (therefore) shall crave favour, to protest these pa∣pers beyond their Censure, and humour: But to those they are wished (I hope) their weak accesses may be the more pardonable since they are the kindlings and scin∣tillations of a modest Ambition, to truth and grati∣tude, which gives me the encouragement to assure your Lordship, that if mine Authors be sincere and faith∣full, my penis free and innocent, having learned, that a story (as it ought) must be a just, perspicuous Narra∣tion of things memorable, spoken, and don. The Histo∣riographer, veritable; free from all Prosopolepsyes, or partiall respects, and surely his pen should tast with a great deal of Conscience, for there is nothing leaves so an infected a sting, or scandall, as History, it rankles to all posterity, wounds our good names, to all memory & places, by an Authentick kind of preiudice: I am with his opinion, in his excellent Religio Medici, who holds it an offence to Charity, and as bloody a thought one way, as Nero's in another; My Lord, under these humble addresses, this sues to your honoured hand, Pre∣sented by the unfained wishes of your Honours avowed and humble Servant, GEO: BUCK.
The ARGUMENT and CONTENTS of the First Booke. The Linage, Family, Birth, Education, and Tirociny of King Richard the third. THe Royall house of Plantagenest, and the beginning of that name; What Sobri∣quets were: The antiquity of Sirnames; Richard is created Duke of Gloucester, his marriage, and his issue; His martiall imployments; His Iourney into Scotland, and recovery of Barwick; The death of King Edward the 4th. The Duke of Gloucester made Lord Protector, and soone after, King of England, by importunate suite of his Barons and of the People, as the next true and lawfull heire. Henry Teudor Earle of Richmond practiseth a∣gainst the King; He is conveyed into France. The No∣ble Linage of Sir William Herbert, his Imployment; He is made Earle of Pembrooke. King Edward the 4th. first, and after King Richard, sollicite the Duke of Brittaine, and treat with him for the delivery of the young Earle of Richmond his Prisoner. The successe of that businesse. The quality and title of the Beau∣forts or Sommersets. The Linage and Family of the Earle of Richmond. The solemne Coronations of King Richard, and of the Queene his wife, his first at Westminster, the second at Yorke. Nobles,
Knights and Officers made by him; Prince Edward his Son invested in the Principallity of Wales, and the Oath of Allegeance made to him; King Richard de∣mandeth the Tribute of France; His Progresse to Yorke; His carefull charge given to the Iudges and Magistrates; He holdeth a Parliament, wherein the marriage of the King his Brother with the Lady Gray is declared and adjudged unlawfull, their child∣ren to be illegitimate and not capable of the Crowne: The Earle of Richmond and divers others attainted of Treason; Many good Laws made; The K. declared and approved by Parliament to be the only true and lawfull heire of the Crowne. The King and Queene dowager are reconciled; He hath secret advertisemēts of Innovations and practises against him; Createth a vice-Constable of England. His sundry treaties with Forraigne Princes. Doctor Morton corrupteth the Duke of Buckingham, who becometh discontent, de∣manding the Earledome of Hereford, with the great Constableship of England; He taketh Armes, is defea∣ted and put to death by marshall Law.
THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF RICHARD THE THIRD, OF ENGLAND, AND OF FRANCE, KING, AND LORD OF IRELAND. RIchard Plantagenet, Duke of Gloce∣ster, and King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland, the third of that name, was theThe House and Title of Yorke. younger sonne of Sir Richard Plantagenet, the fourth Duke of Yorke of that Royall Family, and King of England, designate by King Henry the sixth, and by the most noble Senate, and uni∣versall Synod of this Kingdome, the High Court of Parliament. The Mother of this Richard Duke of Glocester, was the Lady Cecily, Daughter of Sir Ralph de Neville, Earle of Westmerland, by his wife Ioane de Beaufort, the naturall Daughter of Iohn Plantagenet (alias) de Gaunt, Duke of Guiene and Lancaster, King of Castile and Leon, third Sonne of King Edward the third, for in that order this Duke is best accounted, because William of Hatfield, the second Sonne of King Edward the third dyed in his infancy, and this Duke of Yorke, and King designate, was propagated from two younger sonnes of the same King Edward the third, whereby he had both Paternall and Ma∣ternall Title to the Crowne of England and France: But his better and nearer Title, was the Maternall Title, or that which came to him by his Mother the Lady Anne de Mortimer, the Daughter and heire of Phillippa Plantagenet, who was the sole Daughter and heire of Lyonell Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, and second Sonne of King Edward the third, according to the account and order aforesaid. And this Lady Phillip was the Wife of Sir Edmond de Mortimer, the great and famous Earle of March, and that Duke Richard, King designate, by his Father Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York (sirnamed
also de Conningsbrrough) issued directly, and in a masculine line from Edmond Plantagenet, alias de Langley, the first Duke of Yorke, and the fourth Sonne of King Edward the third, who was the most renownedThe Linage of Edward 3. and glorious Progenitor to those Princes of Yorke and Lancaster, and the first King in a Lineall descent from that great Henry, sirnamed Plantagenet, famous for his great Prowesse and many victories, King of England in the right of his Mother the Empresse Matil, or Maud, daughter and heire of King Henry the first, and stiled Anglrum Do∣mina, sometime wife of the Emperour Henry the fifth, by which he was also sirnamed, filius imperatricis: The French men called him, Henry du Court Mantea, or Court Mantle, because he wore a cloake shorter then the fashion was in those times. By his Father Galfride, or Geoffry Plantagenet, he was Earle or Duke of Anjou (for then Dux, & Comes, and Ducatus & Comitatus, were Synonomies & promiscuous words,) he was also Earle of Maine, of Torraine, and hereditary Sene∣schall, or High Steward of France, and by his marriage of Elianor Queene of France Repudiate, Daughter and heire of William Duke of Gascoigne and of Guiene, and Earle of Poictou: He was Duke and Earle of those Principalities, and Signiories, also by the Empresse his Mother Duke of Normandy: He was Lord of Ireland by Conquest, and confirmed by Pope Adrian. But these were not all his Seigni∣oriesThe Empire of K. Henry. 2. and Dominions; for after he was King of England, he extended his Empire and Principate in the South to the Pyrerean mountaines, (The Confines of Spaine and France) in the North to the Isles ofGirald. in To∣pog. Hibernie. Saribur. in Pol. Newbrig. Lib. . Orkney, and in the East and West with the Ocean, as Giraldus Cam∣brensis, Gl. Neubrigensis, & Ioannes Sarisburiensis, grave and credible Authors affirme, who stiled him, Regum Britanniae maximus; and doubtlesse he was the greatest King of Brittaine since King Ar∣thur. But it is controverted amongst the Antiquaries and Heralds, which Earle of Anjou first bare the sirname and Sobriquet of Plantagenest, or Plantagenet after the vulgar Orthodoxe, by what occasion, and for what cause it was taken and borne, and from what time and age it had beginning: Some would have the forenamed Geoffry Plantagenet, Fa∣ther of this Henry, the first Earle of Anjou, which bare it. But we shall finde stronger reasons to derive it from a much more ancient Earle of Anjou, and better causes then can be found in him, if we step but a little backe to their stories, and compare the men and their times. Geoffry Plantagenet being a man of a gallant and active fire, disposed to the Courts of Princes, to Justs Turnaments, &c. and to the Courtship of faire Ladies, those of the highest ranke, and had so amorous a Star, That Philippe le Grosse K. of France, suspected him for too familiar commerce with his bed. But it was of better influence when he archieved and married the Empresse Matilda, by which we may very well calculate, he neither had, nor would be intent or at lei∣sure for such a mortified and perilous Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. ButFulk Earle of Anjou. if we would know the man, let us looke upon the first Fulke, Earle of
Anjou, who lived about an hundred yeares before the Norman Con∣quest of England, and was Sonne of Godefray, or Geoffry Grisegonell the first Earle of Anjou (according to du Haillon) Ancestor and Proge∣nitor to the foresaid Geoffry Plantagenet, some seven or eight degrees in the ascending Line, as Paradin accounteth, a man raised upon the foundation of a great courage and strength (two of the best Principles when they have good seconds, and make too a glorious man, where they serve his vertues, not affections, as in this Prince they did) whose disposition on the other side being let out into as vaste an ambition and covetousnesse, ne're looked upon the unlawfulnesse of his desires, how horrid soever (which amongst the many rest) run him upon the shelves of wilfull perjury, and murder; the one for defrauding & spoi∣ling a Church of certaine Rights, and the other for contriving the Tragedy of his young Nephew, Drog, Earle of Brittaine, to make himselfe Lord of his Countrey and Principallity. The secret checke and scourge of those crimes had a long time to worke upon his con∣science, and of a great sinner made a great Penitent, being old and ha∣ving much solitary time, and many heavy thoughts (which naturally accompany old age, and suggest better considerations of our former and youthfull sinnes.) he opens the horrour of them, and his afflicted mind to his Confessor, (as great Constantine to AEgyppus) who en∣joyned him to make the same confession before the holy Sepulcher, at Jerusalem, which Pilgrimage the Earle performed in all lowly and contemptible manner, passing as a private and unworthy person, without traine or followers, save two of his meanest, which he tooke rather for witnesses then servants, whose service was, when they came neare Jerusalem, the one with a cord (such as is used for the strangling of Criminals) thrown about his Masters neck, to draw or leade him toAcoustre in criminall & condemne. Paradin. the holy sepulcher, whilst the other did acoustré and strip him as a con∣demned person, and with extremity scourge him untill he was pro∣strate before the sacred Monument where he gave evidence of his un∣fainedFrom this ex∣ample Henry 2. submitted his body to be scourged by the Monks of Canterbury for the death of Tho. Becket. contrition and sorrow. Amongst other devout expressions, uttering this, Mon dieu & Signeur recy a Pardon le perjure & homicide & miserable Foulque; And after this pilgrimage he lived many years of prosperity in his Country honoured of all men. To justifie this, there be many Examples of other Princes and Noble Persons, who lived about the yeare of our Lord one thousand, and somewhat before, and in three or foure ages after, who under went the like Pilgrimages im∣posed under base and mechanicke nick-names and persons, as of a Carpenter, a Smith, a Fisher-man, a Mariner, a Shepheard, a Wood∣man, a Broome-man, &c. In my Inquiry after that of Plantagenet, I met with an ancient Manuscript, that afforded me a large Cata∣logue of many such, by the French▪ called Sobriquets, from whence I have transcribed these few for a taste.
Sobriquets. Berger, Shepheard.After this man∣ner and long after K. H. 2 the heire and successour of this Earle, Fulko was in∣joyned by the Pope to go to the Holy-Land, and to fight a∣gainst the Infi∣dels, Ho∣vend. Rival. &c. Grisegōnelle, gray-coat Teste de Estoupe, Head of towe. Arbuste, A Shrub. Martell, A Hammer. Grande boeuf, Ox-face. LaZouch, Branch up∣on a Stem. Houlette, a sheep-hook. Hapkin, Hatchet. Chapelle, Hood. Sans-terre, Lackland. Malduit, Ill taught. Geffard, Ieuvencas, or Heyfer. Filz de Fleau, Son of a Flaile. Plantagenest, the Plant or stalk of a Broome. And under the name and habit of a Broome-man our Pilgrim per∣formed this Penance, and tooke the Sobriquet of Plantagenest from wearing a stalke of Broome, or plant of Genest; this is generally re∣ceived, but the time and reason neither set downe nor rendred by any of our Heralds and Antiquaries, French or English; for the time when he performed this, I observe it about the yeare of our Lord, one thousand certainly. But for the particular relation, this Count had to chuse the genest plant, or Broome stalke before any other vegi∣tall or thing, I shall lay downe that opinion which is mine owne no∣ting for a circumstance by the way, that the Broome in Hieroglyphi∣call Learning is the Symbole of humility, and the Poets, particularly Virgil the best of Poets, give it the Epithet of humilis, humilis genista; and the Etymologists derive it from genu the knee, the part most ap∣plyed, and as it were dedicate to the chiefe Act of Reverence, knee∣ling, to which the naturall Philosophers say, there is so mutuall a correspondency, and so naturall a sympathy between genu and gensta,Leon. Fuchius. that of all other plants or vegitals, it is most comfortable and medi∣cinable to the paines and diseases of the knees. Pliny a great Ma∣ster amongst them saith, Genista tuscae, cum, &c. genua dolentia sa∣nat.Plin. Lib. 24. cap. 9. But the considerable reason is, as I conceive it, from the use he was constrained to make of the twigges of Broome when he came to be scourged at Jerusalem, the place necessitating the use of them to that purpose, being (as Strabo relates) a stony, sandy, and barren soyle, onlyStrabo, Lib. 16. naturall and gratefull to the genest, as the watry and moist to the Birch, Willow and Withy, of which there could be none there, for that reason. And from hence it must most conjecturally take the begin∣ning of that Honour, which afterward his Princely and Noble Po∣steries continued for their sirname, who became Dukes & Princes in
sundry places, and some of them Kings of England, France, Scotland and Ireland; and (as the pious people of that Age verily beleeved by their observation) were the more prosperous and happy for hisDu Haillon. sake. For the continuance of the Name, some (who pretend to see further and better in the darke then others as cleare sighted) would have it taken of late time, and not used by the Kings and Princes of England, of the Angeume race. But there are many proofes to be adduced a∣gainst them; Let us looke into Master Brookes genealogies of Eng∣land,In his Cata∣logue of Ho∣nour. we shall find nothing more obvious and frequent in the dedu∣ctions of those Princes of the House of Anjou, then the addition and sirname of Plantagenet; Edm. Plantagenet, Geo. Plantagenet, Iohn Plan∣tagenet, Edward Plantagenet, Lyonell Plantagenet, Humphry Plantagenet, &c. In the French Historians and Antiquaries, Ion de Tillet, Girard du Haillon, Clande Paradin, & Iean Baron de la Hay, we shall often meet with Geoffry Plantagenet, Arthur Plantagenet, Richard Planta∣genet, and diverse the like, all of the first Age, when the Angeume Princes first became English, and some before. Master Camden also in his Immortall Ptannia, mentioneth some very ancient, as Richard Plantagenet, Iohn Plantagenet, &c. And witnesseth, that the forenamed Geoffry Plantagenet used to weare a Broome-stalke in his Bonnet, as many Nobles of the House of Anjou did, and tooke it for their chiefe sirname. It might be added, that these Earles of Anjou were descen∣ded out of the great house of Saxon in Germany, which hath brought forth many Kings▪ Emperors and Dukes; and that they were of kin∣dred and alliance to the ancient Kings of France, and sundry other Princes. But I will close here for the high Nobility of King Richard, as the good old Poet did for another Heroicall Person: —Deus est utroque parente. Ovid. Deus. i. Rex. And come to the other matters of his private story. And first for his Birth and native place, which was the Castle of Fotheringay, or as some write, the Castle of Birkhamsteed, both Castles and Honours of the Duke his Father, about the yeare of our Lord 1450, which I discover by the calculation of the Birth, Raigne, and death of King Edward his brother, who was borne about 1441, or 1442. and raig∣ned two and twenty yeares, dyed at the age of one and forty, Anno 1483. The Dutchesse of Yorke their Mother had five children be∣twixt them, so that Richard could not be lesse then seven or eight yeares younger then King Edward, and he survived him not fully three yeares. This Richard Plantagenet, and the other children of Richard Duke of Yorke, were brought up in York-shire, and Northampton-shire, but lived for the most part in the Castle of Midelham in York-shire, untill the Duke their Father, and his Sonne Edmund Plantagenet Earle of Rutland were slaine in the battell of Wakefield, Anno Dom.
1641, upon which the Dutchesse of Yorke their Mother (having cause to feare the faction of Lancaster, which was now growne very exulting and strong, and of a mortall enmity to the House af Yorke) secretly conveyed her two younger sonnes, George and Richard Plan∣tagenet (who was then about some ten yeares old) into the Low-Countries, to their Aunt the Lady Margaret, Dutchesse of Burgundy, Wife of Charles Duke of Burgundy and Brabant, and Earle of Flan∣ders. They continued at Utrich, the chiefe City then in Holland, where they had Princely and liberall education, untill Edward Earle of March their eldest Brother had revenged his Fathers death, and taken the Kingdome and Crowne (as his right) from Henry the sixth, when he called home his two Brothers, and enters them into the practise of Armes, to season their forwardnesse and honour of Knighthood which he had bestowed upon them; and soone after in∣vests George into the Dutchy of Clarence, and Earledome of Rich∣mond, which Earledome he the rather bestowed upon him, to darken the young Earle of Richmond, Henry Teudor. Richard had the Duke∣dome of Glocester, and Earledome of Carlile, as I have read in an oldLib. manus. in quarto apud D. Rob. Cotton. Comes, i. Praeses. Manuscript story, which Creation the Heralds doe not allow. But whether he were Comes thereof after the ancient Roman under∣standing, that is, Governour▪ or Comes, or Count, after the common taking it by us English, or others; that is, for a speciall Titular Lord, I will not take upon me to determine, but affirme I have read him, Comes Carliolensis. And after the great Earle of Warwicke and Salisbury, Richard de Neville, was reconciled to the Kings favour, George Duke of Clarence was married to the Lady Isabell, or Elizabeth, the elder Daughter of that Earle, and Richard Duke of Glocester to the Lady Anne, which Ladies by their Mother the Lady Anne de Beauchamp, Daughter and heire of Sir Richard de Beauchamp, Earle of Warwicke, were heires of that Earledome. But Anne, although the younger sister, was the better woman, having been a little before married to Edward Planta∣genet, Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall, only Sonne of King Henry the sixth, and was now his Princesse and Dowager, by whom Duke Richard had a sonne called Edward, created Prince of Wales when his Father came to the Crowne. The imployment of this Duke was for the most part in the North, as the Countrey of his birth, so more naturally affected by him ac∣cording to the Poet: —Natale solum dulcedine cunctos mulcet. Ovid. And there lay his Appanage and Patrimony, with a great Estate of the Dutchesse his Wife, of which the Signiory of Penrith, vulgò,Camden▪ in Cumberland. Perith in Cumberland was part, where he much resided, and built or repaired most of the Castles, all that Northerne side generally ho∣nouring and affecting his Deportment, being magnificent, (to apply
Sir Thomas Moore something above his ability which he exprestSir William Haward. most in his hospitality. And surely, if men are taken to the life best from their actions, we shall find him in the circle of a Character (not so commaculate and mixt, as passionate and purblinde pens havepurblind Quasi part blind. dasht it) whilst we squint not at those vertues in him, which make up other Princes absolute; His wisedome and courage, had not then their nicknames and calumny, as now, but drew the eyes and acknowledg∣ment of the whole Kingdome towards him; and his brother had a sound experience of his fidelity and constancy in divers hazardous congresses and battels, through which he had faithfully followed his fortune, and return'd all his undertakings successefull: as at Barnet, where he entred so farre and boldly into the Enemies Army, that two of his Esquires, Thomas Parr and Iohn Milwater being nearest to him were slaine; yet by his owne valour he quit himselfe, and put most part of the Enemies to flight, the rest to the sword. With the like valour he behaved himselfe at the battell of Exon, Doncaster, St Al∣bans, Blore-heath, Northampton, Mortimers Crosse, and Tewkes∣bury. And it was then confest a very considerable service to the State, his taking of the famous Pyrate, Thomas Nevill▪ alias, Faulkon∣bridge,The Bastard Faulconbridge. Earle of Kent, with whom complyed Sir Richard de Nevill, Earle of Warwicke, a neare kinsman to the Earle of Kent his natu∣rall Father, which d him up in the better esteeme, and whetted him to any Attempt or this haughty Earle, who had drawne him from the House of Yorke (to which he had done valiant service not long be∣fore) to the party of Henry 6. and his Lancastrian faction; and fearing what forces and aid King Edward might have from beyond Sea, provides a warlike Fleet for the narrow Seas, of which this Faulconbridge was appointed Admirall, with Commission to take or sinke all Ships he met, either of the Kings friends or Sub∣jects; who did not under act it, but made many depredations on the Coasts, and put many to the Sword becoming an Enemy, the more considerable, King Edward finding (as the case stood then with him) his Attemps by Sea would be of too weake a proofe to surprise him, which the Duke of Gloucester contrived by an advertisement he had of his private stealth into severall of the parts, sometimes where he had recourse to some abetters of that Faction, and comming too shore at Southampton, by a ready Ambush seized and apprehended him, from whence he was conveyed to London, so to Middleham Castle, and after he had told some Tales, put to death. And whilst he con∣tinued in the Northern parts, he governed those Countries with great Wisdome and Justice, preserving the Concord and Amity betweene the Scots and English, though the breaches were not to be made up with any strength and continuance, the borders living out of mutu∣all spoyles, and common Rapines, ever prompt for any cause that might beget braules and seds. And in the last yeare of the Reigne of the King his brother, the Quarrels grew so outragious and hostile, that nothing could compose them, but the Sword and open War
arising from an unjust detaining the Tribute, King Iames was yearlyAn Army sent into Scotland under the D. of Glocester. bound to pay, as Polidore thus writeth. King Edward tooke it very ill at the hands of Iames fourth King of Scotland, that he refused to pay the Tribute whereunto he was bound by Convenant; And therefore resolved by Armes to compell him to it: But King Edward being distracted with a jealous care and watch∣ing of France, neglected that businesse of Scotland, and in the meane time Alexander Duke of Albany, Brother to King Iames, pretending earnest businesse in France, makes England in his way, and instigates King Edward to put on Armes against his Brother, promising to re∣turne shortly out of France, and raise a power in Scotland for his aide: Hereupon the King resolved it, and sent the Duke of Glocester with a good Armie into Scotland, who marched master of the field neare to Barwicke, having a little before sent thither Thomas Stanley to besiege it, and soone after tooke it himselfe. But the Duke of Al∣bany failed him, and had underhand strooke up a peace with his Bro∣ther of Scotland; yet Richard of Gloucester accomplished the expe∣ditionAnno 24. Ed. 4. very honourably and happily: Thus Polidore. But to enlarge what he reporteth desertively, and abridgeth; King Edward, notwith∣standing that negligence (noted by him) levied strong forces (the King of Scotland being as vigilant in that businesse) and made the Duke of Glocester his Generall, under whom went Sir Henry Peircy Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Stanley after Earle of Derby, the Lord Lovell, the Lord Gray of Grestocke, the Lord Scroope of Bolton, the Lord Fitzhugh, Sir William Parre of Rose a noble and valiant Gen∣tleman, Father of the Lord Parr of Rose, Kendall, and Fitzhugh, and Grandfather to Sir William Parr Earle of Essex, and Marquesse of Northampton, Sir Edward Woodville Lord Rivers Brother to the Queene Elizabeth, with many other of Eminency and Noble quality. The Duke marched first with his Armie to the borders and frontieres of Scotland, giving the overthrow to such as resisted, then made up to the strong Towne of Barwicke, which at that instant the King of Scot∣land possessed by the surrender of Henry 6, and had the like successe with those Troopes of the Enemies he met and found about the Towne. After a short siege the besieged upon Summons and Parlee (finding themselves too weake to make good the opposition) were ea∣sily perswaded to be at quiet, and safely rendring the Towne and Ca∣stle vpon very slender conditions, as is recorded in the Chronicle of Croyland. Having plac't a Governour and Garrison in the Towne, heChron. Croy. continued his march towards Edenborough, with a purpose to be∣siege and sacke it, but was met in the halfe way by Embassadours from thence, who (after a favourable audience and accesse craved) in the name of their King and Nation implore a League, or at least a Truce betweene the Kingdomes, offering so faire conditions for it, that the Generall after a deliberate consultation, granted to suspend or inter∣mit all hostile proceedings, with a faire entertainement to their per∣sons, and a publike Edict throughout the Army, that no English
should offer any violence or offence to any Scot or their goods, and by this provident truce, that ruddy storme (which seemed terrible to im∣pend) was diverted and made a calme preface to the famous League, afterward concluded by him when he was K. and Iames the 4th. of Scot∣land. But whilst these imployments staid him there, newes arrived of King Edwards death, and was muttered very doubtfully by some who had confidence and ground to suppose it hastened by treachery. TheThe doubtfull death of K. E. 4 vid. lib 4. Nobles at London, and in the South parts speedily call the Duke home by their private letters and free approbation, to assume the Pro∣tection of the Kingdome, and two Princes committed unto him by the King. Rex Edwardus 4. filios suos Richardo Duci Glocestriae, in tute∣lamThe Duke of Gloucester made Lord Protector. moriens tradidit: as Polidore testifieth. The Army and affaires of those parts disposed, he came to Yorke, where he made a few daies stay to pay some religious Offices and Ce∣remonies to the manes and exequies of the deceased King, so hastned to London, having in his Traine (besides his owne ordinary Retinue) sixe hundred voluntary Gentlemen of the North parts, brave Horse∣men and gallantly mounted, upon the way he dispatched certaine seguall messengers to the young King (who was then at Ludlow Ca∣stle in Wales) to provide for his honourable Conduct of London where he arrived not long after the Lord Protector, and was magnifi∣cently received and lodged at the Bishops Pallace; his Brother the Duke of Yorke was then with the Queene Mother in the Pallace at Westminster, who out of a pretended motherly care (rather indeed her pollicy) would not let him stirre from her to see the King, who had desired his company, but instantly takes Sanctuary with him in the Abbey. The Lord Protector sollicites her by some Noblemen to send or bring him to the King, which she peremptorily stood against, untill Cardinall Bourser, Archbishop of Canterbury, was made the Messenger, who so gravely and effectually perswaded with her, that she delivered him the Duke: After some dayes respite in London-House, the King (according to ancient custome) was to remove Court to the Tower of London, the Castle Royall, and chiefe House of safety in the Kingdome, untill the more weighty affaires of the State, and such troubles (if any hapned, as often interceeds the alterations of Raignes were well dispatched and composed (some threatning evils of that kind being discovered and extinguished before the Protector came to Lon∣don.) And untill all things proper to his Coronation were in pre∣paration and readinesse, the Lord Protector still being neere untoPhil. de Comi∣nes in Lud. 11. him with all duty and care, and did him homage, as Honourable Phil∣lippe de Comines, Le Du de Glocester avoit fait homage á son Nphn Comme á so Roy & souverain Seigneur; but this Testimony being a voucht by one who loved not the Protector may leave more credit; who sayes, when the young King approacht towards London, the LordSir Tho. Moore. Protector his Unckle rode barehead before him; and in passing along, said with a loud voice to the People; Behold your Prince and Soveraigne,Chronic▪ Abbat. Croy. to which the Prior of Croyland, who lived in those dayes, reporteth,
Richardus Protector nihil reverentiae, quod capite nudato, genu Flecto alio∣ve quolibet corporis habitur insubdito exigit, regine potisuo facere distulit aut recusavit; And why should these services and his constancy be judged lesse real to the Son then to the Father, his care & providence looking pregnantly through all turnes that concern'd him and his State; and therefore timely remov'd such of Danger as were vehemently suspe∣cted for their Ambition and insolent assuming Power and Authori∣tie not proper to them, and so stood ill-affected to their Prince, and turbulent Maligners of the Government. And thus his strict justice to some, begat the envie of others, as it fell out in the time of King Edward, betweene those of the blood Royall (with whom the ancient Barons sided) and the Reginists, who being stubborne, haughty, and in∣computableThe insolency of the Queens Kindred. of the others nearnesse to the King, stir'd up Competiti∣ons and turbulencies among the Nobles, and became so insolent and publique in their pride, and Out-rages towards the people, that they forc't their murmurs at length to bring forth mutiny against them: But finding the Kings inclination gentle on that side, they so temper'd it, as they durst extend their malice to the Prince of the blood, and chiefe Nobilitie, many times by slanders and false sugge∣stions, privately incensing the King against them, who suffered their insinuations too farre, whilst his credulitie stood abus'd, and his fa∣vour often alienated from those, whose innocence could understand no cause for it. The Engines of those intrusions and supplantations, were the Grayes, the Woodvills, and their kinsmen, who held a strong beliefe, to have better'd their power with the young King their kins∣man, and then they might have acted their Rodomontades and inju∣ries in a higher straine, remov'd the Prince of the blood, and set up what limits they pleased to their Faction and Power during the mi∣noritie of the King, and after too, whilst the Queene Mother could usurpe or hold any superintendency upon the Soveraigntie, or her Sonne. These things, and the mischiefes that seem'd to superimpend the State, equally poiz'd, and consulted, by the Lord Protector, and others of the principall Nobilitie, it was resolv'd, to give a timely remedy or period unto them; all which Sir Thomas Moore acknow∣ledgeth,Sir Thomas Moore, in Ed∣ward 5. Rich. 3. and confesseth, the Nobles of the Kingdome had reason to suspect and feare the Queenes Kindred, would put their power more forward when their Kinsman came to be King, then in his Fathers time, although then their insolencies were intollerable. And this Au∣thor further acknowledgeth there had bin a long grudge & heart-bur∣ning betweene the King and Queenes Kindred in the time of King Edward; which the King, although he were partiall for the Queenes Faction, was earnest to reconcile, but could not: And after he was dead, the Lord Gray, Marquesse Dorset, the Lord Rich. Gray, and the Lord Rivers, made full accompt to sway the young King; and having learn'd, it was best fishing in a troubled streame, threw all occasions of dissention amongst the great men of this Kingdome, that so, whilst the other Nobles were busie in their owne quarrells, they
might take an opportunitie to assault and supplant where they hated. And for provision towards the Designe, the Marquesse had secretly gain'd a great quantity of the Kings treasure out of the Tower, and the Woodevills made good preparations of Armes; of which, some were met with by the way as they were conveighed close packed in Crts. It was therefore high time for the Protector and ancient No∣bilitie to looke circumspectly about them, and fasten on all occasions that might prevent such growing Treacheries, which could be no way but by taking off their heads. Which being resolved, the Mar∣quesse of Dorset, the Lord Richard Gray their Uncle, Sir Anthony Woodeville, Lord Rivers, and some other of that kindred and Faction were apprehended, and at Pomfret executed (onely the Marquesse, by some private notice given him, fled, and tooke Sanctuary) At theLord Hastings. same time the Lord Hastings (who much favoured the Queene and her partie, especially the Marquesse (therefore the more to be suspe∣cted dangerous) was Arrested for High Treason, and in the Tower upon the Greene had his head chop't off, an Act of more strange and severe appearance then the other, having the esteeme of a good Sub∣ject, and generally supposed much affectionate to the Protector, and the Duke of Buckingham. And Sir Thomas Moore, reporteth,Sir Thomas Moore. that the Protector was most unwilling to have lost him, but that he saw him joyning with their Enemies, and so his life had ill requited them and their purpose; this was a Dilemma; But what that purpose was, and what they had in Agitation at that instant is not disertly said onely from other places of the Story. And those which fol∣low Sir Thomas Moore, it may be conceiv'd, they doubted him for his affectation of the Soveraigntie, & some practice against the King and his Brother for those be the charges they presse upon him, although it is neither said, nor made good by any direct and just proofe. But admit he was now growne jealous of him, and sent Sir William Catse∣by, a man in great credit with the Lord Hastings, to ound what opi∣nion he held of that Title and Claime he might lay to the Crowne, who (presuming upon Catsebies gratitude and trust that had beene ad∣vanced by him) without circumstance, and even with indignation exprest an utter mislike thereof, and engaged himselfe, his uttermost power and abilitie against it, peremptorily adding, he had rather see the death and destructions of the Protector and Duke of Buckingham, then the young King deprived of the Crowne: Which reply, Catseby, (being more just to his employment then honour in this poynt) re∣turnes the Protector, who layd hold upon the next occasion to seize his head, which is the greatest and bloodiest Crime that brings any proofe against him; and yet not so cleare, but that there may be some other State-mistery or fraud suspected in it. Let us leave it up on that accompt, and but consider how much more wee forgive the fames of H. 1. E. 3. H. 4. E. 4. H. 7. because they had their happy Starres and successe; and then, Prosperum scelus virtus vocatur, there is applause goes with the Act and Actor: Iulius Caesar, was, and ever
will be reputed a wise and a great Captaine, although his Emulati∣on cost an infinite quantitie of excellent humane blood, and his Ne∣phew, Octa. Augustus, never ceased proscribing banishing and massa∣cring, untill he had dispatched all his proud Emulators: Iulius Caesar thought it, Crimen sacrum vel crimen Regale; or, Crimen sacrum Ambi∣tio:Ci. lib 3. de offic. & Suet. in via Iuli Caesaris. whoe rule was, Si violandum est jus, regnandi gratiâ Violandum est, ali is rebus piet atem colas. If right for ought may e're be violate, It must be only for a Soveraign State. Drawing it from that rule (though Apocrypha) in Euripides. Eurip. in Phoe∣niss. Si injuste agere oportet, pro tyrannide (aut regno) pulcherrimum est in∣juste agere, in aliis pietatem colere expedt. And Antonius Caracalla, alledged the Text to justifie the killing of his Brother Geta his Collegue, in the Empire. Polynics, the Brother of Eteocles was of the same Religion, and said, A Kingdome could not be bought at too high a rate, put in Friends, Kindred, Wife, andAxiom. Polit. Riches. Via ad potentiam est tollere ulos & premere Adversarios, which the great Mster of Axiomes allowed, hath beene countenanced by many great examples of State-reason, and policie in all times, even since the Ogygian Age for an old observation, and generall in all for∣raigne Countries saith, —Regnum furtoSenec. in trag. Et fraude ademptum antiquum est specimen imperii. So King Atreus, by his owne experience could say; —Vt nemo doceat fradis & sceleris vias, Regnum docebit. But what those Ages call'd Valour, Wisedome, and Policy, in those great Schollers of State, who with credit practised their ArtesArtes imperii. Imperii, and rules of Empire, comes not under the license or warrant of our Christian times; yet we may speak thus much for Richard (to those who cry him so deepe an homicide) that he had either more conscience or lesse cruelty then they attribute to him, that by the same Act of power could not secure himselfe of others he had as just cause to feare; especially Iasper Earle of Pembroke, his Nephew Richmond,
and the subtill Doctor Morton, who was extreamly his Enemy, and the Chiefe Instrument that secretly mov'd against him. And al∣though the King had no certain notice which way his Engins wrought, yet he knew enough to suspect him for, and to remove him from the Councell-Table unto the custody of the Duke of Buckingham, the man he had reason to suppose nearest to his trust, though his ex∣pectation leaned on a broken Reed there; for the Duke was now se∣cretly in his heart defected from the King, and become male-con∣tent; Morton but toucht his pulse, and knew how the distemper lay, which he irritated into such sparklings as gave him notice where his constitution was most apt and prepared; yea, so subtilly mastred it, that he had leave to steale from Brecknock Castle to Ely, so for good store of Coine found safe passage into France whither his desires ve∣hemently carried him, in hope to fashion the Earle of Richmond to his Plot; and under pretence of a Lancastrian Title, to stirre him to take up Armes and invade England, with the Assurance of many mightie friends here, which would make the Designe of an easie and quick dispatch; nor forgot he how much Artificiall and Eloquent perswasions adde to the Blaze of Ambition, knowing the Earles tem∣per like other mens in that, and observing him with a kind of plea∣sure listen, he gave such a studied glosse and superlation to the Text, that the Earle was now so full of encouragement and hope for the in∣vasion, that their purposes spread as well into England as in France. The Protector having also certaine intelligence of some particular Designes, disposed himselfe in his actions more closely, and knew what Friends and Confederates had engaged themselves to Richmond, who yet kept a face of love and fidelitie towards him, as did the Duke of Buckingham, and the Countesse of Richmond, who appeared at this instant an earnest Sutor to reconcile her Sonne into favour; and that the King would bee pleased, to bestow on him any of King Edward the fourth his Daughters. But this took not the vigilancy of his eye from him and his partie, the cause being of greater danger and apprehension now, then in King Edwards time; for the Earle had drawne unto him many of the English Nobilitie and Gentry; and some Forraigne Princes had in favour to him promised their aydes. But in the time of King Edward, his Title and he, was so little under∣stood by his blood of Lancaster, that the better judging-sort of the English Nobilitie and Gentry, King Lewis the eleventh of France, Francis the second Duke of Brittaine, and other Forraigne Princes looked very slightly upon it. And yet, as Iohn Harding observed, the King might be jealous of him, being given out for an Heire of the House of Lancaster, and Nephew to Henry the sixt: With this he considered, that some Forraigne Princes stood not well-affected to him; or that some at home, envying his House and Posteritie, would catch at any sparke to trouble his peace, and kindle a Sedition; there∣fore he had good reason to thinke, that as his libertie might make these beginnings more popular, so their ends more dangerous and in∣gratefull
(the vulgar tasting all things by the eare, and judging by the noyse) which he sought earely to prevent. For Phillip Comines re∣ports, When he first came to know this Earle, he was then a Priso∣ner in Brittaine, and told him, he had beene either in Prison, or un∣der strict command from five yeares old▪ which is not unlikely; for I find him but young when he was committed to the custody of Sir William Herbert, Lord of Ragland Castle in Montmouthshire, where he continued not long; for Iasper, Earle of Pembrooke, who was Uncle unto Him (being then in France, whether he had fled after the overthrow of the Lancastrians at Tewkesbury, (as Iohn Sow) having advertisement that his Nephew was under Sir William Herberts cu∣stody, with whom he had Alliance and friendship, came secretly out of France into Wales, and at Ragland Castle found onely the LadyThe flight of Richmont with his Vncle Pembrooke. Herbert, her Husband being with the King; in whose absence, the Earle practised so cunningly with her, that he got his Nephew from thence, and conveighed him to his owne Castle of Pembrooke, (the young Earles native place) presuming upon the strength of itThe Earle of Rich. borne in Pembrooke Castle. and the peoples affection, but over-weaned in his opinion and hope. For so soone as the King received notice of the escape, Sir William Herbert was commanded to Levie Forces, and make towards them, a man of a wise and valiant disposition, descended from Herbertus, who was Chamberlaine and Treasurer of the Kings, William Rufus, and Henry Beauclerke, and was created Earle of Pembrooke afterward; from this Noble Herbertus, are descended the Herberts, Earles of Pembrooke and Montgomery, and many other Welh Gentlemen of that Sir name and Family. The two Earles being informed of his approaches and strength, distrusting their owne, fled by night, and posted to the Port of Tim∣by, where they kept close untill a fit opportunitie, offered them transportation for France, intending to see the Court there, whereThis slight of theirs was in Anno 11. E. 4. Iohn Stow. the Earle of Pembrooke had not long before received very favoura∣ble entertainment. But a violent storme diverted their course, and runne them upon the coasts of Little Brittaine, which fell out as a sad disaster, and crosse to them and their Designe for a long time af∣ter, the Duke of Brittaine being no friend to it; but at the Port of St. Malos they must land. What successe they met with in this flight (and other Noble Englishmen which followed the unluckie partie of Henry the sixt, being constrained when he was overthrowne by Ed∣ward the fourth to fly) will fall into our discourse hereafter: there is this memoriall in the Stories of Brittaine. Plusieurs du Seigners d' Angleterre qui tenoyent la partie du Roy H. 6. sen fairent par mer hrs du Royalme & entr▪ autres le Conte du Pem∣brooke aisant sauué un jeune Prince de Angleterre nommé Henry Conte du Richmont. Whilst these Earles made some stay in Saint Malo to refreshEarle of Rich. Prisoner in Brittaine. themselves, Francis the second, Duke of Brittaine had notice of their landing, who sent as speedily a Command to the Governour to ar∣rest
them both into safe custody, an act, as it appeared, both strange and injurious, being subjects to a Prince with whom the Duke had league. But for a better glosse, he had found a considerable clause to detaine the Earle of Richmond untill he had received satisfaction of him for usurping and holding the Title and Estate of Richmond, be∣longingThe last D. of Brittaine, who was Earle of Richmond, & possessed of the Earledome, was Iohn de Montfort, who flourished An. Dom. 1440, & had sons, but not Earles of Richmond, as Rob. Glou. writeth, & now this Francis 1. renewed the claime which was about 30 yeares after Iohn de Mont∣fort, Duke of Brittaine. to the ancient Dukes of Brittaine (whose heire and successor he was) though diseised by the space of thirty yeares, now he would expect either restitution or compensation for it; and the better to assure himselfe, he conveyes them with a good guard to the Castle of Vanes, where himselfe often resided, continuing a more cautious and strict eye upon the Earle of Richmond, as Nephew to Henry the sixt, and he that laid claime to the Title and Crowne of England, by the bloud of Lancaster: For which he made their imprisonment more honourable, as Philip Comines saith, Le Duc les traict'e doce∣ment pour Prisonniers. And Iean Froisard cals it, Prison Courtoise; for the Duke had well considered what expectation and use he might raise by them, and knew the newes could not be distastefull to the King of England, whose Throne had been threatned so much by the Earle of Richmonds liberty; and therefore, from hence he hoped an answera∣ble benefit, and to contract the King in a firme amity and acknowledg∣ment unto him; nay, which is further, (if we may beleeve Iac. Nyerus) he thought by this occasion to beare the reines so hard upon King Edward, as that he should not dare to make any breach with him,Iac. Nyerus in Annal. Fland. lib. 17. propter Henricum Richmontiae Comitem non audebat Anglus ab amicitia Brittani discedere. Nor was this Author much mistaken, for the King would have accorded to any reasonable thing to purchase the Earle into his hands, and it was no little perplexity to him when he heard of their flight, but was the better calmed when he understood where they were, the Duke of Brittaine being his friend and Allie, in whom he supposed so neare an interest (set off by some other conditions) that he saw a faire encouragement to demand and gaine them both; whereas had they falne into France, he must have expected the greatest disadvan∣tageKing Edward treateth for the delivery of Richmond. could have been contrived out of such an occasion. For Lewis, though he were then in truce and league with him, was meerly a Poli∣tician, and studied only his owne ends, yet feares him as a King famous for his Prowesse and Victories, and as ably supplyed in his Coffers for all undertakings: But (which did equally quicken the hate aswell as feare of France) had threatened to enter it with fire and sword, for the reconquest of the Dutchy of Normandy and Aquitaine, the Counties of Poictou and Turaine; wherefore we may beleeve that beares the credit of an Oracle, which good Ennius said: —Quem metunt derunt,Ennius apud Cicer. ta Offic. Quem oderunt, periisse expetunt. And doubtlesse in his heart he was favourable to any chance that
might have ruined or insested England, and could have wisht the Earle of Richmond and his Title under his Protection. King Edward seasonably prevented this, that such attempts, though at first they appeared but like the Prophets Cloud, might not spread after into spacious stormes. And to prevent all underhand Contracts with the Duke of Brittaine, dispatcht Letters unto him, further inter∣pretedK. . 4 sends for Richmond. by a rich Prssent, and richer promises. The Duke receives both with as Honourable Complement, protesting none could be more ready to doe the King of Englands Commands then he. But where he treated for te delivery of the Earles, he hoped to be law∣fully excused▪ being an Act would cast a staine and scandall, not only upon his credit and honour, but upon all Princely and hospitable Priviledges, and could appeare no lesse then a meere impiety to thrust such distressed persons as fled to their protection, into the Armes of their enemies; and it was his opinion, if any malice or violence should be acted upon them, the guilt must reflect on him. But that the King might beleeve he was forward to come as near his desires, as in honour could be, he engaged himselfe to keep so carefull and vigilant a watch upon them, that they should have no more power to endanger him, then if they were in strict Prison. This being returned, though not agreable to the Kings hope and wishes, yet bearing such a Cau∣tion of Honour and Wisdome, he remained satisfied; and so it paused for the space of eight yeares, (as I conjecture) for the King made this demand in the twelfth yeare of his Raigne 1472, all which time he was very intent to preserve the League with good Summes of Mony, and costly Presents. In the twentieth of his Raigne 1480, he received intelligence▪ that the Earle of Richmond had stird up fresh Embers, and new friends in the French Court to blow them, and that the French King had dealt by solicitation of the Earle of Pembrook, and others privately, to get the Earl of Richmond, and offered great SumsHist: de Brit. to the Duke of Brittaine. This gave new disturbance, and the King must now by the best meanes he could, renue his former ste to the Duke of Brittaine; for which employment, he intrusts Doctor Stil∣lington Bishop of Bath, his Secretary, a man of a Wise, Learned, andD. Stillington sent for Rich∣mond. Eloquent endeavour, of good acquaintance and credit with the Duke of Brittaine, who gave him an honourable and respective entertaine∣ment. The Bishop (after he had prepared him by the earnest of a very rich present) tenders the Summe of his Employment, not forgetting what he was now to Act, and what to promise on the Kings part. And (for a more glorious insinuation) tells him how the King had elected him into the noble Society of St. Georges Order (as the most honou∣rable intimation he could give of his love;) to qualifie all exceptious too, and jealousies, assures him, the King had no intent to the Earle of Richmond, but what was answerable to his owne worth, and quality of the Kings Kinsman; having declared a propensity and purpose, to bestow one of his daughters upon him. The Duke well mollified and perswades, delivered the Earle by a strong Guard to the Bishop at
St. Maloes Port: a change of much passion and amazement to him, whose sufferings tooke hold upon the affable disposition of the Noble Peir de Landois Treasurer to the Duke, who had the Earle in Charge and Conduct, to St. Malo. He urges the cause from him of his so altered and present condition, with Protestation of all the aide he could: The Earle thus fairely and happily provoked (and perceiving the sparkles of his sorrow had hapt into a tender bosome) freely expo∣sed himselfe, and with such an overcomming Countenance, of teares and sighes, framed his own Story, and prest Landois, that it so wrought upon his temper, he perswaded the Earle to put on clearer hopes, as∣sures him there should some meanes be found to shift the Tempest; thereupon writes a sad Relation to the Duke, to move his compassion and favour, and knowing the Baron Chandais, (a great man in credit with him) well affected to the Earle by a long and reciprocall affecti∣on, he repaired to his house neare Saint Malo, and prevailed with him to use his power with the Duke, for returning the Earle; who posted to Vanes, where the Court was then, and tooke the Duke at such an advantage, by suggesting his credulity abused, and cunningly drawne into this contract by the King, that there was a Post dispatcht to stay the Earle. In that interim, Landois had not been Idle, to find a way to let the Earle escape into the Abbey Church of St. Malo, where he claimed the benefit of the holy Asyle, which was easily contrived, by corrupting his Keepers. But the Duke to stand cleare of the Kings suspition, sent over Maurice Brumell to satisfie him, that the Earle ac∣cording to promise was sent to Saint Malo, there delivered to his servants deputed, whose negligence let him escape; and that he had demanded him of the Covent, who denyed to render him without security & caution; & that he should be continued a prisonerin Vanes, with as much courtesie as formerly. Now being it was falne into those strict and peremptory termes, and within the contumacie of such lawlesse persons, where he could not use power, he yet faithfully protested no suite from the French King, or any other, should draw him from his former promise: All which, he religiously performed, whilst King Edward lived, the space of twelve yeares (after Phillip de Comines) in which circle of time, it may with admiration be observed, through what changes and interchanges of hazards, dangers, and diffi∣culties, he was preserved. Soone after King Edwards decease, King Ri∣chard renewed and continued the Treaty by Sir Thomas Hutton ofK. R. reneweth sut to the D. of B. for the Earle of Richmond. E. 4. Fulmen elli, ut Seleac. Rex inde  i. fulmen dictus. Yorkshire, receiving the same satisfaction in Answer, but was fai∣led in the performance, and so dishonourably, that it then appeared, the Duke had kept in with Edward, more for feare, then for love or honour (the name of Edward, and the Earle of March, being (indeed) accounted terrible, where his victorious sword was drawne) which breach of the Dukes was not left unpunished (at least as that age then guessed) by a divine revenge; for having married Margaret, Daughterclaud. Paradin and Co-heire of Francis de Mountford, Duke of Brittaine, she dying without issue, he married Margaret, Daughter of Gaston de Foix, King
of Navarr, by whom he had one only daughter Anne, married to the French King, Charles 8. Thus Duke Francis dyed without issue male, the Dutchy being swallowed up, and drowned in the Lillies or Cra∣pands of France, and with his Family of Brittaine irrecoverably lost and absorpted. Thus much for the jealousie and feares of those two Kings, now to the progresse of ou Story, where the Barons and Commons with one generall dislike, and an universall negative voice, refused the sonnes of King Edward, not for any ill will or malice, but for their disabilities and incapacities; the opinions of those times too, held them not legitimate, and the Queene Elizabeth Gray, or Woodvill, no lawfull Wife, nor yet a Woman worthy to be the Kings Wife, by reason of her extreame unequall quality. For these and other causes, the Barons and Prelates unanimously cast their Election upon the Protector, as the most worthiest, and nearest, by the experience of his owne deservings, and the strength of his Alliance, importuning the Duke of Buckingham to become their Speaker, who accompaniedB. Mort. Sir Th Moore, Holling∣shed, Graston, Stow, Hall, Virgill, &c. Parliament. with many of the chiefe Lords,, and other grave and learned persons, having Audience granted in the great Chamber at Baynards Castle (then Yorke-house) thus addrest him to the Lord Protector. SIR, May it please your Grace to be informed, that after muchThe Duke of Buck. to the L. Protector in the behalfe of the 3 Estates. grave Consultation amongst the Noble Barons, and other worthy persons of this Realme, it stands concluded and resolved, that the sons of King Edward shall not raigne; for who is not sensible, how mise∣rable a fortune, and dangerous estate that Kingdome must be in, where a childe is King, according to the Wise man, Vaetibi terra cujus Rex est Puer. But here, Sir, there is exception of further consequence against them, That they were not borne in lawfull Marriage, the KingThe common published sto∣ries have Eliz. Lucy, but that is false. having than another Wife living, Dame Elizabeth Butler. Besides, the great dishonour and reproach he received by disparaging his Roy∣all bloud, with a woman so far unmeet for his bed. These Conside∣rations have resolutely turned all their eyes, and Election towards your Grace, as only worthy of it, by your singular vertues, and that interest in the Crownes of England and of France, with the Rights and Titles, by the high Authority of Parliament, entailed to the Roy∣all bloud, and issue of Richard Duke of Yorke, whose lawfull begotten Sonne and heire you are; which by a just course of inheritance, and the Common Lawes of this Land, is divolv'd and come to you. And unwilling that any inferiour Bloud, should have the Dominion of this Land, are fully determined to make your Grace King; to which, with all willingnesse and alacrity, the Lords and people of the Northerne parts concurre. And the Maior, Aldermen, and Com∣mons of this City of London, have all allowed, and gladly embraced this generall Choice of your Grace: and are come hither to beseech you to accept their just Election, of which they have chosen me their unworthy Advocate and Speaker. I must therefore againe crave
leave in the behalfe of all, to desire your Grace will be pleased, in your noble and gracious zeale to the good of this Realme, to cast your eyes upon the growing distresses and decay of our Estate, and to set your happy hand to the redresse thereof; for which, we can conceive no abler remedy, then by your undertaking the Crowne and Govern∣ment, which we doubt not shall accrew to the laud of God,, the profit of this Land, and your Graces happinesse. This speech of the Duke is recorded by Doctor Morton, Sir Thomas Moore, and other Chronicles and Historians, to which the Protector gave this reply: MY most noble Lords, and my most loving friends, and deareThe Answer of the Lord Pro∣tector to the 3 Estates. Country-men, Albeit I must confesse, your request most respe∣ctive and favourable, and the points and necessities alledged and ur∣ged, true and certaine; yet for the entire love and reverend respect I owe to my Brother deceased, and to his Children, my Princely Cou∣zens, you must give me leave, more to regard mine honour and fame in other Realmes; for where the truth and certaine proceedings herein are not knowne, it may be thought an ambition in me to seeke what you voluntarily proffer, which would charge so deep a reproach and staine upon my honour and sincerity, that I would not beare for the worlds Diademe, Besides, you must not thinke me ignorant (for I have well observed it) there is more difficulty in the Government of a Kingdome, then pleasure; especially to that Prince, who would use his Authority and Office as he ought. I must therefore desire, that this (and my unfained Protestations) may assure you, the Crowne was never my ayme, nor suits my desire with yours▪ in this; yet I shall thinke my selfe much beholding unto you all, in this Election of me, and that hearty love I find you beare me, and here protest, that for your sakes it shall be all one, whether I be your King or no; for I will serve my Nephew faithfully and carefully, with my best counsels and endeavours, to defend and preserve him and this Kingdome; nor shall there want readinesse in me, to attempt the recovery of that hereditary right in France, which belongs to the Kings of England, though of late negligently and unhappily lost. There the Protector became silent, and thought it not safe in his discretion, or policy, to open all the disgusts he had of the Soveraignty, for that would have been matter of Exprobation of the Barons, and toucht too neare the quicke, though he had well observed, by sundry experiences of the leading times, and moderne too, the inconstant ebbing and flowing of their dispositions, how variable and apt they were, to take up any occasion of change pursuing their Kings (if once stirr'd) so impla∣cably, that many times they never left without death or deposing. Examples he had in the Raignes of King Edward his Brother, and Henry the sixth; not long before that in the time of Richard the second, and his Grandfather Edward the second; more anciently the extreame
troubles and distresse of King Iohn, and Henry the third, all by the Barons, being dreadfull warnings and insolent monuments of their haughtinesse and Levitie; and this was Altamente repostum with the wise Prince. But the Duke of Buckingham, thinking the Protector set too slight a consideration upon so great a Concernment, and the affection tender'd by himselfe and the Nobilitie (and over hearing something, he privately spake to the Lord Maior and Recorder, tending to his mislike) for an Epilogue or close to his former Oration, he thus freely addes. SIR, I must now, by the Priviledge of this Imployment, and inThe bold and round conclu∣sion of the D. of Buck. the behalfe of those and my Countrey, adde so much freedome unto my dutie, as to tell your Grace, It is immoveably resolved by the Barons and people, that the Children of King Edward shall not Reigne over them. Your Grace hath heard some causes▪ nor need I intimate, how these Estates have entred and proceeded so offensively to other men, and so dangerously to themselves, as is now too late to recall or retire. And therefore, they have fixt this Election upon you, whom they thinke mostable and carefull for their safetie. But, if neither the generall good, the earnest Petitions of the Nobility and Commonalty, can move you, wee most humbly desire your An∣swer, and leave to Elect some other that may be worthy of the Imperi∣all Charge; in which, (wee hope) wee shall not incurre your displea∣sure, considering the desperate necessitie of our welfare and King∣dome, urges it. And this is our last Suit and Petition to your Grace. The Protector toucht by this round and braving farewell, which made him very sensible: For (as Sir Thomas Moore disertly con∣fesseth) the Protector was so much moved with these words, that o∣therwise of likelyhood he would never have inclined to their Suit: And saith, That when he saw there was no remedy, but he must either at that instant take the Crowne, or both he and his heires irrecovera∣bly let it passe to another; paradventure, one that might prove an Enemy to him and his, especially if Richmont stept in; betwixt whom, and this Prince, the hatred was equally extreame: There∣fore, it behoved the Protector to Collect himselfe; and fixing his Consideration upon the effect of that necessitie they last urged, gave this Reply: MY most Noble good Lords, and most loving and faithfull friends,The Protectors Reply to the Dukes last Suit. the better sense of your loves and most eminent inconvenien∣cies insinuated by your Noble Speaker, hath made me more serious to apprehend the benefit of your proffer and Election. And I must confesse, in the meditation thereof, I find an alteration in my selfe, not without some distraction, when I consider all the Realme, so bent
against the Sonnes of King Edward. And therefore being certaine, there is no man to whom the Crowne by just Title can be so due as to our selfe, the rightfull Sonne and Heire of our most deare and Princely Father, Richard Duke of Yorke; to which Title of blood and nature, your favours have joyned this of Election, wherein wee hold our selfe to be most strong and safe▪ And having the lawfull power of both, why should I endure my professed Enemy to ∣surpemy right, and become a Vassall to my envious Subject? The necessitie of these causes (as admitting no other remedy) urges me to accept your offer, and according to your request, and our owne right, we here assume the Regall Praeheminence of the two Kingdoms; England and France, from this day forward, by us and our heires, to Govern and defend the one, and by Gods grace, and your good aydes to recover and establish the other, to the Ancient Allegeance of Eng∣land; desiring of God to live no longer then wee intend and endea∣vour the advancement and flourishing Estate of this Kingdome; at which they all cry'd, God save King Richard: And thus he became King. But yet his Detractors stick not to slander and accuse all that was said or done in these proceedings of State for meer dissimulation; by which justice they may as well censure (At si Reverentia dictum) all the Barons, worthy and grave Commons, which had their Votes therein▪ which would fall a most impudent and intolerable Scandall upon all the High Court of Parliament; for in short time after, all that was alledged and acted in that Treatie and Colloquy was ap∣proved, and ratified by the Court of Parliament, so that their Ca∣vills onely discover an extreame malice and envy. For it was not possible, therefore not credible, he could upon such an instant (as it were) by any practice, attaine to that power and credit, with all the Barons, Spirituall and Temporall, and Commons, to procure and perswade them from the Sonnes of King Edward, so unanimously to become his Subjects, and put the Crowne upon his head with such Solemnitie and publicke Ceremonies. Whilst those matters had their current, the Northerne Gentlemen and his Southerne Friends joyned in a Bill Supplicatory to the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, earnestly expressing their desires for the Election of the Lord Prote∣ctor, with the former causes urged; Also, that the blood of the young Earle of Warwicke was attainted, and his Title confis∣cate by Parliament. This Bill was delivered to the Lords, Assemb∣led in the great hall at Westminster, the Lord Protector sitting in the Chaire of Marble amongst them, upon the 26 of June, some six or seven dayes after he was Proclaimed; the tenor of the Bill was thus written in the Chronicle of the Abbey of Croyland:Lib. Abb. Croyl PRotector eodem die, quo Regimen sub titulo regii nominis sibi vendicarit (viz) 26o die Iunii, Anno Dom. 1483. se a∣pud Magnam Aulam Westmonasterii in Cathedram Marmoream
Immisit & tum mox omnibus proceribus tam Laicis quam Ecclesi∣asticis & Caeteris assidentibus, astantibus &c. ostendebatur rotulus quidam, in quo per modum supplicationis in nomine pro∣cerum & populi Borealis exhibita sunt, Primum, quod silii Regis Edwardi erant Bastardi, supponendo, illum praecontraxisse ma∣trimonium cum quadam Domina Elianora Boteler, antequam Reginam Elizabetham duxisset in uxorem: deinde quod sanguis alterius Fratris (Georgii Scil: Clarensi ducis) fuisset At∣tinctus. Ita quod nullus certus incorruptus sanguis Linealis ex parte Richardi Ducis Eboraci poterat inveniri, nisi in persona Richardi Protectoris, Ducis Glocestriae, & jam eidem Duci su∣plicabant, ut jus suum in Regno Angliae sibi assumeret & Co∣ronam acciperet. But the Barons were all accorded before this Bill came, both sides moving with an equall and contented forwardnesse; And in July next following 1483. was Crown'd and receiv'd, with as generall Magnificence and Acclamations, as any King in England many years before. For as a grave man writeth, (Fuit dignissimus regno &c. nonCambden. inter malos sed bonos principes Commemorandus; That he was most wor∣thy to Reigne, and to be numbred amongst the good, not bad Prin∣ces. The Queene his Wife was Crowned with him, and with no lesse State and Greatnesse; Accompanied him from the Tower to Westminster, having in their Traine, (besides the Nobilitie of the South parts) foure thousand Gentlemen of the North. Upon the 19. of June 1483. in the 25. yeare of Lewis the French King, he was named King of England, the morrow Proclaimed, and rode with great Solemnitie from London to Westminster, where in the seat Royall, he gave the Judges of the Land a strickt and religious charge for the just executing of the Lawes; then departed towards the Ab∣bey, being met at the Church doore with Procession, and the Scep∣ter of King Edward delivered to him by the Abbot; so Ascended to Saint Edwards Shrine, where he offered; the Monks in the meane time singing Te Deum: From thence he return'd to the Palace, where he lodged untill his Coronation. Upon the fourth of July he went to the Tower by water with the Queene his Wife, and the next day, Created Edward his onely Son, (about ten yeares old) Prince of Wales: He Invested Sir Iohn Ho∣wardMonstrolet. Co∣ine. Anglici scriptoret. (who was made Lord Howard, and Knight of the Garter, 17. Edward 4.) in the Dukedome of Norffolke, in a favourable ad∣mission of the right of the Lady Margaret his Mother, Daughter of Sir Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norffolke, and an heire generall of theStile of the D. of Norff. In rotuli in domo convers. Mowbrayes, Dukes of Norffolke, and Earles of Surrey, descended from the Lord Tho. Plantagenet of Brotherton, a younger Sonne of
King Edward the first, and Earle of Norffolke. This King also made him Marshall and Admirall of England; he was as rightfully Lord Mowbray, Lord Segrave, Lord Bruce, as Lord Howard, as I have seene him Stiled by Royall Warrant, in a Commission for Treatie of Truce with Scotland. His eldest Sonne, Sir Thomas Howard, was at the same time Crea∣ted Earle of Surrey, and made Knight of the Garter; Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, was made Constable of England for terme of life, but he claimed the Office by inheritance. Sir Thomas Moore writes, That Sir Thomas Howard Executed the Office of Constable that day; William Lord Berkley was Created Earle of Nottingham, Francis Lovel Viscount Lovel, and Chamber∣lain to the King; the Lord Stanley restor'd to liberty and made Steward of the Household, Thomas Rotheram Chancellour and Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, having beene committed for delivering the Great Seale to the Queene Widow, receiv'd to grace, and many Knights Addubbed of the old Order, and some of the new, or habit of the Bath, whose names I have set downe, to shew what regard was had of their Family, and in those times accused of so much Malignity. Sir Edward De-la-Poole, Sonne to the Duke of Nor∣folke. George Gray. Sonne to the Earle of Kent. William Souch, Sonne to the Lord Souch. Henry Nevil, Sonne to the Lord Abergaveny, Christopher Willowby. Henry Bainton. Thomas Bullen. William Say. William Enderby. Thomas of Vernon. William Barkley. Thomas Arundel. Gervoise of Clifton. Edmond Beddingfield. Tho. Leukenor. Iohn Browne. William Berkley. i. Another Berkley. The fift day of July he rode from the Tower through the City in Pompe, with his Sonne the Prince of Wales, three Dukes, and nine Earles, twentie two Viscounts and simple Barons, eighty Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, not to be numbred, besides great Officers of the Crowne which had speciall service to doe. But the Duke of Buckingham carried the Splendour of that dayes Bravery, his habit and Caparisons of blew Velvet, imbroidered with golden Naves of Carts burning, the trappings supported by Foot-men ha∣bited costly and sutable. On the morrow, being the sixt of July, all the Prelates Miter'd in their Pontificalibus, receiv'd him at West∣minster-Hall towards the Chappell; the Bishop of Rochester bare
the Crosse before him, the Cardinall and the Earle of Huntington followed with a pair of guilt Spurres, and the Earle of Bedford with Saint Edwards Staffe for a Relique. After the Precession, the Earle of Northumberland beares a poyntlesse Sword naked, the LordSignifying mercy. Stanley, the Mace of the Constableship (but waited not for Consta∣ble) the Earle of Kent bare the second Sword naked with a poynt,Signifying Iustice to the Temporalty. Iustice to the Clergy, Peace. Monarchy. upon the right hand of the King, the Viscount Lovel another Sword on the Kings left hand with a poynt. Next came the Duke of Suf∣folke with the Scepter, the Earl of Lincoln with the Ball and Crosse, then the Earle of Surry with the Sword of State in a rich Scabbard, in place of the Constable of England, the Duke of Norfolke on his right hand with the Crowne: After him immediately, the King in a SurCoat and Robe of Purple, the Canopy borne by the Barons of the five Ports, the King betweene the Bishop of Bath and Durham, the Duke of Buckingham bearing up his Traine, and served with a white Staffe for Seneshall, or High Steward of England. In the Front of the Queenes Traine, the Earle of Huntington bare the Scepter, Viscount Liste the Rod with the Dove, the Earle of Wiltshire her Crowne, and next to him followed the Queene her selfe (in Robes like the King) betweene two Bishops, the Canopy borne by Barons of the Ports, upon her head a Coronet set with pre∣cious Stones, the Lady Margaret Somerset, Countesse of Richmond, carried up her Traine, followed by the Dutchesse of Suffolke, with many Countesses, Baronesses, and other Ladies. In this manner the whole Procession passed through the Palace, and entred the West doore of the Abbey, the King and Queene taking their seats of State, stayed untill divers holy Hymnes were sung, then ascended to the high Altar shifting their Robes, and putting on other open and voy∣ded in sundry places for their Anoynting; which done, they tooke other Robes of Cloth of Gold, so teturned to their seats, where the Cardinall of Canterbury and the other Bishops, Crowned them, the Prelate putting the Scepter in the left hand of the King, the Ball and Crosse in his right, and the Queenes Scepter in her right hand, and the Rod with the Dove in her left; on each hand of the King stood a Duke, before him the Earle of Surrey, with the Sword as a∣foresaid; on each hand of the Queene stood a Bishop, by them a La∣dy kneeling, the Cardinall said Masse and gave the Pax; then the King and Queene descending were both housed with one host parted betweene them at the high Altar: This done, they offered at Saint Edwards Shrine, where the King layd downe Saint Edwards Crowne & put on another, so returned to Westminster-Hal in the same State they came, there dispersed, and retired themselves for a season. In which interim, came the Duke of Norfolke, Marshall of England, mounted upon a brave Horse, trapped with Cloth of Gold downe to the ground, to submove the presse of people and void the Hall. A∣bout foure of the clocke the King and Queene sat to Dinner, the King at the middle Table of the Hall, and the Queene on his left
hand; on each side a Countesse attending her, holding a Cloth of Plaisance (or rather of Essuyance) for her Cup: On the Kings right hand sate the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and all the Ladies were placed on one side of a long Table in the middle of the hall against them, at another Table, the Lord Chancellour, and all the Nobles; at a Table next to the Cup-board, the Lord Maior of London and the Aldermen. Behind the Barons of the Kingdome sate the Barons of the Ports; there were other Tables for persons of qualitie. After all were sea∣ted, came the Lord Marshall againe, the Earle of Surrey Constable (Pro illa vice tantum) the Lord Stanley Lord Steward, Sir William Hopton Treasurer of the Houshold, and Sir Thomas Piercy Contro∣ler, they served the Kings boord with one dish of Gold and another of Silver. The Queene was served all in guilt Vessells, and the Car∣dinall Arch-Bishop in Silver Dishes. As soone as the second course was served in, Sir Robert Dimock the Kings Champion makes Proclamation, That whosoever would say, King Richard the third was not lawfully King, he would fight with him at all gutterance, and for gage thereof threw downe his Gauntler, then all the people cryed, King Richard, God save King Ri∣chard; And this he acted in three severall parts of the Hall, then an Officer of the Cellar brought him a guilded Bowle with Wine which he dranke, and carries the Cup away as his ancient Fee. After that, the Heralds cryed Largesse thrice, and returned to the Scaffold. Lastly came the Maior of London with the Sheriffs, with a Voyder, serving the King and Queene with sweet Wines, who had each of them a covered Cup of Gold for reward: By which time, the day began to give way to the night, the King and Queene departing to their Lodgings. And this is a briefe and true Relation of his Coronation, testifiedMoore. Graston. Polidore. Hall. Croyland. Hollingshed. Stow, &c. by all the best Writers and Chroniclers of our Stories, publicke and allowed, which may confute the boldnesse of that slander that sayes, he was not rightfully, and Authentically Crowned, but ob∣scurely and indirectly crept in at the Window. But all times have Detractors, and all Courts their Parasits, and many that have admi∣red Princes to their graves, even there have turn'd from them, with ingratitude and murmur. Soone after this the King dismissed, and sent home all the Lords, Spirituall and Temporall, with a straight charge and direction to them, the Judges of Oyer and Terminer, with all other Magistrates and Officers in generall and particular, for the Equitable and just Government of their Jurisdictions and Circu∣its▪ And it is observed, those times were under as happy an ex∣pectation of Law and Justice, as those, either before or after more flatter'd; which Iohn Hide (a Learned man, and Doctor of Physick) implyes in a Manuscript Poesy of his.
—Solio juris recti{que} Minister, Ille sedens alto, tali sermone profatur; Moses concilio soceri persuasus Iethro, Solus quod Populi nequijt componere lites, Constituit populi praefectos at{que} tribunos; Sic cum me praecelsa premant fastigia Regni, Ardua magnarum teneatis muner a rerum; Et primùm, à vobis pravos secludite motus AEquis Iustitiae trutinis appendite causas; Ob paupertatem miseros ne spernite cives, Nec vota in cassum fundat pupillus in auras, Deni{que} largitio, nè vos Corrumpat iniqua, &c. All things thus in a happy presage and good order, the King with the Queene departed from London, and makes Windsor the first gift in his Progresse for some few dayes: From thence to his Mannor of Woodstock, then to the Universitie of Oxford, where the Muses Crown'd their browes with fragrant Wreathes for his en∣tertainment. Next he visited the circular Citie of Glocester, and gave the Citizens, (for the love and loyaltie they exprest, in holding the Castle and Towne so constantly against Queene Margaret and the forces of Henry the sixt, for him and his Brother the King) large Pri∣viledges and Immunities. And here the Duke of Buckingham takes his leave for Brecknock, constantly disposed and affected in all outward appearance. The King making small stay any where, (save at Coventry) untill he came to the goodly and ancient Citie of Yorke, the scope and goale of his Progresse, which receiv'd him with all honour and Festivitie, and was there the second time Crowned by Dr. Rotheram Arch-Bishop of that Sea, in the Cathedrall Church, and his Sonne invested in the Principalitie of Wales, as the Prior of Croyland reporteth; Eodem die quo Richardus Coronatus est Rex in Ecclesia Metropolitana Eboracen∣si, mox filium Edwardum in Principatum Walliae eum insigntis virgae aureae &c. evexit & Pomposa & sumptuosa festa & convivia ibi fecit. And indeed, it was a day of great state; for (as Polidore saith) There was then three Princes in Yorke wearing Crownes, the King, Queene, and Prince; In acclamation whereof, there was Stage-Playes, Turneaments, and other Triumphall Sports, as Sir Thomas Moore relates. At this time the King Knighted Richard of GlocesterChron. M. S. in Quar. apud. D. Ro. Coton, and Rob. Fabian. Rich. the Ba∣stard of the D. o Gloc. Captaine of Calice. his base sonne, who was after Captaine of Calice, and many Gentle∣men of those parts. But (albeit this was an intermission as it were of all busie and serious agitations) yet the King, still where he tra∣vall'd had a just regard to the Administration and Execution of Ju∣stice and the more facinerous Malefactors: And surely these respe∣ctive inclinations of his had their solemn affections and desires Natu∣ralized
in him, witnessed by the scope and integritie of those just Lawes which after followed. The Progresse thus spent, he returnes to London; and having con∣sulted some matters of State, declares his first resolution for the Tri∣bute detain'd by France, which he had formerly by a friendly Message demanded, but now sends stout menaces and threats for it. The French would not have it cal'd a Tribute, but a Pension, as Phi∣lip de Comines insinuates, though it had beene rays'd and payd to King Edward the fourth, in lieu of the Dutchy and Countries of Aqui∣taine, Normandy, Poictou, and Maine, &c. whereof the the French had deseis'd the Crowne of England, which King Edward the fourth forced Lewis to acknowledge, and to Covenant and agree, That he, his heires and Successors, should pay unto the Crowne of England, the summe of fiftie thousand Crowns, with caution and securitie to be payd in the Citie of London, or after Iean Tillet and Iohn Maierus, seventy five thousand Crowns to be payd into the Tower; with which the French King also granted, in the name of Annuall Pension, sixteenIohn Maierus. Iean Tillet. d Tillet saith, That that tri∣bute or Pension was 75000 crowns, or, Es∣cu's & chacun Escu vallant. trois souls. thousand pounds to some Noblemen and others of speciall credit with the King: As to Sir Thomas Gray, Marquesse of Dorset, Willi∣am Lord Hastings, Chamberlaine to the King, Doctor Thomas Roth∣ram, Bishop of Lincolne, and Lord Chancellour of England; Iohn Lord Howard, Sir Iohn Cheyney, Master of the Horse; Sir Thomas Mountgomery, Master Challoner, and to the Master of the Rowles; The chiefest of these had two thousand Crownes apiece per annum. Besides which Pensions, he gave rich Presents, and sent rewards to such Lords as stood most for this accord. Eugueraunt de Moustrolet a∣voucheth, that the Lord Howard, and the Master of the Horse, were the chiefest of the mediators in it; his reason is, that they were the men most in favour with King Edward. Iean Tillet, with Philip de Co∣mines, tells us, the Lord Howard in lesse then two yeares had the value of twentie foure thousand Crownes in Plate, Coine and Jewels, o∣ver and above his Annuall Pension; the Lord Hastings at one time to the value of two thousand markes in Plate, besides his Pension. And if their owne Stories speake truth, Richard de Nevil, the great Earle of Warwick, had of the Kings of France much more then any other English Nobleman, which the Chronicle of Brittaine seconds. And doubtlesse, King Richard had still compel'd him to continue it, had not eruptions of State and tumultuary practises fatally deterr'd his Sword: For as Kings have vaster limits, they have higher bounds then others. If our vulgar paths be rugged, theirs are slippery, and all their mighty resolutions and ambitions have their fate and circle, hither they must, and no further; yet as envious as fortune shew'd her selfe, he brought King Lewis to termes of faire promises and mediation for time of payment, as Comines obscurely implyes. This yeare the King kept a very magnificent Christmas at West∣minister,The Q. Mother & King Rich. reconciled. and was reconciled to the Queene Dowager, who left Sanctu∣ary, and to congratulate the Kings favour, sent her five daughters to
Court, where they were received with all Princely kindnesse. On the three and twentieth day of January, in the first yeare of his Raigne, he summon'd a Parliament to be holden at Westminster, i which (after the enacting of many good Lawes) the marriages oThe Parlia∣ment of R. 3. King Edward were debated, that with the Lady Gray adjudged unlaw∣full, and her children illegitimate, there being proofe of a former Contract and Marriage with the Lady Elianor Talbot, daughter of the old Earle of Shrewsbury, and Relict of the Lord Butler of Sudely then and long after living, and all that had been inferred by the Duke of Buckingham, or contained in the Bill supplicatory, demonstrated, was againe consulted, and judgement given against that Marriage, and incapacity of the Children also, of the Earle of Warwicke and his sister, the Lady Elizabeth Plantagenet, all decreed and confirmed by Act of Parliament; so that here to taxe so generall an Assent, were to say there was not one honest nor just man in that High Court, and what greater scandall to the whole Kingdome? There was likewise notice taken of the Earle of Richmonds pre∣tence to the Crowne, by a Title derived from the House of Lancaster, who was at that time in France, labouring to engage the King and the Duke of Brittaine in the quarrell. Oh the infinite windings, and per∣plexed sleepes we labour through, to get that we must bid goodnight to to morrow; And yet the true and rightful Lancaster had no finger in it, for this Earle was not then granted to be of the House of Lan∣caster, untill the Pope by his Bull had given him that stile, and him∣selfe (after he was King) by his Prerogative assumed it. In this Par∣liament he was attainted of High Treason, and with him Iohn Earle of Oxford, Thomas Marquesse of Dorset, Iasper Earle of Pembroke,The friends & confederates of the E▪ of Rich. Lionell Bishop of Salisbury, Peirce Bishop of Exceter, the Lady Mar∣garet Countesse of Richmond, Thomas Morton Bishop of Ely, Thomas Naudick by the stile of Thomas Naudick of Cambridge Conjurer, William Knevet of Buckingham smeared with the same pitch, George Browne of Beechworth, Thomas Lukenor of Tratton, Iohn Cuilford, Iohn Fogg, Edward Poinings, Thomas Fieries of Cherstmonceur, Nicholas Gainsford, William Clifford, Iohn Darrell, with others of Kent and the West Countrey. There was further enacted for the appro∣bation and confirming the true and lawfull Title of King Richard, this clause or sentence. It is declared, pronounced, decreed, confirmed and established by the Authority of this present Parliament, that King Richard the third is the true and undoubted King of this Realme, as well by right of Consanguinitie and Heritage, as by lawfull Election and Corona∣tion, &c. And in a place of the Rowle of this Parliament, there areThe sons of K. E. living in Jan & Febr▪ af∣ter the death of their Father. Arguments to be gathered, that the two sonnes of King Edward were living in the time of this Parliament, which was at the least nine moneths after the death of their Father, and sixe moneths after King Richard; which will import thus much, That if King Richard then, lawfully and quietly possessed of the Crowne, suffered them to live so
long, there is no reason why, he should after make them away, for their lives could not rectifie their Bloud, or Titles, nor their deaths advan∣tage him, neither can Bastards be dangerous, or prejudiciall to the true and titular Lord, or lawfull proprietary, be he Prince or Subject; Witnesse Forraigne Countries, and England it selfe, which holds Bastards uncapable of Heritage, Honour or Offices: In the Month of February, towards the end of this Parliament, the King in his pro∣vidence to establish the Regall fortune and Succession in the Prince his Sonne, and to fasten the affection of the Nobility and People unto him with the Crowne, procures them to meet him in the Pallace at Westminster, and there (Interiori Caenaculo, as mine Author saith) tendred by the Duke of Norfolke unto them, an Oath of Fealty and Allegeance in writing, to be taken to the Prince of Wales; which they tooke and subscribed most willingly; the occasion of this, was his jealousie of that new League struck up between the Earle of Rich∣mond and the Duke of Buckingham, who was now discovered more apparantly, and the rest of the engagement: To oppose and suppresse them therefore, and stifle the Confederacy before it should grow more threatning; The King makes a Commission by Letters Pa∣tents, in the name of the Vice Constable of England, unto Sir RalphVice Consta∣ble of Eng∣land. Ashton, A Coppy whereof (the President being unusuall, and the Office great) I have Transcribed verbatim from the Records in the Chappell of the Convertits. Vice Constabulario Angliae Constituto. REX dilecto & fideli suo, Rudolpho Ashton militi, salutem.Patents de anno 1 Rich 3. part. 1. me. 2. Sciatis, quod nos defidelitate, circumspectione, & probitate, vestrâ plenius confidentes, assignavimus deputavimus & ordinavimus vos hac vice Constabularium nostrum Angliae, ac Commisionarium nostrum, dantes & concedentes vobis teno∣re presentium potestatem & authoritatem generalem, & manda∣tum speciale, ad audiendum & examinandum ac procedendum, con∣tra quascunque personas de crimine laesae nostrae regi majestatis suspectas & culpabiles tam per viam examinationis testium quam aliter prout vobis melius visum fuerit ex officio vestro; nec non in causis illis judicialiter & sententialiter juxta casus exigentiam & delinquentium demerita omni strepitu & fu∣tura Iudicij appellaione quacunque remota, quandocunque vo∣bis videbitur procedendum, judicandum et finali executione de madandum cum omnibus etiam clausulis, verbis, et terminis spe∣cialibu
ad executionem istius mandati et authoritatis nostrae de jure vel consuetudine requisitis, quae etiam omnia hic expressa habemus, assumpto vobiscum aliquo tabellione fide digno, qui singula conscribat unà cum alijs quae in praemissis vel circa a necessaria videbuntur seu qualitercunque requisita; mandantes & firmiter vobis injungentes, quod alijs quibuscunque praetermi∣ssis circa praedicta quoties & quando opus fuerit intendatis, caus as que antedictas audiatis, examinetis, & in eisdem proced∣tis ac eas judicetis & finali executione ut praefertur demande∣tis. Damus etiam omnibus & singulis quorum interest in hac parte tenore praesentium firmiter in mandatis, quod vobis in pr∣missis faciendis pareant, assistant & auxilientur in omnibus dili∣genter, in cujus, &c. Teste Rege apud Covent. 24. die Octobris, Anno regni primo; per ipsum Regem oretenus. What successe this Commission, and new Office had, I find not re∣ported, but it might come too late, or the new Officer forget what he was to execute, for the faction lost none they could corrupt or winne; yet surely, the institution of it was very politicke and important, as a plaine Image and pourtraict, of the Office and Authority of the great or High-Constable of England, which in the execution of a wise and valiant person, is of a high and great use. Having made mention of these Offices, it shall not be a Parergue,Other Offi∣cers of King Richard 3. between these Acts, to interadde the rest of this Kings Officers, both Chiefe and others; at the least such as were of Honour or Dignity: I have before named the High-Constable, the great Marshall, high Admirall, Lord Chamberlaine, the rest were Sir Iohn Wood the Elder, L. Treasurer the first yeare, and Sir Iohn Touchet, Lord Adley during the rest of his Reigne, Doctor Russell Bishop of Lincolne had the great Seale, Thomas Barrow was Master of the Rowles, (which place Henry the seventh continued to him, and made him a Privy Coun∣sellour) Iohn Kendall was principall Secretary, Sir William Hopton Treasurer of the Houshold, Sir Thomas Peircy Controler, after him Sir Iohn Buck, Iohn Gunthorpe Keeper of the Privy Seale, Sir William Hussey Chiefe Justice, Thomas Tremaine and Roger Townsend the Kings Serjeants, Morgan Kidwell Attorney Generall, Nicholas Fitz-Willi∣am Recorder of London. For matters of Treaty, betwixt this King and Forreigne Princes, I have seen a memoriall of one, for intercourse and commerce, be∣tweenTreaties for League and commerce with Flanders, &c. In Thesauro Scaeccarij 1 R. 3. him and Philip Duke of Burgundy, and the Estates of Flanders, who in the Record are called Membra Flandriae: These Princes and States had each of them their Commissioners to treate and determine the Affaires, which I find they dispatch with approbation of the Princes their Masters.
There was also a Commission about these times, to heare and re∣dresseIn Rowles A. 1 R. 3. the complaints made to the King, by the Subjects of the King of France and of Denmarke, which was well expedited. Anno Regni 2. That Treatie of Peace and League with Scotland,An. Dom. 1484. (began before) was continued, and finished by Commissioners sent from Iames the fourth King of Scotland, and by other Commissioners delegate for the King of England; those for Scotland, were Coli: EarlEgile in Re∣cord. of Argile, Chancellor of Scotland, N. Bishop of Aberdene, the Lord Lisle, the Lord Dromonde of Stobhall, Master Archibald Quhitlaw, Arch-Deacon of Lodion, & Secretary to the King, Lion King at Arms and Duncan of Dundas; they came to Nottingham in September Anno Domini 1484, and were honourably receiv'd in the great Chamber of the Castle, the King sitting under his Royall Cloth of State; Master Archibald Quhitlaw stepping before the rest, addrest a very Eloquent Oration unto him in Latine, which reflected upon the praise of Mar∣tial men & Art Military, including much to the honour and praise of King Richard. This Treatie aimed partly at a Truce and Peace, part∣ly at a Marriage, betweene Iames the Prince of Scotland and the La∣dy Anne, Daughter of Iohn de la Poole, Duke of Suffolke, and Neice to King Richard. Commissioners for the King of England, were Iohn Bishop of Lincolne, Richard Bishop of Asaph▪ Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Henry Earle of Northumberland, Master Iohn Gunthorpe custos privati sigilli, Sir Thomas Stanley, Lord Stanley, Sir N. Lord Strange, Sir N. Lord Powis, Sir Henry Lord Fitz▪hugh, Sir Humphry Lord Dacres, Master Thomas Barrow Master of the Rowles, Sir Richard Ratcliff, William Catesby, and Richard Salkeld: The other for the Treatie of Alliance and Marriage, were Thomas Arch-Bishop of Yorke, Iohn Bishop of Lincolne, Iohn Bishop of Worcester, Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Wil∣liam Earle of Nottingham, Iohn Sutton Lord Dudley, N. Lord Scroope of Upsall, Sir William Hussey, Chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench; Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and William Catesby: But the successe of that, and many other good intendments, were interposed by the inconstan∣cy and contraste of the times. The Lady Anne de la Poole, upon theThe Lady Anne de la Poole a Nun. the breach thereof, (resolving to accept no other motion) forthwith tooke a religious habit in the Monastery of Sion. There was another Treatie of Peace and Truce in this secondTreaty with the Duke of Brittaine. yeare, betweene him and the Duke of Brittaine, or at the least given out for peace, yet was indeed but a part and pretext of the Treatie: for the maine negotiations on the Kings side, was, how to get the Earle of Richmond out of his custody into his owne, or be as well se∣cured of him there as his Brother King Edward was: And for this Treatie, the chiefe Negotiators, were the Bishop of Lincolne and Sir Thomas Hutton for the King, the Bishop of Leon and others forIb. in Scaccaer. the Duke. The Treatie began Anno Domini 1484. and was finished and ratified in the yeare following, but the Duke violated his part immediately by giving ayde to the Kings Enemies.
In the same yeare there were Letters made (which are yet extant in the Treasury of the Exchequor) that moved a Peace and Truce be∣weene King Richard, and Charles the eighth King of France;Treatie with the King of France. wherein it must be understood, the tribute before mentioned was Articled. Also in this yeare, and the yeare before, there was a private Trea∣tie, which we must not passe by, for the Marriage of the Lady Eliza∣beth with King Richard himselfe: what the successe of it was, andTreaty of mar∣riage of King Rich. with the Lady Eliz. how farre it proceeded, will more aptly present it selfe in another place. Wee are now to take notice of the Duke of Buckinghams revolt,Revolt of the D. of Buck. for this was the preparative and fourrier of the rest: And to give it the more taking feature and specious pretence, it must be given out▪ That the cause was the Reformation of an ill Government and Ty∣ranny, under which species, (for Treason is ever fairely palliated, and seldome wants the forme of some plea, though at the Barre) they must take up Armes against the King. And here (as some Rivers de∣riv'd from the Sea, cannot suddenly loose their taste of saltnesse) they discovered their ancient taint and inconstancy which the Prince wise∣ly suspected from the first. For the Duke of Buckingham (how af∣fablyThe Duke of Buckingham first riseth in Rebellion. The quarrell of the Duke of Buck. against the King. soever he trim'd his countenance) it should seeme departed male-content from Court, yet made not that generall publick pre∣tended cause of the Kings Crimes all his quarrell, but challenged him by some private grudges, as denying to give or restore to him the Earledome of Hereford, and Constableship of England, (for they went together a long time) which he alledged belonged to the Partage that fell to his great Grand-mother the Lady Anne, Daugh∣ter and Heire of Thomas Plantagenet, alias Woodstock, created by King Richard the second Duke of Glocester, and Earle of Buckingham, and of his Wife Elianor, daughter and co-heire of Humphry de Bohun Earle of Hereford, and Constable of England: Which claime, had he considerately look't upon, could not rightly revolve to him, butThe Title of the Earldome of Hereford, & of the Con∣stableship of England. rather was for the Kings part; For Humphry de Bohun, Earle of Here∣ford, of Essex and Northampton, Lord of Brecknock, and Consta∣ble of England (in the time of King Edward the third, and the last Earle of the Family of the Bohuns) had by the Lady Iane his Wife, Daughter of Richard Fitz-Allan Earle of Arundel, two Daughters and Heires, Elianor and Mary: Elianor was Married to the same Tho∣mas Plantagenet, alias de Woodstock, youngest Sonne of King Edward the third, Duke of Glocester and Earle of Buckingham: Mary the second Daughter was Married to Henry Plantagenet Duke of Lanca∣ster, and after King of England by the name of Henry the fourth, and the Earledome of Hereford fell to his Wife: In favour where∣of, he was Created Duke of Hereford by King Richard the second, and the Earledome (now a Dutchy) and the rights therof, remained in the King, and in the Kings Heires and Successors untill the death of King Henry the sixt, who dyed without Issue, & then all the Estate
of Lancaster (especially that of the Royall Family of Lancaster) es∣cheated to King Edward the fourth, and from him it came to King Ri∣chard, as Heire to his Brother and all his Ancestors. But the Duke of Buckingham pretended Title to that Earledome by his said Grand∣mother Anne, who was one of the Daughters and Heires of the a∣foresaid Lady Elianor (Wife of Thomas de Woodstock Duke of Glo∣cester) and the Wife of Edmond Stafford Earle of Stafford, and Grand-father to this Henry Duke of Buckingham, who the rather presumed to make this Claime, because the Issue of the other Sister Mary, being extinct, he tooke himselfe also to be her Heire. But King Richard relishing something in this, neare the dispositi∣on and inclination of Bullingbrooke, answered, That the Earledome of Hereford was of the inheritance of Henry the fourth, who was al∣so King of England (though by tort and usurpation) and will you my Lord of Buckingham Claime to be Heire of Henry the fourth? You may then also happily Assume his spirits, and lay Claime to the Crowne by the same Titles. This was as bitter as short, and doubly ill taken: First, because it came with a Repulse: Next, because it seemed to proceed from a suspition, and as a tax of his Loyaltie, and begets another pretence of exception in the Dukes bosome, which he called a breach of promise in the King, for not joyning the Prince his Sonne in Marriage with the Lady Anne Stafford his Daughter; but all those Colours were but to give complexion to the face of his defection, the true cause was well devined and found out by the King, his Ambition and aime to be Soveraigne, rays'd by an overweening of that Royall Blood he supposed to be in his descent from the said Thomas de Woodstock, &c. Sonne of a King; and yet he was not resolutely determined to make his Claime to the Crowne this way, nor to attempt the Kingdome by Armes, untill those embers which (as it were) lay but luke-warme in his thoughts, were quickned and revived by the animation of Do∣ctor Morton Bishop of Ely then a Privie Counsellour though he stood in some umbrage and disgrace in the Court with the King, for his practises against him, and was at this time in the custody of the Duke of Buckingham as a Prisoner; more expressely, for that being a Privie Counsellour, he had given secret advertisement to the Earle of Richmond of what passed in the secret Councells of the King; To this advantage, he applyes that which he had wittily drawne from the Dukes discontent and passionate discourses at times passed. By which, perceiving the glance of his Ambition, and that deriv'd from the great opinion of his Royall Blood, he pregnantly tickles and feeds that humour, untill he had soothed him past his owne strength or re∣tyrement; for his secret drift was, to apt and prepare the Duke to a Rebellion at any hand, though not to set his owne Title on foot, yet layes open the advantage of the present times to it, proposing flat usurpation and tyranny against the King Regnant, and the strong like∣lyhood of his Deposing. This lifts the Duke something higher in his
owne opinion. But comming to a pause, (and perceiving Rich∣mond was the man they had aimed at for this great blow (who had conditioned by Oath to marry the Lady Elizabeth, (for the Countesse of Richmond, had by the meanes of Doctor Lewis, conciliated theSir Tho. Moor. friendship of the Queene Mother to that Alliance, and to draw as many of the House of Yorke into the Action as were at her Devoti∣on) that many Potent Lords and some Forraigne Princes had promi∣sed their ayds) he began to retreat, and conceive he had taken the wrong path to his journyes end, for his Title and Claime must be no∣thing, if those of Yorke and Lancaster were united: And that the Earle (who stood betweene him and his Aimes) was not onely reso∣lute to attempt, but strongly ayded for it, himselfe not able upon such an instant to raise a power able to encounter, much lesse give check unto his violent Ambition, therefore concludes all against him∣selfe, and that it would fall out farte better to side with the times; a consideration which doubtlesse would highly stirre a spirit where so much greatnesse of opinion and ambition was. And the Doctor dis∣cerning this disgust, and that he was startl'd in his hope and resolusi∣on, to recover him an intire man, & not let him stand by, an idle specta∣tor in so meritorious an action, he opens a private way of honour and satisfaction, suggesting him the first and greatest man, the King∣dome was to know next the King: And finding his particular distasts to King Richard, of quickest sense and argument to him, he freshly urges (and as it were) refricates each particle, to the greatnesse of his spirit and discontent; the Duke replyes not much at that time, but busie in his thoughts leaves him, and presently fashions a visite to the Countesse of Richmond, (a Lady of a politick and contriving bo∣some) to know the credit of his intelligence, which she insinuatesThis Margaret Countesse of Richmond, was Daughter and Heire to Iohn Beaufort Duke of Somerset, & Margaret de Beaufort, Mo∣ther of the D. of Buck. was Daughter of Edmond D. of Somerset; and thus were the E. of Rich. and the D. of Buck. a Kin. Rob. Glov. in catal. &c. The Conspi∣rators with the D. of Buck. for the E. of Rich. with arguments so full of circumstance and honour, besides her Sons indearment to him, their hearnesse of blood, affirming the Dukes Mother a Somerset, the reciprocall affinitie betweene her Father and his, and then the bravery and Religion in the Cause, that the Duke now forsakes himselfe, and fully gives up his resolution and promise to her; thus prepar'd, he finds out the Lord Stanley, the Marquesse of Dorset, Edward Courtney Earle of Devonshire, and his Brother the Bishop of Exeter, Sir Iohn Bowrchier, Sir Iohn Wells, Robert Willow∣by, Edward Woodvill, Thomas Arundel, who had severally raised for∣ces, and intended their Rendezvous neere Glocester, so to march for Dorsetshire, there to receive the Earle and the Duke, with his Welchmen: But the King was early in his preparation, to prevent them before they could unite, or the Earle of Richmond arrive there, else they had fastened a most dangerous Blow upon him. And at this full stop, in these progresses (me thinkes) wee may ob∣serve, how uncertainely, in our strongest valuations, we are our owne; and that our greatest Confidences, and humane Policies, are but heavie weights hung at trembling Wyers, while our expecta∣tions are apt to be flattered, and out-goe themselves, but are over∣taken
in their Successe, and Fates, as was this great Mans; for their Forces neither met by Sea nor Land, the English being scatter'd by a suddaine and huge inundation that so dangerously over-flowed all passages, they could not joyne nor passe the River Severne, while the suddainnesse and strangenesse of it stroke the Souldiers with such al∣teration, that most part of them forsooke the Duke and left him toThe overthrow of the Duke of Buckingham. himselfe: The Earle of Richmond was as unfortunately met at Sea by a great tempest, upon the coasts of England. The King took the advantage this accident offered, and pursued thePolidore lib. 25 Duke, not only with a galloping Army, but with Edicts & Proscripti∣ons, that promised a thousand pounds in mony (whereunto some Wri∣tersKing Richard sharply repre∣hended Bani∣ster for betray∣ing his Master, which argued a noble mind. adde, so much Lands as was worth one hundred pounds per annum) to any that should bring in the Duke, who was betrayed and brought to the King then at Salisbury, by Humphry Banister,) an eternall brand) having lived by this mans service, and now thought treache∣rously to subsist by his Ruine. The Duke being examined, freely confessed all, and for it lost his head in the field according to Mar∣shallThe D. execu∣cuted by Mar∣shall Law. Law used by Armies, in November An. Dom. 1484. An. 2 Rich. 3. And here, if wee view him in the figure of his Ambition or Fate, wee shall find Doctor Morton his Caput Argoll, or the malignant Pla∣net of his fortune; who, as Sir Thomas Moore confesseth and affirm∣eth, by his Politick Drifts and Pride, advanced himselfe, and brought the Duke to this ruine. The rest fled, some into Sanctuaries, others into Brittaine to the Earle of Richmond, and some into Flanders, all their Plots being now how to be safe. And thus farre King Richard, in the Voyage of his Affaires had a promising Gale; wee will therefore here cast Anchor a while, and claspe up this first Booke, with the Relation of his better Fortunes. Explicit Lib. I.
THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD. The Argument of the Second Booke. THe Earle of Richmond practiseth with Forreigne Princes, and with the English Nobles for assistance and Forces to make his first and second invasions of England, He came first to Poole with ill successe, secondly to Milford cum bonis avibus. What Bastards are, and whereof they are capable, who be of the House of Lancaster, how Lancaster and Beaufort or Sommerset differ. Bastards of Kings must not take the Sirnames of the King or Kingdome. The honourable priviledge of the name of Planta∣genet. Prince Edward, and Queene Anne, John de la Poole proclaimed Heire of the Kingdom by Richard the Third. Bastards of John Duke of Lancaster made legi∣timate,
and capable of Offices, Honour, and of Heri∣tage by Richard 2, and the Parliament. What the Legitimation of the Pope is. Armes and Names of Princes Bastards. The Nobility of King Henry 7th. He affied not much in the Titles of Yorke and Lancaster. The Pope giveth to him the Title, de jure belli, & de domo Lancastriae. The greatnesse of the Title of Yorke, of Counsell, and Connsellours. The Prerogative of the King in Iudgements and Controversies. The Earle of Richmond landeth at Milford Ha∣ven; His entertainment there, and in Wales; His apt∣nesse for divers wives; he marcheth to Bosworth; King Richard and he sight, Richard is overcome and slaine, also the Duke of Norfolke by the Earle of Ox∣ford (ut Creditur.) The Earle of Richmond is straight Crowned King in the field; The fatall Er∣rour of King Richard; Kings loved Combate; The Titles of King Henry 7th. Kings go not now to war; Cruelties committed upon the body of King Richard; He was attainted of Treason, though against the Laws of Nature, and of Royall Majesty, with many of his followers and servants; The Earle of Surrey how released out of prison, his Geneology from He∣wardus walter de Buck, and his Progeny.
The Second Booke. WE left King Richard the Third in the growth of a flourishing and promising Estate, and his fate now, in the rise of a peacefull and prosperous Raigne, of a calme and hopefull presage; But Fortune that lends her smiles as Exactors do mony, to undoe the Debtor, soone cald for the Principall and Interest from this Prince, to whom she was meerly Novercall, and he might well call her with the expert Heros in Euripides fortuna diurna, i. e. fortune of a daies life,Eurip. in hea. for in her best mood, she is most slippery in her favours, and rediousValer. Max. l. 7 in her mischiefes, as was aptly considered by a grave man: Fortuna ad∣versas res cupido animo inducit, secundas parco; she is a mother but a little while, a stepdame a long time, and for ever to some; here then, we are aggressing into the turbulent and luctuall times, which were to∣wards the end and period of his Life and Raigne; the formall and fi∣nall causes, happening from the invasions attempted by the Earle of Richmond; I will begin the Second Booke there, and may say invasi∣ons, because he twice invaded the Kingdome, though by errour or ig∣norance of our Vulgar Historians, they are confounded and made one, which corruptly maimes the Story, and conceales and pretermits some very remarkeable agitations: particularly, the true cause of the Duke of Buckinghams ill successe and defeate, is misunderstood, or not at all known. To come to it therefore more certainly, we must take notice of the first preparation by the Earle of Richmond, who was resolved to advance his claime that way, and unbosomes himselfe to the Duke of Brittaine, his possibility and advantage by friends, if he could raise but sufficient strength to set him safely in England. The Duke gives him all good wishes to his undertaking, but opposes (against all Arguments of drawing him in) first, his Amity and League with England, which in honour and justice he was not to vio∣late: Then his wants by the long Civill and cruell Warres, with his Barons, that had so exhausted his Coffers, as durst he dispense with
the former cause, yet that might render him excused, being unable to furnish him, at least in so short a time as his expedition required; beyond which answer, for the present, the Earle thought not fit to presse him: But having a prompt and strong affiance in his good for∣tune, makes up to some of the Dukes most honourable and powerfull Friends, to lay siege that way to him by private advantages, for by his ingenious demeanour, he had won the inclinations of many great ones, being Master of a pleasant acute wit, which was well supplied in him by the straine of all Courtly Acts; to those he had the helpe of the French Tongue, which he spoke excellently well, and (to give all the more plausible accesse and influence) hee was (as Philip de Comines, who knew him, testifies) a very compleat and well featur'd Gentleman which makes the rule certaine, and well animating Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. Virgill. The beauties of the mind more gratious are, When as the bodies features are more faire. In the number of those eminent persons he had gained during his faire imprisonment: more fortunately he had applyed himself unto the Lady Margaret, Dutchesse of Brittaine, Daughter of Gaston de Foix, (a great man in the Westerne parts of France, whose Ancestors were well affected to the English) and Madam de Bevier; the Dutches,Iohn Froisard Paradin. Hist. de Brit. The Duke had by this Lady his daughter and heir Anne, who brought the Dutchy of Brittaine to France. so farre countenanced him in his designe, that she became an earnest suitor unto the Duke her husband, and prevailed both for his liberty and aide; for caution and pledge herein, he was only to kneele at the High Altar, before the blessed Sacrament, in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Vannes, there to make his religious Vow, justly and truely to observe what restitution he privately had promised to the Duke and Dutches; which protestation made, he had three Ships well rigged and furnished with Men, Armes, and Victuals, as my Author re∣lates.Hist. de Brit. Au Conte de Richmond furent aux despens du duo trois grosses Navi∣res de Brittannia, charges de gens de Armes, &c. & qui se misent in mer. But, by the favour of this Brittish Writer, the Earle staid many daies at Saint Malo, to receive and send intelligence, and made it the beginning of October 1484, before he came to Saint Poole in Dor∣set, where he lay some time at Anchor, to send his Boates a shore as Explorers or Spies, for discovery of the Coasts, where the Kings Armie, or his friends lay, who returned without any particular satis∣faction, but that there was many Armed men about the Country. The Earle (who in all things was circumspect, and cautiously rime∣rous) resolved immediately to loose from thence; but the night fol∣lowing, a terrible tempest constrained them with all hast to weigh Anchor, and make into the Maine, the Storme and darkenesse of the night severing and dispersing their Ships, some to the Coasts of Brit∣taine,
but the Earle himselfe to the Coasts of Normandy. And this was the successe of his first invasion, which, though it bore an inauspi∣cate face, it proved of a friendly event: For had he landed about Poole, or but stayed till the Kings Ships had come in, that lay waiting not far off, he had been a lost man every way, the King being not only active to meet their contrivements, but had some advantage upon them, by the close intelligence of a friend, and knew that the Forces of the Duke of Buckingham, with the Earle of Devon, and others, were to meet neare Gloucester, and march in their full and united strength, towards the sea-Coasts of Dorset, there to receive the Earle: But the King encoun∣tred with the Duke of Buckinghams Army, beate him, and cut off his head, before any of the rest could come at him daily putting the ordi∣nary bands of these West Countries in a ready posture for guard of their Coasts; and that if the Earle of Richmond, or any of his French Forces came a shore, they were to be entertained courteously by them pretending themselves of the Duke of Buckinghams Army, who had routed the Kings Party, and were sent thither to receive and conduct the Earle with his men to London. This was the projected end: But it is of remarkeable note, to look into the various paths of this Earles fortune, and how they brought him to his journies end, when they ap∣peared most doubtfull and threatning, not only gave him advantage by the good successe of his Enterprises, but made the most adverse accidents serve as prosperous unto them; for was it not happy the storme at Poole drove him from the Coasts of England, and no lesse fortunate, that the Duke of Buckingham was defeated, whereas, had the Duke atcheived that day, the Earle of Richmond not being there, (who was to be present in person, and Generall of the field) we may with reason conjecture his Emulation and Policy, would have ac∣cumulated the honour and fortune of the Conquest to his owne pre∣tended Title: such Spirits like the Sea, where they intrude or win, making their advantage their right, and not easily surrender, so much is the engagements of Ambition, too strong for all ties of faith and right. The example is observable in the Earle of Richmond himselfe; who although he knew the Children of the Duke of Clarence and others, had better right to the Crowne, yet once possest, would not resigne, no not to his owne Sonne, whilst he could hold it; nor did he want his Presidents, as all men know, who know any thing. And to take all Relations in our way, that may be levell with our Story; be∣twixt this and his second Invasion, some other passages offer them∣selves, as an interim, and not impertinent to supply the Readers ob∣servation. Amongst other, the Death of the Kings deare and only Sonne (at least Legitimate) who dyed in the Castle of Middleham in Yorke∣shire,The death of Edw. Prince of Wales, Sonne of Rich. 3. Chron. Croyland. in the Month of Aprill, Anno Dom. 1484 which newes gave such a passionate Charge upon the Nature and Affections of the King and Queene (being then in the Castle of Nottingham) that as mine
Author saith, Subitis doloribus insanire videbantur.Ibidem. Yet the King, being a man of an equall moderation to his courage, puts it into the Scale of his other worldly encounters, and as it was said of Iulius Caesar, that he soone passed the death of his only daugh∣ter Iulia (most pretious in his affection) Et tam facile dolorem hunc,Seneca. quam omnia vicit; So King Richard tempered his griefe and businesse so together, that the one made him not unsensible, nor the other neg∣ligent; but as the Prior of Croyland telleth, did all things gravely and discreetly as before. Rex Richardus nihilominus tamen suam partem defensione vacaverit. although the Queene could not hold so proportioned a temper over her griefe, the tendernesse of her Sexe, letting it breake upon her in a more passionate manner, and with such an Impression, that it became her sickenesse past recovery, languishing in weaknesse and extremity of sorrow, untill she seemed rather to overtake death, than death her; which was not long after the Princes, and added not a little to the Kings sufferings and sorrowes, (though traducing Spirits have char∣ged him with shortning her life by poyson, or some other practice, which are prestigious and blacke Comments, falsly plac't in the Mar∣gent of his Story, and may mere nearely touch the credit of the Au∣thors than his, if we judiciously take a view of him and his Actions; and looke upon the indulgent and active care for his Country, which he gave a constant and sincere expression of, instantly after his SonnesIohn Earle of Lincolne, and after Duke of Suffolke pro∣claimed Heire Apparant. death, when by the deliberation and consent of the Barons, he was in∣dustrious to thinke of a Successour, and to nominate such an one whose bloud and worth might make him equally Heire to the Crown and the peoples affection, (with the highest approbation of the King∣dome) and none more neare to either, then Sir Iohn de la Poole Earle of Lincolne, Sonne and Heire of Iohn de la Poole Duke of Suffolke, and of the Lady Elizabeth Plantagenet, Duchesse of Suffolke, the Sister and Heire of this King Richard, who was declared and proclaimed Heire apparant to the Kingdome. This was a Contrecarre to the Faction of Richmond, and (indeed) what greater affront could thwart them, if those of the House of Lancaster or Beaufort, were next Heire to the Crowne, (as the pretenders affirmed for the Earle of Richmond) who would likewise have him to be Caput gentis Lancastriae, & Princeps fa∣miliae, though they could scarcely prove him (not without question I am sure) Membrum illius familiae, untill he came to be King, for it was a question in those times, and much disputed, whether the Beauforts or Sommersets were of the House of Lancaster, or no: most true it is, the Children of the House of Lancaster being lawfully borne, and after Henry Plantagenet Duke of Lancaster, had Conquered and depo∣sed Richard the Second, were to be held Princes of the Bloud Royall, and capable of the Crowne in their naturall and due Order. But those of Beaufort or Sommerset, were as the Vulgar hath it, filij populi, or as the Imperiall Juris-consults say, liberi vulgo quesiti, who by the old Greeks were termed , i. e. sine Patre, the Doctors of the Spiri∣tuall
Law, drawing the Originem of such children, ab illicito & damnatoIohn Sarisbu∣riensis Ep. 85. coitu, of the polluted adulterous bed (and so those Beauforts, three males and one female, begotten by Iohn of Gaunt (as he believed) ac∣cording to the Lawes were to be reputed, the children of Sir Otho Swinford, begotten upon Katherine his Wife in his life time, who was daughter of Sir Payen Rovet a French-man, dwelling in Beauforts, and was Guyen Herald to the Duke of Lancaster. His Dutchesse Dona Constantia, (a most noble and vertuous Lady, daughter of Don Pedro King of Castile) was living also in the time he kept this Kathe∣rine, and had those Beauforts, who were Sir-named so from the place of their birth, a Town of his own in Aniow. But to note transitu, how obnoxious this Duke made his frailties, that (thinking to put a smoo∣ther face upon his sin) gave it but the same blush, by making this Ka∣therine Swinford his Dutchesse, against the liking of the King & all his noble friends, & direct Tenor of the common Laws, which pronounceSir Tha. Walsin. in Rich. 2. marriages between such as have lived in Aldutery unlawfull: Nay, to make him the more marvaile and smiling discourse of the Court, the glasse of his age was turn'd to his last yeare when he sacrifie'd these scatterd embers of his desires and passion. But he obtained those children to be legitimated: First, by the Pope Vrbanus the sixt; next by the Charter of King Richard the second, and had both these in∣dulgences afterward enlarged and confirmed by Parliament. Yet nei∣therParl. ann. 20. Rich. 2. these foure legitimate children, nec qui nascebantur ab illis, were permitted to the Princely familiar Title of Lancaster, so long as that ame flourished, much lesse of Plantagenet, for that was the peculiar Sir-name in chiefe of the Kings of England, and Princes of the blood Royall, since the time of the second Henry, Sonne of the Empresse Matilda, the first founder of that name in the Royall Fami∣ly of England. Of which honour were partakers, the Princely Fa∣mily of Wales, of Brotherton, of Yorke, of Lancaster, of Cla∣rence, of Woodstock, of Glocester, &c. And there are yet some Noblemen in Portugall, who descended from Iohn Duke of Lanca∣ster, and are called and written de Lancastro, others of the like OrigineDon Duart de Lancastro a Noble Gen. of Portugall, averred him∣self descended from the D. of . Valodolid. and Title may doe as much. Neither would King Henry the fourth, Henry the fift, nor King Henry the sixt, all Kings of the Lancastrian race indure to let the Lineage of Beaufort (though they respected them as kinsmen, and advanced them to many honours) Assume the the Sir-name of Lancaster, holding it an Arrogation and Usurpation of Royaltie and Royall Rights, wherein they followed their Ance∣stors, who devised other names for their base children: As Fitz. Roy,The peculiar Sir-names of the Bastards of the an in Kings of Eng∣land Oxenford, Fitz-Herbert, Clarendon, Fitz-Henry Longuespee Cornwall; and so they continued the name of Beaufort and Somersets untill the Earle of Richmond came, and this was in imitation of the Kings of France as I conceve. For within the reach of my observation, since the time of Hugh Ct they never vouchsafed any of their base sons to be capable of the Crown of France, or to have the Adven (as they call it) nor the Sir-name of France; but the illegitimate daughters may
take the Sir-name France, or de France; because they can make no claime to the Crowne by a pretended permission of the Sa lik-law, which Iohn de Tillet witnesseth. La troisiesme lignèe a du tout rejectè, les Bastards non seulement de la Coronne mais aussi de l'aduen, et Surnom de France, qui Concession est per∣misArmes of Ba∣stards of the Kings of Eng∣land. aux Bastards de roy' &c. And as the Bastards of the Kings of England had other names, so they tooke differenced Armes; or elsewere permitted to beare their mothers (if of any Family.) If tolerated to beare the armes of Eng∣land; then they were diversified in a Checking, Debasing and Reba∣ting manner, with Bastons, Bends, Sinister Barres, Bordutes, Marks of Basenesse, Obscuritie and Noveltie, which any new Gentleman might beare, such as the Learned call filios terrae & novos homines; and wee vulgarly, upstarts. But to object against the use of this in Eng∣land, the example of Hamelin is brought in; and to credit it, his Armes forged by some weake and negligent Heralds, who call him Hamelin Plantagenet, when the truth is, this Hamelin (base sonne of Ieoffry Plantagenet, Earle of Aniow) was simply called Hamelin, and his sonne William tooke the Sir-name of his Mother Dame Isabel de Warren, daughter and heire of William de Warren Earle of Surrey, which their Posteri continued; as Ioannes de Warrena the first, and Ioannes de Warrena the second, both Earles of Surrey; and Isabella de Warren, and Elianor de Warren &c. mentionedin the Charters and Re∣cords, but never Plantagenet, which is acknowledged by our best Heralds and Antiquaries; Master William Campden hath these words: Isabella fillaCamd. in Surr. sola Gulielmi de Warrena Comitis Surreiae Hamelinum Nothum Galfredi Plantageneti &c. titulo Comitis Surreiae maritum exornavit. Hamelinus Gulielmum Surreiae Comitem genuit, cujus posteri à Scito Warrenorū nomi∣ne eundem titulum gesserunt. And that the base sonne of King Edward the fourth, was commonly called Arthur Plantagenet proves nothing neither, well considered: For in the times when this Arthur lived, the name of Plantagenet, being onely left in the house of Yorke (the Lancasterian Plantagenet being more extinguished) had not the for∣mer honour and reputation, but was darkned and setting, rather drawing a contempt and hate to them that bare it, the White Rose dayly fading and withering; and so malignant was their Planet then, that, as a Learned Gentleman hath further observed, It was not safeThe. Gainsford. in that time to be a Plantagenet; therefore the permission of those times can be no warrant for the objections, nor the ignorance of the Poeticall Heralds, who have strain'd this fable of Hamelin. Yet far∣ther, not onely giving him and his Posteri a false Sir-name, but as∣sign'd him by the like Fabulous Art, a shield of familiar Ensignes, the Armes of France border'd with an Orle of Normandy or Guyen: which he, nor yet any of the Antique Lineage of Aniow, or their Progeny ever bare, or could by just Title beare, either simply, or compounded, or the Progenitors of our English Kings the Lillies of Gold in an azure field, untill King Edward claimed the Crowne of
France, and assumed them in the right of Queene Isabel de Valoys his Mother, who was the first that bare them quarterly with the Armes of England. But the Armes of the ancient Earles of Aniow were a Scarboucle,Scarboucle, falsly called Carbuncle. (that is, a Golden Bucle of a military Scarffe or Belt, set with preci∣ous Stones) not a Carbuncle or more precious Ruby, for the terme is erroneous and absurd, if considered: The Princes of Aniow bare this Scarboucle in a shield party per Chiefe, Argent and Gueules; and the Heires of this Hamelin (who tooke the Sir-name of Warren) bare also the Armes of the house of Warren in their Shields and Caparisons, but bare the Scarboucle of Aniow for their Crest, as they were descended out of that House, as I have seene upon a Seal of Ioannes de Warrena Earl of Surrey, at a Charter, dated 20. E. 3. An. Dom. 1346. apud Dom. Rob. Cotton, which hath given me occasion to speake thus much to cure the Blemish that mistake hath thrust into History, such absurdities having their infection, and passing by an Age or two upon the easie and common judgments, after grow up for tall and undeniable truths: For some meerly reading the complexion of things, as they do men by their out-sides, or as boyes Poetry, with a tickled faith; through such wide eares and observati∣ons, crept in that Parasitisme on the one side, and Pride and Usurpa∣tion on the other side, that made the house of Lancaster and the Beau∣forts,Difference be∣tweene the house of Lan∣caster and So∣merset. alias Somersets, all one; which (whilst the house of York flouri∣shed) was held to differ as much as Royall and Feudall, Soveraignty and Suzeraignty; for their modestie at first was very well pleased with that of Beaufort, and it seem'd honourable enough untill the children of Iohn de Beaufort, the eldest Brother (being Earle of So∣merset) assumed the name of their Fathers greatest honour and Earle∣dome for their Sir-name, and the rest following, quite left the name of Beaufort, and made the other Hereditary. From this, Iohn de Beau∣fort Earle of Somerset, and Marquesse of Dorset, descended Henry Duke of Somerset, Father naturall to Charles Somerset, created EarleThe Earles of Worcester, from whom. of Worcester by King Henry the eight. And it is worth the noting that this Duke Henry left the Faction of Lancaster to follow Edward the fourth. The first Beauforts legitimated by the Pope, and Richard the second have no other Sir-names, but Beaufort in either of the instruments Apostolicall, nor any words to give or emure them to any capacitie of Royall Title, or state of Soveraignty in the Crown, onely purged them by the Popes spirituall power from the foulenesse of Bastardy, allowing them as children legitimate and lawfully born, but gives them no other title then Ioanna de Beaufort miles, Henricus de Beaufort Clericus, Thomas de Beaufort Domicellus, Ioannus de Beau∣fort Domicella, and more the Pope cannot doe. As the Doctors of Sorbone, and some of the best Canonists hold, who peremprorily affirme, That the Pope cannot make Bastards capable to inherit the Hereditary Lands of their Father; neither can give them power to Constitute Successours or Heires, or hold Offices, Dignities, or Ti∣tles,
without the Princes speciall dispensation, to which the Civill and Imperiall Lawes agree, and is Authentick in England, as aThe civill and imperiall Law against Ba∣stards. Sir Edw. Cook. Learned and eminent Judge reports, though others thinke it of too severe a nature, and moderately agreeable to reason and Law (the Law much observing reason) That Bastards being honest and worthy men (the rather if they be avowed by their Fathers) may be admitted to Honours, Dignities, Titles, Feuds, and other Ornaments of re∣wards and vertue. Of this indulgence and connivence, wee have ex∣amplesDoctor Stephen Gardiner. Sir Tho. Eger. Chancellors of England. in England by two worthy and deserving men (flourishing in this Age) who, though Bastards held the greatest Offices in England. So Richard the second, in his Charter for the legitimation of the Beauforts, would have men of desert (and avowed by their Fathers) capable of Advancement and Honours. The Tenor of which Char∣ter and Confirmation of it by Parliament I shall exhibite, as it is taken out of the Archives and Tower Records, opening the way by a short advertisement, That in this Act of Parliament, there is an In∣duction to the Charter, made by Doctor Edmond Stafford, Brother to the Earle of Stafford, and Bishop of Exeter, Lord Chancellour of England in the twentieth yeare of Richard the second; which in∣timateth, that Pope Vrbanus the sixt, at the earnest request of the King, vouchsafed to legitimate these Beauforts, the base sonnes and the daughter of the Duke of Guyen and Lancaster: That the King also, having power to legitimate and enable Bastards in the same kind, and in as ample manner as the Emperour hath or had, for so he pressed and avowed in the Act, was pleased at the humble request and suit of the Duke their Father, to make them not onely legitimate, but also capable of Lands, Heritages, Titles, Honours, Offices, Dig∣nities, &c. And that the King for the more authority therof, crav'd the allowance and favourable assent of the Barons in Parliament, which was granted: The Charter runnes thus. Charta Legitimationis Spuriorum Ioannis Ducis Lancastriae. RIchardus dei gratia Rex, Angliae, Franciae, Dominus, Hiber∣niae, charissimis Consanguineis nostris, Nohilibus viris Ioanni de Beaufort Militi, Henrico de B. Clerico, Thomae de Beaufort Domicello & Nobili mulieri Ioannae Beaufort domicellae prae∣clarissimi patrui nostri Nobilis viri Ioannis Ducis Aquitaniae & Lancastriae Germanis natis & liegis nostris salutem. Nos pro honore & meritis &c. Avunculi nostri, Proprio arbi∣tratu & meritorum suorum intuitu vos, quia magno pro∣bitatis
ingenio, ac vitae ac morum Honestate fulgetis, & ex re∣gali estis prosapia propagati &c. hinc est quod Ioannis &c. avunculi nostri genitoris vestri precibus inclinati vobis (cum (ut asseritur) defectum natalium patimini) hujusmodi defectum & ejusdem qualitates quascunque abolere praesentes, vos haberi vo∣lumus, pro sufficientibus, ad quoscunque honores, dignitatis prae∣eminentias, status, gradus, & officia, publica, & privata, tam perpetua quam temporalia, atque Iudicialia & Nobilia, quibus∣cun{que} nominibus nuncupentur, etiam si, Ducatus, Principatus, Co∣mitatus, Baroniae vel alia feuda fuerint, etiamsi mediate vel immediate, à nobis dependeant seu teneantur praefici, praemoveri, eligi, assumi & admitti, illa{que} recipere pro inde libere ac licite va∣leatis, ac side legitimo thoro nati existeritis, quibuscunque Statu∣tis, seu Consuetudinibus regni nostri Angliae in contrarium edi∣tis seu observatis quae hic habemus pro totaliter expressis, nequa. quam obstantibus, de plenitudine nostrae regalis potestatis & de assenssu Parliamenti nostri tenore praesentium dispensamus, vos∣que & quemlibet vestrum natalibus restituimus & Legitima∣nus, Die Feb. Anno regni 20. R. 2. Here wee find large Graces, Honours, and Priviledges, conferred upon those Beauforts; for the King calls them Consanguineos sous, and not onely confirmes their Legitimation, but makes them (by the helpe of the Parliament) capable of Baronies, Earledomes, Duke∣domes, and Principalities, enableth them for all Offices publique and private, temporary and perpetuall, to take hold of and injoy all Feuds, as well noble as other, all Lands and Signiories Hereditary, as lawfully, firmly and rightfully, as if they had beene borne in law∣full matrimony, but yet conferres no Royall Title nor interest in the Crowne, at the least, to the observation of those who allow not the claime of the Beauforts and Somersets, and say, that to reach that, there must be words of a higher intent, words of Empire, Majesty, and Soveraigntie, such as Regni summa potestas; Corona; Sceptrum, Diade∣ma, Purpura, Majestas, and the like: Neither of these, nor any im∣porting their extent, being in this grant, so no Title to the Crowne nor Soveraigntie could passe to them. To which the other side replyes, That there is a word in the Char∣ter that comprehendeth Empire, Raigne, and Soveraigntie, that is,Principatus, Princeps. Principatus; whereof the King and Parliament make the Beauforts capable, Principatus being the State of Princeps, a Title of the most absolute Soveraigne Power; for the Roman Emperours in their grea∣test height, were called Principes, therefore Princeps is thus defined;
Princeps est penes quem summa Reip. potestas est, & qui primus omnium dominatur; And Principatus, and Dominatus are used, as Synonomies. But it is conceiv'd an errour now, to take Principatus for Regnum, O Supremus Dominatus, being the word Principatus long before, and in the age of Richard the second, also ever since, hath beene restrained to the Estate of Primogenitus and Heire apparant, not onely of Kings, but also of Dukes and Marquesses, as well Feudall as Sove∣raigne. And the next King Henry the fourth, a wise, discreet, and wary Prince, though he was much inclin'd to those Beauforts (as be∣ing his naturall Brethren by the Paternall side, and willing to ad∣vance them all he could) yet he discovered clearely enough by that certaine Charter in which he entailed the Crowne successively to hisThe Charter▪ of H. 4 for en∣tayling the Crowne. soure Sonnes, and to the Heires of their bodies, that he reputed not the Beauforts to be Lancastrians, or neare the Crown. Neither is there the least clause or mention to leave any remainder therein to them: First, he intaild the Crowne to his eldest sonne Henry Prince of Wales, after him to the Heires of his body; If they faile, then to Thomas of Lancaster his second sonne, and to the Heires of his bo∣dy, so to his third sonne Iohn of Lancaster, and to the Heires of his body. Lastly, to the fourth sonne Humphrey, and to the Heires of his body for still, and for every estate: the words are, Post ipsum successive Heredibus suis de ipsius Corpore legitime procreandis, which is all, and implicatively an expresse exclusion of the Beauforts. This CharterThis Charter I saw in the hands of Sir Rob. Cotton, & from it tooke these Summa∣ry notes. The Noblenes and Family of H. E. of Rich. was confirmed by Act of Parliament holden at Westminster the two and twentieth day of December, in the eight yeare of Henry the fourth, and sealed with his owne Signet. Upon the Dexter side of that, hung the seales of sundry Lords Spirituall; on the left side, the seales of the Lords Temporall witnesses. And albeit, the Earle of Richmond could not so well and rightly beare the name of Beau∣fort or Somerset, being a Teador by his Father, and so to be Sir-na∣med, or of some other Welch-name (if there were any in his Fami∣ly) by his Mother he was descended from the Beauforts; for the La∣dyGlover. 1413. Margaret, Countesse of Richmond, was daughter and heire to Sir Iohn de Beaufort Duke of Somerset, and Grand-child to Iohn of Gaunt by Katherine the wife of Otho de Swinford, which Iohn de Beaufort was created Duke of Somerset by Henry the fift, his Wife was the daughter, and at length the heire of Sir Iohn Beauchamp of Blet soPoli l. lib. 25. So King R. 2. called Iohn of Gaunt Avun∣culum nostrum, Rec. in Tower; But that was the fault of the barbarous La∣tine Clerks, not knowing the difference between pa∣truos & avun∣culos. and the widow of Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn when he married her: But the Earle of Richmond, by his Grand-mother Katherine Queene of England, was descended from the Kings of France, and I have seen him in a Pedigrce (drawne after he was King) derived from the ancient Kings & Princes of Brittaine. Polidore saith, he was Ex fratre Nepos to King Henry the sixt, who cal'd him Nephew, and he the King, Avun∣culum nostrum (our Uncle) insteed of Patruum, as it is in the Records of Parliament, Ann. 1. of Henry the seventh, but not his Nephew, as wee erroneously now take it, that is his German younger Brothers Sonne, for then he had beene a true Masculine Issue of the house of Lancaster and Royall blood of England.
But he was Nephew to him by his Brother Uterine, Edmond Teudor Earle of Richmond, the sonne of Owen Teudor or Meridock, and of Queene Katherine, daughter of Charles the sixt King of France, and widow of Henry the fift King of England, which the French well knew, and gave him the better esteeme for it, but those Honours were obscure Additions to him that must not goe lesse then for a Prince of the house of Lancaster, and so of England, which passed with such vulgar credit in France, that Du Tillet mistooke Iohn DukeIn his Booke Le Recuerl. des Ranges, &c. Part 2. of Somerset, Father of Margaret Countesse of Richmond, for the true and lawfull Sonne of Iohn de Gaunt, &c. by his first Wife Blanch Plantagenet, Daughter and Heire of the Earle and Earledome of Lan∣caster. Philip de Comines Lord of Argent, had better intelligence of his Pedigree and Title which he gives us thus. Iln' avoit croix, ny pile, ne null droit (Come je croy) a la Coronne d'Angleterre: And this expresses, he had no great opinion of either, though he were then King when this was writ. But let us suppose him lawfully from that Duke of Lancaster, his claime must stand ex∣cluded whilst the house of Yorke survived, for Richard Plantagenet, Duke of Yorke, and King of England designat, by Act of Parlia∣ment holden 39 yeare of King Henry the sixt, to whom these Titles of Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earle of Chester, and Protector of England, were given by the three Estates in that Parlia∣ment, descended from the Daughter and Heire of the second Sonne of King Edward the third. (For as before, so still I leave the InfantPhilip Plant. Lyonel Plant. D. of Clarence William of Hatfield without the Catalogue) and King Henry the fourth and his Progeny, descended from the third Sonne; and King Henry the sixt; being the best of the house of Lancaster then living, did acknowledge in that Parliament, the Title of Richard Duke of Yorke, the onely lawfull and just Title, so consequently next and bet∣ter then that of Lancaster or any other; and before any Beaufort or their Heires, the Issue of the two daughters of Iohn Duke of Lanca∣ster, Philip and Katherine (married to the King of Portugall and Ca∣stile) were to be preferr'd if Forraigne Titles be not excluded by Par∣liament. But the Earle of Richmond, measuring his owne height, by the advantage of a tumultuary and indisposed time, and finding his Lancastrian pretence, began to have a popular retinew, he was now incompatible of any others precedency and propinquity for those great ones that led him by the hand unto the Action, layd the line by their owne corrupted hopes and feares of the successe, there∣fore would not let the fortune of their expectation faint in him. Bishop Morton steered much in the course of their Affaires, and was a great Oracle to the Earle, who was noted too partiall and credulous, especially where he believed the persons of any honesty, vertue, or learning, for which his fame yet beares some staines of Morton, Dud∣ley, Empson, Bray, Vrswike, Knevett, &c. for there be two extreames observed in the Councells of Princes, one when the Prince is subject to follow the councells of evill men; the other, when the Prince is
too opinionated to consult with Counsell, such an one as was Charles, the hardy Duke of Burgundy, so opinionated and overweening of his owne wisedome and judgement, that he under-thought all mens else, which wide conceit of his hath left this Monument. Carolus pugnax altorum consilia & rationes (ne dicam) sequi uix audirePe. Henterus. Ioh. Megerus. volebat, ignominiae loco habens ab alijs discere, & judicavit, se proprio cere∣bro omnia concilia habere recondita. And to give us yet further character of Bishop Morton, Sir Thomas Moore (sometimes his Master) tels us, his best inclinations were swaid to the dangerous positions and rules of pollicie, and Doctor Iohn Hird in his metricall History of England, brings him in an Ambodex∣ter and observer of fortune, one while yorkeizing another while Lan∣castrizing, thus delivering himselfe: Si Fortuna meis fauisset partibus olim, Et gnato Henrici sexti diadema dedisset, Edwardi nunquam venissem regis in aulam, Sed quia supremo stetit haec sententia Regi, Henrico auferre, ac Edwardo reddere sceptrum, Tanta mea nunquam lusit dementia mentem, Vt sequerer partes regis victi atque sepulti. Adversus vivum, &c. Which may be thought well said by a meere Politician, But from a friend it wants something of a Christian, for true friendship and pi∣ety will owne us in the blackest adversity and silence of the grave, as the divine Ariosto hath something neare observed in this elegant Stanza. Nessum puo super du chi sia amatoAriost. cant. 19. Quando felice in sula rota si ede; Pere ch' haiveri, & ifiniti amici alato, Chi mostran tuti, una medessima fede, Se poi si cangia in tristo il he'sto stato, Volta laturba adulatrice il piede, Et quel di cu or' ama riman' forte, Et ama il suo amico doppola morte. No man whilst he was happy ever knew Assuredly of whom he was belov'd, For then he hath both feigned friends and true, Whose faith seemes both alike till they be prov'd, But he is left of all the flattering Crew When from his happy state he is remov'd, But he who loves in heart, remaines still one, And loves his friend when he is dead and gone:
Doctor Mortons aimes were drawne from other rules which with good Alacrity, made him Archbishop, and Lord Chancellour of Eng∣land, and put him the next list into a Cardinallship, and then he stood on tiptoes by the King, according to the Roman Marshalling of states for in the Popes list of ranges and presence, his holinesse is the first, then the Emperour, next a Cardinall, then a King▪ and in this▪ Sir Tho. Moore notes the extremity of his pride, to abuse his wisdome and piety, which otherwise might have kept him and his memory un∣fullyed in these preferments, so much our vices impostumate our fames, hypocrisie leaving the scarre but of a deformed cure upon it at best. But Doctor Goodwin Bishop of Hereford, presents him nearer (asFra. Goodwin in Catalogo Episcoporu. it were) in his Domesticke nature, and reports when Doctor Morton was Archbishop of Canterbury, he exacted and exrorted a far greater Summe of money from the Clergy of his Diocesse then was ever before, and for his private Commodity (which he covetously sought) brought certaine Leames or bigger Ditches to his owne grounds a∣bout Wisbitch, from the River Nine, which was before navigable, and of much publike use, but hath since served for little or none. And Iohn Stow saies he was the stirrerup of those great and grieveous taxesIohn Stow. which raised the people to Armes and Rebellion: These notes of his naturall dispositions stucke like wennes upon the face of his Religion, and from that mind, where by affections justle Religion and consci∣ence out, how hazardous may the Power and Counsell of such be▪ to the inclinations of a wise Prince: but this Prelate made his so Canoni∣call, and fitted them to the times, and his Mr temper, that they decei∣ved not his expectation, but brought him home to his ends, and to the favor of aprovident & wise Prince; that he was so, the world must just∣ly avow, and in all his actions, we may see-him, of a safe and contracted wisedome, governed by a most cautelous spirit, as great a husband of those vertues he had, as of his Glory, not too modest, (if I be not much mistaken) to heare of either; of both which he hath left us pious tastes. But the most surviving addition of memory, is that great example of Majesty, and her Sexe, Queene Elizabeth, who was said to be likeQu. Elizabeth. this King her Grandfather, as well in composition of qualities, as fa∣vour, and lineaments, that she was his lively and perfect Image; and to use an even hand in the extention of himselfe and his power, it must not be denyed, (how far off soever he was at first) after the Crown yeil∣ded to him, he was the true proprietary of all the Rights and Titles which carried it, or had dependency thereon; and to colleague all in a full and perfect strength, the Title of Yorke was confirmed to him by marriage of Elizabeth Plantagenet Eldest Daughter of Edward 4, Prince or head of that Family, to whom the Title of Lancaster in∣stantly escheated as he was King, which before was in controversie, or in nubibus, or Abeyance (as our Lawyers say) for no man being a Sub∣ject, how Capitall and chiefe a Judg, or of what judicatory power soe∣ver, could give a definitive Sentence, in any ambiguous cause or Act
of the King: but the King himself which is an ancient and Authentique paragraph in the Laws of England, as learned Judge Bracton affirmeth. De Chartis Regijs, & de factis regum non possunt Iusticiarij disputare,ra. li. 2. Cap. 16. nec si disputatio oriatur, possunt eam interpretari, sed in dubijs & obscuri, & ubi aliqua dictio contineat duos intellectus, domini Regis erit expectand interpretatio & voluntas, &c. The reason is given in the Bookes of the Civill and Imperiall Lawes peremptorily, quia de principali Iudicio non est disputandum. So that Controversie, whether the Beauforts or Sommersets were of the House of Lancaster, and capable of the Crowne or no, could not be determined untill there came a competent Judge, a King, and King of England, who by that vertue and power decreed to himself, the Title of Lancaster, with all the Royall Apurtenances confirmed by the Pope, as proper to him, and then the Writers both English and French, had some colour to say he was de la ligne de Lancastre, & caput gentis regalis & Princeps familiae Lancastriensis. But the Chancellour Morton, by a more happy & plausible insinu∣ation, termed the Marriage an union of Yorke and Lancaster, and not improperly, nor without a very favourable acceptance to the King (at least in the beginning of his Raigne,) though after (as may be ob∣served,) he thought those attributions, but small wyers to hold the weight and consequence of his Crowne, nay, so slender was his Affi∣ance, (or rather none at all) in his Titles of Yorke and Lancaster,King H. 7. on∣ly affected the Title de jure Belli. much lesse of Sommerset, that he seemed tacitly to wave and quit them, and stucke to that of his Sword and Conquest; For the more publike vote and knowledge whereof, there was at his Coronation, Proclamations made with these Titles, Henricus Rex Angliae jure divi∣no, jure humano, & jure Belli, &c. which the Barons could not fancy, no condiscend to, thought the King peremptorily avowed and maintained he might justly assume and beare it, having as a Conquerour entred the Land, fought for the Crowne, and wonne it; they answer as perempto∣rily, that he was beholding to them, both for his Landing and Victo∣ry, and by their permission had that faire and prosperous fooing upon their Coasts, not by any stroke of his French, which were not so many as the least Legion of the Romans, and had found but bloudy enter∣tainment by the valiant English, if ever they had landed, besides the instigation of a mortall hatred against the Invader, never to be extin∣guished, but with an utter expulsion and destruction, which they hum∣bly prayed might be worthy of his consideration, and not to take from his loving people the just due of their Affections, by ascribing so much of his victory to the French, or his Welsh Sword, Sith, they voluntarily opened their Armes and Country, to receive him and put the Crowne upon his head, that this was their free and voluntary Act they hoped he could not forget: and if so, why would he make such an Atchievement, a Conquest, or a purchase of the Sword, tearmes of a most harsh and disonant sound to the English, who reputed them as Barbarous and Tyrannicall, their ends and events to enslave them,
their Goods and Fortunes, under a Licentious power that might ActSene. and will any thing: Quicquid Victor audet, aut Victus timet? The exam∣ples of the conquering Gothes and Vandalls, Longobards, in Italy and Spaine, Saxons and Normans in England; and lately the Spani∣ards in America, with many other cruell Lords estated onely by their unjust Armes and Swords, being fresh and bleeding instances, that when but mentioned, stirre up thoughts of horrour and detesta∣tion of the Swords Title. But the more they oppos'd it, the more he is constant to have it assented by the Pope with his Title of Lan∣caster, which he thought would be a stronger bridle to check all mur∣murs, but yet indeavoured it not directly and disertly, but under a close and borrowed praetext, the out-side of his Embassage being on∣ly to obtaine a dispensation and pardon for his marriage, praetending a feare of Incest, his Wife being his Kins-woman; Et quarto Cosan∣guinitatisAn. Dom. 1 486. & forsan affiinitatis gradu, which Pope Innocentius the eight granted the first yeare of his raigne, and afterward (upon what occasion I cannot say) he renewed the same suit to Pope AlexanderAn. Dom. 1490. the sixt, who confirmed and ratified the pardon and dispensation made by his Predecessors in the fourth yeare of this Kings Raigne, But it is observable that the Pope herein taketh not upon him to confer or give any new Titles; neither did the King publikely solicite the Pope to confirm these two Titles, his Embassador had that particu∣lar in his private instructions: So that by this, the Pope seemeth on∣ly to make a rehearsall of those Titles as due and proper to him be∣fore,I have seene this Bull in the Cabinet of Sir Rob. Cotton. and the Titles de jure Belli, & de jure Lancastriae, seem'd not as any matters or subject of the Bull, but rather some desire the Pope had, to expresse a love and honour to the King, and that he was plea∣sed, Ex proprio & mero motu & certa scientia sua, to make such honou∣rable memoriall of all the Majesticall Titles in the Kings right, as the more stately embroideries to his glorious Letters of Apostoli∣call indulgence, for the dispensation of the said marriage convey∣ed, and in these words: Hic Rex Angliae, de domo Lancastriae originem trahens, ac qui notorioThe Popes Charter▪ for the Title of Lancast. E de jure Belli, &c. for the dispen∣sing with the Kings incestu∣ous marriage. jure, & indubitato proximo successionis titulo & Praelatorum & procerum Angliae Electione & concessione &c. Etiam de jure Belli est Rex An∣gliae. After, for the more cleare reparing and curing all flawes and de∣fects of Titles, the Pope addeth this gracious clause; Supplemus{que} omnes, & singulos defectus, tam juris, quam facti, si qui intervenerint in regno dicto. And then in the end, not in the front, this Bull is intituled, Pagi∣na confirmationis nostrae, approbationis, pronunciationis, constitutionis, de∣clarationis, suppletionis, monitionis, requisitionis, prohibitionis, Benedictio∣nis, inhibitionis, & excommunicationis, & Anathematizationis in quos∣unque, qui pesumpserint, infringere, vel ausu temeritatis, contravenire his literis Apostolicis. For all this must be held, and thought to be done Autoritate Apo∣stolica,
i. by the Authoritie of the Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul. And thus the King received of the Pope the two Titles, De Domo Lancastriae, and De Iure Belli, without any seeking or solicitation (as wee are led to credit) for there appeareth not any expresse suit or mo∣tion by the King to that purpose, though by circumstances and pro∣babilitie it was preferred under hand, for the other things were but of slight request and no necessitie, nor obnoxious to any danger; when those two Titles were the present markes, his aime was strongly and mainly directed to. Though I must confesse, after a while, he was a lightly satisfied in these (notwithstanding the Popes thunder and lightning, added to them,) as in the Titles of Yorke and Lanca∣ster, which he discovered, and not obscurely, when he moved the Estates in his first Parliament, to grant an Estate Hereditary and en∣tail'd of the Crowne and Kingdome, with all the Appurtenances, to the Heires of his body: beyond this he could not require much, nor they give, which was unanimously condiscended unto, as a gift of a new Title confirmed by their Act; the Copy whereof I have tran∣scribed (where I come to rehearse the Titles of our Soveraigne Lord the King that now is.) Nor is the Devination of this peece so darke, but that the cause may be guessed at, why he held himselfe not safe in the Titles of Yorke and Lanacster, of Beaufort and Somerset alrea∣dy toucht at, but may fall more seasonably elsewhere into our Sto∣ries, without confounding it with Historologies, and presenting matters out of their time and place; my purpose onely being, to take so much light from the Story of Henry the seventh as shall but properly conduce to the true shadowing and proportioning of King Richards, being necessarily inforced to inculcate such matters as may seeme of no present conclusion; yet loosing their observation, wee shall want the knowledge of many things much pertinent to the credit and honour of King Richard and his Actions: To which, ac∣cording to the Order and Affaires of time, I am now to come a∣gaine. And here, upon our accompt, wee shall find it neare upon tenne months since the Duke of Buckingham was suppressed, and the EarlThe second in∣vasion of the E. of Rich. of Richmond driven from Poole with the storme, who was now a∣gaine very busie raysing fresh preparations in France, and King Ri∣chard upon the intelligence, as stickling to Levy Souldiers, and re∣inforce all his Havens and Frontier places. But the Earle of Rich∣mond found it not so easie a matter now as at first, to draw a party and concurrence from France, having sped so ill in his former under∣takings, which indeed struck a great discouragement in the expecta∣tion of all his Favourers, and made his welcome the colder to the Duke of Brittaine; the rather also, because he had beene with the French King before he came to him, which was taken but ill, although the Earle could not otherwise doe, being forc't upon the Coasts of Normandy; And comming into the Road at Deipe landed, to re∣fresh
himself and company: From thence he intended to Roan, which being so neare Paris, ingaged him thither to the King, being (as Philip de Comines saith, followed in a very honourable Port by 500 English∣men) In his stay there (to shew us how much interest a provident and active spirit hath in fortune) he so heightned and sweetned his beha∣viour to the Court, as conciliated the favour and respect of the Grea∣test and Noblest Persons to him. But most happily, the faire opinion and esteeme of the Princely Lady Anne de France, eldest Sister to King Charles the eight, who had such an influence upon him in his minoritie, that she out-pitched Lewis Duke of Orleance, chiefe Prince of the Blood. In envy or mis-like whereof, he tooke Armes, and raysed a Civill Warre in France (as Iohn Tillet and others write) she was wife to Pierce de Bourbon Lord of Beaujen, after Duke de Bour∣bon, but Beaujen being his most stately and honourable Signiory, he was called Mounieur de Beaujen; and this Lady had so flexible an in∣clination to the Earle of Richmonds Cause, that she importuned the King to aide him with a good summe of mony and 3000 men, but odde fellowes. For Philip de Comines saith, they were trois milleComines pag. 536. hommes les plus meschants que lux peut trouver, no better then Rogues and Trewans, men of base qualitie and as low courage. Whilst these were Levying, the Earle (thriftie of all opportunities, and as dili∣gent to adde what advantage of time and ayde he could) visits the Duke of Brittaine to the same purpose. The Duke propounds it to his Councell, which Peter Landois, his Treasurer and chiefe Counsellour objects against, with this reason, That if the Enterpize succeeded well, yet the event must fall out unhappily and ill to him, the Earle having now interested himself to the favour and assistance of Charles King of France: And this would be the first linke of so strong an ingage∣ment, that the Earle and his Confederacy must be lost to Brittaine when he came to be King, being respectively tyed to lend the King of France ayde against them, if any cause should happen, which the King of France had a prepared stomack for, and had not beene nice to seeke any provocation that might countenance a Quarrell against the Dutchy of Brittaine, which was beyond his spanne, so long as they continued in League with England; that being untwisted, and France and England Contracted, how easie was it for the French to envade and swallow up both him and his Dukedome. To make the present advantage (therefore) as profitable, as safe, his advice was to stay the Earle; the Duke knowing his Coffers at that time very lanke, and that the King of England would offer well for him, ap∣proved the Counsell, and resolved to be led by Landois (whose respects (notwithstanding) were very affectionate to the Earle) But whether by the secret caution of some friends, or suggested to him by his bet∣ter genius, Sure it is by some unknowne meanes he had knowledge of it; and yet this was determined but at night, and designed for the morning; But before midnight, or the knowledge of their flight, he and twelve Gentlemen his followers, had left Vannes, and recovered
Aniow (under the French Kings protection) from thence to the French Court againe, the King being still very pliable and constant to his promise concerning those French forces under his owne charge. The next thing he works at, is how to enlarge the Earl of Oxford out of the Castle of Hammes, committed thither by Edward the fourth (and in this he uses, or rather followed indeed) the contrivement of Doctor Morton, who held good quarter with the Earle of Oxford, and by his frequent visits had a familiar and easie doore open'd, which the Earl readily tooke the opportunitie of, least it might be shut againe by some miscarriage, for Richmond thought or found the constitution of his Designe not a little strengthned by the Earle of Oxfords co∣federacy: nor did he mistake himselfe in his accompt, when he set him downe of speciall use, knowing him a man of an eminent power; wisely and valiantly temper'd: And to give him the stronger pre∣sumptions and confidence) one that most mortally hated Edward the fourth, and all the house of Yorke: To begin therefore an Obligati∣on, the Earle of Richmond makes a Complementall journey to Ham∣mes, where the Earle of Oxford was then, under the charge of Sir Iames Blound; He finds all honourable and respective entertainment with fit libertie, and occasion to propound himselfe unto the Earle, who had beene partly prepar'd by Doctor Morton, and therefore met him the nearest way, engaging himselfe solely to the premises, and (by vertue of an indefatigable confidence) sets upon his Keeper, winnes him to the Faction, and to Paris with them. By which time, all preparations were in readinesse; and whilst they make this stay in the French Court, the Earle of Richmond receives a faire ex∣cuse and protestation from the Duke of Brittaine, with offer of Auxiliary Forces: This supply came very acceptably, and however he resented the Dukes late purpose upon him, his wisedome told him, he must now convert his anger into thanks, which he returns with a reciprocall Protestation and Order, to send the Troopes to Harflew where his Shipping lay, and was the Rendezvous for his Soul∣diers. In the end of July 1485. he tooke leave of the King and his most Noble Cousin Madam de Beaujen, departing for the ort of Har∣flew in Normandy, where he met with two thousand Brittaines from the Duke honourably accommodated. But by the way he made some stay at Roven, and had newes which much distemper'd him, That the Lady Elizabeth was forthwith to be married to King Richard, this quickned his hast for England, presuming, his landing would forbid the Banes, otherwise he might sit downe with folded hands, for upon this marriage insisted the maine hope and consequence of his For∣tune; without her, all his great praetexts would faint, yet seemed to heare it, as a thing that could not concerne him so much, having so present and provident a wit, that in any chance he wanted not Councell and determination in himselfe for all Fortunes; in∣stantly resolving, to apply his suit to her Sister the Lady Cecily:
but ere he could perfectly fashion these intents, they were also coun∣terchecked, by the next packet, which assured him the Lady Cecily was lately married: neither did that (after some Collection) seeme much to discompose him, but quickely, varying his disposition to his for∣tune, he would now fixe himselfe upon some choice in Brittaine, Amongst his nobler friends (for the most part Welsh-men) and treates about a Daughter of Sir William Herberts, a Gentleman of a Noble Allyance and principall power in the South part of Wales: who had married the Eldest Daughter not long before to the Earle of Northumberland, to whom the Earle of Pembrooke (by a new created friendship betwixt them) imbosomes the whole designe, and presses his Comprobation in it; for by this meanes it was presumed, the greatest part of Wales would fall under their Command: which had been no small addition to a Banished mans fortune. Whilst those things were in their mould, Doctor Morton gave him such assurance (by Letters) of the Countries readinesse to receive him, that it was thought best to take the advantage of landing there, and in the Month of July, they loose from Harfleu, and safely arived at Milford Haven in Pembrookeshire, his native Country: after some refreshing, he Marches to a Town called Haverford West, and was entring amongst his Brittish kindred, who welcomed him as a Prince, descended from their ancient Princes of Wales, (the Country generally very Noble and loving to their friends); whilst he continued amongst them, Sir Rice ap Thomas, Sir Walter Herbert, Sir Iohn Savage, Sir Gilbert Talbot (who drew his young Nephew the Earle of Salop into this Acti∣on with him) and divers others of all qualities, brought, or sent their Forces; his Army thus strong and united, he passes the Severne, and Marches to Lichfield, purposing to hold on to London, if the King had not interposed it, who though he lay at Nottingham when the Earle landed, and while he marched through Wales, had constant Spies upon him. But as no Policie, or Law can secure their faith, that thinke they may dispense with it, so all Benefits are too narrow, where Ambition and Ingratitude urges merit; and to shew there is not much of our Fate in our own providence, when this King thought the Nobility most firmly cimented to his side, and was to put himself upon their constancy, they make a present and general defluxion to the other; But he had heightned and contracted his Resolution and judge∣ment, to the greatnesse of his Cause, and was not now to be outbid by Chance, or danger: The next day (which was Sunday about Evening)Leicest. inquit, Rex Richardu, cu maxima Pompa portan dadema, in capie. Chron. Croy. passing through Leicester in open Pompe, the Crowne Royall on his head, with him Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Marshall of England, the Earle of Surrey, the Earle of Westmorland, the Viscount Lovell, and other of the Nobility and Gentry at Redmore Heath, the Armies came to an Interview, and put themselves in Array; the next morning early, there was some conference held in the Kings Tent, by those Peeres, and others of principall trust, who gave him particular infor∣mation of all those, secretly revolted; and it much amazed him: the
Earle of Northumberland was one, to whom he had ever been most constant and forward in his respects and favours; therefore, where he had conferred so much, he suspected little. But no Obligations are Re∣ligious, if not held so: and although in the conflict he stood but as neutrall, yet the suddainesse and example of it, drew many from the King, even at the instant, when he was ready to Arme himselfe, yet this was not of so great and sensible amazement unto him, as the Lord Stanleys defection, who in pledge of his faith, had left his Son George Stanley, whilst his wife (the Earles mother) had made her subtill per∣swasions of stronger tye, and subinduced him to the Lancastrian sice, which he ayded with 26000, men, if Phillip de Commines be not mista∣ken: for our stories have but five thousand. But it was a very great de∣fection, and made the Earles Army far stronger, so that the chiefest point of Consultation now, was how to preserve him by flight, and the recovery of some strong hold, untill the tempest had scattered, or spent its violence, which they conceived covld not be long, if the Campe brake up, and once dissolved. But no Argument could fasten on him, though the benefit of a swift Horse was offered at his Tent doore, nor the fatality and portent of Prodigies, related by his friends, as presaging some inevitable Calamity, and that Propheticall Pre∣diction. Iack of Norfolke be not too bold, For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold. These things aggravated, the weakenesse of his Army objected, Counsels, Perswasions, Terrours, Prodigies, Prophesies, could not make him heare, so fatally resolute he stood in the jealousie and repu∣tation of his Honour and Valour, peremporily protesting he would rather adventure Life, Crowne, and Fortunes, than his honour to a cowardly and sinister construction; this might taste of a desperae will, if he had not afterwards given an apodixis in the battaile, upon what plat-forme he had projected and raised that hope, which as t had much of danger in it, so of an inconcusse and great resolution, and might have brought the odds of that day to an even bet; for know∣ing the Earle to be thirsty and Appetent after Glory and Renowne, but of an unpractised skill in Warre, and as inferiour in courage to him, he had projected (in manner of Stratagem) so soone as the Ar∣mies approached ready for the Charge, to advance himselfe before his Troopes, and give the Earle, being Generall of his Forces, the sig∣nall of a Combate. And to provoke and single him with a more glo∣rious invitation, he wore the Crowne Royall upon his head, the fairest marke for Valour and Ambition; Polidore saies he wore it, thinking that day should either be the last of his life, or the first of a better,Why K. Rich. wore the Crowne at Bosworth. which may aswell be a reason of his wearing it three daies before at Leicester, when he rode from thence to Bosworth. But doubtlesse, by it he intended chiefly, that the people might see & know him to be their
King: and those that stood Armed against him, looking upon that Im∣periall evidence, where their own hands and voyces had set it, should by the awe and Soveraignty of it, consider how lately they had avowed him their Lawfull King, and by what Pledges of their Faith and Alle∣geances, they stood solemnly bound to defend him and his Title in it, against all other: what ever was his mystery, it rendred him a valiant and confident Master of his Right; and in the constancy of hope and resolution, he gives order for the Battaile: The Armies confronted, and whilst the Alarme, and every blow, began to be hot and furious, forth breakes King Richard towards the Earle, wafting him by a signall, who seemed readily to accept it, and pricking his Horse forward came on very gallantly, as if but one Genius had prompted their Spi∣rits, and Ambition: for a good Author testifieth that Comes Rich∣mondiaeChron. Croy. directe super Regem Ricardum, &c. But his cariere soone fal∣tred, and Mars became Retrograde, it being but a nimble traine, to draw the King on to some disadvantages, or else he liked not his furi∣ous approach, for suddenly he makes a halt, and with as much credit as he could (& no harme) recovered the Vanguard of his Army, whither Richard pursued him, with so much speed and fiercenesse, that he forc't him to his Standard: And now, high in bloud and anger (to see his Valour deluded by such a politicke Bravery) with his Sword makes way, and with his owne hand slew Sir Charles Brandon Standerd-Bea∣rer,S. Wil. Brandon Father to Charles Bran∣don, afterward Duke of Suff. thinking to have made the next blow as fatall to the Earle, but the confluence of Souldiers interjecting, rescued him, Sir Iohn Cheney be∣ing one of the foremost, whom the King stroke from his Horse to the Earth; But Charged and invironed, with multitudes (that like a storme came on him) Valiant Richard falls, the Sacrifice of that day, under their cruell Swords, so rabious in their execution, as if his body must suffer more, because they could not kill his better part, mangling and wounding his dead Corps, whilst it lies drentcht in gore. Et Lupus, & turpes instant morientibus ursi,Ovid. trst. l. 2. Eeg. 5. Et quaecunque minor nobilitate fera est. As Currs in their kenells will bite and teare the skin of those beasts which in the fields they durst not barke at: Occidit in bello miseranda caede Richardus,Dr Iohn Hird. in Hist. Angl. Crinibus attractus, dum ferro saeviat hostis. And after all (to compleate their barbarisme) threw his body be∣hind one upon a Jade, and so conveyed it to Leicester. A story to be thought incredible, at least to charitable and modest eares, and highly upbraided by the happier and Christian fame of William the Con∣querour, who severely punished a Souldier, but for hacking the thigh of King Harold after he was dead, though an Usurper and his perfidious enemy; with all noblenesse causing the body to be deli∣vered
to his Mother for an honourable interment, which was solemn∣lyMathew Paris Henry unt∣ington. celebrated in his own Abbey at Waltham. The Battle thus fought and won, the Victor was Crowned in the field, with that Crown K. Rich. wore, which the L. Stanley put upon hisHenry of Rich∣mond Crow∣ned in the Feild. head, & salutes him King, by the stile of Hen. 7. K. of England, &c. And Henry Earle of Richmond, Son of Edmund ap Meredith ap Teudor (alias of Hadham) Earle of Richmond, and of Margaret Daughter and Heie of Iohn Beaufort Duke of Sommerset, attained to the Crowne, and had the easier ascent by the oversight and remissnesse of Richard, in that Catastrophe of his Raign, who gave too much opportunity and scope to the actings of his Enemies, when they were under his power, and arme. And in the Fortune of his judgment (at the closing Scene) that did not better presuppose his Enemy too prudent, and reserved to trust the advantage he had, upon so sharpe and single an hazzard; But Richard beleeving he had the odds in courage and monomachie of him, which probably might make him Master of the Combate, and so of the Field, (the straite being so desperate too) resolved rather to trust to the Fate of his owne Valour, then the chance of an uncertaine escape; a resolution not so rash and overweening, as commendable, if we looke upon the very aymes and necessity of it, neither is it new or improper for Princes to demand the tryall of campe fight, or single Combate, personaly in their Armies, and to the Generals in their absence; William the Conquerour challenged King Harold; Be∣fore that, a Combate was fought betweene Edmund Ironside, and Canute the Danish King, for the whole Kingdome of England; our Richard the first, and Edward the first, in Palestine proffered the like to some of the Pagan Princes; so did Edward the third, Henry the fifth, with the Kings of France. In the last Age, the valiant Prince, Iaes the fifth of Scotland, in Person challenged Thomas Lord Howard Duke of Norfolke, Gene∣rallThe Challeng of the 5 King of Scots to The. Duke of Norfolke. for the King of England, who accepted it, But the King into his Demands, would have the Country or Lands then in Controversie, to be made Brabium victoris, which was without the Generalls po∣wer to engage, being the Inheritance of the King his Master, but prof∣fers better Lands of his owne upon the Combate, which was not ac∣cepted, so that concluded nothing. The better end of these Challenges and Combates, being at first, levelled from Mercy, and Piety, for by this single adventure, the Innocent bloud of Armies was (more then stanched) preserved▪ Forraigne Stories brings this home to us, and highly Characters their Kings and Generalls in the like examples, which this Age draws a Curtaine before, as not fit for imitation, making too desperate a wound in a setled State and Succession; the (first who rendred that or some more Politike reason) for Princes not to adventure themselves, was Phi. the 2 K. of Spain, (as a late writer ascribeth) but is mistaken: For the more ancient Histories of Syria and Persia, mentions some Kings that refrain'd from Warres long before; as Herodotus, Diodo∣rus,Princes go not to Campe.
Trogus Pompeius tells us: But let us take measure from that, Times, Wisedome, Valour, Policy, &c. to this, and wee shall find them but tottering foundations of States which cannot uphold themselves, or obvert the least Decree of God when he intends to scourge or alter kingdomes; for where such vicissitudes are destin'd, the Councells and faculties of men must be darkned, and there will fall out all concurrences and advantages to further that purpose▪ So in the extirpation and transferring of Families, the Potter in Ie∣remy, breaking one Jarre to make another, whose fatall commutations should extimulate the pietie of our natures, and make us modest cen∣surers of their events: For as wee see things but through a Cloud, whilst wee measure them by accidents, so wee intrude on Gods provi∣dence, judging mens actions in their successe, while wee over-act our owne. Of such a composition was the ill-wishers of King Richard, who forgot him not in his grave, but indeavoured to be equally cruellCruelties done to the body of King Richard. Noble persons attainted by Parliament. to his memory: And in November following a Parliament was holden, in which he was attainted of High Treason; a straine very high to make him guiltie of that, being a King, he could not commit. By the same figure may others, who were stiled chiefe ayders and as∣sistants of King Richard in the Battaile of Bosworth, as Sir Iohn Ho∣ward Duke of Norfolke, &c. though some would have him retired from the Court all King Richards raigne. But Sir Thomas Moore af∣firmes,Sir Tho. Moor. He was constantly with him and neare his Counsells, Sir Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey, Sonne and heire apparent to the Duke; Francis Lovel, Viscount Lovel, Sir Walter Devereux, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Sir Iohn de la Such, Sir Robert Harrington, Ri∣chard Charleton, Richard Ratcliffe, William Berkley, William Catesby, Thomas Broughton, Iohn Buck, Humphrey Stafford, Robert Midleton, Robert Brokenbury, Iohn Kendall, Secretary to the King; Walter Hopton, Ieoffry Saint-German, Roger Wake, Thomas Billington, William Sapcoate, William Brampton, all Knights, and some Heralds at Armes, with di∣vers other; an Act of Parliament being made, to disable and fore∣judgeParliament ann. 1. H. 7. them of all manner of Honour, State, Dignitie; Also to or∣feit all Mannors, Castles, Lordships, Hundreds, Franchises, Lber∣ties, Advowsons, Priviledges, Nominations, Presentations, Tene∣ments, Rents, Suits, Reversions, Portions, Annuities, Pensions, Rights, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattells, and Debts. These be the words of the Act, and if jus, then jus summum in all extre∣mity. Those of note that were taken, lost their heads at Leicester two dayes after, being Saint Bartholmews day, and had a glimpse like that▪ Bar∣tholmew in France in our time; all such slaughters from thence call'd Bartelmies, and Bartelemies, simply in a perpetuall Stigma of that Butchery. It is suggested, the Duke of Norfolke was slaine in the BattaileThe Duke of Norfolk slain by the Earl of Oxenford. by the Earle of Oxford, and the Story of Croyland seemeth to say as much; Comes Oxoniae valentissimus miles in eam alam ubi Dux Norfol∣ciae
constitutus erat in agro (de Redmore) tum Gallicorum tum Anglicorum militum Comitatu stipatus tetendit, &c. Amongst those that escaped the sad destiny of that day, was theThe Earle of Surrey esca∣peth at Bos∣worth. Earle of Surrey, Sir Thomas Howard, Viscount Lovel, Sir Thomas Stafford, and his Brother N. Stafford, with many other Nobles and Gentlemen that got into Forraigne Countries and Sanctuaries, ob∣scuring themselves till the storme and smart of that dayes memory were past. But some would maintain Thomas Earl of Surrey to be one of them that submitted to the new King at Bosworth immediately af∣ter the overthrow which must not be believed, if wee understand the composition of those times & affairs: for certaine it is, the Earl Rich∣mond had peremptorily proscribed all those he had cause to feare or hate, whose names are partly in the Rowles, kept in the Chappell of the Convertites in Chancery-Lane, and partly omitted by the Scribes. Now the Earle of Surrey, of all the rest, was so terrible and distastefull to him, there could be no excuse left for his life. And therefore let no man thinke he was taken or submitted, but tooke a happier season some moneths after. The Relation and truth is (by the warrant of one that well knew him, and the inter-passage of his Fortune) the Earle opportunely left the Field, but so wounded, that faintnesse and night constrain'd him to the house of a Gentleman not farre from Nottingham, and one that bare a faithfull respect to the Earle and his Family untill he was well recovered. In the meane time, that terrible Parliament held in the next November was conclu∣ded, and the Kings desires reasonably well appeased, in seeing the ex∣ecution of his new Lawes past upon some of them. After which, (some small distance of time) followed a gracious pardon to all the offenders in that Cause, which proffered mercy, this Earle layd hold on, hoping to restore himselfe (by his submission) his offence, considered, being but an Act of Loyaltie to his Master. But this confidence sent him to the Tower, for though the violence of the storme appear'd well calm'd, yet the King retain'd some heavings of it in his thoughts: And this Imprisonment continued from his first yeare of raigne unto the fourth; and towards the beginning of that, being in the Tower with the Queene Elizabeth (to whom he was shortly after to be married) he tooke occasion to call for the Earle, (bearing still a gust of the same tempest in his brow) and challenged him upon the old quarrell, his service to the late Usurper & Tyrant, (as he usually termed King Richard) the Earle humbly moved his pardon, and more favourable consideration to the nature of his of∣fence, which thousands more conceived to be but a due effect of their Liege duties, and Allegiance to a Prince so lawfully, and with all ge∣nerall sufferance Crowned, whose Title he held himselfe bound to de∣fend by the law of God and Nations, and would dye in defence of him and that Crowne, though he should find it upon a Stake: The King left him with a sterne and ruffling reply, but in cold blood
better acknowledged his integritie, and thought he would come of no lesse value to him, having the advantage to merit him by his par∣don, which soone after he granted him; nor did the Earle loose oughtScots  thrown by the E. of Surrey. of that opinion: Shortly after, being made of the Privie Councell, then Lieutenant or Governour of the North, and Generall against the Scots, whom he overthrew; as fatall was he to them at Flodden field, where he tooke their King in the time of Henry the eight, who made him High Marshall and Treasurer of England, and restor'd him to his Fathers Dukedome, the Inheritance of his Grand mother Mowbray, being a man of such a happy direction in his carriage and wisedome, that all his Actions came home with prosperous successe, and accumulated what was sometime spoken of his great Ancestour Hewardus, of whom it was questioned, Vtrum faelioior an fortior esset,Iugulsus. so Fortunate and Honourable hath that house beene in the Service to this State; and in the infinite Alliance and Cognation, it holds with the most Ancient Families, the Extractions and propagations from Mowbray, Warren, Bruce, Dalbery, Marshall, Segrave, Plantagenet, Brotherton, Bigot, Fitz-Alan, Matraver, Buckingham, Oxford, and Dacres: The Father of which Haward, was Leofrick Lord of Burne, and the adjacent Countrey in Lincolneshire; his Mother was the Lady Edina, descended from the great Ostac, a Duke amongst the Easterlings in King Edgars time: In whose Family, I also find a No∣bleLib. Eliensis. Kins-man of his called Haward (to note obiter) This Haward was of a Noble and Magnificent note, a goodly Personage, answer'd with an equall Strength and Valour; Et nimium Bellicosus, much, or too much devoted to Mars. He served in the Warres of Northumber∣land, Cornewall and Ireland; and after in the lower Germany, where he made up much of his Fame, and married a faire Lady cal∣led Turfrida, the Daughter of a Noble man in Flanders, where he continued untill the death of his Father called him home. About which time, William Duke of Normandy made his Conquest of this Kingdome, and had gratified Iohannes Talbois the French Counte, now Earle of Holland, with Leoffricks Countrey of Holland, in the Marshand; and the Counte very rudely had expuls'd the Lady his Mother, out of her Possessions and Dower. Hawardus set upon him with such forces as he could speedily rayse, tooke, and held him pri∣soner, in despight of the Conquerour, untill he redeem'd himselfe, and accompted for what he had done with a large summe of money. This drew those of the Nobility to the protection of his sword, which the Conquerour had chased out of their Countrey, who had fortified themselves in the Isle of Ely, and made Hawardus their Generall, where he built a Castle that a long time after had his name. But the Normans tooke that advantage to infest his Countrey, and put him againe to the recovery of it, which he so fortunately setled, that the Conquerour was contented to make him his, and hold him in good favour whilst he lived. He was buried in the Abbey of Croyland; Concerning his Issue by the the Lady Turfrida, there is mention
onely of a Daughter named Tarfrida, married to Hugo Enerma, Lord of Deeping: But circumstance will perswade us, he had other Issue, if wee consider him in the likelyhood of his strength and abi∣litie, and that divers continued of his Sir-name in that Countrey a∣long time after him, which makes it probable, he had a naturall Son, (at least, bearing his owne name of Heward) that next to him was the Originall Ancestor of this house of Howards. And let it not be thought any disparagement, for a Noble Family to be raysed from aThe honour of Bastards. naturall Issue; for many Princely Families have beene derived and propagated from naturall Sonnes, as was Eneas, Romulus, the Foun∣dersHomer. Livy. of the Roman Families; so was Theseus and Themistocles, as Plutarch writeth; others say as much of Hercules, &c. The King of Spaine descended from Henry de Trastamara, base sonne of Alphonsus the Justicer, King of Castile. And who doth not honour the Princely Race of William the Conquerour, Bastard son to the Duke of Normandy? where was a more Heroicall man then Robert Earle of Glocester, base sonne of King Henry the first? The Earles of Warren descended from Hamelin, a base sonne of Geoffry Plantagenet, Earle of Aniow: The Noble Herberts are also said, to come from a base sonne of Henry the first. And the Duke and Earles of Somerset (which followed the Red Rose) were the Off-spring of the Beauforts, naturall sonnes of Iohn de Gaunt. For a further conjecture, why these Howards must be descended from Hewardus or Herewardus (for so some Writers call him; but (Iugulfus, who best knew him, constantly calls him Hewardus) both names may signifie in the Saxon or old Dutch, a chiefe Captaine of an Army, whom the Romans call'd Imperator.) And that the Titles and names of great Offices have given Sir-manes to many Noble Fa∣milies, wee have examples in plentie; Particularly the Visconti of Millan, the Chamberlaines of Normandy, the Stewards of Scotland, the Butlers of Ireland, and divers others, who had their Sir-names from the Offices of their Ancestours and Fathers; and the same pre∣sumption or argument may be for taking the Sir-name of Howard, and the Origine of their Family from Hewardus, the Howards from the time of Heward, dwelling in these Countries of Holland and Marshland▪ and were Lords of some Lands belonging to him, untill by their matches, with the Daughters and Heires of Fitton, Ten∣dring, Mowbray, Tillney, &c. they became possessed in Norfolke, suf∣folke, and Berkeshire, and were Lords sometime of Sunning-hill neare Windsor, and bore the Sir-name ever since (or with small in∣terruption) the old Sir-name written Heward, or Hereward in Char∣ters and Records, and Howard in Stories. But descend wee through the succession of those times to William Haward, Chiefe Justice in the Raigne of Edward the first, Grand-father to Sir Iohn Howard, Admirall of the North Fleet, in the Navall Warres of Edward the third; his Sonne Sir Robert Howard married the Daughter of the
Lord Scales, and Sir Iohn Howard (who lived in the time of Henry the fourth, and dyed Anno 16. Henry the sixt) had two Wives, Margaret Daughter and Heire of Sir Iohn Plais Knight, by whom hee had Eliza: an onely Daughter, married to Iohn de Vere Earle of Oxford, who brought him a goodly part of the Howards Lands: Her Heires were married to Latimer and Winckfield, very fruit∣full Families. His second Wife was the Daughter and heire of Sir William Tendering of Stoke-Nayland in Suffolke, by whom he had Sir Robert Howard his eldest Sonne, who married Margaret Mow∣bray, Daughter of a Cadet of the house of Lancaster, who became Co-heire with her Sister the Lady Berkely, Wife to Thomas Mow∣bray Duke of Norfolke, dead in Venice, and left his Sonne Henry Haward heire to Haward and Mowbray; and Iohn Howard, the sonne of Iohn Howard, was created Earle of Norfolke by King Richard the third, in the right of his Mother Mowbray, he married the Daugh∣ter of the Lord Moulines, and by her had Thomas Howard, the first Howard Earle of Surrey; this is he who survived the danger of Bos∣worth Field, and became afterwards Duke of Norfolke, from whom all the Howards now living are descended, whose Family hath beene so fruitfull to furnish this Kingdome with foure Dukes, ma∣ny Earles, Viscounts, and Barons, three high Treasurers, six high or great Marshalls, tenne high Admiralls, with some honourable Custos of the Privie Seale, and sundry Chamberlaines of the Kings house; and one lately lived who had borne the Offices of high Con∣stable,Sir Charles Ho∣ward. Lord Lieutenant, Lord high Steward, Marshall and Admi∣rall of England, Lord Chiefe Justice in Oyer of the better part of this Kingdome, and Chamberlaine of the Royall house, a man ho∣nourable in his deportments, and fortunate in his undertakings; as at the great Marine Battells against all the Navall powers of Spaine, the Pope, and Princes of Italy, Anno Domini 1588. and in the siege of Gadys, Anno Domini 1596. And this is the Grand-child of that Thomas Lord Howard, who for his better distinction and perpetuall honour is stiled Tri∣umphatorCamden in Octad. Scotorum. I have strayed into this digression, as a gratefull tender of an ac∣knowledgement I owe to that Illustrious Family, for their Noble Pa∣tronage and Favour to my Ancestors, especially to that unfortu∣nate Bucke and his Children, who withered with the White Rose, (bearing an Ancient and Hereditary love to the House of Yorke, and stood in good Credit and Favour with the King his Master) no let this remembrance of him, and his obscured Family, seeme ostenta∣tion or vaine-glory, whilst I say no more then what other Historios dictate, which give him an able Character. Master Camden Claren∣tiusCamdn Octa. (in his Immortall Brittannia,) deriveth this Sir Iohn Bucke, from Sir Walter de Bucke of Brabant, and Flanders, who had that Sir-name of great Antiquity from the Castle de Bucke in Lise, a Ci∣ty and Frontire Towne in Flanders, where the Ancient Earles were
accustomed much to reside, the ruines of this Castle remained in the late time of Lodwicke Guicciardine, who saith, he saw the CarcasseLodow. Guicci. du Paes. Baess. The Ancientry of Buck. thereof: And this Walter Bucke was a Cadet of the House of Flan∣ders, employed and sent by the Prince (then Duke of Brabant, and Earle of Flanders) to King Iohn, with Auxiliary Troopes: Roger Wondover saith, Walter Bucke, Gerardde Scottigni, and Godescalius, ve∣neruntM. Paris. M. Westminst. Redulphus de Cgeshall. Tho. Walsing. in Angliam cum tribus legionibus Flandrensium & Braantianoru militum, &c. and he did the King excellent service here (as many of our Historians report, for which the King bountifully rewarded him with Lands in Yorkeshire, and Northampton shire: And in Yorkeshire (where he made his Seat) he found an Ancient Family of the Sirname of Bucke of Bucton, in the Wapentake of Bucrosse, where that Family had anciently been, (for the name is a Saxon or Dutch word, and signifieth a Beech Tree, or Beech Wood) here Walter contracted alliance, and Married Ralph de Bucke his Eldest Sonne, to the Daughter and Heire of Gcelinus de Bucke, Grandchild to Radolphus de Bucke, who was a part Founder and Beneactour, to the Abbey of Bredlington, (as is mentioned in the Charter of Henry the first, made for the foundation of that Monastery) and from this Walter, descended Iohn Bucke Knight, who married a Strelley, and was so constant in his Affection, that (although she dyed in his best Age) he made a Religious Vow, and became a Knight of the Rhodes, his Armes are yet to be seene in the Ruines of the Hospitall of Saint Iohns neae Smithfield, and in the Church of Alhallows at the upper end of Lumbard Street, which was repaired and enlarged with the Stones brought from that demolished Caenoby: he lived, sub rege Edvardo filio Regis Henrici: as I have seene by the date of his deed in Herthil, Anno 1 Ed. 1. & Anno 22. Ed. 1. From this Knight of the Rhodes descended Sir Iohn Bucke, who for his too much forwardnesse in charging a Fleet of Spaniards (without the leave of the Earle of Arundell Lord Admirall) was committed to the Tower, (testified by the Records there) Anno 13. Richard the second, Lawrence Buck his Son, followed Edward Plantage∣net Duke of Yorke, and was at the Battel of Agin Court with him, when he was slaine: Iohn Bucke Knight, the Sonne of this Laurence, married a Daughter and Heire of the House of Staveley, out of which are descended the Barons Parres of Kendall and Rosse, Queene Ka∣therine (the last wife of King Henry the eighth) the Lord Parre Mar∣quesse of Northampton, and the Herberts Earles of Pembrooke and Montgomery. These Bucks residing for the most part at West-Stanton, and Her∣thill in Yorkeshire, and matched into the Families of Strelley or Stirely of Woodhall, Thorpe, Tilney, (then of Lincolnshire) and Sa∣vill, by which we have much Noble kindred; Sir Iohn Bucke for his service to the House of Yorke, especially at Bosworth, lost his head at Leicester, he married the Daughter of Henry Savill, by whom he had Robert Bucke and other Children, who were brought into the
Southerne parts by Thomas Duke of Norfolke, where they have re∣mained ever since; for the Children (being Orphans) were left in miserable estate by the Attainder of their Father; But the Duke bestowed two Daughters in marriage, one with the Heire of Buck, The other, with the Heire of Fitz-Lewis, very Ancient Families, from which Matches divers honourable and Noble Persons are de∣scended. The Sonnes were, one a Souldier, the other, a Courtier, the third, a Priest; afterward the Duke bestowed Robert Bucke, the El∣dest Sonne at Melford Hall in Suffolke, and married him into the Families of Higham and Cotton, as also did the Blounds of Elwaston, the Talbots of Grafton, from whom the Barons of Monioy, and the late Earles of Shrewsbury descended; one of the Daughters of this Bucke Married to Fredericke Tilney of Shelley Hall in Suffolke, his nearest Kinsman by the Duchesse his Mothers side) But some per∣haps, must call this my vanity, I shall but answer them, that I thinke my selfe bound (by all the bloud and memory I claime from them,) to pay them my best Relations and endeavours, acknowledging with the great Consulare Philosopher, Parentes charissimos habere debemus, quod ab ijs vita, patrimontum, libertas, Civit as tradita est. And I should thinke there is none, who hath an interest in the quality of Gentile, or Noble, (for all is one) but lookes backe (which some delight) to their first Commemoration; and finds a strong engage∣ment due to the Vertues and worth of their first Fathers, for that expresse charge, to honour Father and Mother, is, not to be under∣stood, only of our Parents superstits, and living here with us, but our forefathers: that is, beyond our great Grandfather, for we have no proper word for them above that degree (but Antecessours, vul∣gò Ancestours) whom the Romans called Majores, and compre∣hendeth all our Progenitours departed sooner or later) for the word Pater and Mater, as also, Parens & Parentes, extend very largely, and reach up to the highest Ancestours. The Ancient Roman Ju∣risconsults, deliver in their Law for an Axiome, that Appellatione Parentum omnes in infinitum majores utriusque sexus significantur; and the word Parentes yet spreadeth further, comprehending all Kins∣folkes, and Cosins, of our Bloud and Linage, being used in that sense, by AElius Lampridius, by Iulius Capitolinus, and other the best Wri∣ters in the times of the declined Empire, as Isaac Causabonus hath well observed in his Annotations. The Italians, Spanish, and French (whose Language is for the most part Romanzi (mongrell Latine)▪ and broken and corrupted Romane Language (use Parenti, Parentes and Parents for all their Kins∣folkes and Gentilitious Cosins. We English-men (being more precise) follow the Ancient and Classique Latine Writers, holding Parent strictly to the simple signification of Pater, and Mater, the present and immediate Pa∣rents▪ But the using of the word Parentes, as those Imperiall Hi∣storians use it; serveth better for our purpose here: And I could
(most willingly) imitate the Pious Gentlemen of Italy, Spain, and France, in their Religious and Charitable indeavours, to ad∣vance the happinesse of their Parents defunct, if those desires could besteed them, But where I should crave pardon, I become more guilty and extravogant, it is time therefore to know good manners, and returne home to our proper taske, which will be, to refell the grosse and blacke Calumnies, throwne unjustly upon the Me∣mory and Person of King RICHARD, And falls within the Cir∣cle of the next Booke. Explicit Liber Secundus.
THE THIRD BOOKE OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD. The Contents of this Booke. THe Defamations of King Richard ex∣amined and answered. Doctor Morton and Sir Thomas Moore malevolent to the House of Yorke, Their frivolous exceptions against his gestures, lookes, teeth, shape and birth, hie vertues depraved. The death of King Henry the sixth and his Sonne Edward Prince of Wales. The Actors therein. The offence of killing an anointed King. Valiant men hate treacheries and bloudy acts. King Richard not deformed. The Slanders of Clarence translated to King Ri∣chard.
The Cause of Clarences execution. How the Sonnes of King Edward came by their deaths. King Richard Exculpable thereof. The story of Perkin VVarbeck compared with Don Sebastian, King of Portugall, who are Biothanati. Counterfeit Prince detected, young Prince marvel∣lously preserved. Many testimonies for the assertion that Perkin VVarbeck was Richard Duke of Yorke; his honourable entertainment with forraigne Princes vox populi. Reasons why it is not credible King Richard made away his two Nephewes; the force of Confession. The evill of Torture, the guilt of attempting to escape out of prison, what an escape is. The Earle of Oxford severe against Perkin, and his end. The base Sonne of King Richard the third secret∣ly made away. The Sonne of the Duke of Clarence put to death. The power of furies, Demones & Genii. A∣pollonii Majestas. Quid tibi non vis alteri ne feceris.
THE THIRD BOOKE OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD. THere is no story, that shewes the planetary affections and malice of the vulgar more truly then King Richards: and what a tickle game Kings have to play with them; though his successor Henry the se∣venth play'd his providently e∣nough (with helpe of the standers by) yet even those times (which had promised the happiest exam∣ple of a State, and best of a King) both groaned and complained; but had not the sting and infection of King Richards adversaries who did not onely as the pro∣verbeErasmus in Chiliad. saith, cum larvis luctare, contend with his immortall parts, but raked his dust, to finde and aggravate exceptions in his grave;Terentius in Adelph. having learnt their piety from the Comicall Parasite, obsequium anicos, verit as odium parit, and finding it as well guerdonable as gratefull, to publish their Libels and scandalous Pamphlets, (a piece of policy and service too) to the times, (and an offence to resent any thing good of him) they gave their pens more gll and freedome, having a copy set by Doctor Morton, who had taken his revenge that way, and written a This Booke was lately in the hands of Mr. Roper, of Eltham, as Sir Edward Hoby who saw it told me. Booke in latine,
against King Richard, which came afterward to the hands of Mr. Moore (sometime his servant) so that here the saying of Da∣rius, (which after became a proverbe) hath placeHerodotus. Hoc Caleeamentum consuit Histiaeus, induit, autem Aristagoras, Doctor Morton (acting the part of Histiaeus) made the Booke, and Master Moore like Aristagoras set it forth, amplifying and glossing it, with a purpose to have writ the full story of Richard the third (as he intimateth in the title of his Booke;) but it should seeme he found the worke so melancholy and uncharita∣ble, as duld his disposition to it; for he began it, 1513. when he was Under-sheriffe, or Clerke to one of the Sheriffes of Lon∣don, and had the intermission of twenty two yeares (which time he tooke up in studies, more naturall to his inclination, as law and poetry, He wrote many Poems and Epigrams, sundry petty Comedies, and Entrludes, often times personating, with the Act ors, as his so ving and fami∣liar friend ▪ rasmus reports. for in them lay his greatest fancy) to finish it, before he died, (which was in, 1535. but did not, yet lift himselfe so happily into the opinion of men, that his com∣mendations had more fortune then observation:) and past him under the attributes of learning and religion; though in both he came short of what was ascribed to him; for if he understood the Latine and Greeke, (then held great learning) yet was he so farre under the desert of an excel∣lent Scholler, as the learned censured him a man of slender reading, and Germanus Brixius, Irruditus, i. unlearned;Brixius Antimore. for the sanctity of his life, Iohn Baleus who tooke not up his knowledge of him an age off, (as some of his admirers,) but from the originall, thus gives us his draught.Ioan. Baleus de scriptoribu Brit. ent. 8 cap. 69. Hoc nos probe novimus qui eramus eidem Thomae Moro viiniores, quod pontisicum, & pharisaeorum crudelitati ex avaritia subservins omni tyrāng truculentior ferociebat, imo insaniebat in eos qui aut Papae primatum, aut purgatorium, aut mortuorum invotiones, aut imagi∣num cultus aut simile quiddam oliabolicarum imposturarum negabant, a vivisia▪ Dei veritate ita edocti. Consentire hic Harpagus no∣luit ut Rex Christianus in suo Regno primus esset, nec quod ei liceret cum Davide, Salomone, Iosaphato, Ezechia, & Iosia s∣cerdotes, & Levitas reject Romanensium Nembrodorum tyrannide in proprio ordinare dominio &c. Adding the attribute of tenebri, of veritatis evangelicae perver∣sissimus osr, of obstinaus alophanta, of impudens Christi adver∣sarius;Richard Graf¦ton saith he di∣ed mocking and scoffing as he lived. and saith of his end that decollatus suit in Turre Londinn∣si sexto die Iulij Anno Dom. 1535. Capite ad magnum Londini pontem (ut proditoribus fieri slet) sipiti imposito, & nihilominus a Papistis pronovo Martyre colitur. Thus he became a Martyr and a Saint; but we shall finde o∣ther cause of his condemnation by his owne testimony; for when he stood at the Barre arraigned, some exceptions having been urg'd against him, for seeming to uphold and maintaine the Popes supremacy in England, his reply was, he could
not see quomodo laicus vel secularis homo possit vel debeat esse caput status spiritualis aut ecclesiastici; yet insinuated, that this opinion was taken hold off but for a pretext to supplant him; the grea∣test cause of the Kings displeasure being for his withstanding the divorce, between him and Katharine of Castile his wife, and his second marriage with the Lady Anne Bullen Marquesset of Pembrooke: And his owne words (spoken to the Judges, as they were set downe by his deare friend, George Courinus, inCourinus. a short discourse upon his death) are, non me pudet quamobrem a vobis condemnatus sum (videlicet) ob id, quod nunquam volue∣rim assentiri in negotium novi matrimonij Regis, which uttered, after sentence of condemnation, (when no evasion or subteru∣gies would availe) must proceed surely from his conscience; and before this, he wrote a letter to Mr. Secretary Cromwell; (which I have seene) wherein he protested, he was not against the King, either for his second marriage, or for the Churches supremacy: But wisheth him good successe in those affaires, &c. which renders him, (well looked upon) not so stout a Cham∣pion for the Pope, as many of his partiall friends and RomanistsIn scrinijs div. Ro: Cot∣ton. supposed; neither so sound in his Religion; for I have seene amongst the multitude of writings, concerning the conference about the alteration of Religion, and suppressing of Churches and Religious houses, that his connivance and consent was in it; nor could he excuse it, with all his policy and wisdome, neither had the King ever attempted it, had not the Pope and his Agents opposed that second marriage, an error and insolency Rome hath ever since repented. But it prov'd a happy blow of Justice to this Kingdome, cutting of him and his authority, which else had hazarded the best Queene that ever was, the sacred and eternally honoured Elizabeth, to whose growing glory and virtue Master Moore became an early and cruell adversary, even before she was in rerum natura. To know him further, let me referre you to the Ecclesiasticall History of Master Iohn Fox, in the raigne of Henry the eight, who describes him graphically; for his historicall fragment, it shewes what great paines he tooke to item the faults and sad fortunes of King Richard the third; and how industrious he was to be a time observer, it being the most plausible theame his poeticall straine could fall on in those times,, and could not want acceptance nor credit, well know∣ing in what fame he stood, and that the weaker Analysts and Chroniclers, (of meane learning and lesse judgement) would boldly take it upon trust from his pen; who tanquam ignotum & servum pecus, have followed him step by step without con∣sideration, or just examination of their occurrents and conse∣quents. And the reputation of him and Doctor Morton (being both Lord Chancellours of England) might easily mislead men part blind, who have dealt with King Richard, as some triviall
clawing Pamphleters, and Historicall parasites, with the mag∣nificent Prelate, Thomas Wolsey Cardinall and Archbishop o Yorke, A man of very excellent ingredients and without Peere in his time; yet his values had the sting of much detracti∣on, and the worth of his many glorious good workes interpre∣ted for vices and excesses; to such it must be said, quod ab ipsoTerent. Phorm. allatum est, id sibi relatum esse putant. And if their injustice suffer under the same lash, they must know this doome hathIliad. 20. the credit of an Oracle, quale verbum dixisti tale etiam audies. But so much gall and envy is thrown upon King Richards sto∣ry, as cannot possibly fall into the stile of an ingenuous and cha∣ritable pen; all his virtue is by a malitious Alchymy substracted into crimes, and where they necessarily fall into mention, ei∣ther scornefully transmitted or perverted, with injurious con∣structions, not allowing him the resemblance of goodnesse or merit: If his disposition be affable and curteous, (as general∣ly it was, which their owne relations cannot deny) then he in∣sinuates and dives into the peoples hearts, so where he expres∣ses the bounty and magnificence of his minde; it is a subtle tricke to purchase friendship; let him conceale the knowledgeThe virtues of King Rich∣ard malitiously censured. of his jujuries, and his patience is deepe hypocrisie; for his mercy and clemency extended to the highest offendors, (as to Fogge the Atturney, who had made a Libell against him, be∣sides the counterfeiting of his hand and seale) they were but pal∣liated, and his friendship meerely a Court brow. They have yet a more captious and subtle calumny, reproaching the ca∣sting of his eyes, motions of his fingers, manner of his gesture, and his other naturall actions. I confesse with Cicero that status, incessus, sessio, occubatio, vultus,Cicero de Ossic. lib. 1 oculi, mannum motio, have a certaine kind of decorum; but he makes it not a vice to erre in any of them, nor that any errour committed in them was a vice; although in him it must be so defined by the Lawes of Utopia: nay, they will dissect his very sleepes, to finde prodigious dreames and bug-beares, (accidents frequent to themselves) which they dresse in all the fright and horrour fiction and the stage can adde, who would have sung Peans to his glory, had his sword brought victory from Bosworth field: but now, their envy is borne with him, from his mothers wombe, and delivers him into the world with a strange prodigy of Teeth; although (I am perswaded) nei∣ther Doctor Morton, nor Sir Thomas Moore ever spake with the Dutchesse his Mother, or her Midwife about the matter. But if true; it importeth no reason why those earely and natalatious teeth should presage such horrour and guilt to his birth; when we shall remember those many Noble and worthy men, who have had the like, (without any imputa∣tion of crime) as Pliny, Livy, valel. Maximus, Plutarch. Marcus Curius sirnamed thereupon Dentatus,
Cu. Papiene, King of the Epirots (a Prince much renowned for his victories and virtues) Monodas Sonne of Prusias King of Bithynia, borne with an intire semicircular bone in their mouthes, instead of Teeth; then they aggravate the pangs of the Dutchesse in her travaile with him: which had not beenThis Dutchesse of Yorke died about the 1 of King Hen. 7. at Berkhamsted and was buried at Tothering∣am, Iohn Stow. Seneca. sufferable without death, if so extreame and intolerable, as they would have them thought for, Quod ferri potest leve est; quod non, breve est. But she overcame them and lived almost fifty yeares after; others have died in that Bed, yet the children not made guilty of murther; Iulia the daughter of Iulius Caesar, Wife to great Pompey, Iuliola the deare daughter of Marcus Cicero, Wife of Dolabella, and Iunia Claudilla the Empresse, and Wife of Cali∣gula, died all of the difficulties and extremity of their childe∣bearing; so did Queene Elizabeth Wife of King Henry the seventh; and since the Mother of that most towardly and hope∣full Prince Edward the sixth in travaile of his birth; with many thousands more, whose deaths (much lesse their paines) were never imputed to their children. The next objection is somewhat of more regard, (but as farre without the certainty of a proofe) which is the pretended deformity of his body, controverted by many; some perem∣torilyKing Richard not deformed. asserted he was not deformed, of which opinion was Iohn Stow, a man indifferently inquisitive (as in all their o∣ther affaires) after the verball relations and persons of Princes, and curious in his description of their features and lineaments, who in all his inquiry could finde no such note of deformitie in this King: but hath acknowledged viva voce, that he had spoken with some ancient men, who from their owne sight and knowledge affirmed he was of bodily shape comely e∣nough, onely of low stature, which is all the deformity they proportion so monstrously; neither did Iohn Rouce who knew him and writ much in his discription, observe any other: and Archienbald Qhuitlaw, Ambassador unto this King from Scot∣land, in his Oration saies, he had corpus exiguum; not otherwise; so (to my conceit) Philip de Comines and the Prior de Croy∣land (who had seen and knowne this Prince) seeme to cleere him implicatively; for in all their discourses of him they never directly nor indirectly, covertly or apertly, insinuate this deformity which (I suppose) they would not have pas∣sed; And by his sundry Pictures which I have seen, there was no such disproportion in his person or lineaments, but all decently compacted to his stature; his face of a warlike aspect, (which Sir Thomas Moore calleth a crabled visage) ofRot. in an. 2 R. 2. all the children being said to be most like his Father in favour and composition of shape, who though not tall was of an even and well disposed structure.
And Sir Thomas Moore himselfe, doth not certainely affirmeSir Thomas Moor apud Harligton. the deformity, but rather seemes to take it as a malitious re∣port; for saith he, King Richard was deformed as the fame ranne by those that hated him; habemus reu consitentem, and surely, it had been a strange kinde of confidence and rea∣son in Doctor Shaw, to disclaime a thing which must be soDoctor Shaw. palpable, openly in the Pulpit at Saint Pauls Crosse, whilst the Protector was present, before many hundreds of people, (who had seen and known him before) and might then bet∣ter view and note him; In these words, the Lord Protector is a very noble Prince, the speciall patterne of Knightly prow∣esse, as well in all Princely behaviour as in the lineaments of his body and in the favour of his visage, representing the very face of the Noble Duke his Father; this is the Fa∣thers owne figure, this is his owne countenance, the very sure and undoubted Image and expresse likenesse of that No∣ble Duke. Now, what can malice extract out of this, to upbraid or stig∣matizeSocrates. AEopus. Epictetus. Gala a great and excellent Captain of the Romans, all of deformed sta∣ture. his honour; if men of blemisht persons may containe a wise, valiant, learned, liberall and religious soule, and be in every part most absolute, exampled to us in many famous men; and at our home (as well in this present age, as in the more ancient) we have had men of a harsh fabrick, most nobly furnisht in the composures of their mindes. But because these cavils could not fetch blood from him, they will make him guilty of other men, and first of King Henry the sixth, whose murther they say (and very favou∣rably) his Brother Edward contrived, but wrought him to act it; an accusation of very harsh credit, that either King Ed∣ward, so truly noble and valiant a Prince, should put a Prince and his owne Brother, upon so horrid a thing, or he indure to heare it: Sir Thomas Moore holds King Edward would not ingage his Brother in so butcherly an office, there being ma∣ny reasons that he durst not, neither doe his adversaries charge him directly by any credible Author of that time, or discover by whom this murther was; onely the Prior of Croyland maketh it somewhat suspitious. Hoc tempore inventum est corpus regis Henrici sexti exanimeChron. Croyland. in turre Londinarium. Parat Deus, & spatium poenitentiae ei donet quiunque sacrilegas manus in Christum Domini ausus immit∣tere, unde & agens tyranni & patiens gloriosi martyris titulum mereantur. Tyrannus in the proper construction, being Rex, for who∣soever is Rex is Tyrannus, according to the ancient signification▪ for amongst the Greeks  was used for a King simply, good or bad, and this (some hold) makes against King Ed∣ward; Richard being Duke of Gloucester then, yet so doubt∣fully
as may be refelled by good authority; for it is the opinion of very grave men, Henry the sixth was not mur∣thered, but died of naturall sicknesse, and extreame infirmity of body. Rex Henricus sextus, ab annis jam multis ex accidente sibi aegri∣tuineIdem Croyland. quadam animi incurreret infirmitatem, & sic aeger corpo∣re & impos mentis permansit diutius; this considered with the aggravation of his griefe and sorrow, in the losse of his Crown and liberty (being then a prisoner) the overthrow of all his friends and forces in the Battaile of Teuxbury, but (above all) the death of his Sonne the Prince, might master a stronger heart and constitution then his, in a shorter time; which opi∣nion is received and alleadged by a learned and discreet Gen∣tleman. The occasion of the murther of King Henry the sixth, hathAnonymu. M. S. no other proofe but the malitious affirmation of one man; for many other men more truly did suppose that he died of meere griefe and melancholy, when he heard the overthrow of his cause and friends, with the slaughter of the Prince his Sonne: And Iohannes Majerus saith it was reported, King Henry theRex Hen. 6. in custodia ut a∣lij referunt, gla∣do, & alij me∣ore, deperijt. Ioan Majerus, Annall Flandr. lib. 17. The slaughter of the Prince sonn of H. 6. sixth died of griefe and thought. Concerning the slaughter of the Prince his onely Sonne, it is noted to be casuall, and made suddaine by his owne insolence, not out of any preten∣ded malice, or premeditated treachery, and so it cannot be called wilfull murther; for the King demanding him why he invaded his Kingdome, his reply was, he might, and ought to doe it, in defence and preservation of the right, which the King his Father and his heires had in the Crowne, and main∣tained this lofty answer so peremtorily and boldly, the King in rage strooke him with his fist, (as some say armed with a Gantlet) and instantly the Noblemen attending, as GeorgePolidor. Virgil. lib. 24. Duke of Clarence, Marquesse Dorset, the Lord Hastings and others, drew their swords upon the Prince and killed him; which they would make the particular fact of Duke Richard.Chron in quarto M. S. apud Dom. Regis. Rob. Cot∣ton. But to the contrary, I have seene in a faithfull Manuscript Chronicle of those times, that the Duke of Gloucester onely of all the great persons, stood still and drew not his sword; the reasons to credit this are, first it might be in his meere sence of honour, seeing so many drawn upon him, there was no need of his, or in his respects to the Princes Wife, who (as Iohannes Majerus saith) was in the roome and neare a∣kinneAnna. uxo Ed. filij reg. H. 6. capta est cum marito. Ioan. Majerus in An∣nal Fland. l. 17. to the Dutchesse of Yorke his Mother, and to whom the Duke was also very affectionate, (though secretly (which he soone after demonstrated in marrying her; nay, this Duke bore such a sence of noble actions in his bosome, that mislike∣ing the obscure and meane buriall of Henry the sixth, this Princes Father, he caused his corps to be taken from Chertsey,
and to be Honourably conveyed to the Royall and stately Chappell of Windsor, ordained for Kings. And Sir Thomas Moore saith further, he was suspected to have the contriving part in the Duke of Clarence his Brothers death,Richard not guilty of the Duke of Cla∣rence. yet confesseth it was commonly said Richard opposed him∣selfe against the unnaturall proceedings of the King, both pri∣vately and publiquely; and the truth is, it was the Kings owne immoveable and inexplorable doome who thought it justly and necessarily his due; for Clarence stood guilty of many treasons and great ones, and by his ingratidude had so forfe∣ted himselfe to the Kings displeasure, that no friend durst move in his behalfe; this the King did afterward acknowledge with some discontent, when his wrath had cooled, as we may guesse in this expression of his: O infaelicem ratrem, pro cujus salute neoPolidor. Virgil. homo rogavit; yet Polidor Virgil doth not rightly understand here as I conjecture by the sequell; but let us interpret that a little, and take up another accusation which puts into the way. That Richard Duke of Gloucester should scandall the birth of the King his Brother with basterdy, and alleadge it for a speciall matter in Doctor Shawes Sermon, that he should fame King Edward the fourth a bastard, and that the Dutchesse his Mother had wanton familiarity with a certaine Gentleman; this he might erroneously scatter in the Pulpit, and take it up▪onrrour of Dr. Shaw. the like intelligence, by which (in the same Sermon) he called her (to whom King Edward was betrothed before his marriage with the Lady Grey) Elizabeth Lucy, whose name was for a certaine Ellenor Butler, alias Talbot, so called by King Rich∣ard,That the Duke of Gloucester raised not the slander against the Dutchesse his Mother, nor of his Bro∣thers basterdy. and written in the Records. This drift had been too grosse for King Richard, to lay an im∣putation of whoredome upon his owne Mother, (a virtuous and honourable Lady) being it cast also a shame and basterdy upon himselfe; for if she offended in one, she might as likely offend in another, and in the rest. And to quit him of it, Sir Thomas Moore, Richard Grafon, Mr. Hall, say that King Richard was much displeased with the Doctor, when he heard the relation, which the Duke of Buc∣kingham also affirmed in his speech to the Lord Mayor of Lon∣don. That Doctor Shaw had incurred the great displeasure of the Protectour for speaking so dishonourably of the Dutchesse his Mother. That he was able of his owne knowledge to say, he had done wrong to the Protectour therein, who was ever known to beare a reverend and filiall love unto her: and to cut of all farther doubt and question, it was proved and is testified upon records that George Duke of Clarence onely raised this slander in an extreame hatred to the King his Brother, many jarres
falling between them) by which the King had a just cause to take notice of his malice. Visus est dux Clarentiae magis, ac magis a regis praesentia desu∣trahere, in consilio vix verbum proferre, neque libenter bibere aut manducare in domo Regis. When Richard even in that calamitous time Henry the sixth had overthrowne King Edward in a battaile, Anno. 10. Edward. 4. recovered the Kingdome, and proclaimed Edward an usurper; so faithfull was his Brother, that Lib. M. S. in quarto. apud Dom. Rob. Cot∣ton. he was proclaimed traitor for him; and Chronicle, Croyland. when Queene Margaret besiedged the City of Glou∣cester with the Kings power, the Citizens stood at defiance with her Army, and told her it was the Duke of Gloucester his Towne, who was with the King, and for the King, and for him they would hold it; his Loyalty bearing a most con∣stant expression in this motto Loyalty bindeth men. Loualto melie; which I have seen written by his owne hand and subscribed Richard Gloucester. The other was as constantly undermining at him, after confe∣derate with the Earle of Warwicke his Father Allie, whoFather allie. Quod vulgo & corrupte Fa∣ther in law di∣citur. had turn'd faith from the King, and went into France, sollici∣ting for force against England; which they brought in, fought with the King and overthrew him, and so fiercely pursuing the victory, that the King was forc't to fly out of the Land: Clarence not so satisfied, (unlesse he might utterly supplant him) studied that slander of basterdy, to bring in himselfe an heire to the Crowne, which was proved and given in ex∣presse evidence against him, at his triall and attainder by Par∣liament, amongst sundry other articles of high Treason. Videlicet That the said Duke of Clarence had falsly and un∣trulyIn Parlia∣ment, anno. 17. Ed. 4. Iu. Stow. vidit & legit. published King Edward a bastard and not legitimate to Raigne, that himselfe therefore was true Heire of the King∣dome, the Royalty and Crowne belonging unto him, and to his▪ Heires; these be the very words of the Record, and e∣nough to tell us who was the Author of that slander, and what important cause the King had to quit himselfe of Clarens: a bitter proofe of the old Proverbe, fratrum inter se irae acerbissimaeErasmus Ci∣liad. sunt; and all the favour Clarence could at his end obtaine, was to choose it, (as Iohn de Serres reporteth it) so that it wasIoan de Seres. Invent. not the Duke of Gloucester, but the Kings implacable displea∣sure for his malice and treasons that cut him off, who could not thinke himselfe secure whilst he lived: Witnesse Polidor Virgil, Edvardus Rex post mortem fratris se a cunctis timeri anim∣advertit, & ipse jam timebat neminem. Next for the murther of the two sonnes of King EdwardWho made away the sonnes of King Edward the fourth. the fourth, Edward the fifth King in hope, and Richard of Shrewsbury Duke of Yorke and Norfolke his younger Brother, they alleadge it in this manner. That King Richard, being desirous to rid those two Princes
his Nephews out of the world; imployed his trusty servant Iohn Greene to Sir Robert Brackenbury Lieutenant Constable of the Tower, about the executing of this murther; and by reason that plot tooke no effect, (Sir Robert not liking it) The Protectour suborned foure desperate Villaines, Iohn Dighton, Miles Forrest, Iames Tyrrell, and William Slater to undertake it, who, (as they further alleadge) smothered them in their beds, which done, they made a deepe hole in the ground, at the foote of the staires of their lodging, and their buried them, hi∣ding the place under an heape of stones, (not after the antient manner of tumulus testis;) others vary from this, and say con∣fidently, the young Princes were imbarqued in a Ship at Tower wharfe, and conveyed from thence to Sea, so cast into the Blacke deeps; others averre they were not drowned, but set safe on shore beyond Seas. And thus their stories and relations are scatter'd in various formes, their accusations differing in very many and materiall points▪ which shakes the credit of their suggestion, and makes it both fabulous and uncertaine, one giving the lie to the other, their malice having too much Tongue for their memories, and is worth the noting how opposite (and as it were) ex Diametro repugnant they are.Poodir, Virgill. l. 2. 6. In vulgus fama valuitfilios Edwardi Regis aliquò terrarum par∣temigrasse, atque ita supestites esse. Thus Pollidor, with which Dr. Morton and Sir Thomas Moore agree in one place: The man (say they) commonly calledDr. Morton, Sir Tho. Moore. Perkin Warbeck was as well with the Princes, as with the people, English and forraigne, held to be the younger Son of Edward the fourth, and that the deaths of the young King Edward and of Richard his brother, had come so far in question, as some are yet in doubt whether they were destroyed or no, in the dayes of King Richard; By which it appeares they were thought to be living after his death. And as the act of their death is thus uncertainly disputed, so is the manner of it controverted. For, Sir Thomas Moore affirmeth (as before reported) they were smothered in their beds with Pillowes; but Pollidor saith peremptorily it was never known of what kinde of death they dyed. Another Author and more ancient agreeth with them. Vulgatum est Regis Edwardi pueros concessisse in sata, sed quPrior Croy. land. genere interitus ignoratur; one reason of this may be that they who held Perkin Warbeck and Richard Duke of Yorke to be all one, give another accompt of his death, whereas if it had beene certaine these foure before named for Assasines had murdered them, then the place, time and manner had beene easily known upon their strict examination, they living freely and securely, (and without question) long after this murde was said to be done; Therefore there can be no excuse for this
neglect of Examination, much lesse for the suffering such to goe unpunished, and at liberty, which me thinks maketh much for the cleering of King Richard. As for the burying of their bodyes in the Tower, if that be brought in question, certes, the affirmative will be much more hard to prove then the negative. For true it is▪ there was much diligent search made for their bodies in the Tower: all places opened and digged, that was supposed: but not found; Then it was given out a certaine Priest tooke up their bodies and buried them in another secret place nto to be found; hereunto (but with better decorum for the more credit of this assertion) they might have added it was done sub sigillo confessionis, which may not be revealed. Sir Thomas Moore seeing the absurdities and contrarieties of these opinions, (as a man puzeled and distracted with the va∣riety and uncertainty thereof) concludeth their bodies wereMoore, Halling∣shed Graston, Hall, Stow. bestowed God wot where, and that it could never come to light what became of them; Hall, Hallingshed, Grafton and the rest, confesse, the very truth hereof was never knowne; And (if there be a stricter inquiry into the mystery) we shall discover, that they were neither buried in the Tower nor swallowed in the Sea; for the testimony and Relation of sun∣dry grave, and discrete persons (and such as knew the young Duke of Yorke) will resolve us how he was preser∣ved and secretly conveyed into a foraigne Country; also alive many years after the time of this imaginary murder; to which may be added strong authorities having layd downe some conjectures that may answer the iniquiry after the other. And first whereas it is said the Lord Protector before his Coronation procured this murder: To refell and contradict that, there bee certaine proofes that the Princes were both living in the moneth of February following the death of their Father, which was ten moneths after; for King Edward dyed in April before, and this is plaine in the Records of the Parliament of Anno 1. Rich. 3. where there is mention made of this Prince, as then living; and Sir Thomas Moore confesseth that they were living long after that time before said; But I conjecture Edward the Eldest brother lived not long after, but died of sicknesse and infirmity, being of a weake and sickly disposition, as also was his Brother, which the Queene their Mother intimated in her speech to the Cardinall Boursier; and the weake constitutions and short lives of their sisters may be a naturall proofe to infer it probable enough this Prince dyed in the Tower; which some men of these times are the ra∣ther brought to thinke, certaine bones like to the bones of a Child being found lately in a high desolate Turret, supposed to be the bones of one of these Princes; others are of opinion
it was the arasse▪ of an Apekept in the Tower, that in his old age had happened into that place to die in, and having clamber'd up thither, according to the light and idle manner of those wanton Animals, after when he would have gone down, seeing the way to be steepe and the precipice so terrible, durst not adventure to descend, but for feare stayed and starved himselfe, and although hee might bee soone mist, and long sought for, yet was not easily to be found, that Turret being reckoned a vast and damned place for the hight, and hard accesse, no body in many yeares looking into it. But it is of no great consequence to our purpose, whether it were the Carcasse of a Child or of an Ape, or whether this young Prince dyed in the Tower, or no: for wheresoever hee dyed, why should it not be as probable hee dyed of a naturall sicknesse and infirmity, as for his young Cozen german the sonne and heire of King Richard? many reasons conducing why the qualities and kinde of their death might be the same, and neere one time, being even parallels almost, and in their hu∣mane constitutions and corporall habitude sympathizing, of one Linage and Family, of one blood and age, of the same quality and fortune, therefore not unlikely of the same Stu∣dies, Affections, Passions; Distemperatures, so consequently subject to the same infirmities, to which may be added equall and common constellations, the same compatient and commori∣ent fates and times, and then there is reason and naturall cause they might both die of like Diseases and infirmity, and were not , taken away by violence, secret, or overt: for it may with asmuch Argument bee suspected the son of King Richard, (being in the like danger of secret violence for the same cause as his Cozen was) might suffer so. But to open the circumstance a little neerer: what danger could the lives of those two Princes be to Richard? who was accepted King by a just title, and his Nephewes declared ille∣gitimate, by the high Court of Parliament, and whilst they were reputed such by so great and generall a conclusion, why should he be lesse secure of them, then Hen. 2. was of Robert E. of Glocester, base sonne to Hen. 1.? or Richard the first of his base Brother Geoffrey Plantagenet? So although Iohn of Gaunt left base sonnes, aspiring enough, yet they were of no danger to the Lancastrian Kings▪ neither did Henry 7. or Henry 8. stand in any jealousy of Arthur Plantagenet: and surely Richard the third was as valiant, wise and consident, as any of his prede∣cessors, and had as little cause to dread his Nephewes, as they stood adjudged, or be more cruell and bloudy; neither hath my reading found any Bastards of France or Spaine, who have aspired so publickly, onely except Don Eurique E. of Trastamara▪ who was drawne into that action by the violent rages of the
people, and by the perswasions of the revolted states of Castile, to put downe a monster of Soveraignty the hatefull tyrant, Don Pedro & Cruell. But being Sir Thomas Moore and our best Chroniclers make it doubtfull, whether these two Princes were so lost in King Richards time, or no, and infer that one of them was thought to be living many years after his death; that might be enough to acquit him; which opinion I like the better, because it mentioneth the survivance but of one of them. Neither doe our most credible stories mention the transpor∣tation of more then one, into Flanders, nor had they reason; it will bee sufficient, if one of them survived him, more, or lesse time; we will follow therefore the examination of his story, under the opinion of those times, and the attesta∣tion of grave and credible men, because it will be more con∣spicuous in the true and simple narration of this one Brother; every story being fraught with reports concerning him, and few or none of his brother finding no mention of the Elder Bothers being in Flanders; but of the youngers much, and of his other adventures: The prudent and honorable care of sending away this younger Brother, by some is ascribed to Sr. Robert Brakenbury, by others to the Queene his Mother, and it may well be the projection of them both, though no doubt there was the advise and assent of other well affected friends. And it is the more credible, the Queen wrought in it; for the story of Sr. Thomas Moore saith shee was before suspected to have had such a purpose, which was objected to her by some of the Lords; and the Cardinall Boursier told her the maine Reason which made the Protector and Nobles so urgeing to have him sent to his Brother (being then in the Tower) was a suspition and feare they had shee would convey Him forth of the Realme. So then, it may be cleerly supposed: he was sent into a for∣raine Country, and that Flanders (as all our stories testify) there commended to a liberall education, under the curature of a worthy Gentleman in Warbeck, a Towne in Flanders, but kept very privately all the life time of his Uncle, his Friends not daring to make him of the councell. After his death, know∣ing Henry Richmond a cruell enemy to the house of Yorke, for his better safety was committed to the care of Charles of Bur∣gundy, and his Dutchesse the Lady Margaret Aunt to the Prince, as formerly the Dutchesse of Yorke upon a like cause of feare and jealousy had sent thither her two younger sons George and Richard. The Dutchesse being very tender to let this young Duke have all Princely and vertuous education in Tornay in Antwerp and after in the Court of the Duke of Burgundy, as hee had
bin in Warbeck, &c. And with the greater circumspection, be∣cause the Dutchesse of Burgundy had as jealous an opinion of Henry the Seventh, as the Queene Widdow had of Richard 3. Therefore, as yet, it was advised to conceale his Name and Quality: being not come to the growth nor age to have ex∣perience in his own affaires, much lesse to undertake an attempt so consequent and mighty as the recovery of a Kingdome: neither were the times and opportunity yet ripe, or propitious to fashion such an alteration, as was projected and must be pro∣duced, though there was pregnant hope of an induction to a change of Government stir'd by the Kings coveteousnesse, and some acts of Tyrany, Greivance and Rebellions in the North and West parts; not long after (which lent a seasonable hand to these designes) great unkindnesse fell out betwixt Charles the French King, and Henry the 7. who so far provoked the French, that he besieged Bulloigne, with a great army by land and Sea, the quarrell was of good advancement to the Dutchesse of Burgondy's Plot, and brought the Duke of Yorke better acquainted with forraigne Princes and their Courts; who was sent into France, into Portugall, and other places where he was received and entertained like a Prince. In which time such of the English Nobility as were inter∣essed in the secret, and knew where this Prince resided, found some opportunity to give him assistance, and sent Sr. Robert Clifford and Sr. William Barley into Flanders, to give him a vi∣sit and intelligence of what noble friends he had ready to serve him: though their more particular errant was, to take a strict observance of him, and such private marks as hee had bin knowne by from his Cradle: there had beene some coun∣terfeits, incouraged to take upon them the persons of Edward E. of Warwick, and Richard Duke of Yorke; But here, the certainty of their knowledge found him they looked for, by his Face, Countenance, Lineaments and all tokens familiarly and privately knowne to them; observing his behaviour, naturaliz'd and heightned with a Princely grace, and in his discourse able to give them a ready accompt of many pas∣sages he had heard or seene whilst hee was in England; with such things as had beene done and discourst very privately, speaking English very perfectly, and better then the Dutch, or Wallonish: by which Sr. Kobert Clifford and the rest, found themselves so well satisfied, and were so confirm'd, That they wrot to the Lord Fitzwater, to Sir Symon Mountford and others (who had a good opinion towards him;) the full accompt of what they had observ'd ex certa scientia, & supra visum cor∣poris. About this time (to intermix the Scene with more varie∣ty, and fill the Stage) some principall persons, well affecting the E. of Warwick, and hoping to get him forth of the Tower in
purpose to make him King) had inticed a handsome young fellow, one Lambert Simonell of Lancashire, bred in the Uni∣versity of Oxford to become his counterfeit, and so instruct∣ed him in the royall Genealogy, that hee was able to say as hee was taught; maintained and abetted, cheifly, by the Viscount Lovell, the E. of Lincolne, Sir Thomas Broughton, and Sir Symon Preist, &c. who being presented to the Duke and Dutchesse of Burgondy and by them honorably entertained, drew to him in Flanders one Martin Swartz (a Captaine of a very eminent fame) and some forces, with which hee made over into Ireland where they received him as Edward Earle of Warwick, as hee was of many here at home: and when the deceit was discovered, the excuse was, those Lords but used this counterfet of the Earle for a Colour, whilst they could get him out of the Tower to make him King. But the vaile is easily taken from the face of such impost∣ors, examples giving us light in many; for though some men may, all cannot be deceived: so Speudo-Agrippa in the timeDion, Tacitus, Seionius. Counterfeit Princes. of Tiberius was soone found to bee Clemens the servant of Agrippa, though very like to him, and Puesdo-Nero in Otho's time, who tooke upon him to be Nero revived, was quickly unmasked. Valerius Paterculus telleth of a certaine ambitious coun∣terfet in Macedonia, who called himselfe Philip, and would be reputed the next heire of the Crowne, but was discovered and nicknamed Pesudo-Philippus; Also in theIts written by some of the old Historians that King Harold was not shine at the Battaile of Hastings, by the Conquerer; but that he sur∣vived & went to Ierusalem, &c. But it not importeth whether He were the true Harold, or Pseu∣do Harold, be∣cause he never came to claime any thing in England. Raigne of Commodus one pretended to be Sextus Claudianus, the son of Maximus; with many such that are obvious in old stories; and many of the like stampe have beene here con∣victed in England; which bred the greater jealousy of this Richard, when hee came first to be heard of, Though those jealosies proceeded not from the detection of any fraud in him, but of the late imposture of the said Lambert the Shooemakers son, and the abuse of the Complotters; for the Kingdome having been abused with those Pseudo-Clarences, had reason to bee doubtfull of every unknowne person, which assumed the name of greatnesse; in regard whereof, many shrunke in their opinions from this Perkin, or Rich∣ard; many others suspecting their beliefe, were very cu∣rious to inform themselves who the further they inquired, were the more confirmed, that hee was no other but the second son of Edward the Fourth, against whom those of the harder credulity objected it as an impossibility, that this young Duke could bee conveyed out of the Tower, so long, and so concealed; which the wiser sort could easily answer by many ancient examples, which give us di∣vers
Relations of Noble Children preserved more admi∣rably: and this young Duke himselfe, in his owne behalfe, when such objections were made against him, did alledge to Iames King of Scotland the History of Ioah mentioned in the Booke of the Kings, and that most speciall one of Moses: which the Dutches his Aunt Sister German to his Father, was strongly confirmed in, giving him all answerable and hono∣rable accommodation: so did the chiefe Nobility of those parts, and as an heire of the house of Yorke, there was rendred him the Title of La▪Rose-Blanch, the proper and an∣cient devise of the house of Yorke; with all, a gallant Guard of Souldiers was allowed him for attendance, and much was hee favored by the Arch-Duke Maximilian King of the Romans, by Philip his Sonne Duke of Burgondy, Charles the French King, the King of Portugall and Scotland, by the chiefest of Ireland and many Personages in England, who at extreame perill and hazard avowed him to be the second son of Edward the fourth. The Princes aforementioned readily supplying him with Coyne and assistance, towards his atcheivements. King Hen∣ry actively apprehends what it threatned, and bestirs him∣selfe to take of their inclinations, dispatching Doctor Wil∣liam Warkam (after Archbishop of Canterbury) with Sr.The practice of Hen. 7. with the Duke of Burgondy. Edward Poynings a grave and worthy Knight, to under-rare his credit with those Princes; and such strong perswasions were used That Philip Duke of Burgondy (for his Fa∣ther Maximilian was before returned into Austria) utterly declines himselfe and his subjects from his first ingage∣ment, but excepted the Widdow Dutchesse of Burgondy, over whom hee had no power of command, because shee had all justice and Jurisdiction in those large signories whereof her dowry was composed. And thus Richard was supplanted here; what hope of ayde hee had, or did expect by his voyage into Portugall, I cannot say, though his entertainment there was honorable: but by reason of the distance of the Country it may bee thought hee was to build little upon any from thence; his chiefe conidence and refuge being in England and Ireland, where he had a good party, and sayled with a prety Fleete in∣to Ireland; there hee was welcomed, and received as theThe meanes used by Hen. 7. to prevent the practises of Per∣kin in Ireland. the second Sonne of King Edward; some of the Geraldins and other great Lords in Ireland, purposing to make him their King; To overtake him betimes there too, Doctor Henry Deane, Abbot of Lanthory (a very wise able man) was sent and made Chancellor of Ireland; with him went the said Sr. Edward Poynings, who so actively bestirred themselves
that in short time they drew the Irish from Perkin, so that now hee must returne home, but by the way was encouraged, to apply himselfe to Iames King of Scotland, whither forthwith hee directs his hopes, and found his entertainment answerable to them: the King receiving him very Nobly by his title of Duke of York, calls him Cozen, with promises to give him strong▪ footing in England, and (inThis Lady was so rarely faire and lovely that King H. 7 wondred at her beauty, and was inamored of her sending her to London to be safely kept till his returne out of the West Countries, where he theu was and first saw her. earnest of his better intents) bestowed in Marriage upon him, the most Noble and faire Lady Katharine Gordon his neere kinswoman, Daughter of Alexander Earle of Hunt∣ly: This came home very sharpely to King Henry, who knew King Iames to bee a Prince so Wise, and Valiant, that no easy delusion could abuse him. And true it is, King Iames was very precise in his con∣sideration of this young Duke: but very cleerely con∣firmed before hee would acknowledge him. King Henry is very Studious how to thwat the event of this scene, and unfasten the King: but casts his conidence againe, upon the fortune of his judgement, and sends many Protesta∣tions with rich promises, to King Iames for Perkin (for now wee shall so call him with the times) which tooke small effect at first; but King Henry (being a man preg∣nant to finde any advantage, and one whose providence would not let it die) remembers the stong affinity and friendship betwixt King Iames and Ferdinando King ofThe practice of H. 7. to the King of Scots, and of Castile o get or sup∣plant Perkins. Castile, (one of the most Noble Princes then living.) At that time too, it happened so happily, there was a Treaty and intelligence betwixt Henry the Seventh and Ferdinan∣do, for proposition of a Marriage of Arthur the Prince of Wales, and Katharine Daughter of King Ferdinando: this occasion no sooner offered it selfe to his consideration, but a Post was dispatcht to Castile, with Letters and Instru∣ctions to give the King to know what had passed betweene him and King Iames of Scotland, urging him to use the Power and Credit hee had with him, for the delivery of Perkin to himselfe: which Ferdinando undertooke; andDon Pedro, Aylau. sends Don Pedro Ayala (not one Peter Hialas, or Peter Hayles) as our vulgar stories have (a wise and learned man and of a very Noble house) who so ably used his Braine in this imployment, that King Iames passed to him his promise, to dis∣misse Perkin to his own fortunes; But would by no meanes deli∣ver him to the King. Thus Perkin was againe supplanted Virtute vel dolo, and of necessity driven into Ireland, where hee was formerly received and entertained; whilst they were agitating their first Plot of setling him King, Charles the French King
sends to him Lois de Laques and Estiene Friant, to offer himHall in H. 7. his friendship and ayde; with this good newes Perkin hast∣ed into France, where hee found his welcome very hono∣rable, as befitting a Prince, a Guard appointed to attend him, of which Monsieur Congre-Salle was Captaine; before this King Henry had threatned France with an Army, but now upon a better view and deliberation, foreseeing what this had in it, He propounds very faire Conditions for a Peace with the French King, which the French King was as willing to intertaine, and so it was concluded; Perkin after this began to thinke the King shortned his respects, and looked upon him (as it were) but imagine lusca, with halfe a Coun∣tenance, and fearing there might bee some capitulation in this new League, that might concerne his liberty, private∣ly quits Paris, returning to his Aunt of Burgondy. Al∣though Perkin was thus shortned in his forraine expecta∣tions, hee had those both in England and Ireland, that much favored him and his cause, making another voyage into Ireland, but returned with his first comfort; for though they stood constantly affected and were willing, the Kings Officers curbed them so, they could not stir. From Ireland hee sayled into England, landing at Bod∣min in Cornewall, the Cornish and Westerne men there∣abouts receiving him very gladly, proclayming him King of England and of France, &c, by the Title of Richard the Fourth (as Hee had beene proclaimed before in the North parts of England, by the Councell and Countenance of the King of Scots.) Out of Cornewall Hee marches into Devonshire to Exeter, to which Hee layd Siege, having then about five thousand men in his Army; but the Kings being at hand and farre stronger, Hee was forc't to rise from the siege, upon which those few friends Hee had left (finding His want, and the King with greater strength approaching) forsooke him to provide for themselves: thus abandoned, no way before him but flight, and being well mounted, with a traine of some forty or fifty reso∣lute Gentlemen, recovers the Abby of Beanely in Hamp∣shire, where Hee tooke Sanctuary, from which the Kings party who persued Him would violently have surprised Him; Which the Abbot and Religious persons would not in∣dure as a thing too foule against their Priviledge. The King after sends to him profers of favours and mercy,Perkins Enter∣tainment in the Court. with promises of such Honour and Condition as drew Him to the Court, where the King looked upon him with a very Gratious and Bountifull usage as a Noble person;
But his prompting Jealousies and Feares soone east a dul∣nesse over this first favours and promises; Then a Guard must bee set upon Perkin and his usuall freedome restrain∣ed; these were harsh presages (Hee thought) which so justly moved His suspition and discontent that hee thought Sanctuary againe must bee his best safety, and passing by the Monastery of Shrene, hee suddenly slips into it from his Guard, whither the King sends unto him with per∣swasions of the first Courtly and Honorable tincture; But Perkin that had discerned the Hook, was not easily to be tempt∣ed with the bait this second time. Then the King dealt with the Prior for him, who would not yeeld him, but upon faithfull promise from the King to use him with all favour and grace, which was protested, although Perkin no sooner came into his power againe but hee was sent to the Tower, where his imprisonment was made so hard and rude, that it much dejected and troubled him, oftentimes in private and with peircing groanes, having beene heard to wish himselfe borne the Sonne of any Pesant. And indeed, every one could tell hee fared the worse for his Name, it being an observation of those times that there was three men most feared of the King. Edward Plantagenet Earle of Warwicke, Perkin, alias Richard Plantagenet, and Edmond de la Poole Sonne of King Edwards Sister, all of the Family of Yorke, but most of all Perkin, being of a more active spirit, so more sen∣sible of his wrongs then the other; and cost the King more Consultation and Treasure in the working him into his hands; Therefore answerably aggravated his miseries and disgraces which now beganne to exceede; for hee was not onely sharpely restrained in the Tower, but the fame was the Question orRak. Gehenne was given Him: some∣times he was taken forth, and carried in most ignominious manner abroade, to bee set in the Pillory, otherwhile in the Stockes; after all these bitter and cruell punish∣ments (to pull downe his stomacke) there was sent some unto Him of purpose to perswade his submission to the Kings mercy, and by renowncing His Blood, Birth, and Title, to confesse himselfe no other but Perkin War∣berk the Sonne of a base Flemming▪ which Hee scorn∣ing and denying, His sufferings were made more rigorous, and Hee lodged poorely and basely, as meanely fedde, worse cladde, untill at length by Torments and Extre∣mities, Hee was forc't to say any thing, and content to unsay what they would have Him, to accuse Himselfe
by a forc't Recantation of his Family▪ Name, and Roy∣all Parentage; this must bee compell'd too under His hand, then to bee brought by the Officers unto the most publique places of London and Westminster, to suffer as before related, and with a loud voyce to reade the same, which might passe at present with the multitudeThe force and mischiefe of Torture. for current, who knew not how it was forcd from Him, nor had judgement enough to know and consider that Racks and Tortures have made very able men accuse themselves and others unjustly: Seneca telleth of a man who being suspected of Theft was inforced by torture to confesse the theft and his fellow Theeves; but have∣ing none, hee accused the good and just Cato, to a∣voyd the torture; nay (which is a thing of more hor∣ror) it maketh men by false Oaths to blaspheme God; Therefore Saint Augustine inveigheth sharply against the cruell use of it, and amongst many other sins, which hee findeth in it, this is one, Tortus si diutius nolet sustinere Tormenta, quod nonAugust. in Civi∣tate Dei. commisit, se commisisse dicit. The tortured gladly doing this the sooner to exchange those torments with death as the far lesse pain. And therefore this young Man may bee excusable in what hee did against himselfe, his youth being igno∣rant of these high points of Honour, and could not yet bee confirmed in any brave and firme resolution, nor happily in Religion, and the worse also by the reason of his long imprisonment and heavy trouble, having no Councell to strengthen him, nor so much as in Charity to comfort Him, but left a miserable despe∣rate forlorne Man, and feared to bee so for ever, and at the best. And if learned grave Men, Men of grace, having large Talents of Spirit and Science, for feare of such punishments have denyed some chiefe points of Chri∣stian▪ Faith, yet have beene excused for the torture sake, (of which wee have testimony in the Ecclesiasti∣call Stories) what may a tender and unexperienced youth doe? For which just causes the best Doctors of the Ci∣vill Law, and also of Theology condemne and aborre the use of Torture, as having a further mischiefe in it, and is Arcanum Gehennae a secret of Torture or ofThe French all torture la Gehenne. Hell. For when the Prisoners body by exteame toment is
brought into any mortall State, or symptome of death, or made incurable and deadly, then to avoyde the im∣putation of Murder, the prisoner by a short and pri∣vate processe is condemned of some capitall crime, and presently executed, whilst there is yet some life in him; And to that censure Perkin at last came; for no∣thing could serve but his blood, his confession being on∣ly extorted from him to perswade the People hee was an impostor, and because they could not lay hold of his Life by the Course of Law or Justice (being not at∣tainted nor condemned of any capitall crime.) This scraple being a little considered, there was found out a way to remove that, and matter enough to make him guilty of a capitall offence, for which purpose it was devised there should a practise of escape bee offered him; and because the case of Edward Plantagenet, Earle of VVarrwicke, was like unto his, and as well wisht, being not attainted of any crime, hee also must desire to escape, that devise being the onely matter of guilt, or capitall crime, which was wanting, and might bee (as it were) created for them the more colorably to effect their executions; there not wanting instruments for that purpose to betray their innocent considence, whose inprisonment had layne so heavily and cruelly upon them, that they were easily perswaded to catch at any hope of liberty. Some say the Earle of Warwicke at his arraignment was charged with perswading the other to make this e∣scape, but sure it is they both gladly hearkened to the motion of it; And were (soone after) accused as guil∣ty of practise and Conspiracy, to escape out of the Tower, so for the same arraigned and condemned to die: though geat difference was put in their processe, and execu∣tion;Yorke and Warwick, paralels. for the Earle of Warwick was tryed by his noble Peeres, and had the supplice of a Noble man, in an ho∣norable place, the Tower of London: Perkin alias Rich∣ard, by a Common Jury, who are men (many times) of little honesty, and to suffer at the common and in∣famous place, Tyburne, by the name of Perkin War∣becke, to confirme the People Hee was what they con∣demned him for; For this Nick-name was supposed to have utterly disnobled Him, and (as it were) divested Him of all his Noble Bloud and Titles, the condition of an impostor serving best for a cloke against that purple shower, which was at the fall and cruell usage of this misera∣ble Prince.
It may bee thought, the Earle of VVarwicke had as shamefully suffered, if the Wit and Malice of the Cardinall could have reacht to have made him a coun∣terfeit; But all men knew Hee was not onely a true and certaine▪ Prince, but free from all practise, yet Hee was restrained of his liberty, and a prisoner the most pat of Hislife; from the time of his Fathers attainder untill He Suffered; this was after they had survived King Richard their Unckle about fifteen years. Now for their Offence, the learned Judges willOf escape. tell us of what Nature and Quality, it is called in Law. Some holding an escape to bee but an errour, a na∣turallThe French word escape, is to seeke to be free, and the French men transle escape in to the Latine Salvus. dislike of bondage, or a forfeit of simplicity, pro∣ceeding from a naturall and very tolerable desire of li∣berty, which opinion is contingent to right; And the cause of these two Princes may also bee the better received, if it bee well considered, that this Plot of their escape▪ was not projected by themselves, but cunning∣lyEscape what. propounded to them by proper instruments (being young and unexperienced) to intangle▪ them in some capitall offence, and so of Death, of which kinde of of∣fences they stood cleere before, not once accused, have∣ing never beene indicted, or attained of any thing Capitall. Therefore now their innocence must bee made guilty; And in this I say no more then all our H∣storians, or others say, who agree in one opinion that The KING could not take away the lives of Per∣kin Warbecke and this Earle of Warwicke, untill this practise of their escape was layde to them, and they made guilty thereof. Therefore they were not Tray∣tors before, neither was Perkin now to bee thought a Counterfeit, but a Prince of the Bloud, clayming the Crowne; for otherwayes, Hee was Perkin of Flanders, a base fellow and a most culpable and notorious Traitor: then what neede they looke further for a Crime to put him to Death? And if Hee were not a Traitor, surely it was a Tyranny to make of an Innocent and guiltlesse Man a guilty Fo∣lon, and by Traines, and Acts, to forge an offence out of nothing. For doubtlesse an Innocent and a true man may seeke freedome, and purpose an act of escape, also commit in, and yet be still an honest Man, and a faithfull good subject; for nature and reason teacheth and alloweth all men to eschew in∣juries and oppression.
Besides this Practise of those young men, to escape, was found (as Pollidor well observeth) Crimen Alienum, and not Crimen pro∣prium: then how much greater was the wrong, to take away their lives. But however it may bee laid upon them, it was nothing but a desire of liberty out of durance, in which they were kept for a small, or no offence. The Civill law holdeth suspition of flight or escape, to bee no crime. Suspicio fugae quia, non solet detrimentum, reipublice ad ferre, non censetur crimen; so ulpian. And by the Lawes of Eng∣land, if a Prisoner doe escape, who is not imprisoned for Trea∣son,Just: Stanford, in pleas de la Corone. lib. 1. cap. 26, 27. or felony, but some lesser fault of trespasse according to the old Law of England. Escapae non adjudicabitur versus eum, qui Commissus est prisonae, pro transgressione. Escape shall not bee adjudged for Felony, or other crime, in one who is committed for trespasse. For the offence of the escape is made in the common Law, to be of the same nature and guilt with the crime whereof the Prisoner is attainted; And certainely neither the Earle of Warwicke, nor Ri∣chard alias Perkin were attainted of Treason or Felony, &c. before. But to close this dispute and tragedy, not long after some of the Instruments which betrayed them into this, as Walter Blunt, Thomas Astwood, servants to the Lieutenant of the Tower, fini∣shed at Tiburn because they should tell no tales. And to this succinct relation, there can be no better testimony then the hands of those witnesses, who have sealed their confessi∣on and knowledge with their bloods. Men of all conditions and estates, all maintaining at the last gaspe, that Perkin was the true Duke of Yorke, whose Affirma∣tions I will produce, give mee but leave by the way, to answer one Objection or Cavill brought against this Duke called in scorn, Perkin Warbecke. A new Writer affirming him to bee an Impostor,Whether Don Sebastian of Portugall were a Counterfeit or not. whose learning may be as much mistaken in this, as other things, though he laid a great pretence to knowledge, especially in the History of England and other Countreyes: indeed his judgement and reading are much exprest alike, in his Pamphlet which he cals the History of Perkin Warbecke, wherein he forfeits all his skill, to make him a parallel in advers fortunes, and supposed base qua∣lity, to the unhappy Don Sebastian late King of Portugall, who he also protests an Impostore. And to arrive at this huge know∣ledge, (he would have us thinke) hee tooke much paines in the sifting of Authors (and indeed I thinke he did sift them) concer∣ning his ignorance in the case of Don Sebastian (if he be not too wise to have it informed) I will urge some reasons on Don Sebasti∣ans side, who was King of Portugall: and invading the Kingdom of Barbary, Anno Dom. 1584. was overthrown in a fierce & bloo∣dy Battel in the fields of Alcazer, by the King of Morucco, where it
was thought he was slaine, but escaped and fled secretly, traver stie or disguised: travailing in that manner through many parts of Africa and Asia some 30. yeares, in which time and travaile he suffered much, lived in Captivity and misery, but at last got a∣way into Europe with purpose to have got into Portugall (if possi∣ble) to repossesse the Kingdome. In this returne he came to Venice, there discovered himselfe, and desires aide of the Venetian States: they entertained him as a Prince distressed, gave him good words, but durst not lend him Assistance, fearing the King of Spaine; Yet the chiefe Senators, and many of the wisest of the Sigmory, made no doubt of him. Among them Signieur Lorenzo Iustiniano of the Senators Order, (a man of wise and great abilities) was appointed by the States, a Commissioner (with others) to hear and examine this cause of Don Sebastian, in which they tooke much paines. And this Sig∣nieur Lorenzo (being lieger Ambassadour in England) affirmed and162. protested solemnly, he and all the other Commissioners were clear and very confident he was Don Sebastian King of Portugall, not∣withstanding Hi legatus haec Domino Baroni Darcey retulit. they durst not give him aide, but councelled him for France, where the King favoured right, without feare of a∣nothers displeasure. But taking Florence in his way, in the habit of a Fryer, he was observ'd and discovered by some spyes which the Grand Duke of Tuscany had set upon him from Venice: who to in sinuate with the King of Spaine, Philip the second, and for some other commodious considerations, delivered Sebastian to the Go∣vernour of Orbattelli (a Spanish Port in Tuscany) from thence sent him by Sea to the Count De le Mos, Vice-roy of Naples, who con∣veyed him into Spaine: there for a while his entertainment was no better then in the Gallies: what other welcome hee had I know not; but the fame went certainly he was secretly made away after Philip the third was King. The said Vice-roy of Naples confessed in secret to a friend of his, he verily believed his prisoner was the true Sebastian King of Portugall, and was induced to be of that o∣pinion, by the strong Testimonies, and many strange and peculi∣ar markes, which some Honourable Portugesses did know him by, all found about the body of this Sebastian. And the French King, Henry the 4th it should seeme, was perswaded no lesse: for when the newes was told him the Duke of Florence had sent this Sebasti∣an to the King of Spaine, he told the Queene what an ill deed her Unckle had done in these words; Nostre Uncle a faict un act fort indigne de sa Persone. Doctor Stephen de Sampugo, in a letter to Ioseph Texere, Coun∣cellour and Almoner to the most Christian King, writes thus. The King Don Sebastian is here in Vonice, &c. So soone as hee arrived here (where he hoped to find support) the Ambassadour of Castile persecuted him very cruelly, perswading the Signeury that he was a Calabrois, &c. I sweare to your Father-hood by the Passion of
Jesus Christ, this man is truly the King Don Sebastian, he hath all the markes on his body, without failing in any one as he had in his in∣fancy, only the wounds excepted which he received in that Battel at Affricke, he gives the reason of his life, & account of all his passages, &c. He is knowne and re-known by the Conciergres, by the Judg∣es, by the greater part of the Senate, and by his owne Confes∣sor, &c. and a great deal more of him upon knowledg he justifies: as much witnesses Ion de Castro, Sonne to Don de Alvaro de Castro, one of the four Governours that ruled the Kingdome Conjunctly with the King Don Sebastian, who in his letter the same man sayes thus. The King Don Sebastian (whom the enemies call a Cala∣brois) is the very same which is detained here, as certainly as you are Fryer Ioseph, and my selfe Don Ion. He departed alive from the battaile, but very sore wounded: God having so delivered him with some other of his company, amongst whom was the Duke Anegro, &c. as for the Exterior marks of his body he wants not one of them, he is wounded on the brow of the right eye and on the head, as many witnessed when they saw him in the Affrick Battell. His hand-writing is still the same, observing the very same method, as is very well remembred by divers. There might much more be instanced in the behalfe of this Se∣bastian, but this may serve for better intelligence, to which I may adde, that men experienced in the Affaires and policy of State, know it a rare thing to find in any History the examples of a Prince being seised and possessed of any Signiory or Principality (how un∣lawfull soever) who hath resigned them or any part to the true heires. Have we not instances at home, where the Sonne hath ta∣ken the Kingdome from the Father, and would not let it goe a∣gaine, but rather endeavoured to hast his Fathers fate? Much af∣terEdward 2. and Edward 3. that manner when Henry Duke of Lancaster had got the King∣dome, he held it and would not resigne to the right Heyr Richard the second, nor after his death to the Earle of March, though these were no Impostors; neither was Edward Earl of Warwicke: yet King Henry would not let his hold goe: and the Cardinall Fa∣vourite, finding he could not compasse his aymes one way, con∣trived it another. By the Machivilian advice he gave to Ferdinand King of Castile, not to conclude the treaty of the Marriage be∣tweene Prince Arthur and his Daughter Katherine untill this Earle and Perkin were disposed of, which Ferdinando followed and ur∣ged the King, pretending it the security of his Estate and Issue. In briefe, it is not possible to perswade a private man, though wrongfully possessed to acknowledge the true proprietary hath a better title then he. How unjustly have the Kings of Spaine detain'd sundry Signeu∣ries and Principalities from the lawfull Heirs: yet if the wrong done by such another disseising Lord, be put to this former Usur∣per, Malafide (as the Imperiall Iurisconsults will terme him) his
sentence will be, such a Rapinous Prince doth wrong. But let us now take a more particular view of those witnesses who stood for Perkin. And having formerly mentioned Sir Robert Clifford, a Knight of the Noble Family of the Barons Cliffords, I will proceed with that which may be the more remarkable in him, because hee was of a Family that long hated the House of Yorke,Moor, Hollinsh. Stow, Gains∣sord. from the Battaile of Wakefield, when and where they resolved an enmity so deadly, as was not to bee reconciled or satisfied whilst one of them remained; yet became followers againe of the White Rose family; and this Sir Robert Clifford served King Edward ve∣ry neare, and in good credit, so could not but have an assured knowledge of the Kings Sonnes, and was therefore the more par∣ticularly sent to certifie his knowledge, who certainely affirmed him to bee the younger sonne of Edward 4. and confirmed many with him, such as had likewise served King Edward, and had been acquainted with the Prince his conveying beyond Sea, though much was done to alter Sir Roberts opinion: the Lord Fitz-Walter was of the same beliefe, and avowed Perkin the true Duke of York,Moor, Hollinsh. Stow, Grafton, Gainsford, Hal. most constantly unto death; as resolute was Sir William Stanley, though he were Lord Chamberlaine to Henry the seventh, and in great favour; with Sir George Nevill Brother to the Earle of West∣morland, Sir Symon Mountford, Sir William Daubeny, father to the Lord Daubeny, Sir Thomas Thwaits, Sir Robert Ratcliffe of the houseIdem Autor. of the Baron FitzWalter, Sir Iohn Taylor, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Tho∣mas Bagnall with many other Gentlemen of quality, all maintai∣ning him to be the Duke of Yorke, sonne of Edward the fourth, & sundry of the Clergy who had beene Chaplaines to the King his Father, or otherwise occasioned to attend the Court, as Doctor Rochford, Doctor Poynes, Doctor Sutton, Doctor Worsley Deane of St. Pauls, Doctor Leyborn, Doctor Lesly, with many other learned Professors of Divinity, who would not endure to heare him called Perkin.He was the Noble roge∣nitor of the Earles of York. The Lord FitzWater, Sir William Stanley, Sir Simon Mount∣ford, Sir Robert Ratcliffe, Sir William Daubeny (as martyrs of state) confirmed their Testimonies with their bloods. So did the Kings Serjant Ferrier, who left the Kings service, and applyed himself to Perkin, for which he was executed as a Traitor; and one Ed∣wards who had served this Duke Richard, was cut in pieces for the same cause, also Corbet, Sir Quinton Betts, and Gage, Gen∣tlemen of good worth, with 200. more at least, put to death in sundry Cities and Townes, particularly in Kent, Essex, Suffolke, Norfolke, and about London for their confidence and opinions in this Prince. There were some great men (though they made noe professi∣on of their knowledge of him,) could whisper it one to anotherHollinshed, Grafton, Hall, Stow. which in generall words, is confessed by all our better writers; who say, that as well the Noblemen, as others, held the said Perkin to
be the younger Sonne of King Edward the Fourth. And Sir Thomas Moore after Doctor Morton, thus writeth,Iohn Morton. Thomas Moor. Grafton. The man commonly called Perkin Warbeck, was as well with the Prince, as with the people, held to be the younger Sonne of King Edward the Fourth. Richard Grafton affirmeth the same, in Flanders (saith he) and most of all here in England, it was received for an undoubted truth, not onely of the people but of the Nobles, that Perkin was the Sonne of King Edward the Fourth. And they all swore and af∣firmedMr. William Cambden. this to be true; The learned and famous Mr. Cambden aver∣reth, there were many wise, grave and persons of good intelli gence, (who liued in that time and neere it) That affirmed consi∣dently this Perkin was second Sonne to King Edward, then both the Brothers were not made a way by King Richard, and sarely it was little reason, or policy, to cut off the one & spare the other, nei∣ther indeed was there ever any proofes made, by Testimony, Argu∣ment, or Presumption, nor by Reason, Honour, or Policy, that this crime could be his, though many to the contrary; for he not onely preserved his Nephew the young Earle of Warwicke, but in his confidence (a speciall note of his magnanimity) gave him libertie, pleasure, and the command of a Statly house of his owne. Now if he had beene so Ambitious and bloudy, he would have provided otherwise for him, knowing his Title was to take place, if his bloud had not beene attainted in his Father; in regard where∣of King Richard when his owne Sonne was dead, caused his Ne∣phew Iohn de la Poole, Eldest Sonne of the Duke of Suffolke, andSome think he dyed unnatu∣rally. of the Dutches his sister, (then the next lawfull heir to the Crowne) to be proclaimed heir apparant, an Argument of res∣pect to his kindred & next title to the Crowne, in whomsoever it was; which other men regarded not so much as the unhappy Se∣quel shewed: (& there was an impious necessitie in that) for whilst the Prince of Yorke survived, (Especially the males) no other titular Lord, or pretender could be King by his owne right, or by colour of right, nor by any other meanes: unlesse he had married a daughter, and the Eldest Daughter of King Edward the Fourth. And although the deathes & manner of taking away these Prin∣ces (the Sonnes of King Edward) is held by our writers uncertaine and obscure, It is manifest (at least for the generall manner of their death) to be either by the Publicke sword, that is the sword ofPublike sword. Private sword. Justice, or of Battaile as were King Richard, the Children of the Duke of Clarence and the Duke of Suffolke, &c▪ or by the privateThe arts of treachery. sword, that is, by secret and close slights, treachery (which the Romans called Insidiae, dolus, by Smothering, Strangling, Poyson, Sorcery, &c. And that the sword was used against the family of Yorke, there is more then conjecture, both by Testimonies of wri∣ters, and records▪ King Edward himselfe, (as Credible Authors re∣port)
dyed of poyson. In the Parliament Anno. 1. Richardi tertij there was acused and attainted of sorcerie and such other devilish practices. Doctor Lewis, Doctor Morton, William Knevitt, of Buckin gham, the Countesse of Richmont, Thomas Nandick, of Cambridge Conjurer, with others; There was also an Earle ac∣cused of the same hellish Art, and an old Manuscript Booke, which I have seene, sayes, that Doctor Morton and a certaine Coun∣tesse, contriveing the death of King Edward and others, resolv'd it by poyson. Which are conjectures and proofes more positive and strong against them, then any, they have against King Richard▪ but it was a great neglect in their malice, makeing King Richard soe politick and treacherous as they did, not to charge him also with these Princes Sisters, For it could not serve his turne, to rid away theReasons why King Richard should not de∣stroy his Ne∣phewes. Brothers, and not them; who were capable of the Crowne and had their turne royall, before any Collaterall males. Then he had, the children of his elder Brother, George Duke of Clarence, Ed∣ward Plantagent Earl of Warwick, & the Lady Margaret his sister, after countesse of Salisbury to make away; for they without their Fathers corruption of bloud (which might easily have beene sal∣ved by Parliament, the Lords and Commons affecting them) had a Priority of bloud and precedency of Title before the Protector. I would aske the reason too why King Richard might not en∣dure his Nephewes (being by Parliament held and adjudged ille∣gitimate) as well as the Kings Henry 7. and Henry the eight, endu∣red Arthur Plantagenet, the Bastard of the same King Edward their natales and cases being alike, or why Sir Thomas Moore and Doc∣tor Morton should in one place, say it was held in doubt, when or how they were made away, and in another place, to averr that Tiroll and Dighton being examined, confessed plainely, the murder of them and all the manner of it. These be contraries which with a great disadvantage, drawes their allegation into another argument, Bicorne, or Crocodilites; For in revealing the confession of these men, it is implicatively granted, their fault was not then to be punished, and soe it ap∣peares no fault: or not worth the consideration, the confession of a man being the greatest evidence, can be produced against him. Then in regard the confession of those was such as might not be o∣pened, nor the crime called in question (as the same Authors ac∣knowledge) it was but a fained confession, and they had done better not to have mentioned such a thing, which begot but a jea∣lousie in the falsitie thereof, or privity of some great ones in it;Other great ones pivy to the deaths of those Princes, especially of King ds Sons. & a just imputation of injustice upon the Magistracy. For if Digh∣on, Tirroll, Forrest and Slater, confesse the murder in Act and manner, King Richard being dead (who was said to subborne and protect them) necessarily and in due course of justice, (especial∣ly in the Act of so high a nature, and notice as this was) The pu∣nishment
should have beene expected with all extremity. But being for some unknowne causes deferred, and after a while quite omitted and pardoned, it may be thought such strange Cle∣mency and impunitie proceeded from a singular high indulgence, or else, those examinations and confessions, werebut Buzes and quaint devises, to amaze the people, and entertaine them with ex∣pectation of a justice, to be done in some more convenient time (which was never.) This was after the death of King Richard. All that was done before, was to make him the Author of that horri∣ble crime and no bodie else; For Dighton and the rest were in se∣curity and liberty, yet it stood in good steed with the Lancastrians, to draw the peoples hate upon King Richard, not unlike that story of great Alexander, and a noble man in his Court, who stood so high in the favour of his Nobles and people, that the King grew jealous, and fearefull of his Popularity, studying how he might decline it and him to contempt, but could finde no colour or apt occasion, because he was soe strongly fixt in the peoples like∣ing and was a man of so great a desert, that noe crime could bee charged upon him. The King unbosoming himselfe to the coun∣cell and care of a friend one Medius (of his Country, as I thinke) had this advise. Sir (quoth hee) let not this mans greatnesse trouble you, cause him to be accused of some hainous crime, (though falsly) and wee will finde meanes to make him guiltie, so formally and firmely, that the brand of it shall sticke up on him ever, which he delive∣red in these termes, though divers, yet the same in effect. Medea∣tur licet vulueri, qui morsus, aut dilaniatus est, remanebit tamen Cica∣trix. And it is truely approved by an Antient Christian Poet, thus, Paulum distare videntur,Ausonius. Suspecti verèque rei. The guilty and suspected Innocent, In mans opinion are little different. For there is no more dangerous or fatall destiny to greatenesse, then to be intangled in the multitudes contempt, Odium et Con∣tempt us, being the two evills that overthrow Kings, and King∣domes, the one, that is, Contempt, proceeding from the vanity and obstinacy of the Prince, the other from the peoples opinion of him and his vices, And then he must neither raigne, nor live any longer: Ennius said with Cicero, quem oderunt perijsse expetunt:Ennius apud Ci ceronem offic. lib. 2. And soe all that was practised upon the fortune, fame, and person of King Richard was by this rule (though in the judgment and e∣quity of the most knowing in those times) their cunning translatio Criminis could take noe hold of him, neither appeares it proba∣ble, that the Earle of Richmond himselfe (when he had got all
justice and power in his hand) did hold King Richard guilty of the murder, and Subornation of those fellowes: nor them the Assasines; for doubtlesse then, being so wise and religious a Prince, he would have done all right to the lawes divine and hu∣mane, And that I beleeve in the extreamest and publick'st way of punishment, to make it more satisfactory; and terrible to the people and times: but they freely inioyed their liberty with secu∣ritySir Tho. Moor. Edward Hall. Ralph Hllin∣shead. Iohn Stow, &c. to naturall deaths without any question or apprehension, Tirrell excepted, who suffered for treason not long after commit∣ted by him, against King Henry himselfe. Neither was Iohn Greene (named a party in this murder) ever called in question, nor doe the Historians of those times (though meere temporizers) charge him with this practise against his Nephewes, untill after his Coronation (some say they survived King Richard) and give∣ing this respie of time, there was no cause, why after that, he should make them away being then secure in his Throne and Ti∣tle, and they longe before pronounced uncapable; First by the ec∣clesiasticall Iudges, then by the Barons and Parliament: and where was the cause of feare? but if King Richard had beene of that bloody constitution, the man whose life could be most prejudiciall unto him, was the Erle of Warwicke lawfull Sonne of George Plant a∣genet Duke of Clarence, Elder Brother to King Richard: now there was a necessitie for the Lancastrian faction (if they must have a King of that family) to take those Princes away, not to leave King Richard or his Sonne, nor yet any legitimate issue of Lan∣caster, for all those were before any of the house of Beauforts in the true order of Succession, and stood in their way, so did the Progeny of Brotherton, of Woodstocke, of both the Clarencies, Glocester, &c. Though they feared few, or none of those Titu∣lare Lords being modest men, not affecting Soveraignty, but content with their owne private fate and feudall estate, when all was one with the Lancastrians, who were so vehement in their royall approaches, that besides King Edward the Fourth and his two Sonnes, King Richard and his Son, the Prince of Wales, there was afterward (and as occasion served) The Earle of Warwicke and Duke of Suffolke and others, both male and female, of that princly family, laid in their cold vrnes, and it must be so, else, there could be no place for the Beauforts and Somersets, their turnes be∣ing last (the Kings of Portugall, of Castile, and other being before them, if not excluded by Act of Parliament.) In this Tragedy there was a Scene acted by Iohn de Vere Earle of Oxenford, which may be worthy of our observation for exampleThe Earle of Oxen persecu∣tor of Perkin. sake, and makes not against the cause of Perkin. This Earle of Oxenford much affected and devoted to King Henry the Seventh, was a great enemie to this Richard (Alias Per∣kin) and I thinke the onely enemie he had of the great Nobility, how this dislike grew I cannot say, whether out of ignorance, or
incredulity, or out of malice, hateing King Edward, and all that had a neare relation to that family, or else to applyhimselfe to the honour of the King, but he and the Cardinall are said to be the chife vrgers of Perkins dispatch and hee being high constable pronounced the sentence against the young Earle of Warwicke; (which much distasted the Country) and ne're to Heveningham Castle, (that was his cheifest Seate) there lived in the woods an old Hermit (a very devoute and holy man as the fame of those times admit him) who seem'd much troubled to heare this newes, for the love he bare to the ancient and Noble family of Oxenford, of much anguish of Spirit, saying, the Earle and his house would repent, and rue that guilty and bloody pursuite of the innocent Princes, for the event of which prophesy this hath bine observed. Not long after the Earle was arrested for an offence so small, that no man (considering his merit and credit with the King) could have thought it worth the question, for which he was fined at thirty thousand pounds (in those dayes a kingly sum,) This Earle Iohn, died An∣no. 4. H. 8. 1512 Domins de Ar∣undell viva voe after this he lived many yeares in great discontent: and dyed without issue, or any child lawfully begotten by him, and in much shorter time then his life time, that great and I may call it a stately Erle∣dome, for the Earle of Oxen∣ford, when he came to the possession of it, was offered by some 12000 pounds per An∣num. and leave to his occupa∣tion all Man nors, Houses Castles, Parks, Woods, For∣rests, & all the Demesn lands thereto belong∣ing, which might be more worth by year∣ly value then many Erldoms in this age. stately Earldome of Ox∣enford, with the opulent and Princly patrimony, was utterly dis∣sipated, and como sal in agna (as the Spaniard saith in the refran) yet this Earle was a very wise, magnificent, learned, and religious man in the estimation of all that knew him, and one more like to raise, and acquire a new Erledome. The Mathe∣maticians that calculated, the Nativitie of this Earle Ed∣ward, told the Earle his Fa∣ther, that the Earledome would fall in his Sons time. But it thus fell and was wasted, the Castles and Mannors dilapidated, the Chappell wherein this Iohn de Vere and all his Ancestors lay intombed with their monu∣ments quite defaced to the ground, their bones left under the o∣pen Aire in the feilds, and all this within lesse then threescore yeares after the death of the said Earle Iohn; about the same time these unhappie Gentlemen suffered, there was a base Bastards of King Richard. Grafton & Chron. M. S. in quarto apud Dn. Rob. Cotton. sone of King Richard the Third made away, having beene kept long before in Prison. The occasion as it seemeth was the attempt of certaine Irishmen of the West, and South parts, who would have got him into their power and made him their cheife, being strongly affect∣ed to any of the house of Yorke were they legitimate, or naturall, for Richard Duke of Yorkes sake sometimes their viceroy, and thus much in breife of that. Why the pub lique justice deferred the death of the Princes. Now to resolve a question, why the King deferred so long the death & execution of the Earle of Warwick & Perkin, and tooke so much deliberation after he had resolved it, one reason and the cheifest brought by some, is, That in regard Perkin was an Alien, and in the allegeance of a Forraigne Prince, therefore he could not be condemned, nor executed for felony, nor treason by our lawes: which is a ridiculous evasion, for we have frequent exam∣ples in our stories, that the naturall subjects of France, of Scot∣land, Spaine, Portugall, Germany, and Italy, have had judgement
and execution by our lawes, for felony and treason, as Peter de Gaveston a French man, Sir Andrew Harcley a Scot, and lately Dr. Lopez a Portugall, therefore apparantly that was not the cause the King so doubtfully, and (as it were) timerously deferred their Arraignments & Executions. The Heathens perhaps would have defined it some inward awe or concealed scruple, such as they called Eumenides, and Eurinnies, and beleeved haunted those men that had purposed or acted a wickednesse: upon which the PoetDmones Gnij. said well: —Patiturque unos mens saucia Manes. And assigned to every man his protecting Spirit, whom the Greekes called Doe∣mones, the Latines Genios, concluding, that when the Geni∣us of him against whom the mischiefe aimes, is stronger and more active then his who is to act it, there the Plot hardly taketh effect. For example, produce the mortall enmity betweene Octavi∣anusPluta in Anton. Caesar, and M. Antonius, in which Anthony could never prevaile by any Attempt: who consulting with his Soothsay∣ers, they give the reason to beethe power of Octavians Genius above his. It is reported the great Philosopher Appollonius hadPhilostrat in vita Appollon. such a secret protection, and so strong, that the Emperour Do∣mitian had no power over his life, though hee studied meanes to take it, Suidas adding that this Philosopher in confidence of his Genius when he left the Emperour, added this verse, . Me non occides quia fataliter protectus sum: which is that Fla∣mius Vopiscus calleth Majestatem Apollonij (as I ghesse) and withVopiscus in Aureliano. it the Profestors of Christian Religion agree in the effects, not in the causes, for those whom the Heathen call  Daemones, &c. Genios, the Christian Theologues call Angels or Spirits,Angels good and bad. whereof they hold good and bad. But to returne to the matters further Allegate & Probate. The industrious Antiquary Master Iohn Stow, being required to deliver his opinion concerning the proofes of this murther, affir∣med it was never proved by any credible evidence, no not by pro∣bable suspitions, or so much as by the Knights of the Post, that King Richard was guilty of it. And Sir Thomas Moore (being pu∣zelled with his Equivocations) sayes, that it could never come to light what became of the bodies of these two Princes. Grafton, Hall, and Hollinshead agreeing in the same report, that the trueth hereof was utterly unknowne. Then where is their farre seeing knowledge, that will have them transported into Forraign Coun∣treyes, or drowned, or their giganticke proofes, that say pe∣remptorily, they were both murthered and buryed in the Tower by those foure named before: if so, we need go no further for the
truth. But these are splenitick reaches, and the Parachronisme is too groste as the Comaedian said, Quod dictum, indictum est,Terentius in Phormio. Quod modo ratum, irritum est. Besides, if Perkin were not the second Sonne of King Edward, he must bee nothing, for the Flemish, French, and Wallons ac∣knowledged no such Noble young man to be borne in Warbecke, or in Tourney, but make honourable mention of a young Sonne of the King of England, who was brought to the Dutchesse of Burgundy his Aunt, being then in Flanders, and how hee was in France and in other Kingdomes. And surely so many Noble and discreet English, if they had not knowne him to be the same, by most certaine tokens, and evidence, would not so confidently have laid downe their lives to confirme their knowledge of him, or hazarded their judgements and honours upon an Imposture, or vanity, especially those who had places of Quality and Emi∣nency neare the King then living, and were in favour at Court. Therefore I would be resolv'd from our Anti-Richards, what aim those Noble-men could have, in averring him the Son of Edward the Fourth by the hazard of their lives and Estates (if the KING pleased) and how could they expect lesse; for though they were enough to justifie it a truth, they were too few to maintaine it a∣gainst him, there could be no aime or hope to super-induce young Richard to be King: but meerly I am perswaded in point of truth and honour, as they thought themselves bound to doe, they freely tendred their lives to make good what their Conscience & knowledge witnessed, for it would be an Imposture of a miracu∣lous Deception, so many worthy and wise persons both of the Nobility and Clergy, some of them having served the King his Father and himselfe, that they all in their particular and generall intelligence and understandings, should be mistaken and cheated. I say it was a strange delusion if it could bee so: but indeede those that would have it, so leave it in question, and know not well what to make of their own relations, or how to resolve his History, and if wee marke Sir Francis Bacon in the life of Henry the Seventh (though his speculation be tender, and as favourable as hee can that way) touching the History of this young Duke, hee gently slides from it; Explicit liber tertius.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD the Third. The Contents. UPon what occasion the sentence of Ba∣stardy was given upon the Children of King Edward the 4th and why. The sundry Loves, Wooings, Contracts and Marriages of King Edward the Fourth. His divers Concubines, His device of the Fet∣terlock, and the Faulcon. His wooing the Lady Elianor Talbott alias Butler, the Lady Bona of Savoy, and the Lady Elizabeth Gray widdow, & his marriage with her. His former Marriage or Contract with the said Elianor, her wrongs and her death. Kings must not marry the daughters of their Vassalls, nor other with∣out the consent of their Barons, Doctor Stillington Bishop of Bath Imprisoned for speaking of King Ed∣wards Marriage with the Lady Elianor Talbott, Spuria vitulamina. How King Edward might have salved those Er∣rors and prevented all the mischiefes following them. The Children of King Edward the Fourth declared
and adjudged illegitimate. King Edwards death suspected by poyson; the mortality of the Plantage∣nets. The Authority of Parliament; Parliaments how so called and derived; Parliaments against Par∣liaments. The first Parliament of King Henry the seventh; what Treason is; whether Soveraigne Princes may be said to commit Treason against their Subiects; The treaty of Marriage between K. Richard the third, and the Lady Elizabeth Plantagenet▪ and cheifely sought by her selfe and the Queene her Mother; The entertainement of the Lady Elizabeth at the Court; the first Libell of Divorse; the scruples of the Lady Elizabeth; King Richard never meant to marry her. The marriages of Neeces allowed by the Pope, and usuall; the true cause of Sir Thomas Moores Condemnation and execution.
The FOVRTH BOOK OF King Richard The Third. THe Title King Richard the Third had to the Crown, acrued to him by the illegitimacie of the Children of King Edward the Fourth, and the Attainder of the Duke of Clarence, with the Corruption of his Blood, and forfeiture of the Title in him and in his Heirs, of which there was no question: but of the forfeiture and disheritage of the sons of Edward the Fourth there hath been much. The true cause hath not nor cannot be well known, with∣out the Narration of King Edward's sundry Loves and Wooings, specially his Contracts and Marriages. I shall not need to intimate how amorous and wanton thisHow extreme his desires' were, you may see in the Speech of the Duke of Buc∣kingham, set down by Sir Thomas Moor. King was, his many Mistrisses or Amasia's he kept, in several pri∣vate places; whereof the most famous was Katharine de Claring∣ton, Elizabeth Wiatt alias Lucy, Iane Shore, the Lady Elianor Tal∣bot. And it is worth the remembring (in the Concourse of such matters as these) there was another fair Creature so dear unto him, that his too much Affection begat Suspition; of which he gave her a kinde expression, by a quaint device sent unto her in a rich Jewel, fashioned much after the manner of the trivial Hie∣rogliffs used in France, and called Rebus de Picardy. The device was, A Faulcon encompassed with a Fetter-lock: The Mott, Au Faulcon Serrure. The Caution lying in the ambiguity and double
sense of Faulcon: which being whole and proper, signifieth a Hawk; but divided, hath an obscene signification, and so Faul∣con becometh an aequivoque. The King afterward was so affected with this device, that he would have it carved and painted, in many of his Royal works yet to be seen at Fotheringhay and elsewhere. Yet although the Kings Jealousie was thus particular to her, his Affection was as general to others; being a frank Gaester, and he that would cast at all, fairly set. Above all, for a time he was much speld with Elianor Talbot, daughter of Iohn Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury (called in the Act of Parliament 1 Rich. 3, The old Earl of Shrewsbury) her mother was the Lady Katherine Staf∣ford, daughter of Humphrey Stafford Duke of Buckingham, and she the widow of Thomas Lord Butler Baron of Sudesley. Her beauty and sweetnesse of disposition drew his desire so vehement∣ly, and with such respect, that he was suddenly Contracted, and after Married by Doctor Thomas Stillington Bishop of Bath,Philip de Co∣mines, in Lud. 11. cap. 112. & 122. Councellor of State (one much favoured by the King, and often employed by him in great Affairs.) This is witnessed by our Eng∣lish Writers, and veritable Philip de Comines, in these words: Le Evesque de Bath (lequel avoit este Conseillier du Roy Edward) di∣soit que le dit Roy avoit promis foy de Mariage a une Dame de Angle∣terre, & qu'il avoit nommè, & que le Roy avoit fait la promise entre les mains dudict Euesque, & dit aussi c'est Euesque, qu'il avoit apres espousè, & n'y avoit que luy & ceux deux. In English thus: The Bishop of Bath, a Privie Councellor of King Edward, said, That the King had plighted his faith to marry a Lady of England, whom the Bishop named the Lady Elianor Talbot; and that this Contract was made in the hands of the Bishop, who said that af∣terwards he married them, no persons being present but they twain and he, the King charging him strictly not to reveal it. Which Contract and Marriage are related in the Act of Parlia∣ment aforesaid, where it is disertly called a former Marriage, and the King had a childe by her. But where desires are unlawful, they will be unlimited. We are ever young enough to sin; never old enough to repent: never constant, never satisfied in our neer∣est desires. Though to morrow shew us the sting of to day, the third shall betray us again; and we are taken (like children in a shop of trinkets) by the eye, liking all things, from one to another, until pleasure dull pleasure, and we grow weary of them. As in the dotages of this King, who had now received others in∣to the bosome of his fancy; especially the fame (which was then in every Courtiers ear and mouth) of an excellent Lady in the Court of France, with the Queen Chareltts, wife of King Lewis 11, and sister to this Lady whose name was Bona the daughter of Lewis Duke of Savoy. And so suddenly and strongly had he
taken fire and apprehension of her report (the bent of his affe∣ction being meerly wanton to every new object, thinking Love a cold Composition, without the priviledge of Variety) that he straight falls into terms of engagement and capitulation of Mar∣riage; to which purpose the great and renowned Richard NevilThe great Earl of Warwick. Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, and Captain of Calais (then in the esteem of his best and most trusty friend) had a Commissi∣on of Treaty, and with all speed was sent Ambassadour into France; who, with all honour and magnificence to his wish ef∣fects it; with the more noble and easie dispatch, the Earl of Warwick being a man eminent thorow all the parts of Europe, for his Valour, Wisedom, and Heroical vertues. Expecting aThe Lady Bo na was after∣ward married to Iohn Galea∣zo Sforza, Duke of Mil∣lain el Rue∣ser. welcome at his return, answerable to the period of his employ∣ment, but findes an alteration not onely of the Kings affection, but of his countenance: for in the interim he had (in an instant or particle of time as it were) wooed and wedded the Lady Eli∣zabeth Gray, Relict of Sir Iohn Gray, daughter of Sir Richard Woodville, and of Iaquetta, sometime Dutchesse of Bedford and daughter of the Earl of St. Poole. Her husband was one Gray a Knight of Grooby, who became a very vehement Lancastrian, revolting from the House of York, and therefore the more hate∣ful to those of that Family, and the well-wishers thereof (so to the Earl of Warwick.) He was slain at the Battel of St Albans: Of whom, and of this Lady his wife, as of this Marriage, Philip de Comines relates something, which I shall leave to the interpre∣tation of the better knowing, and desire not to understand it in the words: Or de puis le dict Roy Eduart espousè la fille d'un Chval∣lier de Angleterre femme veufue, qui avoit deux filz & aussi per Amor∣rettes. But neither the despised state of widowhood, nor the mean∣nesse of her quality and condition, the earnest disswasion of the Dutchesse his mother and best friends, could make him withdraw his affection, so deeply and obstinately he was surprised with her beauty: yet if he could have enjoyed his longings otherwise, he ha not married her. But she was of so pregnant and reserved a wit, (seconded by the caution and counsel of the Dutchesse her mother) that his highest temptations and sweetest batteries could not win upon her; protesting never to yeeld to any disho∣norable parley or unchaste motion, although it might warrant the safey of her life; and humbly implored his Grace not to think her so exorbitantly and vainly ambitious, to wish her self a Queen, or to have the hope and presumption to be any thing higher then what she was, His poor and humble vassal: nor was she of so lowe and lost a minde, as to violate her Chastity, or be a Concu∣bine to the greatest King. When the King perceived there was no other remedy but that he must shift his sail to that scantling of winde, he complies with
her, and protests it was his desire and uit to marry her, notwith∣standing her inequality: for in his esteem, her love, her beauty, and her vertue, made her Fortunes and Dowry great, and high enough for any King. Nor did he defer it any longer then there was necessity; but marry her he did, and with such dispatch, that he stayed not for the advice of any, either Councellor, Kinsman, or other whatsoever. Nay, his speed admitted not the approved Ceremony of the Banes asking. And such was the want of Reverend Bishops then, that he was fain to take an ordinary Priest to marry them, in a Chamber too, in stead of a Church, and that in a Lodge or Forest∣house; no body being present but the Dutchesse, and some fewThis Marriage was in the For∣rest of Which∣wood. of her company. So where he first saw her (and by chance) there at the next interview he married her; an act of as high ex∣ception as improvidence. For his Barony thought it a most un∣worthy and unequal Match, distasting it the more, as done with∣out their consent, which they asever'd the King ought to have by their ancient priviledges: and were the more exasperated, considering the great inequality between her condition and the Imperial Majestie of England, being the Relict but of a poor Knight, his mortal enemy too▪ Above all, the Earl of War∣wick took it for an high indignity and scandal to his Honour, which stood so far engaged in France to the Lady Bona and her Princely friends; knowing the French would be as sensible of the scorn, besides the great charge he had been at, to manage the employment. In the heat of these disgraces (for transcen∣dent spirits have their answerable passions; and it is as danger∣ous to stand in their way, as in the reaches of an angry Tyde) he forsook the King, and soon after takes up Arms against him; an Induction to those succeeding evils which pursued that inconsi∣derate Marriage: of which the judicious Polidor (lib. 24.) ma∣keth this Censure. ex Edwardus mutato Concilio de ducenda in uxorem Bona,L'indignete de ce Marriage du Roy Edw. avec un simple gentile femme, displaisant au Conte War∣wick, & aux principaux Sei∣gneurs de Ang∣leterre, & of∣fensa tellement le Roy Lewis 11. qu'ils font confede∣racon, contre le Roy Eduatt, &c. Jean de Tillet, Part 2. filia Ducis Sabaudiae, Elizabetham viduam Johannis Gray Militis, in Matrimonium duxit; & de eo Matrimonio ob mulieris humilita tem non modo necessarios Principes, verum etiam Richardum Woodvillum Patrem mulieris celat: qua causa cognita cuncti proti∣vus mirari, Principes fremere, Passimque voces emittere indignatio∣nis, & Regem non ex sua dignitate fecisse, easque nuptias se cri∣mini dare & dedecori assignare, quod caeco amore non ratione duct us esset▪ sed inde initium profectum est simultatis ortae inter Regem Ed∣wardum & Richardum Comitem Warwici, &c. But if you will not give credit to him, you shall hear an Eng∣lish Prelate living in those times. Edwardus Rex fret us propria electione cujusdam Militis relictam nomine Elizabeth, inconsultis Regni proceribus clandestino sibi de∣stinavit Matrimonio; postea ipsam in reginam Coronari fecit: quod
quidem Regni optimates aegrè tulerunt, quia de tam mediocri stirpe foeminam procreatam ad Regni Consortium secum praepropere subli∣maret. Thus this amorous King lost his honour, with many of his best and great friends: yet escaped well, that he had no more real and present feeling of the errour; being the first King of Eng∣land that ever mingled his Royal Blood and Majestie in the Alli∣ance of so private and mean a family. The Story of Arragon mentions a King deposed for marrying the daughter of his subject. And King Edward was somewhat er it: for soon after, he was expulsed his Kingdom. But be∣ing a man that kept an industrious and invincible Courage above his troubles, he happily recovered that losse, never his honour and friends, which he might have preserved, and prevented all those alamities that overtook him in his issue, by the advice of the Dutchesse his mother, who upon the secret advertisement of his love to this Lady Gray, used all the perswasions and authori∣ty of a mother, to return him to the Lady Elianor Talbot his for∣me love and wife (at least his contracted) to finish and con∣summate what he was bound to, by publike Solemnity of Marri∣age; and prest it with such ingenious engagements, that for the Arguments sake, I have transcribed the passage out of Sir Thomas Moor and the rest of our English Writers. Thus she disswades him. MY Liege Lord, and my dear Son, It is very commonly reportedThe Speech of the Dutchesse of York, to King Edw. 4. you are purposed to marry the Lady Gray, a widow, and a mean Gentlewoman; which you cannot but conceive will redound to your disparagement and dishonour; all the wise, great and noblest per∣sons of your Kingdom, thinking it far more to the advantage of your Honour, profit and Safety, to seek the Alliance of a Noble Proge∣ny, and rather in a forraign Countrey then your own, as well in regard thereupon may depend great strength to your Estate, and great possi∣bility to enlarge your possessions by such Affinity. Also (if well con∣sidered) you may not safely marry any other then the Lady Bona, the Earl of Warwick having proceeded so far in the Current of that Match already, that it is likely he will not sit down contented, if his troublesome and costly negotiation should be so slightly blown off and frustratd. Besides (Sir) consider it is not Princely for a King to marry his own Subject, (at least no great and important occasion leading him thereunto, nor possessions or other commodity depending thereupon) but will be lesse tolerable to all opinion, then if a rich man should marry his maid, onely for a little wanton dotage upon her person; in which kinde of Marriages, many men commend more the maids fortune, then the masters discretion. Yet there must needs be more honesty in such a Marriage, then can be honour in this which you af∣fect:
for the difference is not so great betwixt a rich Merchant and his servant, as you must think between the King and the widow Gray; in whose person (albeit there be nothing to be mistiked) there is nothing so excellent, but it may be found in divers other women, much more noble and many ways exceeding her, and more compara∣tively to your Estate (those also Virgins, who must be thought of a much more honourable estimation then widows;) wherefore the Widowhood onely of Elizabeth Gray (though in all other things she were convenient for you) were enough to restrain you, being a King, and so great a King. And it must needs stick as a foul disparagement to the sacred Ma∣jestie of a Prince (who ought as nearly to approach the Priesthood in Purenesse and Cleannesse, as he doth in Dignity (to be defiled with Bi∣gamy, in his first Marriage. Thus far the King could with attention hear the Dutchesse: But being extremly far gone in love, or rather in the hot passion of Love, he was resolute to marry her; and partly in earnest, and partly in play (as one that well wist he was out of the check of a mother) yet reverently thus replied. MADAM, ALthough Marriage, being a Spiritual thing, ought rather to beThe Answer of King E. 4. to the Dutchesse of York his mother. made according to the Will and Ordinance of Almighty God, where he by his grace inclineth, either parties to love mutually and ver∣tuously (as I hope and trust he doth work in ours) and not for the re∣gard of any temporal advantage: yet neverthelesse this Marriage (as it seemeth to me, being considered even after the worlds account) is not unprofitable, nor without fruits: for I reckon not the Alliance and Amity of any earthly Nation or forraign Prince so necessary for me, as the friendship and love of mine own Subjects; who, as I hope, will be the more induced to love me, and acknowledge mine to them, seeing I disdain not to marry one of my own Land. When (if a for∣raign Alliance were thought so requisite) I could finde the means of that much better by other of my kin (where all those parties would be content) but to marry myself to one whom I should (peradventure) never love, and for the possibility of more possessions, lose the fruit and pleasure of this which I have already: For small pleasure taketh a man of all he hath, or can have, if he be wived against his appe∣tite. And I doubt not but there be (as you say, Madam) other wo∣men in every point comparable to the Lady Gray; therefore I lett not other men to wed them, no more then have they reason to mistike where it liketh me. Nor doubt I my Cousin of Warwick's love can be so slightly setled to me, as to grudge at that which I affect; nor so unreasonable, to look that in my choice of a wife I should rather be ruled by his eye then
mine own, that were to make me a Ward, and binde me to marry by the appointment of a Guardian; with which servile and hard condi∣tion I would not be King. As for the possibility you urge of more inheritance by new Affinity in strange Lands, that is not always certain; but contrariwise, it is oftentimes the occasion of more trouble then profit. Besides, we have already a Title and Seisine so good and great, as may suf∣fice to be gotten, and so to be kept, by one man, and in one mans days. For your Objection that the Lady Gray hath been a wife, and is now a widow, and hath already Children: Why (by Gods blessed La∣dy) I that am a Batchelor have some Children too; and so, for our better comfort, there is proof that neither of us are like to be bar∣ren. And I trust in God (Madam) you shall live to see her bring forth a young Prince, and your pretty Son, that shall be a joy and pleasure to you. For the Bigamy objected; let the Bishop lay it hardly in my way, when I come to take Orders of Priesthood: for I confesse, I understand Bigamy is forbidden to a Priest, but I never wist it yet forbidden to a Prince: Therefore I pray you, good Madam, trouble yourself and me no further in this matter. Then she urged his Contract with the Lady Elizabeth Lucie, and his having had a childe by her, (as she said;) and thought her self bound in conscience to charge him with. Master Moor, Grafton, Stow and the rest, say, the King utterly denied that Con∣tract, and protested it a slander; which well and justly he might do, and these Authors may retract what they have written. For the truth is, he was never contracted to her, though he lo∣ved her well, being of an affable and witty temper; nor did she ever alleadge the King was betrothed to her, but that he had en∣tangled her by sweet and tempting language; And who know∣eth not Credula res amor est? But true it is, he had a childe by her, which was the Bastard Arthur, called commonly (but undu∣ly) Arthur Plantagenet, afterward made Viscount Lisle, by H. 8. In this Relation, the Historians have much and foully erred, not onely corrupting the story, but have injured the Dutchesse of York in her judgement and knowledge of these matters, and the tenour of her former Speech, making her to charge the King as contracted to this Elizabeth Lucy (of birth and quality much meaner then the Lady Gray, whom she conceived so basely of; for Elizabeth LucyElizabeth Lu∣cy. was the daughter of one Wyat of Southampton, a mean Gentle∣man (if he were one) and the wife of one Lucy, as mean a man as Wyat. True it is, the King kept her as his Concubine, and she was one of those most famous three who had peculiar Epithets, being called his Witty Leman.) For that they would have her say, the King was never betrothed to her, it importeth nothing, and there∣fore I conceive it was never extracted from her. But truely to salve the story, and errour of these Writers, we must know, That
Lady to whom the King was first betrothed and married, was Eli∣nor Talbot, daughter of a great Peer of this Realm, of a most no∣ble and illustrious Family, the Earl of Shrewsbury, who is also called in authentick Writings the Lady Butler, because she was then the widow of the Lord Butler (a Lady of a very eminent beauty, and answerable vertue) to whom the King was contract∣ed, married, and had a childe hy her. This is that Lady (not Elizabeth Lucy) the Queen spake of to her son; and (to note Obiter) the Kings breach with this Lady, was a cause the subtil widow would not listen unto him before Marriage, having learned, Credu∣litas damno solet esse puellae. This Marriage cast the Lady ElianorOvid. Butler into so perplext a Melancholy, that she spent her self in a solitary life ever after: and how she died, is not certainly known; but out of doubt kindnesse was not the cause, he having a heart for every new face, and was so become exceedingly fancied to his new wife the Lady Gray, no Court or pleasure now, but where she is. In this continuance of his amorous Indulgence (which was many yeers, and rendred a fruitful issue to him) no que∣stion that party of her kinred made their best advantage from it. Yet the remembrance of that Pre-contract after a time, moved him by such sensible apprehensions, he could not brook to have it mentioned, which was the cause of his displeasure against his ancient Chaplain Doctor Stillington of Bath, because he did what his conscience urged, to God and the Kingdom, in dis∣covering the Marriage, occasioned by the Ladies sudden indispo∣sition and pressing sorrow; who not able to contain her self, had open'd it to a Lady her sister, or (as some say) to her mother the Countesse of Shrewsbury; she to the Earl her husband; he consults it with his noblest kinsfolks and friends, as it was a general scandal to them all: they, to inform themselves the better, had conference with Dr. Stillington, who affirmed the Contract and Marriage: with whom they advise, that as he was a Bishop and a Privie Coun∣cellor, it behoved him to prepare it to the Kings consideration, for some redresse and satisfaction. But the Bishop (though willing) durst not deal with the King in that manner; ra∣ther wisht they would apply it to the Duke of Gloucester, as the man most inward with the King; whereof Philip de Comines thusPhilip de Co∣mines. writeth. Cestuy Euesque d'Bath, mit en avant ace Dux de Glouce∣ster, que le dit Roy Edouart estoit fort amoreux, d'un Dame, d'Angle∣terre, & luy promise de l'espouser pour veu qu'il couchat avec illa, ells s'y consentit: & dit ceste Euesque, qu'il les avoit Espouses, & n'y avoit que luy & eux deux. The Duke of Gloucester, as they desired, prest it to the King, who became more incens'd against the Bishop, saying he had not onely betraid his trust, but his children; and upon that heat puts him from the Councel Table, under a strict imprisonment for a long time, which at length he redeemed himself from, by a heavy fine, as
is testified by Doctor Goodwin Bishop of Hereford, in his Catalogus1620 Episcoporum, who writeth thus: Philip de Comines, le Roy Edw. de supposé l'Evesque, & le tient in prison, & le Ranson d'un bon summe d'Argent. Which was taken for a piece of more passion then justice; the Bishop not deserving so to suffer in this case, where his conscience might very well excuse what he did. Not long after, King Edward died; of what disease, it is doubt∣fullyHow King Ed∣ward died. suggested: Some thought, of an Apoplexy, or dead Palsie. Polidor Virgil saith, of a disease utterly unknown to all the Physi∣tians; which leaves it to a further construction. The Author ofLib. 4. in Hist. de Britaigne. the History of Britain delivers plainly, that King Edward was kil∣led by poison (as the common report in France went.) Aucuns disopent que le Roy de Angleterre Edovart, avoit estè Em∣poisonné au mois d'Aurill en l'an. 1463. And Euguerrant de Moustro∣let writeth, that some said he died of an Apoplexy: others, he was poisoned in Wine of Creu, which King Lewis the eleventhMoustrolet, part 3. de ce Chron. sent to him. Philip de Comines (to that purpose) says, Aucuns disent que le Roy Eduart, mourut d'un Catarhe. That is, Some say that King Edward died of a Catarhe: for that is their phrase in France, when a great man is made away by Poison. Of such a venemous Catarhe died the young King Edward the Sixth. But by whose hand King Edward the fourth had his death, it is not said. Certain it is, he was generally beloved of all his Subjects, except those of the Lancastrian faction. As soon as he was dead, the silence brake into a general muttering against his Marriage; then into loud and publike in veighing against it. All tongues were at li∣berty, and Pardons were hoped for all offences; the general and common opinion being quite against it, and the Children. And Doctor Morton affirmed, The Duke of Buckingham, with o∣therDoctor Morton. Sir Tho. Moore, Grafton, Hol∣linshead, Stow. noble Lords, saw and read certain authentick Instruments made and signed by learned Doctors, Proctors, and Notaries, with the Depositions of sundy credible persons, importing and testify∣ing the Children of Edward the fourth were Bastards: with which opinion the City of London was also possessed; and Doctor Shaw, Frier Pinke, and other Preachers in the Pulpits declared them Spuria vitulamina. To this consented all the people of the North parts in their Supplicatory Scroll before mentioned; which the Court of Parliament adjudged and decreed to be so. A fault of Improvidence in their Father, who mightHow King Ed∣ward might have prevent∣ed all after∣questions. have prevented all quarrels and questions about that and fu∣ture claims, repaired all flaws and defects of Titles; also have taken away the errour and inconveniency of the post-Con∣tract, or later Marriage, that gave the imputation of Bastards to his Children; and so have avoided all the insuing mischiefs and calamities. If first he had procured a Divorce of the former Con∣tract with the Lady Elianor, from the Pope, who was then held to have all power both of heaven and earth.
Or if after the second Marriage (and while he flourished, which was by the space of Fourteen yeers) he had either by a due consideration, or counsel of his best friends, wrought the Popes Pardon for breach of the Pre-contract with the Lady Elia∣nor; then, his Apostolical Bull of Dispensation, for his Post-Con∣tract, or Matrimony superinducted (as they call it) which might easily have been obtained at Rome, for money. And after that, to have summoned a Parliament, requiring the three Estates to have ratified and confirmed these Bulls, for the approbation of the said Marriage with the Lady Gray, and the Legitimation of his Children, and made them lawful by Act of Parliament (accor∣ding to the Popes Indulgence (which was then a sacred and most inviolable thing.) Lastly, to have Declared, Pronounced and Decreed in Parliament, That the said Children of the King, be∣ing so made legitimate, were also capable of all Honours, Dig∣nities, Estates Publike and Private, of which the King stood seised, or which were any ways appertaining and proper to the Kingdom of England, and of France. I say, If he had done this, he had com∣posed all defects, and prevented all succeeding dangers of Claims and Practices, which might have been done with small or no trou∣ble. A course by another afterward opportunely thought on. And surely (it may be conjectured) if this King had not been too secure, and lost in his sensualities, he would by the like Parli∣amentary power have rectified those errours, these great, high, and difficult works, being (indeed) proper to Parliaments, and pregnant and strong proofs of their great and transcendent pow∣er,The Authority of Parliament. holding in themselves a just desert and claim of such power and authority (if assembled and held as they ought) being a Ge∣neral Assembly and Convocation of the most wise, honourable, just, and religious persons of the Kingdom. Therefore the word Parliament (saith one) is compounded of Parium and lamentmm,Parliament, how so called and derived. because (as he thinketh) the Peers of the Countrey did at these Meetings complain each to other of the enormities of their Coun∣trey. But the better opinion is, That Parliament is simply from the French word parler (and that from the Greek , both signifying to speak) and so by adding the termination, ment (which is common in the French Tongue, as well to many Nouns as Adverbs) do make up Parliament; meaning thereby an As∣sembly of men called together to speak or confer, &c. And it may not unfitly be called Parliament, for that each man should parler, lament, speak his minde. But Laurence VallaLawrence Valla. misliketh that Etymologie. It may be ghessed the word Parliament (being transported out of France) began shortly after the Norman Conquest. One of the first authentical reports of that name, is found in the Statute 3 E. 1. commonly called Westminster Parliament; that Assembly being said to be Primier generall apres Coronamentle Roy. But that
is not the first word: for in the Statutes called Articuli Cleri, pub∣lished 9 E. 2, these words are read: Temporibus progenitorum no∣strorum quondam Regum Angliae Parliamentis suis, &c. Which words Progenitorum & quondam, must needs reach higher then E. 1. that was but father to him that spake it. But at what time soever after the Conquest this Court began to be called a Parliament, the same was before known to the Sa∣xons or Englishmen, by the word Sinoth, and Micell Sinoth, of the Greek , now appropriated to Ecclesiastical meetings onely; and sometimes by these terms, Micell, Gemote, Witengemott, and Calca Witengemott; that is, the meeting of wisemen, or of all the wisemen: for witona signifieth wisemen, Calca, all, and Ge∣mott, a meeting: of which last words the names Shire-motts, Eol∣motts, and Halymotts; that is, the meeting or assembling of the men of a Shire, of a Town, and of the Tenants of a Hall or Man∣nor, had their beginning also. Now as Sinoth is more used in the Parliaments themselves; so Gemott is more familiar to the Historians. And this Parliament of Anno 1 Rich. 3. could be of no lesse power and vertue; witnesse the many and good Laws made in it, (albeit the second Marriage of King Edward was adjudged unlaw∣ful, and the Acts of that Parliament for the most part repealed and abrogated afterward) yet the evidence is clear enough, that the Judges and Law-makers of that Parliament, were wise and re∣ligious men, and their Laws upright and just. Therefore whatsoever was adjudged by them, was to be recei∣ved and held as authentick and inviolable (how roughly soever it was afterward handled.) And in this case of the disabling of King Edwards sons, there is least reason to suspect them, the cause being so new, so plain, and notoriously known, that no man could be ignorant therein: Therefore to have given any other Judgement, but according to the truth of evidence, and certainty of knowledge, it might justly have been censured an act of errour and ignorance, or partiality and injustice. For it was not the opinion of a few, nor raised out of a weak judgement and perverted knowledge; but a strong and general evidence, by the ablest and best knowing. If it be objected, The case was obscure and doubtful: That cannot be; for the Estates had all substantial and ready means to inform themselves of the truth, and every circumstance whereby they might be fully satisfied and cleared in all the niceties and doubts: for all the witnesses and dealers in that cause, and such persons as were acquainted with it, were then living; and they must and would have truely and certainly informed the Court of Parliament: For the special and reverend care of this Court is, The advancing of Justice and Right. Therefore all Subjects (by nature or grace) are bound in their Allegeance, to give pious
and religious credit to Parliaments, and to believe in their Au∣thority and Power, as the former times did in Oracles. We must also confidently hold the high and transcendent quality and ver∣tue of that Court, to have all power and authority: And no que∣stion to repeal a good and just Law made in Parliament, is a wrong and scandal to that General Councel, and to the universal wisedom, providence, justice and piety of the Kingdom. In the Parliament 1 H. 7. there is an Act, attainting the King R. 3. of high Treason, for bearing Arms against the Earl of Rich∣mond, intituled The Soveraign Lord (this was at his proceeding from Milford-haven into Leicester:) But when he came to fight the Battel, he was then no King, nor Soveraign, but a Chief of such as made head against their Soveraign. In which Paragraph there appears three grosse faults. First, Certain it is, Richard during his Raign was a Soveraign, therefore no Subject. Next, there was no enemy in the field who was then a Sove∣raign, but all liege Subjects to the Crown. And Richard being the King and Soveraign, could not be ad∣judged a Traitor, nor lawfully attainted of High Treason. Then let it be considered whether a person of sacred Majestie (that is, an Anointed Soveraign) may commit the Crime of Trea∣son. Also in this Parliament, all the Barons, Knights and Gen∣tlemen that bore Arms in the field for the King, were attainted of Treason, their goods and lands confiscate: and one Thomas Nan dick (a Necromancer and Sorcerer, who with others had been condemned to die, for using that hellish Art) was in this Parlia∣ment pardoned the horrible things he had committed. And it seemed he had not then left his black trade: for he hath in that Act of Parliament still the style of Conjurer: viz. Thomas Nandick of Cambridge, Conjurer: which had been a fitter style for his Gibbet then his Pardon; although he had not by his Sorcery or Inchantment hurt or destroyed any humane, yet for his renouncing and abjuration of Almighty God: for it is the opinion of a learned and religious Doctor: Magos & Incantores (saith he) hominum genus indignum, quod vel ob solam Dei, O. M. abjurationem capitali suplicio afficiatur. Other such things there be in that Parliament, which detract it in the opinion of some; those of the best and wisest repute. Now let us come to examine that Treaty the King had aboutThe Treaty of Marriage be∣tween K. R. 3. and his Neece the Lady Eli∣zabeth Plan∣tagenet. marrying the Lady Plantagenet; which is censured to be a thing not onely detestable, but much more cruel and abominable to be put in agitation. Item, That all men, and the Maid her self most of all▪ detested this unlawful Copulation. Item, That he made away the Queen his wife, to make way for
this Marriage; and that he propounded not the Treaty of Marriage, until the Queen his wife was dead. That there was such a motion for the marriage of this Lady to the King, is true; and (which is more, and most certain) it was entertained, and well liked by the King and his friends, a good while; also by the Lady Elizabeth, and by the Queen her mother; who received it with so much content and liking, that presently she sent into France for her son the Marquesse of Dorset, that was there with the Earl of Richmond, earnestly solliciting him to renounce the Faction, and return home to the Kings favour and advancement, which she assured him: and sends the Lady Elizabeth to attend the Queen at Court, or to place her more in the eye, so in the heart of the King. The Christmas following (which was kept in Westminster-Hall) for the better colour of sending her eldest daughter, she sends her other four thither, who were received with all honourable courtesie by the King and Queen Regent; especially the Lady Elizabeth was ranked mostChronicle Croyland. familiarly in the Queens favour, and with as little distinction as Sisters. But society, nor all the Pomp and Festivity of those times, could cure that sad wound and languor in the Queens brest, which the death of her onely son had left. The addresse of those Ladies to Court (albeit the feigned wooing of the King was in a politick and close way) gave cause of suspition to the Earl of Richmonds intelligencing friends, that the King had a purpose to marry the Lady Elizabeth; which must prevent the Earl both of his hope to her, and to the Crown by her Title: a clause that made them mutter very broadly against it (for indeed, what more concern'd them?) therefore the King treats it more privately and coldly; but the Queen-widow and the Lady stood constant in their desires and expectation; onely the Objection was, The King had a wife; as though he could not marry ano∣ther whilst she lived; not remembring how usual it was, not onely for Kings, but private men to put away one wife and mar∣ry another, for venial crimes, as well as Adultery and Trea∣son. The Romanes might repudiate their wives, for conversing with men that were not of their linred, and for going to see Playes and Cirque Spectacles (their husbands not being with them) or if the wife were unquiet or curst of her tongue, &c. Henry the Eighth put away Queen Katharine of Castile, and Queen Anne of Cleve; the one, because she was too old and cold for pleasure; the other, because she was not fruitful or wanton enough. Sometimes men have put away their wives for being Sluts, for having unsavoury breaths, or some infectious disease, without a necessity of taking away their lives; and it was lawful for either of them to marry when they would.
Pope Clement the Seventh so ratified the Divorce of King Hen∣ry the Eighth against Katherine of Castile, as he defied all Laws (Divine and Humane) that should contradict and impugn his Power and Dispensation, in these words: Non obstante Iure Divino nec Humano, nec quibuscunque Consti∣tutionibusBulla Papae Clementis 5. apud D. Ro. Cotton. repugnantibus, aut in contrarium Edictis. Ther was a formal Bill or Libel of Separation prescribed by Moses, with the manner of Divorces and Repudiations, in this tenour, as Andreas Osiander (who translated it out of HebrewOsiander in Annotation. in 4 Evang. Har∣mon. Evang. into Latin) affirmeth: which for the rarity I have here tran∣scribed. Die tertia Hebdomadis, 29 die mensis Octobris, Anno ab orbe condito, 4349. EGo Ioachim cognominatus N. filius Nathanis, qui consisto hodie in urbe N. in Regno N. Te. N. uxorem meam, cognominatam N. filiam N. quae fuisti uxor mea ante hac nunc demisi, & liberavi, & repudiavi te tibi, ut sis tui juris & domina animae tuae, & ad ab∣eundum, ut ducaris abs quolibet viro, quem volueris, & ne vir quis∣quam prohibeat, quo minus sis in manu tua, ito hoc die & in aeter∣num. Et ecce, permissa es unicuique viro, & hic esto tibi a me datus Libellus repudii, & Epistola dimissoria, & Instrumentum li∣bertatis juxta Legem Mosis & Israelis. But the Answer which was made in the name of the King to the Lady Elizabeth concerning his Queen, was, That she could be no impediment of long continuance, being a very weak woman in a Consumption, and past hopes of recovery; her Physitians giving their opinions, she could not live past the middle of Fe∣bruary next following: nor ghessed they much amisse; for the died in the next month, March. When the midst and last of February was past, the Lady Elizabeth being more impatient and jealous of the successe then every one knew or conceived, writesThe credit of the Duke of Norfolk with King Richard, and with the lady Eliza∣beth; and her Letter to him. a Letter to the Duke of Norfolk, intimating first, that he was the man in whom she most affied, in respect of that love her Father had ever bore him, &c. Then she congratulates his many cour∣tesies, in continuance of which, she desires him to be a mediator for her to the King, in the behalf of the Marriage propounded between them, who, as she wrote, was her onely joy and maker in this world, and that she was his in heart and thought: with∣all insinuating, that the better part of February was past, and that she feared the Queen would never die. All these be her own words, written with her own hand; and this is the sum of her Letter, which remains in the Autograph, or Original Draft, under her own hand, in the magnificent Cabinet of Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey: by which it may be ob∣served,
that this young Lady was ignorant that a man having aThe Cabinet of the Earl of A∣rundel, now Earl of Surrey too. wife living, might marry another, and suffer her to live. But the truth is, the King had no real intent to make her his wife, from the beginning; onely in policy entertained this Treaty, as it ap∣peared afterward, when his Queen was dead, and he had all fit accesses without any impediment to marry her, yet did not; pro∣fessing he wooed her not to that end, but for some other causes; and made Protestation (in the great Hall at Saint Iones neer Smithfield, before all the Knights of Malta, and a great Assembly of Noble-men; the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and many Citizens being present) that he had no purpose nor intent to marry the Lady Elizabeth: avowing, Quodeares (viz.) Voluntas contra∣hendiChronicle of Croyland. Matrimonium: cum Consanguinea Germana sua nunquam i venerat in mentem: for so it is testified by the Prior of Croyland. Yet it may not be denied, he pretended love to her, and a proffer of Marriage; which he projected in policy, to divert her affecti∣on from Richmond (whose party the King apprehended private∣ly wrought that way; of which the said Author thus saith, NonChronicle of Croyland. aliter videbat Richardus Rex regnum sibi confirmari, neque spem competitoris sui aufferri posse, nisi in Matrimonio, cum dicta Eliza∣beth, contrahendo vel simulando. And it is most likely the King had no other aim but meerly of Prevention: neither was there any cause (had he been so wicked) to do it by blood, nor anyThe Queen di∣ed 11 March, 1484. just reason to frame so hard an argument against him, being al∣ways so affectionately inclined to his wife, that he was rather thought uxorious then otherwise; which appeared unfeignedly at her death, in the expression of sorrow and magnificent Exe∣quies for her. Non eum immorte honore quam Reginam dicunt, asPrior of Croy∣land. the Prior of Croyland testifieth. Let us look therefore with clear∣er consideration upon the motion or pretence of this Marriage: to call it detestable and cruel, is ignorant and malicious (though she were so neer of kin to him) for Marriages between Uncles and Neeces, have been very frequent and allowed in other Coun∣treys by the Church. In our time, the daughter and heir of Duke Infantasgo in Spain, was married to his brother Don Alde Mendo∣za: and more lately, the Earl of Miranda married his brothers daughter. In the House of Austria, Marriages in this kinde have been very usual, and thought lawful, the Pope dispensing with them: for they say in Spain, Que el padre santo quiere Dios loquire: There∣fore how could it be so highly unlawful in King Richard? Or if his intents had been so forward, where was the Bar, when his wife was dead, and he absolute, unlesse the Ladies aversenesse? But that suggestion is answered by her own Letter, and other te∣stimonies. So the Account will be (if rightly summed by what hath been produced) that he had never any serious determination of Marriage; onely took the advantage of his gain, by looking into
her hand; then no cause to make away his Queen; which his accu∣sers themselves directly and peremptorily charge him not with;Sir Tho. Moor. Hollinshead. but doubtfully say, The Queen (however it fortuned) departed out of this life the 16 of March, in the Lent season. But although he had the commendations of a loving and indulgent husband, I say not he lived always continently; for I finde he had some ba∣stards, two of them I have mentioned: yet peradventure he might have them before his Marriage, and then the fault was lesse. So then, let them that affect not blinde and traditory opinion, more then justice and reason, but equally examine his slanders, they shall finde, Malice and ignorance have been the Kings great∣est accusers, which can onely lay Suspition to his charge: andSuspitio est opinio mali ex▪ levibus signis. B. Th. Aquinas. Suspitio est a∣ctus per quem in dubitatio∣nem trahimur. Suspition in Law is no more guilt then Imagination: for, though Suspition many times lay a great blame upon a man (men holding him to be guilty whom men suspect to be so, though injuriously) yet the Law holds it not a Crime, because Suspition many times supposeth those to be culpable which are not: for an Instrument may as easily be condemned, as a Malefactor, being an evil grown from the errour of men. Wherefore Suspition of it self bring∣eth no sentence by Law Natural or Moral, Civil or Divine, accor∣ding to that of the old Minographus, Suspitio grave est hominibus malum. And the Divine Chrysostome saith, A good man hardly sus∣pecteth another to be evil; but an evil man scarcely supposeth any to be good; far from the counsel of this Epigram. Culparem quoquam, quae non sunt nota malignum est; Presertim si quam cognita sint bona sunt. Non pateant faciles duris rumoribus aures Quae nescire juvat, credere non libeat. Linquantur secreta Deo, qui quicquid opertum est Inspicit, & nullis indiget indicibus. Accuse no man of faults to thee unknown, And much lesse him from whom good fruits have grown: Lend not thine ears to scandalous reports; Believe not that, which known, nought thee imports. Leave secret things to God, who knows all hearts, And hath no need of the Promoters arts.Meos tam sus∣picione quam crimine judico carere oporte∣re. Suet. in vitâ J. Gaes. But as Iulius Caesar (who had many excellent Observations) was wont to say, Vir bonus tam suspicione quam crimine carere oportet: That a good man must be as well without suspition as crime. Yet none so innocent, but may fall under the lash of the malicious; for such, like the Polypus, will take any colour, or make any tin∣cture of a Crime, to serve their ends. Of such a vertue is the ne∣ver-understanding Vulgar, that like Kytes and Daws can digest nought but stench and filth; their Ignorance being their Faith, and that drawn from loose Pamphlets, and the vomits of merci∣nary and mimick pens; to which, and their uncurable fits, I leave them. Explicit Liber quartus.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF KING RICHARD the Third. The Contents. WHat a Tyrant is, and how a Tyrant and King Richard differ. The destruction of the Plantage∣nets. The daughters of King Edward the Fourth, how bestowed. The death of the Queen their Mother. The Vertues of King Richard the Third. The Elogie of the three Brothers, King Ed∣ward the Fourth, George and Richard. The Magnificent, Publike and Charitable Buildings of King Richard the third. His good Laws, and other good works. That to die in the Wars, is no Dishonour, but an
Honour. Artes Regiae Crimen regale. His Comparison with other Kings accounted good. King James his gracious demeanour to his Cou∣sins. A Character and Elogie of King Richard the third. The title of the Norman Race and of York de∣fended. The sundry titles of King James. The Wedding King of England. Lapis Regno fatalis. King Richards Sepulchre and Epitaph. The Authors Scope; Peroratio & Vo∣tum.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF King Richard The Third. WE will next endeavour to understand that Voca∣ble,What a Tyrant is. or term Tyrannus (that is, a Tyrant, or an evil King) cast upon King Richard; which in∣deed comprehendeth all scandals and impieties whatsoever. Tyrannus est qui suis propriis Commodis studet,Aristot. in E∣thic. idem. & publicis adversatur. And, Tyrannus est qui dominatu crudeliter abutitur. A Tyrant is by another wise man compared to a Dragon, who becometh not a Dragon, until he hath devoured many Serpents: of which Conceit this Epigram was wittily framed. Post plures Coluber Serpentes Dracosit esos, Gust at â humanâ carne fit homo Lupus. The Dragon which doth many Serpents eat, Becomes a Dragon of huge shape and strength, And so the man which makes his flesh mans meat, Transformed is unto a Wolf at length. Another Philopher differeth not much from these, who saith,Bias apud Plut. Libell. de adulat. c. 37. that of all tame beasts, the flatterer is most pernicious; and of all wilde, the Tyrant, who forbeareth not for any respect of good
or ill, but studies Oppressions, Wrongs, Exactions, Robberies, Sacriledges, Blood-shed, Murder, Adultery, Incest, Rape, Riot, Gluttony, Luxuriousnesse, Prodigality, and all manner of Ex∣cesses: These be his arts of raigning, and these be his vertues. Invident Tyranni claris fortes{que} trucidant. Lucan. Another saith, Tyrannus miserum vetat perire, foelicem jubet. Seneca. Hrules. F. Demosthines. So it was truely said by the famous Orator of Athens: Liberalitas Tyranni nihil aliud est quam translatio pecunarum a justis Dominis, ad alienos idque indignos. His thirst and covetousnesse, for his largitious riots and lusts, are so inordinate, that nothing can quench it. Non Tartessiaris illum satiaret arenisClaudian in Rss. Tempestas pretiosa Tagi, non stagna rubentis, Aurea Pactoli, totumque exhauserit Hermum, Arde bit majore siti, &c.Iuvenal Sa∣tyre 4. Quicquid conspicuum pulchrumque ex Equore toto, Res sisci est, &c. These may serve for the notions of a Tyrant: to any of which Impieties, our King Richard was very little or not at all obno∣xious. For first, Whereas a Tyrant imposeth many grievous TaxesParliam An. 1 Rich. 3. and Oppressions upon his Subjects, he took away such grievances, and particularly by Act of Parliament, a hateful Tax (though dis∣guised with the name of a Benevolence) forbearing to imposeThe Duke of uckingham said, that the name of Bene∣volence, as it was taken in the time of K. Edw. 4, signifi∣ed, that every man should pay not what he of his own good will list, but what the King of his good will list o take. Duke Buck apud Toam Moor. any upon the people. Then, A Tyrant doth not onely rapine his Subjects, but spoils and robs Churches and Church-men. But King Richard did many good things both for the publike good, advancing Gods service, and maintenance of his Ministers and Church-men. Tyrannum pium esse non est facile (as Sophocles well observed.) And the Oracle pronounced, Portae foelicitatis ad Tyrannidem clau∣sae. Tyrants be cruel and bloody: but this King, by the testi∣mony of his enemies, was very merciful and milde; who con∣fesse he was of himself gentle, and assably disposed. These be their own words. Therefore, where tyrannical acts be objected against him, they must be conceived done by other men, or by their practice, or else before he was King; and what he did then, was not, nor could be properly called Tyranny. Amongst those they impute to him when he was King, which are called Tyrannies, the beheading Henry Stafford Duke of Buc∣kingham was the chiefest: yet that act, the cause and just mo∣tives of it being well perused, cannot be censured Tyranny; ra∣ther, due and necessary Justice: for if the King had not put down the Duke, the Duke would have put down the King. Then it is objected, He bare a tyrannical hand over his nephew
Edward Earl of Warwick. True it is, he sent him to Shery-Hut∣ton, a goodly and pleasant house of his own, in York-shire, where he had liberty, large diet, all pleasure and safety; and if that were imprisonment, it was a prison Curtoise (as Iohn Froisard saith) yet this must not be lesse then Tyranny, according to the style of Sir Thomas Moore. When King Henry the Seventh, as soon as he had got the Crown, sent this young Prince to the Tow∣er, afterwards cut off his head; yet that was no Tyranny, after Sir Thomas Moore. But our King Iames (of ever happie memo∣ry)Comes Arund. vi. voce. hath thought it an act of so much detestation, that particu∣larly he protested against it, and shewed another temper of Ju∣stice and Power in his Royal Clemencie, to certain Noble personsKing Iames. in one of his Kingdoms, who being Regal Titulars, and preten∣ding title to the Crown there (as descended from some King of that Countrey) his gracious and pious inclination was so far from seeking their ruine (or so much as the restraining them) that he suffered their liberty, with possession of what they had. Then they call the punishment of Iane Shore a Tyrannie: AIane Shore. common and notorious Adulteresse (as the Duke of Bucking∣ham, who knew her very well, censured her) which she deserved so justly, that it was rather favourable, then severe or tyran∣nous. Next, the death of William Collingborn is made one of hisAnonimus Iu∣ris peritus in Apologia K. R. 3. Tyrannies; who (as some trivial Romancers say) was hanged for making a Satyrical Rhyme; when the truth is, he had com∣mitted Treason, and was arraigned and condemned of High Treason, as may be yet seen in the Record; and then it was Ju∣stice, and not Tyrannie. Another proof against their grosse Paralogisms, take from this observation made by Demosthenes: Tyrannus res est inimica Civibus, legibus contraria. But King Richard was ever▪ indulgent to his people, careful to have the Laws duely observed; his ma∣king so many good ones, being an evident argument of his love to Law and Justice. It is further observed, that Tyrants con∣temn good counsel, are opinionated of their own wisedoms, and obstinate to determine all matters by themselves. These Plaintiffs being called by the Greeks , that is,Axiom. polit. cap. 219. self-Councellors, who say they are natura plerumque occulti & in∣sidiosi, & Arte, & Astu, ea Tagere, & dissimulare conantur, quae agunt, non communicantes quicquid de suis Conciliis, aut rebus cum aliis, nec ab aliis Concilium petentes, neque admittentes, sed tantumSententia Arabica. sua Concilia sequuntur. Also Erasmus hath this Axiome: Nullo Concilio quicquam magnae rei aggredi, tyrannicum est. But King Richard nor did nor would do any thing of impor∣tance, without consultation with the wisest and noblest. And if in any matters he had delivered his judgement, yet his manner
(as his detractors confesse) was, to say in the end and conclusi∣on, My Lords, this is my minde; if any of you know what may else be better, I shall be ready to change it: for I am not wedded to my own will. Thus Sir Thomas Moor. Eastly, Largition and excessive expences, are thought vices pro∣per to Tyrants; the rather, because the Romane Tyrants, forCaligula spent 230 millions of Crowns in lesse then a yeer. Nero said that there was no use of mo∣ney but for i∣ots and prodi∣gal expences. their extreme excesses, were called Monstra & prodigia, & lues Im∣perii, peses reipublicae, &c. As Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus, Heliogabolus, Caracalla, &c. King Kichard was ever held to be frugal, with the preservati∣on of his honour; nor can they tax him with Palliardise, Luxu∣ry, Epicurism, nor Gluttony, vices following many Tyrants; but moderate and temperate in all his actions and appetites; which is confessed, and therefore needeth no further proof. Indeed it had been advantage and safety to him, in the event, if he had been a Tyrant a while; for then he might have preserved his life and kingdom, and given a timely check to the practice of Bi∣shop Morton, the Marquesse Dorset, Earl of Devon, and hisKing Richard in this was like Iulius Caesar, who knowing by certain in∣telligence the conspiracy and conspirators a∣gainst his life, also the time and place of execution, yet he seemed to slight and not regard it. King Richards vertues. brother the Bishop, the Lord Talbot, the Lord Stanley, and his brother Sir William Stanley, with the Countesse of Richmond his wife, and the rest. But his remisnesse and patience bred his ru∣ine, not his tyranny; that had been his protection. And now the black curtain of malice and detraction is drawn, let us see this King in his proper Royalty and vertues casting up the general and particular notions of A good King and happie Government; then peruse what was wanting in him. First then, There is necessarily required proper to Empire, Wisedom, Justice, Fortitude, Beauty, Magnificence, Temperance, and Piety. That he had Wisedom and Prudence, need no other witnesse, then his wise and provident managing both of his own private affairs, and Government of the Publike. Also in the Military actions, in which he was tried, both as a Subject, and a King; his adversaries can allow him to be a wise, prudent, politick and he∣roicalJustice Shelly commendeth the Laws of K. R. 3. to Card▪ Wolsey. Vide Ioh. Stow in H. 8. pag. 882. Chronic. M. S. in quarto, apud D. Rob. Cotton. Prince; his Wisedom appearing, with his Justice, very clearly in the good Laws he made; acknowledged and honoura∣bly predicated by our Reverend and most learned Professors of the Laws. For his further knowledge and love of Justice, there can be no fairer argument, then his desire and custome to sit in Courts of Justice, hearing and distributing Justice indifferently to all men. And when he made his Progresse into York-shire, being in∣formed there of some extortioners and foul offenders, who were apprehended, not tried, he caused the Law to take the just cur∣rent, giving strict charge and commandment to all Officers of Justice, for just administration to all men, without partiality or private respects.
The Fortitude and Magnanimity of this Prince (though of lowe stature) were so great and famous, as they need no Trum∣pet or Praecony, being bred from his youth in Martial actions: and the Battels of Barnet, Exham, Doncaster, the second of St Albans, and of Tewksbury, will give him the reputation of a Souldier and Captain. Being made General of the Kings Armies into Scotland, he prevailed happily in his Expedition, and particularly recovered that famous and strong Hold of Berwick, which King Henry the Sixth had so weakly let go. And in this you shall hear the Elogie of one that was loth to speak much in his favour, yet occasion forced him to speak hisSir Tho. Moor. Doctor Morton. knowledge, though coldly and sparingly. King Richard was no ill Captain in the War: he had sundry Victories, and sometimes O∣verthrows; but never by his own default, for want of hardinesse or politick order. Whereunto he addeth concerning his Bounty; Free was he called of dispence, and liberal somewhat above his power. To which I will adde one Elogie more, above all for Credit and Authority, recorded in an Act of Parliament, and addressed to him in the name of the whole high Court of Parliament, in these words. We consider your great Wit, Prudence, Iustice, and Courage;Parlanno R. 3. and we know by experience the memorable and laudable acts done by you in several Battels for the salvation and defence of this Realm. Here followeth another general and memorable testimony of him, and of more regard and honour, because it is averred by one that knew him from his youth, the Duke of Buckingham, who (after Richard was made King, and this Duke became ill affected) acknowledged to Bishop Morton in private speeches betweenMorton. Moor apud Stow, p. 774. them, That he thought King Richard, from his first knowledge even to that time, a man clean without dissimulation, tractable, and without injury; and that for these respects, he was very de∣sirous to advance him, and laboured earnestly to make him Pro∣tector. Therefore whatsoever the Duke said after, in reproach of the King, it may justly be thought to proceed from spleen and malice. There is to this the commendation of his Eloquence and plea∣sing speech; which though no Regal vertue, yet it is an orna∣mentEloquentia Principibus maxime est or∣namento. Cic. de finibus, l. 4. to the greatest Princes, and commendable. The Prior of Croyland repeating the dispute of a Controversie between the two brothers, George Duke of Clarence, and this Richard of Glou∣cester, at the Councel-Table, before the King their brother, sit∣ting in his Chair of State, relates it thus: Post suscitatas, inter Duces fratres, discordias, tot utrinque ratio∣nes acutissimae allegatae sunt in presentia Regis (sedentis pro Tribu∣nali in Camera Concilii) quod omnes circumstantes, etiam periti Le∣gum eam orationis abundantiam ipsis principibus in suis propriis cau∣sis adesse mirabantur, &c. Then speaking of the excellent wits,
extraordinary knowledge and gifts of these three brothers, ma∣kethThe praise of the three princely bro∣thers. this honourable Praecony: Hitres Germani, Rex, & duo Du∣ces, tam excellenti ingenio valebant, ut si discordare non voluissent suniculus ille triplex difficilime rumperetur. Let us look upon his charitable, religious and magnificentThe good works of King Richard. Iohn Stow, Annal. works. He founded a Collegiate Church of Priests in Middleham in York-shire; another Colledge of Priests in London in Tower∣street, neer to the Church called Our Lady Berking. He built a Church or Chappel in Towton in Gloucester-shire; a Monument of his thankfulnesse to Almighty God, for the happie and great Victory his brother had upon the partisans of the family of Lan∣caster, and the sons of Henry the Sixth, who before slew Richard Duke of York, King designate, and father of these two Kings. He founded a Colledge in York, convenient for the entertain∣mentPolidor, lib. 5. of an hundred Priests. He disforrested a great part of the Forrest of Wich-wood, andRichard loved not Wich∣wood for his brothers un∣happie Marri∣age. other vast Woods between Woodstock and Bristow, for the good and benefit of the people of Oxford-shire and the places adja∣cent. He built the high stone Tower at Westminster (which at this day is a work of good use.) And when he had repaired and for∣tified the Castle of Carlisle, he founded and built the Castle of Penrith in Cumberland. He manumissed many Bond-men. For the better encouragement of the Easterling-hanses (theirIn Rot. in do∣mo Converso∣rum, A. 1 R. 3. Trade being beneficial and profitable to this Kingdom) he grant∣ed them some good Priviledges, as Polidor writeth. He also first founded the Colledge and Society of Heralds, andCharles the Great instituted the Colledge and Society of Armorists, call∣ing them He∣ralds of Ehr & Halten, (Dutch or Franchish words) and not of Heroes. made them a Corporation: and (as the words in the Charter are) he ordained it, Vt sint in perpetuum Corpus Corporatum in re & nomine, habeant successionem perpetuam, &c. (A taste of his love to Honour, and his Noble care for the conservation of No∣bility, Chevalry and Gentry.) Which Corporation, this King established by his Royal Charter; and placed the Heralds in an ancient fair house, which was called Yorkime, sometimes; after commonly Cole-harbour, situate upon the Thames: ordaining Four Kings at Arms, by the names and Titles of Iohn Writh, Gar∣ter; Thomas Holme, Clarentius; Iohn Moore, Norway; and Ri∣chard Champney, Gloucester. For Wales, I have seen the Charter wherewith the King crea∣ted first Richard Champney Esquire, King at Arms, by the Title and name of Gloucester, dated Anno 1 R. 3. at Westminster, in the month of March, when the Charter of the Foundation was granted. He further established, That these four Kings at Arms, and the rest of the Heralds, who are in the Charter called Heraldi &
Prosecutores sive Pursevandi, should lodge, live and common to∣gether, in that house, where the Rolls, Monuments and Wri∣tings (appertaining to the Office and Art of Heraldry and Ar∣mory) should be kept; giving also Lands and Tenements for the perpetual maintaining of a Chaplain or Chantry Priest, to say and sing Service every day, and to pray for the King, Queen and Prince, and for their souls when they were dead. Lastly, he gave sundry good Priviledges and Immunities to the said Corporation: which Charter was kept continually in the Office until within these few yeers; but now is in another place: the want of it importeth nothing, being the Duplicate is upon Re∣cord in the Archives, kept in the Convert-house, now called the Rolls. It was confirmed by the Parliament, and dated 20 die Mar∣tii, anno regni primo, apud Westmonasterium, Baron: and under∣neath was written, Per Breve de privato Sigillo, de datu predicto, autoritati Parliamenti. He also built or repaired some part of the Tower of London towards the Thames: in memory whereof, there be yet his arms impaled with those of the Queen his wife, standing upon the Arch adjoyning to the Sluce-gate. He began many other good works, which his sudden fate pre∣vented; as Polidor thus witnesseth. Richardus Tertius multa opera publica & privata inchoavit, quae immaturâ morte praereptus non perfecit. Which works and monu∣ments of Piety shew not the acts of a Tyrant. Polidor Virgil, be∣ing neither Yorkist nor Lancastrian, speaks much in commenda∣tion of his pious and charitable disposition; to which I refer the Readers, and put it to their indifferent judgements, How many of those called Good Kings, have exceeded him in their longer and prosperous time, being in quiet possession too of their Crown and Kingdoms? Let me adde for a Corollary, what that of the worthy Prelate Archebald Quhitlaw (chief Secretary, and a Privie Councellor of Scotland) in his Oration, when he was one of the Commissioners for a conclusion of a Peace and Marri∣age between Prince Iames, eldest son to the King of Scotland, and the Lady Anne, daughter to Iohn de la Pool: from whence I have collected these. Serenissime Princeps, Una me res consolatur, & juvat, tua (scil.) in omni virtutis ge∣nere celeberrimafama per omnem Orbis terrarum ambitum dissemi∣nata, tuae etiam▪ innatae benignitatis clarissima praestansque huma∣nitas, tua mansuetudo, liberalitas, sides, summa justitia, incredibilis animi magnitudo, tua non humana, sed pene divina sapientia, te non modo singulis facilem, verum vulgo & popularibus affabilemPacem & uxo∣rem neptem. Regis petit. praebes & quibus virtntibus altâque prudentiâ cuncta & pronuncia∣ta & dicta in meliora commutas. Serenissimus Princeps Rex Scoto∣rum,
Dominus meus, qui te alto amore prosequitur, te desiderat, tuam, Amicitiam & Affinitatem affectat, supra captum cogitationis meae; si quid a me erratum erit, tuis & divinis virtutibus, quibus Commer∣cium cum Coelestibus numinibus & societatem contraxeris, tribuen∣dum putato. Faciem tuam summo Imperio & Principatu dignam inspicit, quamRichardus suit Statura parva. moralis & Heroica virtus illustrat, de te dici praedicarique potest quod Thebanorum Principi inclytissimo statui Poeta his verbis attribuit. Nunquam tantum animum natura minori corpore, nec tantas visa est includere vires. Major in exiguo regnabat corpore virtus. In te enim sunt rei militaris, virtus, peritia, foelicitas, & autoritas, quae omnia in optimo exercitus principe Cicero requirit. In te (Serenissime Princeps) praeclari Regis & Imperatoris prae∣cepta it a concurrunt, ut nihil ad tuam Bellicam, aut domesticam vir∣tutem cujusquam oratoris verbis apponi possit. Tu igitur (Serenissime Domine & Princeps) de ineunda inter te & nostrum Principem charitate & amicitia, sic age, ut Angli & Scoti dilectionis respectu nullum penitus discrimen habeatur, sed in unum amoris & benevolentiae vinculum videantur esse con∣nexi, sic numerabiles commoditates ex tui, & nostri populi dilectione, dulci connubio, unione, Matrimonio, & Affinitate consurgent. In freta dum fluvii current, dum montibus umbrae Lustrabunt, connexa polus dum sidera pascet. Dum juga montis aper, fluvios dum piscis amabit, Dumque Thymo pascentur apes, dum rore cicadae, Semper honos nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt. But what is this, or more, to malice and detraction, that haunt him to his death; and after that, making the Catastrophe, or last Tragical act of his life at Bosworth-field, an immediate stroke of the divine vengeance, for such offences as they please to parti∣cular from women or superstitious Clerks, whose natures startleTo be slain in War, is no evil or unhappie death. at the noise of War and Martial trial, to whose fears and weak∣nesse, such reasons would sound tolerable. But if Bishop Morton and Sir Thomas Moor (although they were men of the long Robe) had considered with whom they conversed, and where they most lived; how could they forget, That to die valiantly in the field, for Countrey, life and friends, was always held a glorious farewel to the world; or what infinite numbers of vertuous and most noble Captains have fallen so by the Sword and fate of War. Lampridius affirmeth, that all the best men have died violentOptimes quos{que} violenta morte consumptos esse affirmat. Lam. Alexander. deaths: and what higher Quarrel could call any Heroical spirit, then King Richard's, fighting for a Crown, kingdom, and all his happie Fortunes here. God hath many times taken away Princes, and changed the Government of kingdoms for the iniquities of the people; why then should not King Richard's fate be held in a modest Scale, until we can better know or judge it? Nor can it be
safe to enquire, or peremptorily to determine further after Gods proceedings in such cases. He that owes him no malice (things looked upon thorow judgement and charity) may with more justice say he died valiantly, and in a just quarrel, when many of his enemies fell by deaths more vile, and shameful Executions. But he that hath but a reasonable pittance of Humanity, willKing Richard was slain, Aug. 22. 1493. when he had raigned 2 years and 5 months, accounting his Protectorship; and about the 37th year of his age. King Henry 1. censure no mans life by the manner of his death: for many good and holy men have suffered by violent deaths; though it be this Princes fortune to fall under the ill affections of envious pens, more then many that committed more publike and proved crimes then he, which wanted much of his vertues and desert. Examine him with Henry the First, the good Clerk, and learned Prince, but so covetous and ambitious, that he could not be con∣tent to usurp in this Kingdom the Right and Primogeniture of his elder brother, Robert Courthose; but by force took the Duke∣dom of Normandy from him: and to make his injuries more ex∣act and monstrous, cast him into the Castle of Gloucester, there kept him in cruel durance, and caused his eyes to be put out; so wearied him to most miserable death. King Iohn, by the general voice, is charged with the murder ofKing Iohn. Arthur Plantagenet the son of his eldest brother, and so the next Prince in right of blood to King Richard the First. And it is written by good Authors, that Edward the Third wasKing Edw. 3. not onely privie and consenting to the deposing the King his fa∣ther (a King anointed) but also to his Massacre. And because Edward Plantagenet Earl of Kent, Protector, and his Uncle, moved him to restore the Crown to his father Edward the Second, he call∣ed him Traitor, and cut off his head at Westminster. How King Henry the Fourth caused King Richard the SecondKing Hen. 4. (the true and anointed King) to be cruelly butchered at Pomfret, is too notorious: and this was Scelera sceleribus tueri. King Edward the Fourth is accused of the murder and death ofKing Edw. 4. Seneca de Cle∣mentia. the King Saint Henry, and of Edward Prince of Wales his son. (Ut supra.) King Henry the Seventh (although amongst the best Kings inKing Hen. 7. his general character) is not thought guiltlesse of that Crimen sa∣crum vel regale, in cutting off Edward Plantagenet Earl of War∣wick, an innocent. Edwardum, filium Ducis Clarenciae, puerum & infantem, in suam,Gul. Campden in Britan. & Corn. & suorum securitatem capite plexit. And to secure his Estate, had more then learnt other smart rules of Policie. That reach of State upon Philip of Austrich, Duke of Burgundy, King of Castile and Arragon, is not the least me∣morable. This Prince Philip was by crosse Fortune put into the KingsGrafton. Hollinshead. hands: purposing out of Flanders to go into Spain, with the Queen his wife, took shipping at Sluce, and passing by the coasts
of England, was by a tempest forced for his safety to put into the Port of Weymouth in Dorset-shire: the Queen being ill, and distempered much with the storm, was compelled to make some stay there. Sir Iohn Carew, and Sir Thomas Trenchard (principal men in those parts) gave speedy intelligence of this to the King, who was glad of the accident, and purposed to make good use of it, as speedily returning his command to give them all honourable en∣tertainment; but not suffer them to depart, until he had seen and saluted them. The Duke ignorant of this, as soon as the Queen and the rest had recover'd and refresht themselves, thought he was onely to give those Knights thanks, and take his leave; which they by way of courtesie and request interpose, in behalf of the Kings vehement desire to salute him and the Queen: a motion the Duke much prest to be excused from, as the necessity of his jour∣ney stood: but the intreaty was so imperious, he must stay, and alter his journey for Windsor, to meet the King, who re∣ceived him there in a magnificent manner; and at the height of a Feast, propounds a suit to the Duke for Edmund de la Pool (then in his Dominions) a pretender to the Crown of England, and not so soundly affected to him: a suit of a harsh exposition, as the Duke apprehended it, and to the blemish of his honour and pi∣ety, as he nobly urged: but no argument had vertue, nor no vertue argument enough to excuse it; the King must have him, or the Duke must stay. Cast upon this extreme (and foreseeing what disadvantages were upon him, some honourable conditi∣ons granted, that he should neither lay punishment nor death up∣on him) he gave his promise to send him, and the King strictly and religiously bound himself to the exceptions. The Duke accordingly sent this de la Pool into England; who upon his arrival was delivered to the Tower; but his life not toucht until the King lay a dying; then he equivocated his Vow by a Mental Reservation, enjoyning his son after his death to cut off his head; which was done when he came to be King, and was held some taint to them both; though the son held himself acquit & warranted by the example of King Solomon, who was made the instrument of such another subtil slaughter by his father David, that thought he kept himself by equivocation: examples not to be imitated by any Christian Prince, being a sin; and sins are to be avoided, not imitated. The eldest brother of these de la Pools, Iohn de la Pool, heir to the Duke of Suffolk, and Head of this Family, was slain ca∣sually at the Battel of Stoke; and is he who, as neerest kinsman to King Richard the Third, was proclaimed heir apparant. The sister of these Princely de la Pools, the Lady Katherine, was kept close prisoner in the Tower, until grief and sorrow bowed her to the grave.
Nor is it much from our purpose to note, that the chief Plan∣tagenets,Grafton. namely, the children of King Edward the Fourth, had but cold influences then: for the Lady Bridget was thrust into a Nunnery at Dartford, chiefly (as it was thought) that she should live sterile, and die without issue. The Lady Cecily wasPolidor. lib. 4. married to a base fellow, that so her issue might be ignoble and contemptible; the wrong being the greater, in regard she was offered Matches to her quality; the King of Scotland propound∣ing Prince Iames unto her; and the French King Lewis demand∣ed her for the Dolphin Charles of France. It was observed too, that this King was but an unkinde andAlthough the Lady Anne and the Lady Ka∣therine were well married, that may not be alleadged here; for they were bestowed in the time of Rich. 3. the one to the Lord Haward, after Duke of Nor∣folk, the other to the Earl of Devon. Robert Glover. Ioel, cap. 1. severe husband to his Queen (indeed:) they had all but short lives; and our Stories report he picked a quarrel with the Queen-Dowager-Mother, for an old and venial errour, because she delivered her son Richard to the Protector; for which there was a Confiscation upon all her Goods, Chattels and Revenues, and she confined to Bermondsey Abbey, where she lived not long, care and grief untwisting the threed of her sad fate. And when death had seized him from all the glories and policies of this world, his son succeeds; and then, Residuum Locustae, Bruchus comedit; & residuum Bruchi comedit Rubigo: for, what remain∣ed of the House of York, he gave the last blowe to; and after the dispatch of the aforesaid Edmund de la Pool, caused the Lady Margaret Plantagenet Countesse of Salisbury, then daughter and heir of George Duke of Clarence, to be attainted of Treason by Act of Parliament, and condemned unheard, being dragged to the Block barbarously by the hair of her head, though above Threescore yeers in age, Anno 33 Henr. 8. Not long after, SirDominus Ioh. Baro. Lumley, viva voce. Henry Pool her eldest son was put to death, and her son Reynold Pool was attainted of Treason with her (no man knowing what the Treason was) but got suddenly out of the Kingdom into I∣taly, where he became much favoured by the Princes there, and by the Popes afterward made Cardinal, and highly renown∣ed) in those times) for his Learning, Piety and other noble me∣rits. Richard Pool, another son of the Countesse of Salisbury, fled, and lived a banished man in forraign Countreys; yet at the height of a good reputation, until he was slain at the Battel of Pavia. These be sad pauses, which my Pen but touches at, to note the Partiality of some on one side, and the malignity of some on the other side, who have made King Richard the worst of all Princes; when other of our own, have had as great an ap∣petite of Empire, whose fames and sacred names we gratulate with honour. Nor let my just and plain meaning be mistaken, which urges nothing in dislike or exprobation that King Henry the Seventh had the Crown, whom our age must acknowledge a wise, provi∣dent
and religious Prince, The restorer of the ancient Line of the British Kings to their Raign and Kingdom, Nephew of King Henry the Sixth by his Grandmother Queen Katherine, widow of King Henry the Fifth, and mother of King Henry the Sixth, and of his brother Uterine Edmund Teudor Earl of Richmond, the father of this King Henry the Seventh; and so he was Nephew also to Charles the Seventh King of France. I onely conceive he took it by too violent a hand, not staying tempus bene placiti. And here I may fitly take occasion to make up a Defect or Brack covertly imputed to the Titles of the Normans, and Prin∣ces of York, by our vulgar Historians and Chroniclers. And first, we are to suppose, If there be, it grew by the er∣rourThe sundry great Titles of our King to the Crown of England. of King Edwards Marriage, by which they hold that Ti∣tle was weakned (at the least blemished) but that could have no continuance, being made sound again as soon as King Richard came to raign, and after cured and confirmed by the mighty power of sundry Parliaments, by which it was made as strong and firm as ever; besides the aid of the Dispensations Apostoli∣cal (in those times sacred and authentick.) And without that (if need were) our King now raigning hath other Royal Rights▪ more then funiculusi Triplex; some more ancient, authentick and just, therefore more secured, and of more prosperous hopes then that Norman Title, which was a violent acquest of the Sword, and a purchase made by blood, so consequently none of the best; which was well conceived by that great Macedon, when he said,Alex. apud Curtum, lib. 8. Non est diuturna possessio in quam gladio inducimus. Neither would it avail in this behalf to cite or avouch the Donation of this King∣dom, which the Confessor is said to have made to William the Conquerour, being to no purpose, because that gift or Legacy was disclaimed and disallowed by the Barons of this Land, and found to be void. Yet time now, and prescription, have also made that Title good: for prescription hath power to ratifie and confirm the Titles both of Princes and of private men. But our King is the immediate and sole lawful Heir of King Egbert (who first gave the name of England to this Land, and was absolute Lord of it) from him, by the glorious Kings, Ed∣gar, Edmund, Athelstan, Alfred, and many others, as well Saxons and Angles, as Anglo-Saxons, the Right and Title of this King∣dom is duely descended and devolved to Edmund Ironside King of England, who was father to the most Noble Clyto, EdwardClyto, that is, A Prince of the blood. sirnamed Exul, whose fair daughter and heir (a religious La∣dy) the Princesse Margaret of England, was married to Mal∣com Canmoire King of Scotland; from which ancient and hap∣pie Alliance, the King our Soveraign Lord is directly and cer∣tainly descended, and is the true and onely Heir to the Rights and Titles which were without flaw; so the most ancient and
famous Title, and Right of the first Kings of Britain are in him, being the next Heir of our last British King Henry Teu∣dor, wose Genealogie I have seen derived from the antique Kings of Britain, and from divers other British Princes. And this Henry Teudor (or the Seventh) to confirm all the Titles of this Kingdom unto his claim, by the strongest and greatest au∣thority, procured them decreed to him and to his issue (so e∣stablished in himself and his posterity for ever) by Act of Parlia∣ment, in this manner and words. TO the Pleasure of Almighty God, and for theAnno 1. H. 7. in Parliament in Novemb. Wealth, and Prosperity, and Surety of this Realm of England, to the singular Comfort of all the Sub∣jects of the same, and for avoyding all Ambiguities and Questions: Be it Ordained, Established and Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That the In∣heritance of the Crown of the Realm of England, and also of France, with all the Pre-eminencies and Dignities Royal to the same appertaining, and all Liegances to the King belonging beyond the Seas, with the appurtenances thereunto in any wise due or appertaining, To be, rest, remain and abide in the most Royal person of our Soveraign Lord King Henry the Seventh, and in the Heirs of his body lawfully comming perpetually, with the Grace of God, and so to endure, and in no other. Which is also another Title to our King, Heir to Henry the Seventh. And this Act was renewed and firmly established, for our So∣veraign Lord King Iames, Anno regni primo. Yet King Henry the Seventh obtained of the Pope another Ti∣tle, Iure Belli. All which Titles and Rights (which ever were appertaining to this Kingdom, and to the Empire of Britain) are coalesced and met in our Soveraign King; for he hath not onely the claims of the ancient Kings of Britain, of the Saxons, and Anglo-Sa∣xons Kings, and of the Norman Race; but also the Titles and Rights of the Royal Families of York, of Lancaster, and of Wales, &c. And (no as the least, in reference with these) he hath in
possession also, those singular and particular Monuments of Empire and Raign by some called Fata Regni, and InstrumentaThe wedding Ring of Eng∣land. & Monumenta Regno, & Imperio destinata. One being the Ring of the accounted holy King Edward, the son of King Etheldred, which was consecrated and extraordina∣rilyEdwardus Elthelredus d'Rivallis. blessed by Saint Iohn Baptist in Palestine, and sent back by the King (as old Writers tell) which hath been religiously kept in the Abbey of Westminster, and is (as Tradition goes) the Ring which the Archbishop of Canterbury at the Inauguration and Consecration of the Kings, puts upon their finger; called in our Stories, The Wedding Ring of England. The other Monument of the British Empire, is the Marble∣stone whereupon Iacob laid his head, when he had those caele∣stialThe fatall tone. and mystical Visions mentioned in holy Writ; which stone was brought out of Palestine into Ireland, and from thence car∣ried into Scotland by King Keneth; after translated to the City of Scone, and used for the Chaire wherin the Kings sate at their Coronation; brought out of Scotland by Edward the First into England, as the best Historians of Scotland and England re∣late. Cathedram Marmoream Regibus Scotorum fatalem (in qua in∣sidentes Scotorum Reges Coronare consueverant.)Hector, Boetius lib. 4. Et Geo. Buchan Gul. Cambden. Rex Edwardus primus e Scona Londinum transtulit, & in West∣monasterio (ubi hodie visitur) deposuit. It is set or born in a Chaire of Wood, and for a perpetual ho∣nour (upon a Table hanging in the Chappel at Westminster) this is writ: —Si quid habet ueri vel Chronica cana, sidesve Clauditu hac Cathedra, Nobilis ille lapis, —Ad caput, eximius Jacob quondam Patriarcha, Quem posuit cernens numina mirifica; Quem tulit a Scotis Edwardus primus, &c. George Buchanus saith, The people are seriously perswaded that in this stone (which he calleth Lapidem Marmoreum rudem) the state of the kingdom is contained, and that fatum Regni isIn hoc lapide fatum regni Scotiae conti∣netur. Geor. Buchan. thus understood; viz. What King of Scotland soever is Lord of that Stone, & Soveraignly possessed thereof, shall be King and raign in the Countrey where he findeth that stone: thus told in a prophetical Distich. Ni fallat fatum, Scotus quocunque locatum Inveniet lapidem, regnare tenetur ibidem.
Which Prophecie was accomplished in King Iames, when heScotus primus Rex Scotie, ut Anglus Gallus Hispannus &c. pro Rex Angliae Galliae Hispan. &c. came first into England: for his Titles were not onely funiculus triplex qui difficile rumpitur; but also funiculus multiplex qui nunquam rumpitur. And may those Titles for ever be establisht in his Loins, according to that of the heavenly Messenger, Re∣gnum perpetuum. & cujus non est finis. Amen. Thus I have led you thorow the various Relations, and Tra∣gical Interchanges of this Princes Life, to his last act and place, where, after Revenge and Rage had satiated their barbarous cruelties upon his dead body) they gave his Royal earth a bed of earth, honourably, appointed by the Order of King Henry the Seventh, in the chief Church of Leicester, called Saint Ma∣ries, belonging to the Order and Society of the Gray Friers; the King in short time after causing a fair Tomb of mingled co∣lour'd Marble, adorned with his Statue, to be erected thereupon, to which some grateful pen had also destined an Epitaph, the Copie whereof (never fixtto his stone) I have seen in a record∣ed Manuscript-Book chained to a Table in a Chamber in the Guild-hall of London: which (the faults and corruptions be∣ing amended) is thus represented, together with the Title thereunto prefixed as I found it. Octob. 9. 1646. Imprimatur, Na: Brent.
TO give you him in his equal Draught and Composition: He was of a mean or lowe compact, but without disproportiō & uneveness either in lineaments or parts (as his severall Pi∣ctures present him.) His aspect had most of the Souldier in it; so his natural inclination (Com∣plexions not uncertainely expounding our Dispositions) but what wants of the Cour-Planet, effeminate Censurers think must needs be harsh and crabbed (and Envie will pick quarrels with an hair, rather then want Sub∣ject.) The Judgement and Courage of his Sword-actions, rendred him of a full Honour and Experience, which Fortune gratified with many Victories; never any Overthrows through his own default, for lack of ValourSir Tho. Moor. Dake Bcking▪ in his speech to Mr. Morton. or Policie. At Court, and in his general de∣portment, of an affable respect and tractable cleernesse. In his dispence, of a magnificent li∣beral hand, somewhat above his power (as Sir Tho. Moor sets down.) And surely the many Churches, with other good works he founded, (more then any one former King did in so short a time) must commend him charitable and reli∣gious, as the excellent Laws he made, do his wisedom and strain of Government, which all men confesse of the best. So having (even from those his bitterest times) the esteem of a valiant, wise, noble, charitable and religious Prince, why should ours deprave him so much upon trust, & deny works their character and place?
EPITAPHIVM Regis Richardi tertii, Sepulti ad Leicestriam, jussu, & sumptibus Sti Regis Henrici Septimi. HIc ego, quem vario Tellus sub Marmore claudit, Tertius a justa voce Richardus eram; Tutor eram Patriae, Patrius pro jure Nepotis; Dirupta, tenui regna Britanna, fide. Sexaginta dies binis duntaxat ademptisAnnos 2. & 51. dies. AEtatesque, tulitunc mea Sceptra, duas. Fortiter in Bello certans desertus ab Anglis, Rex Henrice, tibi, septime, succubui At sumptu, pius ipse, tuo, sic ossa dicaras, Regem olimque facis Regis honore Coli. Quatuor exceptis jam tantum, quin{que} bis annisAnno Dominie 1484. Acta trecenta quidem, lustra salutis erant, Antique Septembris undena luce Kalendas,Die 21. Aug. Redideram rubrae jura petita Rosae. At mea, quisquis eris, propter commissa precarem Sit Minor ut precibus poena levata tuis. Deo O. M. Trino & Uno, sit laus & gloria aeterna. AMEN.
EPIGRAMMA In Richardos Angliae Reges, ex vet. lib. M. S. transcriptum. TRes sunt Richardi quorum fortuna erat aequa, In tribus aescariis sua cujus propria sors est, Nam Concors horum finis sine posteritate Corporis, atque rapax vitae modus, & violentus Interitus fuerat; sed major gloria primi, Praelia terrarum qui gesserat & redeuntem Tela Balistarum feriunt apud extera regna. Alter depositus regno, qui carcere Clausus, Mensibus extiterat certis, fame velle perire Elegit potius, quam famae probra videre. Tertius exbausto statim amplo divitiarum Edwardi cumulo, proscribens auxiliares Henrici partes, post annos denique binos Suscepti regni, Bello confectus eisdem Mundanam vitam, tum perdidit atque Coronam: Anno milleno; Centum quater octuageno, Adjunctis quinque, & cum lux Sextilis adest Vndena duplex, dentes apri stupuerunt, Et vindex albae Rosa Rubra refloret in orbe. FINIS.
A Table of the Heads contained in this BOOKE. A. AMbition and Covetuousnesse, the cause of unnaturall fends, mur∣ders, and infinite other mischiefes. Example, pag. 5. 12, 13, 14. 35, 36. 98, 99. 104. 141. &c. Ambassadour of Scotland his speech to K. Richard 3. p. 139. 140. Angell, Guardian. Genius. p. 106. Ann de la Poole, a Nun. 35. Anjou Fulke, Earle of Anjou, sonne of Geofrey Grisegonnelle; p. 4. his pur∣jury and murder of his Nephew Dro∣go. ib. his pilgrimage to the holy Se∣pulcher, his penance. ib. his great and famous posterity. p. 6, 7. Armes of France assumed by Ed. 3. p. 47. Armes of the ancient Earles of Anjou pag. 47. Armes of bastards differenced, 46. Arrogation of royall rights, 45. Arts Imperij and rules of policy in aun∣cient times not warrantable, p. 14. Ancesters, or Antecestoures, the duty and respect we owe unto their memo∣ries, p. 69. Ambitious minds easily flattered, 35. a sower sweet, p. 30. B. BArrons of England their great pri∣viledge, 118. Bastards, what they are, 44. cannot in∣herit, p. 45. not beare their fathers name or arms, 46. without speciall indulgence, p. 48. Take the mothers name, 46. 47. The ancient custome of England and France herein, ib. Great families discended from bastards. p. 66. may bee capeable of offices and dignities, 48. Battell of Bosworth, 60. 61. Baynard Castle London, formerly Yorke house, p. 20. Beauforts, naturall children of Iohn of Gaunt, so called from a towne in An∣jou, 45. not permitted to the title of Lancas. ib. A charter of their legiti∣mation, 48. 49. Benevolence, the meaning of that word in Edw. 4. his time, 133. in Margin. Barwick, recovered by the English. 10. Bucking▪ an auncient famly, 67. how de∣sended, &c. 68. of the name, ib. Buckingham, Henry Stafford D. of Buck. his speech to the Lord protector, 20. 22. His revolt and rebellion, 34. his pretended title to the Crowne, 35. retires & sides with Richmond, 36, his forces are scattered, himselfe be∣trayed and beheaded, 37. D. of Brittaine chose Knight of the Gar∣ter, 18. C. CHarter of Henry 4. entailing the Crown to his 4. sons successively, 50. Camp-fight, or single combates between Princes and Generalls, and grounds of it, 62. Catarhe, to dye of a Catarhe, what it meanes in France. 123. Censure and censuring, 63. K. Charles our most Gracious and dear
soveraigne Lord; his just, undoubted right, his many great and auncient titles to the Imperial Crowne of Eng∣land, 144, 145, 146. Clarence, G. D. of Clarence, rebells a∣gainst his Brother Edward 4. is taken and beheaded, 82, 83. Clergy, pride of Popish Clergy, 53. Comlinesse of personage adds a grace to vertue, 42. Comes, or Count two fold signification of it, 8. Constable-ship of England, joyned to the Earledome of Hereford, 34. Vice-Constable, a new and politick in∣stitution, 31. A coppie of their Com∣mission, ibid. Cole Harbour London, at first Heralds Office, 138. Conquerour and Conquest, Licentious power of it, 54, 55. Titles by conquest not safe nor lasting, 144. distasted of the people as tyranicall, 54. Covetuonsness roote of all evill, 5. &c. as in Ambition. Councel and Councellers, 51, 52. 55. 103 Counterfeit princes, many examples. p. 89. Cowardice, Insolence over a conquered enemy a note of it, 61. Crowne, little pleasure in it, 21. D. DEath, the best men have dyed vio∣lent deaths, 140. To dye in battell a glorious death, ibid. Wee must not a mans life, by the manner of his death, 141. Decree of God, not to be prevented, 63. Deformity of body, no blemish to ver∣tue, 80. Desires unlawfull, alwaies unsatiable, 5. 116. Detraction, v. Slander. Dimock, Champion to K. Rich. 3. makes a challenge in defence of the Kings title to the Crowne, 27. Divorce of Wives, formerly usuall upon slight occasions, 127. Copy of a Bill of divorse in use among the Iewes, 128. Dux and Comes, Ducatus and Comita∣tus were formerly Synonomies. 4. Drogo, Young Earle of Brittaine made away by his Vncle, 5. E. EDward 3. King of England his li∣nage, 4. thought privie and con∣senting to his fathers deposition & assacre, 141. Edward Earle of March, obtaines the Crowne, 8. sends an army into Scot∣land to recover his tribute, 10. recei∣ved tribute of France, 29. much fea∣red for his prowess, 19. His wanton∣nesse and many loves, 115, 116. His witty Leman, 121. Had two wives at once, 116, 117. Ill consequences of his last marriage, 118. His answer to his mother, 120. Adjudged unlawfull, & the children illegittimate. Parliam. Anno 1. Rich. 3. p. 30. And refused by the Barons and Commons as in∣capeable of rule. 20. 22. His daughters meane fortunes, 143. His death sup∣posed by treachery, 11. by poyson, 102. 123. Appointed his brother Ric. D. of Glocester protector, 11 Edward 5. conveyed with an honorable conduct from Ludlow to London 11. reports of his death diverse, but un∣certaine, 83, 84. most probable that he died of sicknesse and infirmity, 85. Edward, Prince of Wales sonne of Hen. 6. Murdered, 81. 141. Edw. Prince of Wales son of R. 3. dyed to the great griefe of the K. & Q▪ 44. Elianor Talbott, alias Butler, married to Edw. fourth 116. her wrongs and death, 122. Elizabeth Gray, her witty strengths a∣gainst K. Edwards amorous assaults, 117. Is marrid to him privately in a lodge, 118. Is confined to an Abbey by Hen. 7. and dies of greife, 143.
Elizabeth, daughter of Ed. 4. desired by her letter to marry with Richard 3. 128. 129. Elianor Talbot, alias Butler, married to E. 4. 116. her wrongs & death, 122. Escape what the offence is. 100. F. FAulcon Serrure, a French devise of obseen signification, 115. Faulconbridge a famous Pyrate appre∣hended by a wile, 9. Flattery and Flatterers, 52. 133. 78. Fortune inconstant, 41. Vertuous Ma∣ster of her, 57. Fortitude, a notable example in Rio. 3. 59. 60. 61. Friends and friendship, 52 best known in adversity, Ib. French King payes a tribute of 75000. crownes to K. Edw. 4. and rich pen∣sions to diverse Noble men. 29. G. GAston de Foix K. of Navarr, 19. Gray, Woodvile, and others of the Reginists executed at Pomfret for treachery, 13, Glocester City rewarded by Rich. 3. for their loyalty, 28. Gmot, what it is, 125. Genius or Angell Guardian, 106. H. HAstings his affection to Edw. 4. his children, 13. Is betrayed and ex∣ecuted in the Tower, ibid. Henry 2. K. of England, his great des∣cent and spacious Empire, 4. his pe∣nance for Tho Beckets death, 5. Sir∣named du Court Mantea, & why, 4. Henry 4. King of England, caused his soveraigne Rich. 2. anointed King to bee Murthered, 14. Entailes the Crowne to his heires, 50. Henry 6. K. of England, not murthered by Rich. 3. but dyed a naturall death of griefe and melancholy, 80, 81. Henry Tedor Earle of Richm. borne in Pembrooke castle, 16. His noble de∣scent, 144, 145. by his mother, 50. by his Grand-mother and Father, Ib. His escape into France, 16. And there de∣tained prisoner, 17, 18, 19. His va∣rious and doubtfull fortunes. Ib. & 43. 57. Is attainted of high Treason, 30. A description of his Person and qualities, 42, 58. 144. A wise, provi∣dent, a religious Prince, 58. 144. Laies claime to the Crowne of Eng∣land, 17. Made good by marriage, 53. And the Popes Bull, 55. And act of Parliament, 145. His title de jure belli, or of conquest confirmed by the Pope, and distasted by the Barons, 54, 55. Invades England with ill successe, 43. His 2. invasion by aid of the French, 56, 57. 59. Overthrowes K. R. 3. at Redmore heath, and is crowned by the name of Henry 7th. 62. His vow at the high Altar in Van∣nes, 42. Is very covetous, 88. too partiall and credulous, 51. Unkinde and severe to his Wife, 143. And to the Wife and Children of Edw. 4. Ib. His pretence against the Ea: of War∣wick, 105. 141. And Perk. Warbeck alias Rich. Plantag. 95. His breach of promise, 93. He feared 3. men spe∣cially, Ib. His reach upon the Duke of Burgundy, 142. His charge to his son upon his death-bed, ib. Henry the first, K. of England, sirna∣med Beauclerke, 16. Or the good Clerk. His ambition and covetous∣nesse, 141. cruelty to his elder Bro∣ther, ib. Heralds, whence the name derived, 138. a Colledg of Heralds founded by R. 3. ibid. Herbertus, Chamberlaine to W. Rufus & Ancestor to the Herberts of Pemb. and Mountgom. & founder of that name, 16. Historians, their great partiality, 134, 135. 143. The errours of vulgar Hi∣storians, 41. Howards, their great Nobility, alliance
and discent: from Hewardus or He∣rewardus; the story of him, 66. sig∣nification of the name, ib. & of Ha∣wardus, 67. Tho: Howard Barl of Surrey, escapes Bosworth field, 64. A notable speech of his showing his integrity, ibid. Is advanced by Henry 7. ib. Triumpha∣tor Scotorum, 67. Sir Charles Howard, Lord Admirall in 88. His noble fame, 67. I. IAmes the 4th King of Scotland, denies his tribute to England, 10. An army is sent to recover it, ib. But a Truce concluded, ibid. James the 5th. of Scotland, challenges Thomas Earle of Arundel in Campe fight. 62. James King of Great Brittaine, his No∣ble elemency to some regall Titulars, 135. Jane Shore, King Edw. 4. his Concubine, 115. 135. Jerusalem a barren soile, 6. Imperiall Ensigns of England, & their signification, 26. Ingratitude, ex. 59, 60. John, King of England, charg'd with the murther of his Nephew, 141. K. KAtherin, wife of Sir Otho Swin∣ford, Mother of the Beauforts, 44. Kings have their bounds, 29. Their pre∣rogatives in Iudgments and Contro∣versies, 54. Cannot commit high Treason, 63. May not marry their Subjects, 119. A King deposed for so doing, ib. Kings and kingdomes in Gods disposing, 63. changed by him & why, 140. Two evils especially the overthrow of Kings and kingdomes, 103. To kill an Anoynted King a sa∣crilegious offence, p. 80. Knights and Lords created, 25. L. LAncaster and Beaufort how they differ, 30. 44. 47. Legitimation. What the Popes legiti∣mation is, and what the Princes, 47, 48. Liars need of good memories, 84. Lancaster escheated to Edward 4. 35. 47. Don Duart de Lancastro, 45. Laws, good Laws made by R. 3.▪ Lawes against Bastards, 48. Loyalty, a rare example, 64. M. MArgaret Plantag. daughter of Geo. Duke of Clarence put to dearh, 143 Matilda or Maud the Empress, daugh∣ter and heir of H. 1. 4. Anglor Dom. ibid. Malice, malitious, 130. Height of ma∣lice, 75. Marble stone, or fatall stone, prophesie of it, 146. Brought out of Scotland into England by Edward the 1. And placed at Westminster, ib. The stone that Jacob laid his head upon, ib. Marriage not lawfull between those that have lived in adultery, 45. Between Uncles and Nieces frequent in other Countreys, 129. Monasteries supprest with the true cause of it, 77. Monuments of the British Empir, 146 Sir Thomas Moore a great enemie of R. 3. 76. Came short of the learning is ascribed to him, dyed scoffing, ib. Lord Chancellor of Eng. 77. And a sworn vassall to the Pope, 76. Morton Bishop of Ely a subtle man. 15. A great enemie of K. R. 3. ib. & 75, 76, 77. A temporizer, 52. His ex∣treame pride and covetousnesse, 53. Lord Chancellor of Eng. 77. N. NAmes taken from Offices, & other occasions, 5, 6, 66. Nandick, a conjurer. Parl. 1. H. 7. Natural Father, natural sons & daugh∣ters, why so called!— Naturall daughters may take the sir∣name
of France, 46. Noblenesse of nature, Examp. 61. &c. O. OFficers of State, 25. 32. Oxford, Iohn de Vene Earl of Ox. fevere against nick-named Perkin Warb: 105. he gave sentence of death gainst the innocent Earl of Warwick, ib. Strange dissipation of a mighty e∣state, ib. Oppression: many examples of it, 99. 141. and pastime, alibi. P. PArasites, the nature of them, p. 27. 78. Parliaments, their power & authority, 124. From whence the word is deri∣ved, ib. A Court of great antiquity, 125. Called by the Saxons Witenge∣mot, the meeting of wise men, ibid. The honour and obedience due unto them, 126. Parl. 1. R. 3. Many good Lawes enacted. Pater, mater, parentes, or parents, words of larger signification, among other Nations then among us, 69. Perkin Warbeck his story, 84. Confir∣med by many noble and learned men, 100, 101. Philip Duke of Burgundy, K. of Castile, driven by a storm with his Qu: upon the coast of England, 141, 142. His entertainment, ib. Plantaganest, or Plantagenet: original occasion of that name, 4, 5. borne by the Earls of Anjou, ib. Growes into contempt, 46. Geoffery Plantagenet Earle of Anjou a Courtly Prince, 4. Married Maud the Empress, ib. Who was first founder of that name in England, 45. Poole, Edmund de la Poole commanded to be put to death by H. 7. contrary to his promise, 142. Katherine de la Poole dyed in prison, ib. Sir H. de la Pool put to death, ib. All of the house of Yorke. Reynold Poole after Car∣dinall, fled beyond Sea, ib. Iohn de la Pool Ea. of Lincoln, proclai∣med heire apparant to the Crowne of England, 44. Popes, their power anciently very great, 124. Limited by Canonists, 47. Can∣not legitimate Bastards to inherit, ib. That belongs only to the Magi∣strate, 48. Their intollerable pride, 53. Dispense with incestuous mar∣riages, 55. Their dispensations held sacred, 144. Popes Bull, 55. Their proud defiance to all Laws divine & humane, 18. Prescription, power of it, 144. Prince, formerly a title of Soveraigne power, but now restrained, 49, 50. Prince of Wales, Sonne to H. 6. barba∣rously murthered at Tewksbury, 81. Rich. 3. cleare of it, ib. Prophesie of a Hermite, concerning de Vere Earl of Oxford; the occasion & event of it, 105. Providence, Divine providence wor∣keth by conrtary meanes, 43. Cannot be prevented, 63. Q. QUeen Mother, and Dowager of Ed. 4. reconciled to R. 3. 29. Confi∣ned to an Abbey, and dyes of griefe, 143. Quithlaw, Commissioner for the K. of Scots, an eloquent man, 33. 139, 140. R. RAcke and torture, use of it condem∣ned, 94, 95. and reasons, ib. Restitution of ill-gotten goods, a hard and rare thing, 43. 99. Resolution a notable example in Rich. 3. 59, 60. Ryot, and riotous Princes, 139. Richard 3. King of England, his great and Noble discent, page. 3. Time and place of his birth, p. 7. Brought up at Utricht in Holland, p. 8. Is Knigh∣ted, created Du: of Glost. & marries
the Princesse Dowager of Wales, ibid. & 81. His wisedome, courage & con∣stancy to his brother, 9. makes a pro∣sperous expedition into Scot. 10, 11 & is made protector, ib. His care of his Nephewes, and duty to the young K. in hope Edw. 5. ib. Is elected K. by the Lords and Commons in Parliam. 20. 22. Is crowned with his Queene, and anoynted with great Magnifi∣cence, 24, 25, 26. Received at Yorke in great honour and crowned the 2 time. ib. His title conferred, 30. Is cleared from the death of his Nephewes, 21, 22, 23. 31. 84, 85, 86. 101. 102, 103, 104, 106, 107. Of his brother Clarence 82. Of H. 6. & Prince Edw. his son, 81 82 of his own wife, 107. 129. & from the slaunder raised upon his mother and brother, 82, 83. Was no Tyrant, 78. his mildnesse, his ruine, 61. 136 His great magnificence, wisedome, & justice, 8, 9. 12. 15. 27. 28. His many eminent vertues, 136, 137, 138. His pious workes, 138, 139. His vertues maliciously depraved, 78. The partia∣lity of his accusers, 130. 135. His de∣famations examined and answered, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79. His description and commendation, 148. Was not defor∣med. His politick woing the L. Eliza. his Niece, 126, 127. 129. His trea∣ties with forraigne princes, 32. 33. 34. His noble valour at Bosworth field Weares the Crowne Royall and why, 59. 60, 61. Invites Rich. to a single combat. ib. Is slaine and barbarously mangled, 62. Is buried at Leicester under a faire Marble, 147. His Epi∣taph, 149. attainted of high treason with his followers, 126. Is compared with other Kings of England. 141. Three Richards Kings of England com∣pared, an Epigram vpon them, 150. Rowles, domus conversorum or house convertits, 139. S. SAnctuary, great priviledge of i, 19. 92, 93. Sebastian King of Portugal escaped the battell of Alcazar, 97, 98. After long travel gets to Venice & is knowne, ib. Is betrayed into the K. of Spains power, charged for a counterfeit, & made away, 99. Slander and Slanderers, 77, 78. 103. Sotbriquets, nick-names or sir-nmes, examples, 5, 6. Somersets Earls of Worcester, from whom descended, 47. Sorcery & witch-craft, divers accused of, 102. Subjects, men are Subjects to that Prin under whose protection they live, 105. Suspition, evill of it, 30. Note of an e∣vill minde, ib. Honest mind nor sus∣pitious, Ib. T. TAlbot. Elianor Talbot Widow of the Lord Butler, forsaken of Edward 4th. which caused her death, 122. Teeth, many worthy men borne with teeth, 79. Traitor, reward of Traitors, 37. 97: Treason and rebellion, their pretext, 34. Soveraign Princes cannot commit Treason, 126. K. R. 3. attainted of Treason, but unduely, ibid. Tyrant, what it signifies in the proper signification, 80. 133, 134. Torture vid. Racke. V. VAlour a notable example, 60, 61. Valiana minds hate treachery and bloody acts, 81. Vanity and uncertainty of humane States, 36, 37. 59. Upstarts, 46. W. WAkefield battell, 7.
Warre between England and Scotland, and the cause of it, 9, 10. 7. Warren, Earl of Surrey, 46. Warwick, Richard Nevil the great Earl of Warwicke, 117. Distasts K. Edw. 4. and takes up armes against him, 118. Edward Earl of Warwick put to death, 96. Wedding King of England, 146. William Conquerour his noblenesse to∣ward his dead enemy, 61. Woolsey the great Cardinall, his just commendations, 78. Y. YOrke. Edmond Plantagen. alias de Langley first Duke of Yorke, 4. The Title of that House to the Crowne of England, 3. Richard Du: of York and Father of K. R. 3. designed King by H. 6. And the High Court of Par∣liament, 3. Crowne entailed to his Issue, 20. 51. Richard Duke of Yorke, 2d son of Edw. 4. sent beyond sea, and brought up privately at Warbecke in Planders, for feare of the faction of Lancaster, 85, 87. Discovers himselfe, 88. Is acknowledg'd by the English Nobili∣ty, ib. Favoured of Forreign Princes, 90, 91. His various fortunes, 92. Is proclaimed King, 92. Is taken and sent to the Tower, 93. His sufferings there, 94. His offence forged, for which he is hang'd at Tiburn, 95. Duchesse of Yorke her speech to her Son King Edward 4. 119, 120. Cruelty shewed to the remainers of the House of Yorke, 143. A finall subversion of that house and name, ibid. An Explication of some dark words and Sentences. SOtbriquets or Sobriquets; Nicke∣nams, 4. Angeume, of or belonging to Anjou. Naturall son; i. a Bastard, also a natu∣rall Father. Rodomantade, p. 12. a brag or brava∣do. Cloth of assuyance, 27. Towel or napkin that wait on the cup. Contrast, withstanding or repugnance. Parergum, 32. Something added that is not of the principall matter. Tort, 35. wrong, injury, and violence. Vmbrage or Ombrage, 35. Suspition, also disgrace. Disgust, 36. Distaste. Contrecar, 44. A counter-strength, &c: Filij populi, 44. Bastards so called, being children of common women, & in respect of the Father of uncertaine Parentage. Ne Croix ny Pile, 51. Neither cross nor pile, not one title or jot of right▪ &c. Ambidexter, a Iack on both sides. Brother uterine, 51. (1) by the mothers side. Abbayance. 53. In delay or dispute, such as Lawyers use, a term borrowed from another creature. Apodixis, 60. Plain demonstration of a thing. Jnconcuss, that cannot be shaken, un∣daunted. Bartlemies, 63. Meant of the great and generall massacre of above 100000. Protestants in France, chiefly in Pa∣ris, and the Countrey adjoyning on Saint Bartholmews Eve, Anno 72. whereupon St. Bartholmews teares, Bartholomaeus flet, quia Gallicus occubat Atlas.
Como sal in aqua, 105. Is meant of suddain wasting. Monomachy, 62. When two sight sin∣gle without seconds. Cadet, 67. A younger brother. Guerdonable, worthy of reward, 75. Aneu, 45. An acknowledging, or taking for his owne. Geus saus adneu, va∣gabonds, that none will owne so Ba∣stards, are not admitted to their ad∣neu (1) not acknowledged by their Fathers. Rebus de Picardy, Devises and repre∣sentations of odd things by words & mottoes, which present one thing, and by deviding the word, in pronun∣ciation, signifie another. Faulcon Serrure, An abscene French device, and presents the use of Itali∣an lockes. Authors quoted in this History. AUgustine. Aristotle. Baleus. Boetius. Buchan. Cambden. Cicero. Cambrensis. Claudian. Croyland. Pryor Comineus Cooke Demosthines Dion. AEsopus. Euripides Ennius Erasmus Epictetus Fabian Fuchius Froisard Grafton Glover Guinsford Goodwin Du Hailon Hall Hollinshead Hyrd Dele-Hay Harding Hist. de Brit. Homer Julius Capital Juvenall Justus Vulterius Lib. Manusr. Apud D. Rob. Cotton. Lampridius Lucan Maximus. Moore Monstrolet Newbrigensis Nyerus Ovid Osiander Pliny Paradin Polidor virg. Plutarch Seneca Sarisburensis Stow Strabo Socrates Stanford Suetonius De Serces Tacitus Terence Tillet Virgill Valla Walsingham With many Parliament Roules and Records. FINIS,
