B5357 13664271 101151
AN EXPOSTULATION WITH Thomas Lloyd, Samuell Jenings, And the rest of the Twenty Eight Unjust Judges and Signers of the Paper of Condemnation against George Keith And the rest of his Friends. And COMPLAINT FOR A Publick Hearing AND TRYAL Before all Impartial People.
An Expostulation with Samuell Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of the twenty eight Unjust Judges and Signers of the Paper of Condemnation against G. K. & his Friends. And Complaint for a Pub∣lick Hearing and Tryal before all Impar∣tial People. WHereas Samuell Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and others being in Number 28 have published a Paper a∣gainst G. K. & the rest of his Brethren ohae joyned with him in this Testimony for the Lord Jesus, against whom they prophecy, That, Dryness and Barrenness from the Lord, will be their Reward. We having read and considered the said Judgment, do testifie against it, as an uniust and unrigh∣teous Act; but that which aggravates the Crime against them is, that they say, This Meeting having tenderly and orderly dealt with him, &c. when they know in their Consciences, they dealt o with G. K. nor never sent for him to their said Meeting, but tryed and judged him altogether in his absence, wherein they have done worse than the Baptists did in the case of Tho. Hicks; for when Friends appealed to the People cal'd Baptists for iustice against T. Hicks, they took their time & appointed a Meeting, and 3 or 4 days before the said Meeting sent Let∣ters to G. W. and W. P's, Houses to give them notice to be at the Meeting, but they being so far from home that they could not have timely notice, it was reckon'd great Injustice for them to proceed and try Friends and T. Hicks in their absence; and
upon Complaint they gave another Meeting: But T. Lloyd S. Jenings, and the rest are so far short of the Justice of the Baptists, that they never so much as acquainted G. K. of their Meeting or intent to proceed against him, nor never sent for him that we can understand, only W Byles came to G.K's house and asked for him, his Wife told; he was from home, and she expected him the next Morning, but they told nothing of their business with him, but in all haste proceeded to judge him in his absence before he came home. Is this your orderly dealing with him? Is this your Justice? Is this your Christian tender∣ness? your Charity, & your bearing with him in  Christian Spirit? for shame cease thus proceeding, or you will ea stink in the Nostrils of the Nations where it shall be told What! pretend to Christianity & fall short of Heathen Justice! John 7. 50, 51. Acts 25.16, 17 Did the Baptists do unfair in procee∣ding to try Friends in their absence? Then much more you: for they gave some Notice before of their intending to Try Tho. Hicks, but you never so much as told G. K. of your so Meeting: Wherefore allow us so much Justice as the Baptists did to have another Meeting publickly to try G. K. where all People may be present, that are willing to come, and whereof G. K. may have timely notice, and liberty to plead his own Cause, and let all Impartial People judge; & through Gods Assistance we shall make it appear, that your said Judgment is unjust, & G. K. not worthy of Condemnation. Was there ever such an Act done in any Christian Society before, to con∣demn a man without ever hearing of him, or suffering him to speak for himself? Surely its far short of any worldly Court, where the party shall have timely notice to prepare for his his Tryal, and liberty to plead his own cause in the face of the Country, and where his Accusers are not allowed to sit and give Judgment against him: But so it is, that those Unjust & Unrighteous Judges have proceeded to try, judge, and publish their Judgment against G. K. without ever hearing of him,
when its well known the most of them were his great Oppo∣sers: They might be sure this way to condemn him, when only a Faction of them get together, and accuse him, and he nor any for him be present to speak for him. But that which still hightens the Crime of Tho. Lloyd, Sam Jenings, and the rest of the 28 Unjust Judges, is, that they of the Ministry should give such a false Judgment, and then impose it on all the Meetings in these 3 Provinces, when most of the Friends thereof are great strangers to the Matter in Controversie, not knowing which Party is in the Right, but they must take said Judgment upon Trust from them▪ without enquiring into the Cause and Verity thereof; and where they think their said Judgment will not readily be swallowed down, they will fol∣low it from Meeting to Meeting, cloathed with their Magi∣stratical Robes, and if any Friends show their dislike of having it imposed on them without their own consent, and considera∣tion of the matter, presently threaten to bind them to the good Behaviour, and to the Peace, and call out for a Constable, thereby endeavouring to trample us down by their Magistra∣tical Power & Authority, as Samuell Jenings, Sam. Richardson, Thomas Lloyd, John Delavall and Anthony Morris did lately at a Monthly Meeting near Frankford, as is well known to many. Oh! whither do you think these things will run? will it not give People just cause to say, the Quakers are turned Persecu∣tors? But our Trust and Confidence is in the Lord alone, who hitherto has pleaded the Cause of the Innocent, and carried his People through all the Powers & Oppositions that have hither∣to risen up against them in all Ages, and we doubt not but he will do the lare for us, as we keep faithful to him, and to the Guidance of his holy Spirit, Light and Life in our hearts. But are these your Proceedings Christians, or Protestant-like? or do they not rather relish of Rank Popery, for the Clergy or them of the Ministry to impose their Edicts on the People, without their enquiring into the matter? is not th  Obedience?
Is not this believing as the Church believes, in order to bring in Ignorance the Mother of Devotian? Oh! who but ignorant and blind men, but can see these things! And yet now will ye stand in them, O ye Ʋnjust Judges! will ye not be willing to answer our just Complaint for a Hearing? Will you come short of the Justice of the Baptists, who admitted of another Meeting for a Hearing? But perhaps you will say, The Act of that Meeting was Infallible, being made up of such a Body of the Ministry, (as Arthur Cook said lately in the House of G. K. That a Yearly Meeting could not Err) But we desire to hope, that som of you will better consider of it, & answer our just Complaint, and not lurk in holes and corners, but come openly and defend your selves, and repent of the Error and false Doctrine you have run into, and let a time and place be appointed & agreed on by both Parties for a Publick Hearing: If you have Truth and Justice on your side, come forth and let it appear before the World, and say not that such and such things are false, but prove them to be so; and bring things to the Light, and let not Christs words be fullfilled on you, viz. You hate the Light because your deeds are Evil, &c. Say not, that we are bold and daring thus to Challenge you; for its not writ in a presump∣tuous Spirit as relying on our own Strength or Parts, but on the Lord alone, on whom is our Dependance, and who knows the Innocency of our Cause, and therefore we are not afraid to bring it to the Test, but willing to appear openly, as hither∣to we have done in Print, and not as your Practice is to report false things secretly abroad, which we know not whom to fasten upon; but what we publish in Print remains to be the Authors, whether true or false; if false, why don't you refute it, the Press is free and open for you, as for any? But the matter in our ine Printed Books is true, and stands over your Heads, and which you will never be able to Ruine. But next, let us enquire, what have you condemned G. K. for? some of you say, Pary  of Doine, and partly
for hard Words; But as for Doctrine you have not mentioned what it is; and as for the hard Names you mention, it is made appear in The Plea of the Innocent, &c. that they were justly given by G. K. to them that deserved the same: But have his Opposers given no hard Names, no unjust and false Reflections? yea, many. But why only then must G. K. be condemned, and not they also who have given hard words and false Names to G. K.? When G. K. complained against them for not giving Judgment against W. Stockdale's Blasphemy Samuell Jenings could excuse it, by bringing the Example and Practice of worldly Courts, saying, George, thou hast reviled thy Brethren, and in Courts we allow of Discount. So that according to S. Jenings, W. Stockdale's Blasphemy must be discounted against G. K's Reviling his Brethren, as they account it, but can never prove. But if Discount be allowable in this case▪ why are not G. K's hard words discounted against those that have been given to him, so far as they will reach? And that it may appear what hard Name, have been given, we think fit here to mention, viz. They say G. K. has called them, 1. Fools, 2. Ignorant Heathens, 3. Infidells, 4. Silly Souls, 5. Lyars, 6. Hereticks, 7. Rotten Ranters, 8. Muggletonians. They of the other side have called G. K. 1. Brat of Babylon, 2. Accuser of the Brethren, 3. Apostate, 4. Worse than Prophane, 5. A Troubler of the Church, 6. A Person that no one could have Difference with; but he was in danger of the Life of his Soul. 7. A Preacher of two Christs, 8. A Teller of an Old St Andrews Story. 9. Pope, 10. Father Confessor, 11. Lyor, 12. Devil, 13 Muggletonian, 14. Com∣pared him to a Wolf. Tyger, &c. 15 One that alwayes endea∣voured to keep down the Power of Truth. 16. A more vexatious Adversary than Hicks, Faldo, Scanderet, or the worst of Enemies.
17. One that is fallen upon the soaring Mountains, &c. 18. As a man slain. 19. Become Treacherous is to the Spouse of his Youth. 20. Fallen on his first Love. 21. Gone into a Spirit of Enmity, Wrath, Self-Exaltation, Contention, &c. 22. Foam∣ing out his own Shame 23. A Person without the Fear of God before his Eyes. 24. Leting loofe the Reins to an Extravagant Tongae. 25. Broken out into many Ʋngodly Speeches, Railing Accusations, Passionate Threatenings, being Cruel, &c. like an Ʋnwearied Adversary. With many more that can be proved. Now let the Impartial Reader judge, which have exceeded in hard Words? and whether they are not very partial to pass by all that hath been said against G. K. and condemn him for what he hath spoke in its right place, as is made appear in the Book called, The Plea of the Innocent. And yet when G. K. was the Complainer for many Months, for Justice to be done to Truth, they could plead for Discount, and put Blasphemy against Christ Jesus, in the Ballance against Reflections upon themselves, and yet now will not disount for hard words. And a so they have judged a whole Meeting without ever admo∣nishing of them. If this be not Partiality, Injustice and Un∣righteous Judgment, tell us what is. And clear your selves of these things, if you can. Signed by us, in behalf of the rest of our Friends by order of our Meeting, the 18th of the 5 Month, 1692. Thomas Budd, Richard Hilliard, John Hart, Thomas Paschall. William Bradford. James Cooper, Elizabeth Keith. THE END.
Books to be sold by William Bradford in Philadelphia, 1692. The Christian Faith of the People called Quakers in Rhode-Island. 4 d. A Catechism for Children and Youth, and such others as need to be instructed in the first Principles of the Christian Religion. By G. K. Pr. 6 d. A Testimony concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, Day of Judgment, and Christs last Coming & Appearing without us. By G. K. 3 d. Truth and Innocency defended, against Calumny & Defamation, in a late Report concerning the Revolution of Humane Souls, &c. G. K. 5 d. Some Causes and Reasons of the late Seperation that hath come to pass here at Philadelphia. Shewing, That G. K's Opposers were the Cause of the said Breach and Seperation, and most properly are the seperate Meeting. To∣gether with an account of the sincere Christian Faith of G. K. and his Friends. Price 9 d. The Plea of the Innocent, against the False Judgment of the Guilty, being a Vindication of G. Keith & his Friends, from the false Judgment, Calumnies and Desantations of S. Jenings, J. Simcock, T. Lloyd and others, being in Number Twenty Eight. Price 6 d. A Vision concerning Seperation among Friends in Old England. By G. F. A faithful Warning and Exhortation to Friends to beware of seducing Spirits. By S. Crisp. 6 d. An Appeal from the Twenty Eight Judges, to the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment in all faithfull Friends, called Quakers. A true Coppy of three Judgments given forth by a Party of men, called Quakers at Philadelphia, against G. Keith, &c. With two Answers to the same. New Husbandry to New-England, or an Experienced way to raise Quick Hedges and Clover Grass; and the way to make Syder. Note, That in some of Printed Copies of the Appeal from the twenty eight Judges, &c. these happen'd an Error in the Postscript, which pray amend, viz. line 1. for Anthony Morris read Sam. Richardson. And whereas it is reported, That the Printer being a favourer of G. K. he will not print for any other, which is the reason that the other Party appear not in Print as well as G K. These are to signifie, that the Printer hath not yet refused to print any thing for either Party; and also signifies that he doth not refuse, but is willing and ready to print any thing for the future that G. K's Opposers shall bring to him.
