B5375 R19514 12399593 61238
A Modest Defence Of my Book, Entituled, Quakerism Expos'd: AS ALSO, Of my Broad Sheet; with a Scheme of the Quakers Yearly Synod; and other Books, presented Anno 1699. to the PARLIAMENT. AND G. Whitehead's Inside Turn'd Outward, by Reprinting his Ancient Book Ishmael, &c. intirely; shewing thereby the Quakers Ancient Testimony of Contempt of the Holy Scriptures, and Blasphemy against the Blessed Trinity; and they tell us they are not chang'd. By FRANCIS BƲGG. There shall be false Teachers amongst you, who shall bring in Damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. ii. 1. LONDON: Printed by R. Janeway, Jun. for the Au∣thor; and sold by J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church-yard; H. Rhodes, at the Star at the Corner of Bride-Lane, Fleetstreet; Ch. Broome at the Gun in Ludgate-street; and J. Marshall at the Bible in Grace-Church-Street, 1700.
To the Right Honourable the High Court of Parliament, Humbly Dedicated, &c. Right Honourable, WHereas the Quakers, for many Years, have presented their Books and Papers to the Parliament under many fair Shews, whilst the Tendency of their Doctrine is to Sub∣vert Christianity; and I being sensi∣ble thereof, think it my Duty to God and my Country, both as a Christian, and Free-born Englishman, to discover the same; and therefore to obviate some Objections, I do most hum∣bly beg Leave to Apologize for my self in this Affair, since by many Books of the Quakers I have been represented as an indigent Person, a Mercenary Agent, one that is prompt on by other, a Judas, &c. and
thereupon I am greatly desirous to ac∣quaint your Honours, that I am no such manner of Person: And as a De∣monstration thereof, I have somewhat to offer in my own Defence, which is briefly this. I came of a good Yeoman Family, and have lived in good Repute all my Days, having had a competent Estate of near a Hundred Pound a Year, besides Stock; and that whilst I was a Quaker, I was of good Repute and Esteem amongst them; I enter∣tained their Teachers with no little Charge, I put Cloaths on the Backs of some, and Money in the Purses of others: I was Register to their Month∣ly and Quarterly Meeting about Six∣teen or Eighteen Years together, to which I rode Fifteen or Sixteen Miles every Month, and all this freely, as themselves know, if they would speak: I was Prisoner for the Cause of Qua∣kerism Three Years and Four Months, and for Meetings I suffered by Fines and Distresses more than One Hun∣dred Pound; and when we built a
Meeting-House, (for before Meeting were at my House) I gave 20 l. towards it; and to that Day all freely, with∣out any Retribution; all which con∣sidered, might abate the edge of their Defamations, and lead them to keep to the Matter in Controversie: And since (upon a sight of their Errors) I left them, I have been Useful, but ne∣ver Mercenary; I have born all Town-Offices, as Overseer, Constable, and Church-warden; I have been of∣ten an Assessor, and sometimes Colle∣ctor of His Majesty's Taxes, serv'd on Juries of Life and Death, as well as Nisi Prius; in all which places I have discharged my Trust free from any Accusation. And since I have more narrowly looked into their Principles, and found them to be Pernicious to both Church and State, I have first used all pri∣vate Means to Reclaim them: But when they persisted therein, and would justifie, excuse, and defend all things, whether agreeable to the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apo∣stles,
or in Contradiction to them, I have thought it my Duty to discover their Pernicious Ways, and therein I have proceeded upon a Principle of Ju∣stice, and can with good Conscience say, that from first to last, no Cler∣gyman in the Kingdom ever asked or desired me to write one Book, Page or Line, against the Quakers, nor have any one Man (Clergy or Laity) seen this Book till printed; tho' I do grant, that by my Constan∣cy of Writing for more than Twenty Years together, and by the Charge of Printing, together with other Los∣ses incident to Tradesmen, I have been reduced; and I am not ashamed to acknowledge, that the Gentry, the Justices of Peace, the Clergy, and some Protestant Dissenters, have ex∣tended their Bounty towards my Sup∣port; and which, the Quakers them∣selves do to their own People: And if this be Cause sufficient to render me a Judas, or Mercenary, they have ma∣ny Mercenary Judas's among themselves.
I have read in the Book of Esther, That when Haman designed the De∣struction of the Jewish Church, then in Captivity, how Queen Esther ap∣peared in the Defence thereof, say∣ing, Esther 3.6, 14, 16. I will go in to the King, which is not according to Law, and if I Perish, I Perish. And it is in the remaining Story of Esther in the Greek and Latin Copies, Cap. 13. Mordecai appeals to God thus, Thou knowest, O Lord, that it was nei∣ther of Malice, nor Presumption, nor of any Desire of Glory that I did this, &c. And when I came to understand the Pride and Cruelty of George Fox and his Accomplices, which was equal to that of Haman, who in Oliver Crom∣well's time (as by their Books appear) were for Slaying and Banishing all the Clergy in the Kingdom, and how averse they ever were against Liberty of Conscience (as elsewhere I have shew∣ed) as also what Enemies they were to the Holy Scriptures and Ordinan∣ces of our Saviour, namely, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, damning the
Ever-blessed Trinity to the Pit of Hell, and divers other Blasphemies, too ma∣ny here to relate; I was stirred in my Spirit to appear in Defence of our Holy Religion, which their Doctrine tends to overthrow; saying with Queen Esther, If I Perish, I Perish; and can appeal to God, as Mordecai did, say∣ing, Thou knowest, O Lord, that it was neither of Malice, nor of Presumption, nor any Desire of Glory, that I did this, &c. And who knows but for such a time as this, I was deliver'd from them by the good Hand of Providence. And (Right Honourable) that which is chiefly defir'd by me, is, (and that in Concurrence with many Thousands of good Christians) that the Quakers may be examined, whether what I object against them be so or no; and if found true upon them, that they may then be obliged to Retract and Con∣demn what is Erroneous, as well as Dangerous; and this is no Persecuti∣on: Nor do I know of any who desire any Alteration of the Act of Tolerati∣on.
I have likewise read the Story of Bell and the Dragon, wherein the Fraud of the Priests of Bell is set forth; who pretended (as our Quakers do) that they served in the Temple freely; and that their God Eat up all the Provisi∣on set before him: But upon Examina∣tion it was found far otherwise. Even so I make this offer, and that on the Terms of Daniel's Proposition, to make it appear (notwithstanding the Qua∣kers Loud Clamours against the Clergy, for their Tythes, and other Dues, set apart by Law for their Maintainance, whilst they Serve at the Altar) that Ten of the Quakers Teachers have re∣ceived more Gifts than Fifty of our Episcopal Divines, Rectors of Parishes, in the Counties of Suffolk and Norfolk; only by strewing a few Ashes on the Floor, or something Equivolent. But as the Priests of Bell, were too powerful for Daniel, without Assi∣stance from the Government; even so are the Quakers for me. I can only discover the Riddle, and propose a Me∣thod to try them by; but cannot bring
the Matter about to bring proof there∣of, without Assistance from the Go∣vernment. But as Daniel by his three∣fold Medicine, Pitch, Fat, Hair, boil'd together, by God's Blessing, burst in sun∣der the Babylonians Dragon, their other Idol-God; even so have I been Instru∣ment l, with the help of Pen, and Ink, Paper, well prest together, and applied Warm, with God's Blessing, Burst in sunder the Quakers great Idol, their Darkness within, (which they call Light). So that their Infallibility is flown one way, and their Sinless Per∣fection another; their Spiritual Dis∣cerning they pretend to [so as to know who are Saints, and who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speak∣ing a Word] this way, and their Mi∣racles that way. And if to bring this to pass, I have sometimes taken the freedom of the Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 18. who speaking to the Prophets of Baal, in a Holy Derision of them and their Idol Gods; said, Ver. 27. And it came to pass at Noon, that Elijah mocked them and said, Cry aloud, for he is a
God, either he is Talking, or he is Pur∣suing, or he is in a Journey, or peradven∣ture he Sleepeth, and must be Awaked, &c. if then I have taken such freedom, with the false Quaker Prophets, and their Dumb Idols, which can neither See, Hear nor Understand, much less dis∣cern who are Saints, who are Devils, or who are Apostates, without speak-ever a Word; or if I have with the Woman of Tekoah, 2 Sam. 14. by way of Metaphor, brought about a Form of Speech, with design to get the Quakers examined, whether what have been Objected against them, be true or not; I hope it is Pardonable, since in all Ages in the World, the same Cause leads to the same thing. For I do Believe, (and not without Ground) That as there never was a People, since Simon the Sorcerer, pretended to such High Prophetical Attainments; so likewise there never was a Sect of Falser Prophets since the time of Elijah, nor that ever held such Blasphemous
Principles as their Books set forth: And they say they are the same still, their Principles the same, and not changed. Be not deceived (I beseech you) by the Quakers, who appear like the Pharisees, Fair and Beautiful even like Painted Se∣pulchers; Remember the Subtilty of the Gibionites, Josh. 9. how they by their Dissimulation deceived good Joshua, and all the Princes of the Congrega∣tion of Israel: The Quakers tell you they own the Scriptures to be given by Divine Inspiration; but mean not one word of it, like other Christians; for so they own their own Books. They tell you they own a Scripture Trinity, but mean not a word of it: This is a Matter (Right Honourable) of great weight; and your Honours will find it as difficult a thing, to gain the true meaning of the Quakers, touch∣ing the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and their Belief of a Scrip∣ture Trinity, as Constantius the Em∣perour found it, in the Examination of Arius the Heretick, to get his true meaning, touching the Faith of one
Substance: For the Quakers (as did Arius) mean as they have written; but how? Namely, in their own Books; I mean of that sort they read in their Meetings, and keep close among them∣selves; one of which I have herein Reprinted. In these sorts of Books they deny the Scriptures to be the Written Word of God; For it is (say they) a Rotten Foundation, Dust, Death, and Serpents Meat. In like manner they dissemble the Doctrine of the Trinity, when they pretend to own it; whilst in their Books they Damn it to the Pit and Lake. All this, and much more, I offer to make appear, who am, with all Submission, Right Honourable, Your Honours most Humble and most Obedient Servant, Fran. Bugg.
A PREFACE, By Way of PARABLE. THere was an Island, very Populous, and well Scituated, the Air good, and the People generally of a sound Constitution, and go∣verned by wholesom Laws, and professed the most Reformed Religion of any Nation round about them: But so it fell out, that in the North Part of this Island, Anno 1650. there arose a great Sea-MonsterViz. Geo. x, alias  Magus., of a Luciferian Pride, who pretended, that he, and all that received, embraced, and had the same Spi∣rit that moved him, were equal to God: That he was the Eternal Judge of the World, and knew who were Saints, who were Devils, and who were Apostates, without speaking ever a Word; and he having betrothed himself to a young Harloti. e. The nters., she conceived, and brought forth her Young; to whom she drew out her Breasts, and gave them Suck, and they multiplied exceedingly, and many of them be∣came fiery flying SerpentsSuch of  Pro∣ts, as re him h Di∣e Attri∣es., and spread themselves like Locusts, all over the Island; some entering the Churches, where they stung both Men, Women, and Children; others entered into the Market-places, Barns, Orchards, and private Chambers; like the Frogs in Egypt, poysoning the Air, and infecting much People. Upon this, the Physicians, both Conformists and Nonconformists were extreamly allarmed, not well knowing what to do, or what Course to take, to stop
the Gangrene of this Pestilential Disease, and to heal the People, who were bitten by these Serpents; but as wise Physicians, they took their Christian Dispensa∣toryi. e. The Holy Scri∣ptures., and turn'd over to this Chapter, and that Verse, and made excellent Receipts, which were sold at reasonable Rates at every Booksellers Shop, and prepared many Antidotes against the Venom of this dangerous Infection: But these wounded Peo∣ple being intoxicated by the Venom of these Scor∣pions, they refused all these Christian Offers; but the Physicians (as in Duty bound) resolved to apply their Medicines to the grieved part of this wound∣ed and bewitched People, who like the Samaritans of old, said, That this Monster was the Power of GodG. Fox's Journal, 3d Index, un∣der the Letter M.; that he wrought Miracles; that he had Power to bind and loose whom he pleased; and cried out, who is able to make War with the Beast: But not∣withstanding the Power and Prevalency of this Dra∣gon, they applied (as aforesaid) their Medicines ve∣ry warm, and withal giving them some Physick to purge away the Dregs of their Distemper; which as soon as they had done, and before they could finish their Prayers for a Blessing upon their Endeavours, these diseased People grew into a raging Fit, and raved at the Physicians like mad Men, saying, We are perfect, and free from Sin, sound, and have no need of any Physician; for as they did not think themselves obliged to ask Forgiveness of Sin to God, nor ac∣knowledge their Errors to Man, so they resolved to use none of their Medicines, and therefore bad them be gone, calling them by these Names following, viz. The Idle Gormondizing Priests of England,The Guide mistaken, &c. by W. Penn, p. 18. no sort of People have been so universally through Ages the very Bane of Soul and Body of the Universe, as that Abomina∣ble Tribe, for whom the Theatre of God's most dreadful Ven∣geance is reserved to act their Eternal Tragedy upon. With this the Gentlemen were amazed, and looking one upon another, said, Good Lord, may it please thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecuters and Slanderers, and to turn their Hearts: Grant us, O Lord, to love our Ene∣mies, and by the Example of thy Martyr Stephen, to pray for our Persecuters, &c. And when this Prayer was
ended, they judging it their Duty to do Good a∣gainst Evil, they again tried another Expedient, thinking their Distemper lay in their Brain, and being somewhat Lunatick, was the Cause of those violent and abusive Words. Well, they gave them some Pills, advis'd them to be still, and take some Rest; but before this Physick could work, they fell into another Convulsion Fit, and raved as much as ever; (yea, all of them, except some few, who were not wilfully ignorant, who, by the Blessing of God upon their Endeavours, came to their Sences, and remain so to this Day, as Monuments of God's Mercy, praising his Great and Glorious Name, and returning their Thanks to the Physicians who labour in the Word and Doctrine,) calling the Physician, (methinks I hear them still) Baal's Priests, Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Blind Guides, Devils, Serpents, the Sir-Symons of the Age, a Viperous and Serpentine Genera∣tion, Witches, Bloodhounds, Merchants of Babylon, Dogs, SodomitesIs this from a Christian Spirit? See their Brief Discovery, &c. p. 7, 8., we (said this Intoxicated People in their mad Zeal) have nothing for them but Woes and Plagues, who have made drunk the Nations, and laid them to sleep on downy Beds of Sin-pleasing Principles, whilst they have cut their Purses, and pickt their Pockets; Tophet's prepared for them, to act their Eternal Tragedy upon; whose Scenes will be renewed, Direful, Anguishing Woes, of an Eternal Irreconcileable Justice, &c. And in excuse for these dreadful Thunderbolts, W. Penn thus saith, That had these Expressions been Ten Thousand times more significant, earnest, and sharp, against that cursed bitter Stock of Hirelings, they had been but enough, and I would then say not enough; but that the Reverence I bear to the Holy Spirit (i. e. in the Quakers) would oblige me to acquiesce in whatever he should utter, through any Servant or Pro∣phet of the LordW. Penn's Ser. Apol. p. 156., &c. At this the Gentlemen stood amazed, thinking with themselves that all the Furies of Hell could not help them with more dreadful Curses, much less Ten Thousand times more sharp, and so they left them, as fit only for Bedlam. Upon this there was some dissenting PhysiciansDr. Owen, Mr. Bax∣ter, Mr. Faldo, and others. in this Island, who also had good Skill of this Malady, with which this People
were infected by the Venom of the Scorpions a∣bove-noted, and in great Pity to them, they search∣ed diligently into their Christian Dispensatory, and found therein divers Receipts, and of the most pro∣per Medicines, they apply'd both Corrosive and Lenitive, but nothing took place, (except only up∣on a few, who were not willingly Ignorant, and of an obstinate Temper) but the Treatment they had for them was much of the same Nature of the a∣bove-noted; for they called them, An ill-bred Pedan∣tick CrewIs this from a Christian Spirit?, the Bane of Religion, and Pest of the World, the old Incendiaries to Mischief, and best to be spared of Mankind, against whom the boiling Vengeance of an irri∣tated God is ready to be poured outQuake∣rism a new Nick∣name, &c. p. 165., &c. Whoever read this Book, and my former Books, will find this Parable unfolded. Thus, Reader, you see here is nothing but Plagues, and Woes, Hell and Damnation, both for the Con∣formists, and Nonconformists, for all their Love, Care and Pains; are these mad People then to be dealt with, as a Man would deal with any other well-disposed People? I think not: If then you find me in some Cases to deal roughly with them, mar∣vel not; it is for their Good, since the way (as one of themselves say) to recover the Deceived is to discover the * Deceivers: And this Witness it true, as St. Paul said touching the Cretians, Tit. 1.12, 13. so may I (and that for the same Reason) say of the Quakers, viz. one of themselves, even a Prophet of their own said, The Cretians were always Liars, evil Beasts, Slow-Bellies, this witness is true, (said St. Paul) wherefore Rebuke them sharply, &c. that is, (as in the Dutch Anno∣tations) Severely or Cuttingly, a Similitude taken from Physicians, who cut off the dead Flesh, &c. Then not softly, with smooth Words, sewing Pillows under their Armholes, as some did in former Ages; and for which they were sharply reproved; no, no, they must be launched, and the Wound laid openA Despe∣rate Wound must have a Desperate Cure., and searched to the bottom, and then we may hope of a Cure; and this Doctrine of St. Paul, that able Phy∣sician, has seemed proper to me ever since I have
practiced; for the Quakers, like the Cretians were al∣ways Dissemblers with God and Man; they were al∣ways Liars; they were always evil Beasts, and Slow-Bellies; and for the Truth of this, St. Paul (touch∣ing the Cretians) produceth a Prophet, or a Poet of their own, who gave that Witness; and notwith∣standing they were always Liars, yet St. Paul said of this Evidence of their own Poet, this Witness it true; therefore rebuke them sharply, Severely or Cutting∣ly, in order to cut off the dead Flesh; and in like manner I shall produce a Prophetess of their own, who also is a Poet, and a Writer, and Defender of their Way, and in their Unity, which stands princi∣pally in Lying, and Dissembling; and when she does write in the Defence of the Quakers, she is as great a Liar as the rest; yet in this Case her Witness is true, as St. Paul said of the Cretian Poet. Wherefore I shall briefly recite some Passages out of some Letters, writ by her to my self, and to Mr. Crisp; as also out of a printed broad Sheet, all wrote by Anne Docwra, of Cambridge, one in their Unity, as above-noted, which Letters we have still by us, as well as her printed Paper, and which are more at large recited in my Book, The Christian Ministry of the Church of England vindicated, &c. p. 2. and my Pil∣grim's Progress, &c. 2d Ed. p. 54, 121, 129. and her Witness in this Case is true, viz. I. I have (said she) given witness against Geo. Whitehead's Book, Judgment fixed, &c. we have (continues she) Knights of the Post amongst us, &c. This Witness is true. II. That the honest Quakers (for some such there are amongst them) have suspected G. White∣head (by his Craft and Subtilty, in defending or excusing what he must know to be erroneous a∣mongst them) to be a Jesuit, at least like them. This Witness is true. III. That their Second-Day Meeting put Names to their Certificates, and Passages into their Books, without either Consent or Knowledge of the Parties or Authors. This Witness is true.
IV. That the Quakers separate Meetings for Go∣vernment (with Doors shut) are dangerous to the Peace of the Nation. This Witness is true. V. That the Magistrates look upon Common Bankers (i. e. the Quakers Fund) to be as bad as Arms and Ammunition, and not (said she) with∣out Reason, for Money answers all things. If Friends (said she) would put away this Dagon, and take Money only for their present Necessity, things would soon be better. This Witness is true. VI. That the Quakers Distinct Men's Meetings (touching their Government within the Govern∣ment, and opposite to it) serve to little Purpose, but to shelter great Bellies, and to protect the Proud and Vicious. This Witness is true. VII. That their Teachers, G. Whitehead, Sam. Ca∣ter, &c. are the most confident Liars, and wicked Forgers, that ever she met with. This Witness is true. VIII. That their Second-Day Meeting both ad∣ded to, and altered the Sence of her Letters, to make Lies seem true; of which Forgery she sus∣pected G. Whitehead to be Guilty; for (continue she) Sam. Cater is not Sophister great enough. This Witness is true. IX. I had (said she) a sharp Conference with Sam. Cater, for his Clamouring against Francis Bugg and John Ainsloe, in his abuseful Narrative, herein (said she) he (Sam. Cater) have used my Name in Print, to justifie him in his Conscious Pamphlet with Francis Bugg: I (said she) laid it before him smartly; he is very bold, (continues she) and the most confident Liar that ever I met with. This Wit∣ness is true. X. That G. W. forged a Certificate in's Judgment Fixed. This witness is true. Thus much from a Prophetess of their own, one in their Unity, and that have wrote many Books in Defence of Quakerism; one in 1699. by which Evi∣dence we may know that the Quakers, like the Cre∣tians, were always Liars, evil Beasts, slow Bellies; but not only so, but Liars, Forgers; and, to speak Comparatively, Knights of the Post, Jesu∣its,
and dangerous to the Government; Slanderers to their honest Friends, whilst they protected the proud Blasphemers, and Vicious Hypocrites; and as St. Paul said, the Evidence which a Prophet of the Cre∣tians said was true, (who said, and said truly, that the Cretians were always Liars, &c.) why? Because he knew the Truth thereof; and as to the Evidence which this Propheress, Anne Docwra, has given of the Quakers, I say it is true; why? Because I know it to be so in the Cases now recited: But further, to con∣firm it, I shall recite an Abstract of a Letter sent me, dated January the 19th, 1699. from Robert Sandiland, who formerly was one of their Teachers: But upon Conviction of his Errors, and the gross Hypocrisies of the Quakers, he has left them, (as many others have done) and Retracted not only his Errors, which he (with my self, G. Keith, Tho. Crisp, and divers o∣thers) held, but also his uncharitable Language to me, and others, tho' much, of what his Books con∣tained, was, as Anne Docwra says, foisted in as his, yet none of his; and I am apt to think the same Per∣son, G. W. was the Forger in his Book; for which horrible Practice he (I fear) has a large Account to give. Now follows R. S.'s Letter somewhat abstra∣cted. Loving Friend, Francis Bugg. AS concerning my Book, printed 1683. Entituled, Righ∣teous Judgment, &c. whatsoever it herein, inconsi∣stent, (or any other of my Books) with the sound Christian Faith and Doctrine, I do now wholly Disown, and Retract; together with all Harsh and Uncharitable Expressions on thee, or any others, named in my Book; and particularly these Verses, p. 97. viz. Team, Rogers, Pennyman, Bullock and Bugg, Dark Devil, driven dungy God's desperately Lugg; That are ty'd to the Tail of their separate Schism, Papists, Libertinism, Heathenism, Judaism, Atheism. I do say, and affirm, that tho' these Verses were put into my Book as mine, yet I assure thee that they were none of my ma∣king, I did not compose oneword of them; but they were made by another Hand, and put into my Book, together with the
whole Ninth Chapter, which was likewise done by another Hand, and put also into my said Book, (as mine) whilst I was in the Country; and after I had left it with the Second-Day-Meeting for the Press, and they did with it what they pleas'd, as thou knowest they use to Read and Correct all Books brought before them; and G. W. I suppose may remember who it was that writ that whole Ninth ChapterYea, and I guess that it was G. W. himself., from p. 91, to 100.— Blessed be God, that their gross Errors in the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, are now sufficiently Detected; and there is nothing remains now for them to do, but either openly and freely to Retract (and Condemn) them, or else to be exposed, and liable to all the ill Effects and Consequences, which must unavoida∣bly attend their obstinate persisting in their Errors.— Robert Sandilands. But to shew the horrid Cheats, wicked Forgeries, and deep Hypocrisies of this their Second-Day Meet∣ing, will exceed the bounds of a Preface; and there∣fore for a compleat System of this their black Art in their dark Divinity, I refer my Reader to my Pilg. Prog. &c. 2d Edit. p. 149, to p. 170. And that I may not leave a Stone unturned that may discover the pious Frauds of this Painted Har∣lot, I shall recite a brief Abstract of W. Mucklow's Book, Entituled, The Spirit of the Hat, &c. he being a Man of Note amongst them, and may be called in St. Paul's Sence a Prophet of their own, and whose Evidence in this Case is true; yea, I know it to be so: For the Quakers were always Liars, evil Beasts, Slow-Bellies, whilst yet they pretend to Infallibility, and also that their Books are given forth from the Immediate Eternal Spirit of God. 1. That the Foxonian Unity is to yeild Obedience to the Body, tho' no Conviction inwardly of the Truth of the thing commanded; saying, who is able to make War with us? These are the high swel∣ling Words of proud Babel. This Witness is true. 2. That G. Fox, &c. was of an Antichristian Spirit. This Witness is true. 3. That their Ministers (in their Meetings for Go∣vernment, conjoin'd together to subvert our Laws and Liberty. This Witness is true.
4. That G. Fox was lifted up with Luciferian Pride, saying, he had Power to bind and loose whom he please. This Witness is true. 5. That Sol. Eccles, one of their Prophets and Teachers, ador'd G. Fox with Divine Attributes. This Witness is true. 6. That their People bowed down on their Knees to G. Fox for Absolution; [in particular, John Fretwell, Christopher Gilborn, James Naylor, which was Idolatry.] This Witness is true. 7. That G. Fox's Luciferian Pride was manifest, when he gave out a Paper, That his Marriage with Margaret Fell, Widow, was a Figure of the Marriage between Christ and his Church, and that his said Mar∣riage was above the State of Adam in his Innocency, in the State of the second Adam that never fell. This Witness is true. 8. That great Pains had been taken by Sam. Newton and John Bolton, to bring to light the unheard-of Pra∣ctices, and Beastly Wantonness, and filthy Unclean∣ness of their Teachers. This Witness is true. 9. That John Bolton had a Confession in writing of one or two of the Females concerned in their De∣bauched Actions; shewing also that many eminent ones in their Ministry resorted to them daily, giving them these Appellations, Innocent Lasses, and Daughters of Sion. This Witness is true. 10. That the Quakers represent such as discover these their Abominations, Envious, Malicious, Distra∣cted, Bad, Dirty and Factious Spirits, who are gone from Truth, &c. This Witness is true. Therefore saith St. Paul, rebuke them Sharply, Severely, or Cuttingly; who, notwithstanding their high Pretences to Meekness, Charity, Self-Denial, Temperance, and other Graces of the Spirit, yet are found to be Liars, evil Beasts, Slow Bellies, great Forgers, gross Hypocrites, and proud Blasphemers. Read over the 20 Instances, and R. Saudiland's Letter of Retractation; together with what else you find in this and my other Books; for to them I refer for further Demonstrations of the Deceitfulness of these vain Pretenders, and high Boasters.
If they tell you this Book of W. Mucklow's is answer'd, and again complain that I take no Notice thereof, as Jos. Wyeth does of the Author of The Snake in the Grass, &c. in his Anguis Flagillatus, &c. to them I thus reply, that their pretended Answers are in Rea∣lity no Answers, otherwise than mock Answers to abuse the World, and to blind their Proselytes, and to paint over the Poyson of their foul Opinions; and this is easie to discern by any that will be at the Pains to read what is wrote on both sides; and by considering their way and manner of answering Books. See G. W.'s Truth and Innocency vindicated, &c. in these three Instances, viz. I. Their Way of Transposing. II. Their Way of Adding Words. III. Their leaving Out Words. Of their Transposing Words. First, As to Transposing, G. Fox having taught in his Great Mystery, &c. saying, p. 213. You cannot know Scripture, but by the same Degree of the Spirit that the Prophets and Apostles had, &c. this was objected a∣gainst the Quakers; as Pride in them that so thought, and false Doctrine in them that so teach; see A Brief Discovery, &c. p. 8. to which G. Whitehead reply'd in his Truth and Innocency, &c. p. 19. These Words, says he, should be Transposed, it should run thus: Thou canst not know Scripture but by a Degree of the same Spirit the Prophets and Apostles had. Now by thus Transpo∣sing Words we may read Acts 12.2. That James slew Herod with the Sword; and so overthrow the Divine Au∣thority of the Holy Scriptures, whether Doctrinal or Historical. Now whether G. W.'s Method of Transpo∣sing the Words of their Prophets, was not to cover and palliate their Errors, let the wise in Heart judge. Their Way of Adding Words. Secondly, Again, their Way of Adding Words. A Brief Discovery, &c. p. 26. the Clergy having ob∣jected to the Quakers, a Blasphemous Position out of Burrough's Works, p. 273. viz. The Sufferings (says Burroughs) of the People of God (i. e. Quakers) in this
Age, is a Greater Suffering, and more Unjust, than in the Days of Christ, his Apostles, (and Martyrs) or any time since — What was done to Christ or his Apostles was Chiefly done by a Law, and in Great Part by the Due Execution of a Law, &c. To this G. White∣head, the Quakers Soderer, replies; see his Truth and Innocency, &c. p. 44. not once mentioning the Page in the said Brief Discovery, on purpose (no doubt) to lead his Reader from the Sight and Scent of their Blasphemy; and that which confirms me therein is, that he dropt the latter part of the Quotation, viz. What was done to Christ or his Apostles, was Chiefly done by a Law, and in Great part by the Due Execution of a Law. No, this was so apparently Blasphemous, that as hardy as he (G. W.) is, he was ashamed to re∣cite it; but whilst he blames others for splitting Sen∣tences, Mangling and Curtailing, he is a profound Practitioner of it; but in p. 46. ibid. being loth to let it pass wholly unspoken to, he there says, Instead of [Due Execution] it should rather have been said [by a Regular and Judicial Procedure.] But how far this mends the Matter, let all true Christians judge; viz. whether the Proceedings of the Jews against our Saviour when they Scourg'd him, Spit upon him, Platted a Crown of Thorns upon his Head, Smote him with the Palms of their Hands; when Herod and his Men of War set him at nought, and mocked him, and the like Indignities, which were not then, nor now, done to the greatest Ma∣lefactors: I say, was this A Regular and Judicial Pro∣cedure against our Blessed Saviour, as G. Whitehead, (he being expert in Law Terms) grants it to be in fa∣vour of his Brother Burroughs? Again, George, one Question more; were the Jews Nailing his Innocent Hands and Feet (in whose Mouth never was Guile, nor sinful Thought in his Breast) to the Cross, and the Soldiers piercing his Side with a Spear, so that his Precious BloodWhich the Qua∣kers say is no better than the Blood of a∣nother Saint. streamed out at five Places; I say, was this A Regular or Judicial Procedure? An∣swer in your next. Again, A Regular and Judicial Procedure, supposeth a Transgression of some Law: And Burrough says expresly, that he not only suffered
by a Law, but in a great part by the Due Execution of a Law, as above. Again, and George, since you grant that all the Indignities, and cruel Sufferings our Saviour underwent, (for the Salvation of Man∣kind) was by A Regular or Judicial Procedure, which presupposeth a Law, and that Law transgressed; therefore be plain for once, and tell us what Law it was by which he was (for the Transgression there∣of) Regularly and Judicially proceeded against; and con∣sequently therefore Condemned, Crucified, and Slain by the Jews; if you cannot do this, then condemn both your Truth and Innocency as Blasphemy. Of their Leaving out Words. Thirdly, G. Fox having taught in his Book, Saul's Errand to Damascus, &c. p. 8. saying, HE that Hath the same Spirit that raised Jesus Christ, is Equal with God; this being urged against the Quakers as Blas∣phemy by the Norfolk Clergy in their Book aforesaid, i. e. A Brief Discovery, &c. p. 6. the Quakers Pain∣ter, G. Whitehead, says, in his Truth and Innocency, &c. p. 9. We (says George) deny the Words as there printed, (tho' not until near 40 Years after printed) there∣fore the Words [He that hath] should be left out. Now, George, may not the London Jews by the same Art, and with as much Truth and Innocency, de∣fend their deceased Brethren the Jews in their Blas∣phemy against Jesus Christ, in the Days of his Flesh, who said, John 8.48. Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a Devil? But then, by G. W.'s Rule of Arguing, the London Jews may now say, The Words [and hast a Devil] should be left out; they only meant, that he was the compassionate Samaritan, mentioned Luke 10.33. Would this do, George? No sure, theirs was plain Blasphemy, and Fox's is as plain Blasphemy, who said he was equal to God, as aforesaid. Thus, Reader, have I shewed thee the Quakers way of answering Books, viz. First, by Transposing Words; by which, if allowed, I have proved, that James slew Herod. Secondly, That by their Adding Words they likewise may excuse any Blasphemy,
as Whitehead here doth his Brother Burroughs, who said, first, that the Quakers Sufferings are greater than Christ's, and all his Apostles and Martyrs under the Heathen Emperors, and Bloody Massacres to this Day. Secondly, That the Sufferings of the Qua∣kers are more unjust than all the forementioned. Thirdly, That what was done to Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs, was chiefly done by a Law. Fourthly, and in great part by the Due Execution of a Law: But says Whitehead, It should rather have been said [by a Regular or Judicial Procedure;] and truly this is so far from clearing Edw. Burroughs and his Brethren (for they are all of one Mind, being lead into these Blasphemies by their Darkness within, which they call Light) that it rather confirms what he Blasphe∣mously said, than otherwise: And no great Mar∣vel, for the Quakers in Print deny that Person which suffered upon the Cross to be properly the Son of GodSee W. Penn's Se∣rious Apol. p. 146. For a Confuta∣tion of Penn's Do∣ctrine, read John 14.28. yea, the whole Chapter.; and the Jews being of the same Faith, they said, as in John 19.7. We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God. Thus do both Jews and Quakers agree in their Fundamentals, the Quakers deny him properly to be the Son of God, and the Jews put him to Death, because he said he was the Son of God; and both Jews and Quakers herein resist the Testimony of God himself, the Glorious Angels, the Holy Apo∣stles, and Army of Martyrs; yea, all Christian Churches to this Day; and because my self and o∣thers urge that they may be examined touching these their Blasphemous Books, therefore they cry out Per∣secution, Persecution, Fr. Bugg would raise the Monster of Persecution; with this they make a Noise, and raise a Dust, but fear no such thing; they only fear being examined about their Blasphemous Books, and obliged by Authority to Retract them, and then down goes their beloved Darling Infallibility. And what remains now, but to follow the Pious Example of good KingAgainst the Blasphe∣my of Se∣nacherib, King of Syria. Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 19.14. And Hezekiah received the Letter of the Hand of the Messen∣gers, and read it; and Hezekiah went into the House of the Lord, and spread it before the Lord, and prayed, &c.
And therefore that God may give a Blessing to our Labour; and for his Name Sake Rebuke this Spirit of Blasphemy, which have entered this our Island; and if it be his Holy Will, to convince the Gainsay∣ers of his Sacred Word and Ordinances. For as St. Paul Teacheth, 1 Cor. 9.10. He that ploweth plows in Hope, and he that thresheth in Hope, shall be partaker of his Hope, especially if he faint not; and though to Plow, and Thresh, and Beat Clods, be hard Work; yet 'tis a necessary Work to Prepare the Field. For the Seedsmen who are ordained thereunto, not that the Plowmen or the Sowers have wherewith to Glory; for Paul may plant, and Apolo water, but it is God alone that giveth the increase: And to him (not unto us) belong the Glory. And tho' it has been my work to Plow and Break the Clods, which is hard Labour; and to thresh the Mountains, that the Fields may be prepared, and fitted for the Ma∣ster's use; yet I can say, according to the discre∣tion God has given me, I have not desired to break the Bruised Reed, nor to quench the Smoaking Flax, by being harsh to the weak, or severe to the ten∣der; but have cut down the Lofty Weeds, and hew∣ed down the Tall Ceders, who stood in opposition to the way and work of God, which he is bringing to pass in the Earth: And therefore I shall conclude in the Prayers of our Church, beseeching God of his Great Mercy to give his Blessing to my weak En∣deavours; And say, We Sinners do beseech to thee to hear us, (O Lord) and that it may please thee to Rule and Govern thy Holy Church Universal in the Right Way. That it may please thee to keep and strengthen, in the true Worshiping of thee, in Righteousness and Holiness of Life thy Servant William our most Gracious King and Go-,vernuor. That it may please thee to Rule his Heart in thy Faith, Fear and Love; and that he may evermore have Affiance in thee, and ever seek thy Honour and Glory. That it may please thee to be his Defender and Keeper, giving him the Victory over all his Enemies.
That it may please thee to Illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of thy Church, with true Knowledge and Understanding of thy Word; and that by their Preaching and Living they may set it forth and shew it accordingly. That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility, with Grace, Wisdom, and Under∣standing. That it may please thee to Bless and Keep the Magi∣strates, giving them Grace to execute Justice, and to main∣tain Truth. That it may please thee to give to all thy People Increase of Grace, to hear meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure Affection, and to bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit. That it may please thee to bring into the way of Truth, all such as have Erred and are Deceived. That it may please thee to Strengthen such as do stand, and to Comfort and Help the weak Hearted, and Raise up them that Fall, and finally, to beat down Satan under our Feet. That it may please thee to Defend and Provide for the Fatherless Children and Widows, and all that be Desolate and oppressed. That it may please thee to forgive our Enemies, Perse∣cutors and Slanderers, and to turn their Hearts. That it may please thee to give us [and all Men] true Repentance; to forgive us all our Sins, Negligences and Ignorances, and to endue us with the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, to amend our Lives according to thy Holy Word. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without End. Amen. ERRATA. PArt 1. Page 1. line 13. for of God, read for God, p. 8. l. 1. f. derided, r. divided. p. 21. l. 14. r. doth blind. p. 32. l. 12. f. 45. r. 35. p. II. p. 12. l. 16. f. third, r. second part. p. III. p. 13. l. 32. f. unwilling r. willing. p. 26. l. 12. on this del. p. 15. l. 7. f. K. C. II. r. K. C. I. in Cutting off his Head; for that (say they) was a remarkable Record of the Righteous Judgment of God.See their Book, West Answer∣ing to North, p. 97.
George Whitehead TURN'D TOPSIE-TURVY. PART I. I Find in a Book wrote by W. Penn, in∣tituled, A Key, &c. [and presented to the Parliament, 1699. to obviate the Objections against the Quakers in seve∣ral Books then presented to both Houses of Parliament by the Norfolk Clergy.] this Passage to the Reader in his Epistle, i. e. It is very Unfair, as well as Indiscreet, in any, to Oppose and Calumniate what they do not Understand. It has been (says he) our Unhappiness, far more than all our Adver∣saries have been able to say against us, that hitherto we remain Unknown by those who yet stick not to condemn us, &c.
This indeed, if true, might Apologize for them; but it is so far from that, that were their Principles, and the Danger of them, fully known, it would operate more against them, that all their Adversaries (as they account them) have yet said against them, for want of knowing them so fully, as by their Fruits in time possibly may be mani∣fest: But whose Fault is it that they are no better known? Is it not their own? By their two-fac'd Practice, and double Mean∣ings in all they say or write, their Books be∣ing of two sorts, contrary each to other, sui∣table to their Titles and Directions, one sort to the World's People; whether to the Par∣liament, Bishops, Judges, Justices, Priests, and Professors, in many of which they'll pretend to own the Scriptures, yea, and a Scripture-Trinity too, tolerably well; but their other sort of Books to their Disciples, directed with these and the like Titles, viz. This is only to go amongst Friends. Again, This is only to go among Friends, and not otherwise. Again, Written only for Friends that can read it. In which they tell you, the Scriptures are Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, a Rotten Foundation, a Dead Letter, the Husk, &c. and that such as tell People that the Scriptures are the written Word of God, are no Ministers of Christ; that the Scriptures are not a Means to bring People to the Knowledge of God, and to work Faith in them; and that the
Trinity of Persons is for the Lake, and the Pit: But notwithstanding all this, and ten times more that I could recite, First, Of their acknowledging to the World's People, as above, the Excellency of the Holy Scri∣pture, and that it's of Divine Authority, and the best Book extant in the World, in direct Opposition to their Doctrine they teach to their poor deluded and willingly ignorant Disciples; yet they frequently call their own Books The Word of God, as in many Instan∣ces I could shew: Nay, I have one Book of theirs by me, wrote by Christopher Tayler, one of their ancient and approved Teachers, bearing this Title, Certain Papers, which is the Word of the Lord; and in p. 2, 3, 16. of that Book it's said, To you all this is the Eternal Word of God: Nay, further, Geo. Whitehead preferrs them to be of greater Au∣thority than the Bible. Thus do they, to their Disciples, contemn, villifie, and set at nought the Sacred Word of God, whilst they extol their own Pamphlets, as The Word of the Lord; yea, The Eternal Word of God; and as such, of greater Authority than the Holy Scriptures: How then is it possible for such as are not Conversant with their Books to know them? Indeed, to understand Quakerism rightly, is the Business of an Age, I have had more than Forty Years Experience of them, and yet I do not know the Depth of their De∣ceit and Hypocrisie; I mean, of their Lea∣ders;
for amongst their Hearers I do believe there are many honest (tho' miserably de∣luded) amongst them; I my self in my young Years was carry'd away with their Dissimulation, and a great Zeal I had, tho' I must confess it was without true Scripture Knowledge: But some Years before I left them, I saw them both to walk and act con∣trary to their Pretensions, (a large Account thereof I have given in my Pilgrim's Pro∣gress) insomuch, that I wrote four Books against their Hypocrisies whilst with them, in hopes of a Reformation amongst them; but still, the more I came to examine into their Principles, and to observe their Practices, the more cause I found to leave them, and to this Day I have kept on Ripping and Stripping this well-favoured Harlot, who calls her self the only true Church of Christ, and that out of her there is no Salvation; as in Josiah Coole's Book, The Whore unvailed, &c. p. 12, 16, 18, 28, 31, 41, 50. where also she asserts their Infalli∣bility; and that there's no Tares in their Church; that their Light is Judge of all Controversies, all Power in Heaven and Earth being committed to it, and Miracles thereby wrought: And that she agree with the Papists, that our Bible is a brazen-fac'd Book, an unjust, corrupt and perverse Bible, else she would not have printed it after them, without a Word of Reproof; and the more I came to study this Point, the more cause I found to discover, and lay bare her
Nakedness to the view of the Nations; and my Labour has not been in vain, but have prospered, notwithstanding G. W.'s Inchan∣ting Demureness, and hardy Boldness, to de∣fend himself and Brethren from my several and repeated Charges of divers Kinds, tho', like the Magicians of old, Exod. 8.7. he has done much Hurt: But this Book of his I am now Reprinting will be like ver. 18. I know and am perswaded there is a Finger of God's Divine Providence that has attended those who have denied themselves, and have faithfully managed this Controversie of God's Glory, and the Good of Souls, and are con∣tent to become as the Off-scouring of all things for his Name sake. But why do they still complain they are not known? I do think if they look into my Books they may see themselves as in a Glass, and so may others, especially in New Rome Unmask'd, &c. New Rome Arraign'd, &c. The Picture of Quakerism drawn to the Life, &c. my Pilgrim's Progress, &c. and Quakerism Exposed; I say, these especial∣ly, tho' I think there's none that I have writ but give some Discovery, mote or less; but if all these be wanting, read The Snake in the Grass, and the Defence of it, and then I cannot think any thing is lacking to make the Quakers Known, and Understood: But if after all G. W. can with his Juggles and Paint blind the Eyes of some that are dim-sighted, let them look well into his own
Book, i. e. Ishmael and his Mother cast out, &c. which I herewith Reprint, [that so he may not say I leave out the foregoing or subsequent Words, his old and usual Policy to blind his ignorant Followers,] and I am perswaded they may see and know Quake∣rism to be the most horrible Heresie that ever the World knew. Indeed when the Norfolk Clergy presented their Books to the Parliament, of the vile Heresies, Seditions, and Blasphemous Princi∣ples of the Quakers, I thought it almost impossible for the Quakers to withstand the Force of the Quotations taken out of their Books; but rather that they would have blushed, repented, and have begg'd of God and the Nation Forgiveness, for the Hurt they have done to Christianity, and Scandal they have brought upon the Protestant Reli∣ligion, both at home and abroad; but behold, G. W. like the Inchanters of old, Exod. 8. with his cunning Craft, whereby he lies in wait to deceive, (as St. Peter well describes such;) as if he had eaten Shame, and drank after it, [whose Face is like Brass, and his Forehead like Case-hardned Steel] he ventures to defend, vindicate, or excuse every Error, every Blasphemy, every Seditious and Trea∣sonable Principle objected against them, the like of which was never broached before in England. And why not? For by the Me∣thod he has taken (if allowed) he may do it: Nay, this I dare undertake, allowing me
his Method, to vindicate or excuse all the Blasphemous Heresies and Treasons that ever was wrote since the Days of William the Conqueror; and thereupon it came into my Heart to Reprint one of his Books herewith, viz. Ishmael and his Mother cast out, &c. Verba∣tim, except the Postscript, to which no Hand is set, to avoid his future Cavils; and possi∣bly hereafter may Reprint his Truth defend∣ing the Quakers, &c. and Truths Defence, if I see Cause: And tho' I shall not answer every Particular in his Truth and Innocency vindicated, yet I shall give some brief Hints of his Method, in defending the Quakers and himself from the Quotations taken out of their Books by the Norfolk Clergy, which I am sure they did with great Care and Fidelity, and that to my Knowledge, viz. P. 6. These Words [whom John said he was not] we disown in that place—his In∣tention ought to be considered. P. 9. We deny the Words as there printed, [He that hath] should be lest out. P. 11. We know they intended. P. 19. The Words should be transposed. P. 25. They wanting due Points, —there wanted this Parenthesis. P. 29. He means Spiritually, and not Literally. P. 30. He meant Earthly Persecuting Kings. P. 45. His Words should run thus. P. 46. It should rather have been. P. 52. Here I take him to mean. P. 63. Not warrantable Expressions. P. 55. He means—I know his Intent was not. P. 59. He means not
derided. P. 61. Was never so intended. P. 62. The Words should be transposed. P. 67. It was directly intended, &c. I say, give me but this Allowance, and I dare en∣gage to defend and excuse all the Treasona∣ble Words, Blasphemous Expressions, and Heretical Principles that ever was wrote by Pen; yet this is the Method that G. W. has taken, to excuse all the Blasphemies and Se∣ditious Principles quoted by the Norfolk Clergy, out of the Quakers Books, instead of condemning them to the Flames, as he ought to have done, had he had the tenth part of that Sincerity he oft pretends to: Nay, moreover when some of the Quotations were so apparently Seditious, as that they struck at the very Constitution of our En∣glish Government, viz. That a Parliament chosen by most Voices could not act for God, nor the Good of his People, and wrote by a Prophet too, enough to raise the Mob; in∣somuch, as Whitehead did not dare to recite the said Quotation, yet had he the Impudence to justifie his Brother Fox, p. 33. viz. Cer∣tainly he (Fox) had an honest intent in what he writ on this Subject: Yet nevertheless in the same Page, and p. 64. his Heart so smote him, that he cried out, I would not (says Whitehead) be understood in any wise to op∣pose the Peoples just Rights of Elections; not understood! No, I believe it; that is, tho' he owns Fox's Seditious Doctrine, tho' he defends and justifies it, saying, Certainly he
had an honest Intent in what he writ on this Subject, yet he would not be understood so. The English of which is this, that tho' both Fox himself, and the rest of their leading Gang, own this Doctrine as their Ancient Testimony, from which (as themselves say) they have not deviated in any one Point, on∣ly for some Politick Reasons he would not be So Understood; that is, he would not be understood to be what he really is; else why should he justifie that in his Brother Fox which he disowns in himself? Indeed he makes an Apology for Fox, that they were wrote occasionally in the Commonwealths Day; what then? I grant they were first wrote in 1659. but then they were Reprin∣ted by the Quakers as one of their Ancient Testimonies Seven Years after, viz. 1665. and has gone among the Friends ever since, as the Word of the Lord, wrote by a Prophet of the most high, namely, Geo. Fox, Jun. But George, if it was so certainly honestly writ, why didst thou not recite it, that o∣thers might have been Judges of it? Well, but since thou hast not, I shall; viz. A Brief Discovery of some of the Blasphemous and Seditious Principles and Practices of the Quakers, &c. p. 17. Geo. Fox, Jun. in his Works, Reprinted 1665. p. 87, 88. intitles his Epistles, A few plain Words to be consi∣dered by those of the Army, or others, that would have a Parliament chosen by the Voices of the People, &c. wherein is shewed unto
them according to the Scriptures of Truth, that a Parliament so chosen are not like to govern for God, or the Good of his People. Consider these things (saith he) which I de∣clare unto you; which in waiting upon the Lord, he by his Spirit of Wisdom and Un∣derstanding opened in me concerning the chu∣sing of Parliaments by the Voices of the Peo∣ple. And p. 89. he says, You are not like to see your Desires fulfilled by a Parliament chosen by the Voices of the People;—Now if you believe these Scriptures, John 15.19. Matth. 7.13. Rom. 9.27. Then may you see, that a Parliament that is chosen by most Voices, are not like to act for God and the Good of his People, And p. 91. And like∣wise the chusing of Parliament Men accor∣ding to the Custom of England, which is called its Birthright, stands in respect of Person, and not in Equality; for the Rich; Covetous, Oppressing Men, who oppress the Poor, they have the only Power to chuse Law-makers, and they will chuse, to be sure, such as will uphold them in their Oppressi∣on. And p. 92, 93. And we see the People have been in great Blindness, in contending for Parliaments so chosen. P. 149. Again, It is God's proper Right to give Laws unto Man:—Now in this Particular also Man have set himself in the Seat of God, and so have dishonoured the one Lawgiver, by set∣ting up many Lawgivers. P. 150. Now mark and consider these things, seeing that the Righteous are fewer in number than the
Unrighteous; and that the Lawmakers are chosen by the most Voices, and that of the Richest People outwardly, how are the Righte∣ous like to be preserved in outward Free∣dom by the Laws that are so made? P. 159. And I must deal plainly with you (saith he) in the Sight of God, who hath made Me a Prophet to This Nation. Well, George, I have recited it, and do averr it was fairly quoted out of your Pro∣phet Fox's Works, Reprinted by your Ap∣probation, 1665. and it is not length of Time, or change of Governments, that can abate the Force of a Prophecy of a divinely inspired Prophet: No, George, if God Al∣mighty did inspire this your Prophet, and reveal to him from Heaven, his Holy Habita∣tion, That a Parliament chosen by most Voices could not, or were never like, to Act or Govern for God or his People; then 'tis of Force, and you ought to stand by it in the Face of all Unbelievers; but on the contrary, if you do now see that Fox was an Impostor, (as I conceive that to be your Case) and that he was never so moved of God, but instigated by a deluding Spirit: then no marvel you dare not recite it, but, as in p. 69. make this guilty Excuse, viz. We are only defensive, and not under a necessity of reciting the Clergies whole Quotations: But whether only defensive, we shall consi∣der by and by. But, George, if this Excuse of yours was your Prudence, lest such as you
present your Books to should see your old Seditious Principles; and which is still worse, that you should have the Face to Reprint and Defend them; then, George, I would willingly know where your Honesty and Sincerity is you so often boast of. But enough of this, I shall proceed to another of your Juggles, as bad as this, in p. 29. viz. As to what these Men (i. e. the Nor∣folk Clergy) quote against us, p. 16. to prove us Antimonarchial, they are very broken in their Quotations with their many sensless Dashes, like the Snake in the Grass, Second Edition, p. 220. But varying in the Citation of the same Passage, these Men (i. e. the Clergy) have the Words, [Are not all these Elders, that doat so much of an Earthly King?] But the Snake, has it, [Are not all these Christians, that will doat so much, &c.] An excellent Critick: Here George is at his old Work, even splitting a Hair, if possible, and all to amuse his Reader, and to put a Vail, if possible, over the Quakers most ma∣nifest Antimonarchial and Treasonable Prin∣ciples, especially since of late in their Yearly Meeting, and other their late Prints, they have reasserted all these their Ancient Seditious Prin∣ples, and tell us they are the same still, and not changed, as in the Postscript to their Ishmael herewith Reprinted I shall shew; which, if so, they do indeed, as to themselves, make void the Act of Indemnity, which otherwise would have blotted out these their old Sins:
But since they say their Principles are now no otherwise than they were in the beginning, I think it is highly reasonable that they should be examined thereabout: And this I think ought to be the Desire of every true English Freeholder. But come, George, as to the varying of these Men, one said, Are not all these Elders, &c. the other, Are not all these Christians, &c. What harm is in all this, especially since the Words of your Fox, in his Book, stiled, Several Papers given forth, &c. to the Pres∣byterians, 1659. are, And are not all these Elders, Christians, that will doat so much of an Earthly King, Traytors against Christ? Now what if the Clergy took only the Word Elders, and the Author of the Snake in the Grass took the Word Christians, since one is enough to shew your Meaning; tho' Fox (as his manner usually was) put in more than enough, what harm is in all this pray? But if you had looked in p. 80. of my Pilgrim's Progress, &c. there you would have found that I have put it even as Fox did, viz. And are not all these Elders Chri∣stians, that will doat so much of an Earthly King, Traytors against Christ? Oh, George, if I would go thorough this Book of thine, I could shew abundance of these thy Shuffles, and Legerdemain, used on purpose to de∣ceive thy Readers. But now to the Clergy∣men's Quotation, which I say is fairly ta∣ken, and carries the Force and Meaning of
your great Apostle Fox; neither do the Nor∣folk Clergy, nor the Author of the Book, ex∣cellently intituled, The Snake in the Grass, vary one tittle in the Relation of Fox's Do∣ctrine; but if you think it do, I will now add Christian to Elder, and then let the Rea∣der see how it helps your Cause, and whe∣ther one of those Words had not been enough to express your Sense; but a Man near drown∣ing will lay hold of any Twig; and your Infallible Cause being Infallibly sinking, you are forced to make use of such Trifles, in∣stead of reciting their Quotation, and then refuting it, as all fair Controvertists would do: And if not able so to do, then you ought to confess fairly, and acknowledge your Errors, and condemn your Apostle's Seditious Doctrine. Now to the Quotation, A brief Discovery of some of the Blasphemous and Seditious Principles and Practices of the Quakers, p. 16. G. Fox in his Book, Several Papers gi∣ven forth, &c. to Presbyterians, &c. just before the Restoration, writ Anno 1659. and printed the beginning of 1660. he hath these Passages; Friends, To all you that desire an Earthly King in England, &c. whether Pres∣byterians, or others:— Did the Elders of old in the Days of Christ, or the Apostles, cry up any King but Christ, to have any King to rule over them but Christ? And doth not the Priests and Presbyterians cry for an Earthly King, and will have Cesar?—And do they
not in this crucifie Jesus?—Are not all these Elders Christians, that will doat so much of an Earthly King, Traytors against Christ?— Do you read that there were any Kings since the Days of the Apostles, but among the A∣postate Christians—for Christ is King a∣lone—I say, that is the false Church that doth not live—upon the Head of the Kings: — They that be true Elders — never go about to set up an Earthly King over them to Rule — Herod the King was mad at the Child Jesus — there is the Fruit of Earthly Kings — and hath not this been witnessed in England? &c. Ignorant and foolish Peo∣ple, that would have a King; and what Work Joshua made with the Kings; how he brought them out of the Cave, a fit Place for them— and all these Novices Christians, that are crying up Earthly Kings — And we know that these Kings are the Spiritual Egyptians, got up since the Days of the Apostles. Come, smooth George, with all thy Purita∣nical Sincerity, why didst thou not recite this whole Quotation? But it seems thou art not under a necessity to be plain-hearted: What! it seems this is too plain, and too manifest: What! to be absolutely against all Kings, and Kingly Government, and thy Paint not able to cover it? But, George, thou also say'st, p. 69. Let their Books and ours be compared to clear our Innocency from these Adversaries Calumnies. Ah, George, this is
still worse; what! to add Hypocrisie to Trea∣son! Thou knowest, George, in thy Consci∣ence, if thou hast any, or if it be not quite seared, that at West Dereham Conference your Friends had an Opportunity, were pressed to it, but could not be prevailed with; nay, tho' there then were near Twenty of your eminent Teachers, and about an Hun∣dred of your Hearers, yet not one of them could be prevail'd with, either to compare your Books; nay, nor to own them; and vin∣dicate the Doctrine contained in them; how then hast thou now the Impudence to say, Let their Books and ours be compared, as above? Wherefore in your next be plain, whether you have not deviated in any one Point from what you were in the beginning, and whether you resolve to justifie your Friends Ancient Books, as you say you can; see the Postscript to your Ishmael annexed.— I will only trouble my Reader in this Place with one Citation more, and it is about the Trinity, and in this George is as defe∣ctive and short, as in the other, and the rea∣son is as plain; which is, to cover over their Blasphemy against the Blessed Trinity; to manifest which, there are several Charges out of divers Books of the Quakers, in the Book intituled, Some few of the Quakers ma∣ny Horrid Blasphemies, Heresies, and their Bloody Treasonable Principles Destructive to Government, out of which I shall mention but one, to shew as well how short White∣head
is in reciting it (upon his Excuse of being only defensive, and thereby not un∣der a necessity to cite the whole) as above noted; See Some few of the Quakers many Horrid Blasphemous Heresies, &c. p. 1. out of G. Fox's Great Mystery, &c. p. 246. The Scripture do not tell the People of a Trinity, nor Three Persons, but the Common-Prayer-Mass-Book speaks of Three Persons, brought in by the Father the Pope. To this George Whitehead Replies, Truth and Innocency vin∣dicated, &c. p. 50. saying, Their first Obje∣ction, the Scripture do not tell People of a Trinity, nor Three Persons, &c. and so dropt the other part of the Quotation out of Fox, viz. But the Common-Prayer-Mass-Book speaks of Three Persons brought in by the Father the Pope. These he left out, as now not proper to mention, since the Act of To∣leration enforces the Acknowledgment of the Blessed Trinity, as the Condition of their Liberty. But as a Salvo, p. ibid. George Whitehead urges another Book of George Fox's, stiled, Some Principles of the Elect People of God called Quakers, &c. Printed 1671. p. 43. Of the Word Trinitas; there is no mention made in Scripture, yet the Scripture speaks of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and all these are one. I have with some Difficulty procuted this Book in order to trace and to find out George Whitehead in all his Subterfuges, and lurking
Places, and I find him as false, in citing Fox their Apostle, as in the above-noted: For of the 57 Words in Fox's Paragraph, he (G.W.) has cited but 26 Words, which is not the one half, but the reason is, there is no more for his Turn, and his Business is only to serve a Turn, Jesuit-like, as his Friend Anne Docwra well observes; now to the Quotation of Fox, which Whitehead has split, viz. Some Principles of the Elect, &c. p. 43. Of this Word Trinitas there is no mention made in Scripture, yet the Scripture speaks of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of Water, Blood, and Spirit, and all these are one among us, as in the Primitive time among the Apostles, who gave no such outward Names to them as Trinity, as the World now doth, &c. Who then can believe this People, who thus split Sentences, and mangle the Sence? For here is Six Persons in the Quakers God∣head, Father, Son, Holy Ghost, Water, Blood, Spirit; all these are one among the Quakers; so that here is a twofold Trinity, Trinitas & Trinitas, in the Unity of their Essence, where no one is greater or lesser than the other, nor yet one before or after the other; for the Water is Spirit, the Blood is Spirit, and both the Light within, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and all within, and every of these Lights is their Eternal God: And to this agrees George Fox, Jun. in his Works, p. 66. viz. By one that witnesseth God, Christ, the Light, the Word, the Spirit,
the Truth, the Kingdom of God, within me and these are one. Reader, Here is in the Quakers Essence Septem Personas; of which, no one was be∣fore the other, nor none greater or lesser than another, and all within. Again, p. ibid. Stumble not at the Light, for if thou dost, thou stumblest at God, at Christ, at the Door, the VVay, the Truth, the Life, the Rock, the Elect Stone, and all these are but one. Here again is one added; here is Octo Personas in the Unity of their Essence, of which no one was before the other, nor none greater or lesser than the other; for the Stone is Light, the Rock is Light, the Life is Light, the Truth is Light, the VVay is Light, the Door is Light, and God is Light, and all within them: Only measurably, as p. 72. And verily, Friends, if you keep not to the measure of the pure God in you; so that God dwells in them by parts or measure; see p. 55, 83. ibid. The next thing I am to prove is their Light within to be the Eternal God; this done, I think I have proved that they, like Thieves and Robbers, have climb∣ed up another way, distinct from the Holy Apostles, Primitive Christians, Saints, and Martyrs, and all Christian Churches to this Day; in order to which, see p. 46, to 50. ibid. I the Light will fall upon you, and grinde you to Powder. All—who will not own me the Light in you; and—I will make you to know, that I the Light am the true E∣ternal
God, which created all things, and that there is not another beside me can save. I matter not by what Name you are called by; whether it be King, Protector, Prince, Duke, Lord, Judge, Justice, Parliament, Priest, Lawyer, Gathered Churches, Army, Gentry, Mean Men, or Beggars, — I'll break all Sects and Opinions, and Gathered Churches, which are not in me, I'll break you in pieces; — I the Light in you will consume it all, I'll Burn Heaven and Earth; I'll burn within and without; — I the Light will overturn Kingdoms, and Nations, and Rulers of all sorts, and Armies, and gathered Churches, which will not own me the Light in them, to Guide and Lead them — And I will be your Dread, and ye shall be the Dread of Na∣tions — And ye shall Reign over all the World — I will give you Dominion over all your Enemies within and without, and I will make them all bow before you; and even as I am, (i. e. God) so shall ye be also. Reader, from hence we may gather what Harangues they have in their Yearly Meet∣ing, when their Doors are close and secure, where they revive and re-assert their Anci∣ent Testimonies; but their Trumpet gives such an uncertain sound, as none know but themselves how to prepare to the Battel; you hear now that their Light within is God, the Eternal God by whom all things were made and created, and besides their Light within, there is no God that can save; and
yet sometimes they Speak to their Light, and Teach their Light, even their Eternal God. For this see their Book, The Vials of the Wrath of God, &c. by G. Fox, Printed 1655, p. 6. Therefore to the Light in your Consciences do I speak, &c. Sometimes their Light is Honest; that is, they have an Honest God. For this, see their Book, The Trum∣pet of the Lord Blown, &c. by James Par∣nel, p. 2. To the Light in all your Conscien∣ces I speak, which is Honest of God. Some∣times their God is Blind, or Dim-sighted; for this, see G. Fox's News coming up out of the North, &c. The God of the World blind your Eye, which is the Light. Thus have the Quakers, like the Gi∣beonites, deceived many Thousands. But hark, George, I have not yet done with your Guilty Excuse. In your Innocency and Truth Vindicated, &c. p. 69. viz. We (says George) are only Defensive, &c. How George? What only Defensive? That I do deny, and shall now make it appear, That from first to last you have been the Aggres∣sors; altho' at present you are so close At∣tackt that you begin to call for a Cessation of Arms. But, George, we are now for Re∣paration, or else no Quarter. It is not your Excuse, That the Clergy in Oliver's time were no Ministers of Christ, nor your Flat∣tering the Episcopal Clergy, will now do, unless you condemn your Erroneous Books. See J. Feild's Defence, &c. If Francis Bugg
accounts those Ministers of Christ, that turned, and kept the Bishops out of their Bishopricks; how can he have the Face (says Feild) to own himself a Member of the Church of England? In this J. Field thinks he hits the Mark, but with a Reverse; for, John, I do believe that in Oliver's time there was a Christian Ministry of Learned Clergy-men: And one Reason among others which make me so believe, is, because they wrote many sound Orthodox Books against Quakerism; and the Quakers, as they began, so they kept on against them: And that you are still as great Enemies to the present Clergy, as you were against them, I shall shew anon. But I have not yet done with your Brother Whitehead; who with a mealy Modesty sim∣pers it out, That you Quakers are now only Defensive; you are for an Amicable and Friendly Conversation, and no Lovers of Contention: Oh meek Saints! But hark, George, did not the Quakers first Challenge the Norffolk Clergy? I say, yea; and shall prove it from the Words of your Letter: viz. If you think you have Matter to charge us (Quakers) withal, let us have your Charge under your own Hands, and appoint Time and Place convenient; and we or some others of us will meet you as publickly as you please, — Any of you all, — Of your Cloth, — And stand a Publick Tryal, &c. By which 'tis self-evident that the Qua∣kers Challenged the Clergy, and if I mistake not, very boldly too; considering the many
gross Errors, and horrid Blasphemies you stand charged with, and convicted of, out of your most Authentick Writers. And for you, yea, I say, for such a Tribe of Self-Condemned Schismaticks, to prick up your Ears, and to Challenge the most Learned Clergy the World have, and who are Mini∣sters of the most Reformed Religion, and of an Established Church by Law, I think this was bold with a witness. But come, George, let us go back to your Beginning, and take our Measures from thence; for you would not have us take you for Changlings: You know Quakerism is the same, and the Principles of it; even what it always was, and will be to the End of the Chapter. For one single Instance of which, I could give many. See your Pro∣phet Burroughs's Epistle, prefixed to George Fox's Great Mystery, &c. viz. Then being prepared of the Lord, and having received Power from on high, we went forth, as commanded of the Lord,— And the dread of the Lord went before us and behind us; and first of all our Mouths were opened, and our Spirits filled wih In∣dignation against the Priests and Teachers; and with them, and against them. First we began to War; as being the Causers of the People to err; and the Blind Leaders, that carried the Blind into the Ditch: And against them as the Fountain of all Wickedness, abounding in the Nations, and as being the
Issue of Prophaneness, — Shewing unto all them, and to all their People, that they were not Lawful Ministers of Christ, sent of him, but were Deceivers and Antichrists, and such whom the Lord never sent. And we spared not publickly, and at all Seasons, to utter forth the Judgments of the Lord against them, and their Ways, and their Churches, and Worships. — And this was our first Work which we entred upon, to Thresh down the Deceivers, and lay them open; that all People might come to see their Shame, and turn from them, &c. Thus then it plainly appears that the Quakers began this Contest, and have car∣ried it on in the same domineering and insult∣ing manner, until of late: And nothing makes you pull in your Horns, but the Dis∣covery of your Bloody, Treasonable, Sedi∣tious and Blasphemous Principles and Pra∣ctices. And as a Third Instance that you are as Implacable Enemies to the present Establisht Church, Ministry, Scriptures and Ordinances, as you were in your dear Friend Oliver Cromwell's Time, (as your Apostle Fox Saluted him) I shall cite some few of the Reasons you give, why you deny the Na∣tional Ministry, even in 1671, as more at large you may see in your Book wrote by George Fox, intituled, Some Principles of the Elect People of God called Quakers, Printed 1671, p. 5. viz.
Grounds and Reasons why we deny the Worlds Teachers. I. THEY (i. e. the Publick Ministry) are such Teachers, as have told us the Letter was the Word, when the Letter says God was the Word; therefore we deny them, John 1.1. Query. Where do the Scriptures say, that God the Father, the First Person in the Tri∣nity, is the Word? No; Christ, the Second Person, is the Word; proved by that Scrip∣ture above quoted, and perverted by them. Whitehead in Ishmael, p. 9. II. They are such Teachers as tell Peo∣ple of a Sacrament, for which there is not one Scripture; and so feed the People with their own Inventions; and therefore we deny them. III. They are such Teachers as have told us the Letter was the Light, whenas the Letter saith, Christ is the Light; there∣fore we deny them, John 1, &c. Query. Where is the Man? What is his Name? What Book is it in? That the Pub∣lick Ministers ever said, that the Letter (as they contemptuously call the Holy Scrip∣tures) was the Light mentioned John 1. or the Essential Word of God; only the Writ∣ten Word of God, spoke forth by Men Divinely Inspired; and as such, are a Light, or give us Light; and are a Means to under∣stand
the Mind and Will of God, through the Influences of his Holy Spirit assisting therein? No; this I take to be a false Ac∣cusation, like that of Joseph Wyeth's Anguis Flagellatus, p. 158. i. e. Upon Examina∣tion of Christopher Wade's Words, they seem to imply, as if he had affirmed of the Scriptures, that they were the Eternal and Indwelling Word of God, &c. This is a Lie told in Hypocrisie; for I have read the Page through, and there is no such Saying, or any thing like it. And thus do they be∣lie their Adversaries, both by false Citations, and Charges. Wherefore as the Protestants says touching the Jesuits, so may the Pro∣testants conclude by the Quakers; both in reciting their Opponents, their reciting their Friends, and their Sham-Creeds and Protestations, in their late Books presented to the Parliament, the Judges, Justices, &c. viz. Distrust them in all they say. A Speci∣men of all which you have in this small Trea∣tise. But to go on. IV. They are such Teachers as tell Peo∣ple, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, is the Gospel; (therefore we deny them.) V. They are Babylon's Merchants, that make a Trade of the Scriptures; —there-we deny them. VI. They are such Teachers, as take a Text out of the Saints Conditions; (i. e. out of the Scriptures,) therefore we deny them.
These are some of the chief Reasons why the Quakers deny the Publick Ministers; and not only so, and there leave it; no; but in Magisterial, Insulting, Domineering manner, counsel and command the People, contrary to all the Laws made and established, to go no more to Church: The like of which I do believe never was done by a dis∣senting People (who enjoy their Liberty by Indulgence) since the World began; which after I have recited Fox's Motion from God, as he audaciously pretends, I shall recite this Counsel against the Esta∣bished Church; and next, his Authority from The Word of God, as he audaciously pretends, as in p. 15, 54. viz. Moved of the Lord, written from the Spirit of the Lord, for the Cleansing of the Land of all False Teachers, Seducers, and Deceivers, and Witches, who beguile the People; and Inchanters, and Diviners, and Sorcerers, and Hirelings, &c. All People that read these things, never come ye more at the Steeple-House, nor Pay your Priests more Tythes till they have Answered them; for if ye do, ye uphold them in their Sins, and must partake of their Plagues, —This is the Word of the Lord God to you all, G. F. Reader, their First and Great Command∣ment is, Pay your Priest no more Tythes; and their Second is like unto it, Never go more to the Steeple-House; and upon these
Two Commandments hangs their Law and their Prophets; and by this you may know that his Disciples love him, in that they keep his Commandments. And the Reasons he gives to enforce Obedience to their Command∣ments are, because the Priests tell them that the Holy Scriptures are the written Word of God; because they tell us of a Sacrament; because they tell People, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is the Gospel; because they take a Text out of the Scripture, and Expound it to the People: And for these and the like Reasons, they call them False Teachers, Seducers, De∣ceivers, Witches, Inchanters, Diviners, Sorce∣rers, and Hirelings: And for their Warrant, This is the Word of the Lord God to you all. Thus do they sit in the Judgment-Seat, even as in O. Cromwell's Time; and for the same Cause, now, as then, they have Condemned not only the Church of England, but Protestant Dissenters too. But, George, as I have turned thee topsy-turvy, so am I now turning thy Inside outward, shew∣ing by thy Ishmael, &c. thy Ancient Testimony and Principle; and thou sayest thou art not changed. See thy Ishmael, to which I have neither added, nor diminished, only the back∣side of the Title-Page, Running Title, Marginal Notes, and Observations from Pag. 11. thy Name being on the Title-Page, the middle, and at the end, Signed and also Sealed with your Common Seal, i. e. Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord in us, G. Whitehead, &c. But let me clear up one Passage in your Truth and Inno∣cency Vindicated, &c. p. 31. As for this Quo∣tation in Ishmael, &c. p. 10, 11. G. Whitehead hath positively disowned the Words, and
affirms they are none of his, and that he writ not that Part of the Answer to Townsend, which was in the YearIt was 1655. 1654. and that he shall nei∣ther stand by nor own these Words. viz. And here thy Antiquity, and the Three Persons, which thou would devide out of one, like a Conjurer, are all denied, and thou shut up with them in perpetual Darkness, for the Lake and the Pit. Now, George, tho' thy Signing and Sealing this Book with thy Hand and Common Seal, as aforesaid, were sufficient to Entitle thee to this Hellish Blasphemy; as if thou hadst Signed and Sealed a Bond of an Hundred Pound, made by a Scribe, would oblige thee to Pay the Debt; tho' thou didst not write the Bond, yet, George, I have a further Demonstration to prove the Book thine, and never heard that until 1690, (an Act being made, which enjoined all that ex∣pected Toleration to own the B. Trinity) that you did disown any part of this Book. But, George, Disowning will not now do, you must Retract and Condemn it; and this to do, will be as bitter a Pill as it was to thee and thy Brethren to own K. W. III. Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms. For I have Mr. Smith's Book, The Quakers Disarmed, &c. and your Book, Truth Defending the Qua∣kers, &c. both Printed 1659. wherein he charges you with this Ishmael, and you both own and defend it. And first, The Qua. Disarm. &c. Mr. Smith. He that writ this Book Ishmael, opens a Door to Damnable Heresies, you writ this Book, G. W. therefore you open a Door to Damnable Heresies. G. W. I deny it, I did not write all, there is something scribled on it. Mr. Smith. True; here are some things writ on the back-side, I'll charge you with nothing
but what is printed: Were you the Author of all that is printed in this Book; your Name is printed at the beginning, middle, and end of it. G. W. About three Years ago, I and Four more writ it betwixt us. Mr. Smith. Pray tell me plainly whether you will own it or not; if you will not own it at all, then tell me what you will own, and what not; otherwise, when I have proved it a most wicked Book, you may disown it, and so all my Discourse fall to the Ground. 'Tis no plea∣sure to me to speak, or this People to hear vain Words. If you will not own it, speak; but you may as well disown to morrow all that you say to day, (telling us Words are but Wind) if you disown what you have Printed and affixt your Name so often unto. G. W. Well, I will own it, prove what you can. Now, George, lest thou should'st say this is an Adversary's Book, (tho' that in this Case would not help Dun out of the Mire,) I shall now come to thy own Book, Truth defending the Qua∣kers, &c.Of Damn∣ing the B. Trinity to the Pit and Lake. said in the Title-Page also, to be writ∣ten from the Spirit of Truth in G. W. &c. P. 1. Question recited out of the foregoing Book, to which this is in Answer. Mr. Smith. Do not you repent G. W. for your endeavouring vainly to Defend, Aug. 29. 1659. in so great a Congregation, these Positions printed in your Book of Ishmael, &c. G. W. The Positions we defended are according to the Scriptures of Truth, and them we need not repent of: As first, in denying the Bible to be the written Word of God: Secondly, in asserting the Scriptures not to be the Word: Thirdly, that there is no such Word in the Scripture, as Three
Persons in the Trinity; but it is a Popish Doctrine, mentioned in the Popish Mass, or Common-Prayer-Book: Fourthly, And thou that affirm Three distinct Persons in the Godhead, art a Dreamer; and he that Dreams, and tell Lies, he with his Imaginations and Dreams, is for the Lake. Truth Defending, &c. Where in the 33d Que∣stion, in The Quaker Disarm'd, &c. thou hast falsly Charged George Whitehead's BookHere he owns the Book, and defends the Do∣ctrine. with proving several Blasphemies in it, which is a wicked Lie and Slander; for thou never yet proved any Blasphemy in it: For that thou countest Blasphemies, was ourMark, Our Wit∣nessing. Witnessing against such Doctrines as thou couldst not prove by Scripture; as that of a Trinity of Three distinct Persons in the Godhead, and that of the Letter being the Word. Truth defending the Quakers and their Princi∣ples, &c. P. 24. G. Whitehead therein reciting the 45th Question of Mr. Smith's, out of his Book The Quaker disarmed, p. 6. for I have them both before me, G. W. thus Recites, and then An∣swers; viz. Do not you, G. Whitehead, blasphe∣mously take to your self an Attribute of God, while you pretend ordinarily to know the Hearts of Men; and tell Mr. Townsend of Norwich in the second Page of your Ishmael, that the Light of God is departed from his Conscience, &c. I think 'tis the fairest Citation that ever I met with, viz. of G. W.'s, now comes his Answer: I (says G. W.) take no Attribute of God to my self, but what God hath given me, &c. — And as for Townsend, I never said that the Light was departed from his Conscience, as thou hast belied me; But that from the Light of God in his Conscience he is departedAnd so are the Words in p. 2. of Ishmael, as you may see: A plain con∣fession, and own∣ing the Book, &c., &c. Truth Defending, &c. P. 25. In thy 46th Que∣stion thou hast (says G. Whitehead) charged me
with Printing Railing Language, with calling Priest Townsend Witch, Lyar, Blind Guide, in p. 3. of Our BookA plain confession, and own∣ing the Book, &c., &c. —But there is not the Word Witch, but that thou would bewitch Peo∣ple with thy Lies, &c. Reader, I cannot inlarge, I now refer you to the Book which Geo. Whitehead owned, when he and his Partners Wrote it, when they Printed it, when they Disputed with Mr. Smith, Aug. 29. 1659. when G. W. Printed his Truth Defending, &c. which is at four or five sundry times, and till 1690, which was 45 Years, ne∣ver disowned it: Yet now he finds Quakerism sinking, would insinuate he did not Write it doth not Own the Words; is sorry his Name is to it; and the like Dissimulation. No, George, you must either Condemn it, as rank Blasphemy, or Defend it; since your Hand Wrote it, Signed and Sealed it, as your Act and Deed. Now therefore, George, my Advice is, That you go forthwith to your Second-Day-Meeting, and together with them, Condemn by Publick Censure under your Hands, this your Blasphe∣mous Book Ishmael, and all other Books of yours, and of your Friends, of the same Nature and Tendency: For as St. Peter once said to Simon Magus, I fear it may be said to your Self, (and Partners.) Read Acts 8.21, 22, 23. Thy Heart is not right in the sight of God; repent there∣fore of this thy Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the Thoughts of thy Heart (and the Words of thy Mouth) may be forgiven thee; for I perceive thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity. FINIS.
ISHMAEL, AND HIS MOTHER Cast out into the WILDERNESS Amongst the wild Beasts of the same Nature. OR, A Reply to a Book entitulled, The Scriptures prov∣ed to be the word of God, put forth by one of Ishmaels Chil∣dren, who calls himself a Minister of the Gospel, and a Pastor of S. Austins and Savours Parish in Norwich; but is clearly made manifest by the light of God in his Servants, to be a scoffer, and an enemy to the Gospel, which the Saints of God are Ministers of, and sufferers for, by such as he is, who Ishamel∣like, hath laid his folly open, and is discovered to the faith∣ful, who are of Abraham, and of the seed of Promise. ALSO, A cleer distinction between the Ministers of Christ, who are of the seed of Abraham, and the Priests of this generation, who are of Ishmaels root; who with the Truth are plainly made manifest, by the light of Christ in us, who for the testimony of God do suffer by the sons of Hagar, and this Generation of the Priests in Norwich: Given forth for no other end, but that the truth may be cleared from such as scoff and deny it. Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord in us that do suffer in the Goal of Norwich for the truths sake, which is persecuted and slan∣dered by the Priests and Rulers of this City: Whose names in the flesh is, Christopher Atkinson, George Whitehead, James Lan∣caster, Thomas Simonds. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle, at the West end of Pauls, 1655.
OBserve, Reader, That tho' the Quakers late Books seem to be more Orthodox than their Ancient Books, said to be given forth (tho' most Blasphemously) from the Spirit of the Lord, yet they are still the same in Principle, tho' they otherwise word the Matter; for Proof of this, see their Book, Primitive Christianity Revived, &c. by Jos. Wyeth, Printed 1698, viz. Our Principles (says he) are now no other than what they were when we were first a People, &c. Next, see G. Whitehead's Counterfeit Convert, &c. p. 72. I may (says he) see Cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet our Intentions be the same, &c. So that it is morally impossi∣ble to understand the Quakers by their Words, whilst they say and write one thing, and mean another, ARIUS like. Therefore David ran and stood upon the Philistine, and took his Sword, and drew it out of the Sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off his Head therewith: And when the Philistines saw their Champion was dead, they fled: And the Men of Israel and of Ju∣dah arose and shouted, and pursued the Phi∣listines, &c. 1 Sam. 17.51, 52.
A bundle of papers,P. 1. 4to. being brought unto our hands by one of the chief Priests of Nor∣wich, which he hath rak't up in his Ima∣ginations, against the harmless people called Quakers, and being full of lyes and deceit, we are moved of the Lord for the truthes sake, to cleare the truth from his lyes and deceit, and false accusations, and to lay him and his two propositions (as he calls them) open unto the simple minded; who have been bewitched and deceived by such deceivers and blind guides as he is; and put forth by one Sampson Townsend, who calls himself a Minister of the Gospel, and a Pastor of Saint Austins and Savours Parish in Nor∣wich. Priest. THE Title of thy confused papers is,The Ti∣tle of Mr. Townsend's Book. The Scripture proved to be the word of God, as also the only foundation of faith, and rule of our obedience, or a clear conviction of the errors of the quakers, who blasphemously af∣firm that the Scriptures are not the word of God, nor the foundation of Faith, nor yet the only rule of our obedience; to which lyes and falshoods we are moved to answer.
Answer. The Qua∣kers An∣swer.THE Scriptures proved to be the word of God is false, and one of the blind, deceitful imaginations, which thou and thy generation hath deceived people with, telling them, that that is the word which saith that God is the word, who made himself manifest in the days of old, before the Letter was, which word was Moses rule, who wrote forth Scripture, and not the Letter but the word, which word by which Moses was guided to speak forth Scripture, and this is that word the Prophets prophesied of which dwelt amongst us,P. 2. 4to. which was before the world was, and seen before the Letter was written; now with the same life and power by which the Scripture was spoken, do we challenge thee to prove such a Scripture as saith that it is the word of God, and thou that would make people believe that the Letter is the foundation, would make void the foundation, upon which the Prophets and Apostles were builded, which spoke forth the Letter, and thou that would build upon the Letter, hateth the Light and the Founda∣tion, which is Christ, from which the Let∣ter was spoken, and thy foundation, and thy rule and obedience is tryed with it, and by it thou art judged, now that which is convicted by thy airy spirit is like unto thy self, and is to be scorched up as the bryars, but the chil∣dren of light who are of God and in the truth, cannot be convicted by such as thou art, who
from the light of God in thy Conscience is departed, and with it art to be condemned, so with the word and the life by which the Letter was declared thou art seen and com∣prehended to be an enemy unto that from which the Scripture was declared, and here again I challenge thee to be a perverter of it, notwithstanding all thy profession from it, and whereas thou hast directed this confused paper unto us, of whom thou hast de∣scribed the names, as followeth, to Christo∣pher Atkinson, James Lancaster, George Whitehead, and Thomas Symonds, now in Norwich Goale for their Errors and Miscar∣riages. Priest. Thou sayest if ever the truth of God were turned into a lye, it is by us (thou sayest) that deny the Scriptures to be the truth of God, and pretend immediate Reve∣lations to be our rule for our actions, and canst not produce any proof, but the words of a dead Man like thy self, which thou calls Mr. Burroughs; to which we answer. Answ. By thee Priest Townsend, is the truth of God turn'd into a lye, and thou art taken with one in thy mouth, who saith that we before mentioned are in the Goal of Nor∣wich for errors and miscarriages, here thou slanderer we challenge thee to prove what errors or miscarriages can be laid to our charge, what is thy lyes and slanders, that which you would make the people believe? and are we counted deceivers for declaring
the Truth, and testifying against thee and thy generations, as it is counted an error in us to unvail thy deceits, and lay thee open to all men: here in the presence of the Lord do we declare against thee, for errors and miscarriages do we deny, and this thy con∣fused stuff wherein first thou sayest that we deny the Scripture to be the truth of God, which is a lye, as thy own words makes it manifest, who in the same page of thy shame∣less discourse, which now is laid open to the understanding of the Simple. Priest. And again thou sayest that we ac∣knowledge the Scripture to be the truth, and yet deny them to be the word of God, here let all that sees thy confused paper judge thee, who art in Babel, where the confusion is, and a minister of it. Answ. The Scripture we own as it was spoken forth by them that lived in the word, and receive it as a Declaration of God, and of what he spoke unto them of former ages, Luke i.i.P. 3. 4to. but thy words and imaginations we do deny, who would call that the word which saith God is the word, and that the light which is not the light, but saith Christ is the light, which is thy condemnation, that hates it in particular, and the worlds condemna∣tion that hates it in general, as is made ma∣nifest, who hates revelations, and us who witness it, shutting thy self forth from the Scriptures, and from them that gave them forth, whereas Christ saith, no man knows
the Father, but the Son, and to whom the Son will reveal him, as thou may read, Mat. ii. 27. here thou hast plainly shewn thy self to be both without the knowledge of the Fa∣ther and the Son, who art in thy mediate natural knowledge, which from the light which comes from Christ is erred, and with it to be condemned; thou dreamer, what hast thou to do to profess thy self a Minister of the Gospel, who art but yet in thy medi∣ate natural conceivings, when the natural man knows not the things of God, for they are Spiritually discerned; so we from God is unto thee thou deceiver, who would make people believe that that which is natural and carnal is the foundation of Faith and obedi∣ence, and so would bewitch thy people with thy lyes, to draw them from the anointing within to obscure something without them, as they did, that would have drawn away the Galations from the Spirit, as thou may∣est read, Gal. 3. Priest. And whereas thou sayest in the third Page that thou wilt reason with us, and tells us, that we did acknowledge the Scrip∣ture to be truth, which in the Page before thou did deny; and thus is making thy folly manifest, who saith that it is our judgment, that we are perfect and free from Sin, which thou never heard us affirm, but these thy lyes will clearly be made manifest by the Scriptures which thou calls thy foundation of faith, and only rule of obedience, by which thou shalt be
judged, for Christ saith unto them whom he taught, be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Fa∣ther is perfect, Mat. 5.28. Answ. But thou and thy generation hates this, and says that there is no perfection to be attained here; Oh thou blind guide! did Christ ever command any thing that might not be accomplished? or did he speak of be∣ing perfect, not till after death, here thou dost deny the very end for which Christ came, who came to take away Sin, and in him is no Sin, Mat. i. 21. i. John 3.3, 4, 5, 6. and i. John 5.18. here thou hast plainly made it manifest, that thou art without Christ and his knowledge, and in Antichrist, now what the Scriptures speaks, in our mea∣sure do we witness concerning these things, and thee we do deny, and all thy generation, thou enemy of God, who doth pervert the Scriptures, and wrest them to thy destructi∣on, and here with the light that never changed art thou to be condemned from God, and all the Children of God. Priest. Another of thy lyes is made evident, thou slanderer, who art not ashamed impudent∣ly to affirm, that we deny the power of the Magistrates in the matters of God, and that we speak not evil only of Governors, but of Government, and condemn the Ministers of the Church of England, and despise them as false teachers,P. 4. to. and say they know nothing of the true light, and say we condemn them for preaching for hire, and say we deny Mi∣nisters
should take any wages for their works. Answ. The powers that are of God ordain∣ed, we own in our souls, and for Conscience sake are subject to them, and such as rule well in the things of God without respect of persons, which respects of persons is contrary to Scripture, such we say are worthy of dou∣ble honour, and such our Souls are subject to, for such executed the Law upon trans∣gressors, and encourage them that do well, and their honour lyes not in a hat, or bend∣ing of the knee, which is nothing but filthi∣ness, which thou and thy generation upholds, but the honour and subjection to him that ru∣leth well is in our souls, as it is written, Rom. 13.1. and here thy lyes and thy slanders we do deny and charge it upon thee from the Lord, to prove where ever we were not sub∣ject unto the power of Magistrates as it was of God, or where ever we spoke evil of Go∣vernors or of Government: thus art thou found with lyes in thy right hand, thou ene∣my of God, and where thou sayest we con∣demn the Ministers of the Church of England, the Ministers of Christ we own, but such as thou art we deny, who seek for your gain from your quarter, and such as call Steeple house Church, and letter word, and foundation, and light, and rule, when Christ saith he is the way, and he is the light, and he is the foun∣dation, and he is the word, which was be∣fore the Letter was, i. John i. 9. and John 3.
and Rev. i9. i. Cor. 3. i2. and here again we do deny all such as say that sprinkling of In∣fants is the Baptism and the seal of the Co∣venant, as thou Sampson Townsend did affirm, and take i2 pence for sprinkling of a poor prisoners child here in this prison of Nor∣wich, the sixteenth day of the eleventh Month, and Scripture saith that the Baptisme is with one Spirit into one body, and the Bap∣tisme is but one, and the Church but one, which is in God, as thou may read, Ephes. 4, 5, 6. and i. Thes. i. and here thou and thy Church, and thy Baptisme is shut out of Scripture, and with it judged, and with the light condemned to be upheld by such sottish blind guides as thou art. Priest. And again thou sayest that the Mi∣nisters of England speaks nothing but what is according to the Law and the Testimony of God in his word, which is the rule to try all teachers by, and thou sayest that this our Judgment is contrary to Tit. 2.15. Answ. Whosoever read that Scripture will condemn thy blindness in these things, who hast pretended thy self a teacher of others,Mark, Rea∣der, this their Anci∣ent Testi∣mony, and they are the same still. and yet shut up in perpetual darkness; thou blind sot, where is it said in all the Scriptures that the Letter is the rule to try all teachers by, or where doth it ever say that the Saints did ever try the Spirits by the Letter, or how canst thou prove that ever it was called by the Saints the only rule of obedience; or a
written word of God, with these thy lyes thou and thy generation hath deceived the blind and simple, taking their money for that which is no bread,P. 5. 4to. making them believe lyes instead of truth, Oh, ye enemies of God, how long will ye despise the truth, if Scrip∣ture had not been these your filthy lyes would have gone forth as truth to those that are in darkness, but praised be the Lord who hath discovered your filthiness, and laid you open with his light, from which the Scripture was spoken, by which light we read you in the Scriptures to be among the false Prophets in their steps, and in the wayes of the Pharises, and now finding you in the latter times your condemnation is justly related in the Scrip∣tures, who go in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam, as thou may read Iude 4.10, 11. and 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Priest. And again thou sayest that Christ and his Apostles gave strong reasons for their maintenance, and to prove it; thou brings those Scriptures, Mat. 10.10. Luke 10.7. Answ. Let all that read these Scriptures judge thee by me to be a lyar, who formerly hast testified, that the Scripture was the word of God, and thy rule and foundation, and now calls it reason, which from reason was never spoken, but holy men of God spoke them forth, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, now the Apostle which was as Minister of Christ never took wages of
of the world, neither did he compel them. though to them he preached the Gospel, and though he robbed other Churches, yet he robbed not the world, neither took he wages of the world, nor hired with them for a certain time, as thou and thy generation do, and this was his boasting to cut off of∣fences, 2 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12. but with the light of God in the offences we find you, who take wages of the world contrary to the Apostles, whose practises judges you to be without their life, whose entrance unto the Thessalonians, he plainly doth declare, that it was neither for pleasing men, neither of deceit, nor guile, nor a cloak of covetous∣ness, neither was their Gospel burthensom, as thou may read 1 Thess. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. con∣trary to which thou and thy generation art found in the steps of them,Mark the Perversion Offences for occasi∣on, these are the Infallible Reform∣ers. the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles cryed against, as thou may read, Isa. 56. and Ier. 5. and Mic. 3. and Mat. 23. and 2 Pet. 2. and Iude 11. And this is the Gospel the Apostles preached, which is witnessed by the same Spirit which to thee is hid, and all thy generations, who out of their steps are found walking in the steps of the false. Priest. Again thou sayest the Apostle inti∣mates that God is mocked, when his Ministers are not maintained, and thou sayest that God will not be robbed. Answ. Here is another of thy lyes, who perverts the Apostles words, and art found adding thy lyes to Scripture, when there is
not such a word in all the Apostles words as intimate, but thou and thy generation are seen to be both thieves and robbers, who en∣ters not in at the door, but climbs up another way, in your inventions, consequences, and imaginations, which are here plainly seen and discovered to them that enter in at the door, and for dishonest gain you destroy Souls, Ezek. 22.25, 26, 27.P. 6. 4to and as a Troop of Robbers wait for a man, so do the compa∣ny of Priests murther by consent, Hosea 6.9. and are found Robbers of God, as the false Prophets were, who in the time of the Law took tythes, and did not bring them to the store-house, as thy generation now do, as thou may read, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10. Priest. And thou says thy design according to promise, is, to prove the Scriptures to be the word of God, the only ground of faith, and rule for our obedience, which thou sayest thou presented us with, and bids us read it, examine it, if it be not truth, witness against it by truth, if it be so, as undoubtedly you will find it truth, as thou sayest, and so bids us submit to it, be ruled by it, and un∣doubtedly our bodies shall be freed from our deserved Imprisonment. Answ. We have read it, and examined it, and thee both, and have found thee to be a lyar, and a denyer of the Word, and of the rule, and of the foundation, which is Christ, and with that which thou calls a rule, and word, and foundation, art thou judged, and
with the light thou art seen to be a wrester of the Scriptures, and thy Rotten foundati∣on being already to fail thee,The Holy Scriptures they say are a rot∣ten foun∣dation; this is their Ancient Testimony from which they have not varied. for it is among the blind Watchmen and greedy dumb Doggs, and hirelings, and among the thieves and robbers, and among the Doggs and swine and filthy dreamers which the Scriptures speaks of, and as for our deserved imprison∣ment, here thou lyar do we challenge thee and them that imprisoned us, to prove the breach of any law by us, for they that did imprison us as many can witness, could not charge us with the breach of any Law; but by their wills to maintain such dumb shep∣herds as thou art; for, for the truths sake, which witnesses against thee and all thy ge∣neration do we suffer, for which thou and thy generation did never suffer imprisonment, nor persecution of the world, for ye are the world, and the world speaks well of you, and hears you, as it did of your Fathers the false Prophets, 1 John 4, 5, and Luke 6.26. drunkards swearers lyars and thieves speaks well of you and fights for you, and loves you, and pleads for you, and there is your fruits and freedom; from our imprisonment will we never speak for in yielding to thy lyes, and false accusations, as is plainly here laid open. Priest. And thou sayest from thy study, Ia∣nuary 29. Answ. Here thy filthy rotten stuff which thou hast been such a long time of gathering
together in thy study, its tryed and seen to be fewel for the fire, and thou art seen to stu∣dy divinations of thy own brain, and to be an inventer of lyes, contrary to Scripture, and where did ever any of the Saints go into a study, and rake up such filthy stuff, and invent such lyes as thou art disapproved in, and with that which thou calls thy word, thy foundation, and only rule of obedience. Here let the life of all the holy men of God judge thee to be both shut out of their life, and out of the Scriptures. Having returned answer to the former part of thy rotten stuff,P. 7. 4to. Sampson Townsend wherein thy lies and deceit is uncovered to all them that have eyes to see, may see thy nakedness and thy shame laid open: now for the simple ones sake, which thou by thy lyes and divinations makes a prey upon, and through thy covetousness makes Mer∣chandise of, who pharisee-like would nei∣ther enter into the Kingdom thy self, nor suf∣fer others to enter in; now for their sakes are we moved to unvail thee and thy deceit, that they that see not might see thee in thy lyes and wresting the Scripture, as thou hast also made it appear in the latter part of thy book; wherein thou sayest, Priest. That thou hast undertaken against the Quakers these two Propositions, i. that the Scriptures contained in the Old or New-Testament (commonly called the Bible) is the revealed will and word of God, 2. That the
Scripture, which is the word of God, is the only foundation of our Faith, and only rule for our obedience, which thou sayest thou wilt prove, 1. by Scripture, 2. by Reason, and thou sayest that he that will not hear the voice of the Scriptures is an Infidel, and he that will not hear the voice of reason is a beast. Ans. We who in scorn by thee and thy ge∣nerations are called Quakers, do own Scrip∣tures, but thee we utterly deny for an evill Beast, whose mouth must be stopped, Tit. i. 10, 11, 12. who in thy filthy reason art going about to maintain those things which thou canst not prove by any plain Scripture, but to it art found adding in thy reason, and thy invention, and therefore the plagues that are in it written is thy portion, and the lake, which is the portion of all lyars as thou art, Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.18, 19. Priest. Again thou sayest that the Scrip∣tures ought to convince us as Christians, rea∣son as rational men. Answ. They that are Christians do see and comprehend thee, and thy reason, thy faith, thy obedience, thy rule, thy foundation, to be without the foundation and the word, which was before thy inventions was, and before Tuball Cain the inventer thy father was,P. 8. 4to. in whose condition thou art, and the word and foundation, and the way, was be∣fore the Beast and false Prophet was, which thou art, Isa. 9.15, 16. and this rule and foundation and worde, did Moses, David,
and the rest of the holy men of God witness, who spoke forth Scripture, which thou calls the word, rule, and foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. Psal. 18.2.31.3. Here thou would make Moses, David, and the rest of the holy men of God who spoke forth Scripture, blind, like thy selfe, both without the word rule, and foundation. Priest. Now to prove the Scripture the word of God, thou brings Exod. 20.1. Levit. 10.13. and many other Scriptures thou brings to the same effect, how God spoke these words. Answ. Thou blind sot, we challenge thee in the presence of the living God, to prove in any of theseThey deny the Scriptures to be the written Word of God. This is their An∣cient Te∣stimony, from which they are not changed; they tell you so. Scriptures, that the Scrip∣tures are the written word of God, or else stop thy mouth thou evil beast, and slow belly, dost thou make no difference between the word and these words? and here again wee charge thee to be a lyar, and an adder to Scripture. Priest. And thou brings these Scriptures Isa. 24.3. and Psal. 125. and other Scriptures to the same purpose, how the Lord saith, and thus saith the Lord, and Jer. 1.1, 2.4.9. the words of Jeremiah to whom the word of the Lord came. Answ. And the word of the Lord that came to Joel, Amos, and others, thou dreamer, doth ever Isaiah, Jeremiah, or David, or Joel, or Amos, or any of the holy men of God, say that the Scripture is the written word, whenas God who is the word, John 1. spoke these words unto them, whose voice
thou never heard, who spoke unto them before the Letter was written, which is a declaration of what the word spoke unto them, or was that paper and Ink, or could it be contained in paper and Inke, which came to the Prophets, whenas Jeremiah saith the word is fire in his heart, and a burning shut up in his bones, and a hammer that breaks the rocks, Jer. 20.9. Jer. 23.29, 30. and behold I am against the Prophets saith the Lord, that steal my word every one from his neighbors, and behold I am against the Prophets saith the Lord, that use their tongues, and say he saith, and behold I am against them saith the Lord, that profess false dreams and tell them as thou dost, and cause my People to erre by their lyes,P. 9. 4to. and by their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit the people at all saith the Lord, and there thou art among the false Prophets and dreamers, which Jeremiah who witnessed the word, cryed wo against such Pastors as thou art, Jer. 23.1. Priest. Thou sayest thou shalt not need to mention the sayings and doing of our Saviour Christ, which are frequently recorded in the New Testament, and hence it is called the word of Christ, and thou brings the Scripture, Coloss. 3.16. let the word of Christ dwel in you. Answ. Here again we challenge thee to be a lyar, and an adder to the Scripture: dost
thou make no difference between death and life, for Christ saith, my words gives life, and it was by his word that the dead was raised, John 11. now that which Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John wrote of Christ, could not give life, for that is called a Declaration of those things which was freely delivered among them, Luke 1.1. and that thou calls the word which is death and killeth, as thou may read, 2 Cor. 3. and Paul was a Minister of the New-Testament, and not of the Let∣ter, which thou calls the New-Testament: ver. 6. and this word which dwelt in the Saints, they did neither call the Bible nor the Letter, as thou dost, here thou hast ma∣nifested thy self to be a blinde guide, both ignorant of the Word and the Letter. Priest. Thou sayest that it is all one to say the Scripture saith, and God saith. Answ. Thou blasphemous beast, dost thou make no difference between the Scripture and God, or is the Scripture God,God who is the Word; so they do not distin∣guish the Father from the Son, i. e. the Second Person of the Tri∣nity. when the Scripture saith God who is the word, was in the beginning, and by him was all things made, and this was before the Scriptures was written, John 1.1. which thou would make thy God of, and here let all that reads this see thy blasphemie. Priest. Again thou sayest the word Scrip∣ture is put for God speaking in the Scrip∣ture, and thou brings Joshua 1.5. Answ. Let all that reads that Scripture Judge and condemn thee to be a Lyar, for it speaks not such a word, as God speaking in the Scripture.
Priest. Again the same page thou sayest, that all the rest that is written in the volume is but a comment or exposition of those ten precepts. Answ. Thou diviner, where dost thou prove such a Scripture as comment? was that which the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles spoke out a comment or exposi∣tion? here again we charge thee Priest Townsend, to be an inventer and a deviser of lyes,P. 9. 4to. which thou hast no Scripture for. Priest. Again thou sayest that thus it ap∣pears that the Scriptures are the word of God, because God writ them, and caused them to be written. Answ. That which is written is the Let∣ter, which is death and killeth. 2 Cor. 3.16. but the word is living, Heb. 4.12. there again with the Scipture thou art disaproved to be a lyar. Priest. Again in another page thou sayest, that the Scriptures are called the counsel of God, the will of the Lord, the mystery of Gods will, and thou bring these Scriptures, Rom. 3.2. 1 Pet. 4.11. Acts 20.27. Psal. 33.11. and Pro. 19.21. Ephes. 5.17. and to con∣clude this, thou sayest that God himself calls the Scriptures his word, and to maintain that thou brings Zach. 1.6. Answ. Let all that reads theseHere Mr. Townsend is together with the Holy Scri∣pture, judged and con∣demned: behold their An∣cient Te∣stimony! Scriptures, see thee to be a perverter of Scripture, and adds thy inventions to them, for they that spoke forth these Scriptures, knew the Coun∣sell of God, and the mystery, and the Go∣spell,
which to thee is hid, whom the God of this world hath blinded thy eyes, and out of the mystery and Gospel, and rule, and foundation, thou art with that which thou calls the only rule, and word, and founda∣tion, art thou judged, and with light seen and condemned, to be an inventer of lies and a deceiver of the blind, but no further canst thou proceed, for thy folly shall be made manifest to all men. Priest. In a second reason of thine; thou sayest, the antiquity of the Scriptures do clear∣ly prove them to be of God, for man could ne∣ver write of things done before he had a be∣ing, but the works of the five first dayes Crea∣tion, are mentioned in Scripture, but man was not made till the sixt day, therefore they must needs be the word of God. Answ. Here thou blind Beast, who art ignorant of God, who makes antiquity as thou calls it, the perfect knowledge of God, and sayes that man could not declare of things before ever he had a being, and so would make people believe that the Scrip∣ture reveal God; thou blind Beast, whether was man, or the Scriptures first? and whe∣ther did God make himself manifest unto? and thou that sayest that the Scripture reveal God, thou art a lyar, for God revealed himself to Moses, before the Scripture was written, and Moses was the first pen-man of the Scripture, was 14 Generations after the fall, and yet he wrote of things, before the
fall was, and thy father Cain was before Mo∣ses was, and yet he knew no Scripture, and thou that would make the Letter the light and way of knowing God, are not so much as a Minister of the Letter, and here thou art made manifest to be in the fall, in the death, which past over all men before Moses was, and are not come to fee the first Days VVork, to see light divided from darkness, and here let all the Prophets and holy men of God judge thee with the Light, from which thou art erred, for they wrote of Christ, and saw his day many Ge∣nerations before he came in the flesh, and here thy antiquity, and thy reasons, and the three persons thou dreams of, which thou would divide out of one, like a Conjurer are all de∣nied, and thou shut up with them in perpe∣tual darkness for the lake and the pit, for thou hast no Scripture that mentions such things.This is their An∣cient Te∣stimony, to damn the Blessed Trinity to the Pit of Hell. P. 11. 4toPiest. And where thou art telling that the Scripture converts the Soul, and works Grace, and the opening thereof make hearts to trem∣ble, and says that Scripture discovers mens thoughts, and makes Laws for them. Answ. Here thou hast made thy self mani∣fest, where did ever any of the holy men of God say that the Scriptures converts the Soul, or make Laws for mens thoughts? and what is that which opens the Scripture? or where is it, if the bare Letter convert the Soul? here thou Priest of Baal, for that is thy name, thy lyes are made manifest and deceits laid open
to the children of the Light, and art seen with the light from which the Scripture was spoken. Priest. Again thou sayest the Scripture speaks to all men alike, but thus do not the word of man, therefore thou sayest they are the word of God. Ans. But thou thy self and thy generation are perverters of the Scripture, and are respe∣ctors of persons, for you are called of men Master stands praying in the Synagogues, has the chiefest places in the assemblies, and the greeting in the Markets, and are pleading for cap and knee, and says we do not reverence Magistrates, because we do not put off our hats, and bend our knees, as thou and the rest of thy generation of Hypocrits do, who have mens persons in admiration, because of ad∣vantage, Iude 16. and this which you calls the word, speaks not to all men alike, for wo is pronounced in it to such as thou art, who art found in the steps of the false Prophets and Scribes, and Pharisees, and goes in the way of Cain, to envie, and after the error of Balaam for gifts and rewards, which wo was never pronounced to the righteous, and wo unto thee thou lyar, who art a wrester of Scrip∣ture to thy own destruction, and art found with so many Lyes, as thou hast here uttered. Priest. In another place thou sayest no Crea∣ture (Angels men or, Devils if all were put together in one) could ever declare before∣hand, what particular person should be born,
and what should be their names, in so many thousands yeers before their birth. Ans. Here thou art taken with another lye, with which thou hast stuffed up this thy con∣fused Book, for both by Angels and Men was Iesus Christ the Son of God prophesied of Moses, who was many years before Christ came in the flesh, prophesied of Christ, and said, like unto me will God raise up a Pro∣phet, him shall the People hear, Mat. 1.17. see if thou can number the year of all these generations which prophesied of Christ, and when Christ came, he saith, before Abraham was I am, thus art thou known and compre∣hended with the truth, which all thy fathers and generations past persecuted, so be asha∣med, and stop thy mouth for ever. Priest. In that thou calls thy two propositi∣ons, 1. thou sayest the Scriptures are the means by which faith is wrought, and to prove that ly thou brings, Rom. 10.17. Ans. Shame cover thy face, thou full of rottenness and filthy dreams,Scriptures not a means to work Faith. This is their Ancient Testimony where did thou ever read in Scripture that it is the means whereby faith isP. 12. 4to. wrought, when that Scripture saith, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word; here thou art deaf, and never heard the word, and thy faith and word is without, but the word of faith which we preach, is nigh in the heart and mouth, Rom. 10.8. therefore search thou the Scripture with the Saduces who knew not Christ, for in them thou and thy generation thinks to have eter∣nal
life, but ye will not come unto Christ, that ye may have life, Iohn 5.38, 39, 40. Priest. Again thou sayest that the Scripture which thou calls the word, is an everlasting rule so long as we live on earth.The Scrip∣ture, which Mr. Town∣send calls the Foun∣dation of Faith, in the Mire and Dirt. Ans. Thou blind sot, see thy confusion; can that Letter be everlasting while we live upon earth? here thou hast shewed thy rea∣son where it is, that they that are not stark blind may see thee, thy reason and thy foun∣dation to be in the mire and dirt, and may see thee to be a senceless natural bruit Beast, who with thy lyes art made to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.13. Priest. And again thou sayest the most emi∣nent believer sin in many things. Ans. Here is the end of thy teaching, here is thy rule, and here is thy foundation, and here is thy obedience, and here is thy fruits, and here is thy service, who commits Sin, and a Servant to Sin, and free from righte∣ousness, Iohn 8.24. Rom. 16.20. Oh thou blasphemer and slanderer of the just, when wilt thou cease from thy Lyes and Blasphe∣my, where dost or canst thou prove such a Scripture as the most emminent believer, Sin in any things, when the Scripture saith he that believeth is born of God, and he that is born of God sinneth not, for whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him, and he that committeth sin is of the Devil, and theres thy condition, and he is thy Father, who is the Father of all lyars as thou art, i. Iohn 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Priest. And to conclude thy filthy rotten stuff, thou sayest they that make not the word of God the rule for their actions are led either by their own fancies, or the Devils temptati∣ons, or both. Ans. Thee Priest Townsend art here laid open, and thou art uncovered, and here thou art found to be a denyer of the word, and rule, and foundation, and thou art led by thy dreams and fancies, and thy foundationViz. The Holy Scri∣tures. is in the dust, and thou art reserved in everlast∣ing chains under darkness, for everlasting fire, and here thou in all these thy lyes, are shut our from God, and all the Children of God, among the Doggs and Sorcerers, and the Lake is thy portion, which is the portion of all lyars, Iude 6, 7, 8. thus have we returned a full answer unto thy senceless stuff, and in plainness have we dealth with thee, and have not flattered thee at all there, call it not railing, lest thou violate the Scriptures so with the word of truth thou art tryed, and comprehended, and us shalt thou witness e∣ternally, when the book of Conscience comes to be opened, and thou judged out of it, so we remain, Sufferers for the truth, and witnes∣ses against thee and thy generation. Named according to the flesh, George Whitehead, Christopher Arkinson, James Lancaster, Thomas Symonds.
A Cutting Switch FOR THE Wounded Snake. I have used Similitudes, Hos. 12.10. READER, BY the Word Snake, which I use by way of Metaphor, (alluding to the Quakers obscure way of Reasoning, evermore hiding themselves in the dark, by their Ambiguous and Doubtful Way of expressing themselves in their Unintelligible Way of Writing) is what I call Quakerism; and having taken this Snake, Quakerism, out of the Grass, and laid her on the Table, and taken out her Sting, I am now coming to exercise my Switch, which I lately twisted out of Jos-Wyeth's Hand, as David did the Sword out of the Hand of that uncircumcised Philistine, Goliah of Gath, which he design'd to wound the Israelites with; for this Joseph, like
blind Hob, playing at Blind-Man's-Buff, smi∣ting every Man that passed by, without all Fear or Respect, being Fool hardy, I was re∣solved to unarm him, and take his Weapon from him; for like Goliah's Sword, there is none like it: And whereas this Water-Snake has swam over Sea, I am minded to send this Switch thither also, that so where-ever her Spawn is gone rattling up and down in other Nations, and Plantations, this Switch may pursue her, and deal severely, or cuttingly, with her, for she has done much Harm. And now I shall tell what is the Cause of this Snake's Fury, which is, as on the Title Page of this Third Part, and where you may see she put forth her Sting against Mr. Townsend; for that he, like other Christian Champions, went to prove the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God; for this the Rattle-Snake came out of his Thicket, and flung out his Deadly Poyson at Mr. Townsend, thus, Ishmael and his Mother cast out among the Beasts, &c. calling him a Dreamer, a Deceiver, a Witch, a Liar, a blind Guide, without Christ and his Knowledge, an Ene∣my of God, an Antichrist, a blind Sot, a sottish blind Guide, shut up in perpetual Darkness, Blasphemous Beast, as in P. 7, 8, 10, 14, 17, 25, 29. Thus, Reader, having shewed thee the Cause of the Dragon's Fury, and the Ground why he threw out his Floods of Malice against the Gospel Ministers, I
shall next shew thee in short a few Words to Confirm what I have said, and that out of the Snake's own Mouth, as in P. 14, 17, 24. first, That the Scriptures are not the written Word of God, but a Rotten Foundation, not the Means to work Faith in the Heart: And because Mr. Townsend, in Opposition to the Quakers He∣retical Doctrine, had proved the Scriptures to be the written Word of God, and as such, a good Foundation for our Faith in our Cruci∣fied Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and the Means to work Faith in our Hearts, which works by Love, Oh how did Geo. White∣head and his Partners hiss like Snakes, sting like Adders, and roar like Dragons, cal∣ling him, as before noted, Dreamer, Deceiver, Witch, Liar, blind Guide, Enemy to God, Antichrist, Sot, blind Sot, Blasphemous Beast, shut up in perpetual Darkness, with other the like Virulent Railing, and Hellish Malice! And this, Reader, is a Map of the O∣riginal Controversie, between the Clergy and the Quakers, for with them the Scrip∣tures are Death, Dust, Carnal and Killing, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, a Rotten Foun∣dation: For alas they have no need of the Scripture; with them the Holy Scriptures are needless, as I shall just now shew. See Isaac Pennington's Book, stiled, Some things relating to the Royal Society, &c. p. 7. Now observe the Difference between the Reli∣gion which God hath taught us, and led us into, and the Religious of all Men upon the Earth besides; our Religion stands wholly out of
that, which all their Religions stands in; their Religion stands in the Comprehension, in a Belief of a Literal Relation or Descrip∣tion, our Religion stands in a Principle, which changeth the Mind, — where we hear the Voice, and see the express Image of the Heavenly One, [i. e. God] and knows things not from an Outward Relation; yea, here (say they) we must profess, that we so know things, that we are fully satisfied a∣bout them, and could not doubt concerning them, tho' there had Never been Word or Letter written of them, &c. And to this a∣grees the Doctrine of Edward Burroughs in his Epistle to Fox's Great Mystery, p. 17. and many other Places I could mention, but I study Brevity. But, Reader, I have not done with this Snake, but must have the other Blow at her, and smite off her Head, lest she get in∣to the King's High Court of Parliament, and do mischief, for she is mischie∣vous Beast, and full of deadly Poyson, and begins to stink all the Nation over; and the Cause why I shall give this Mortal Wound to this Rattle Snake, which so often changes her Skin, while she is the same, with re∣spect to her Venomous Nature, that she was at her first Rise, Anno 1650. I say the Cause is this: Whereas Mr. Townsend of Nor∣wich having proved the Scriptures to be (as indeed they are) the written Word of God, and a good Foundation for our Faith, and a
great Means to work Faith in our Hearts; all which George Whitehead and his Partners opposed with great Vigor, he, Mr. Town∣send, having first proved these things, he then goes on to prove a Trinity of Three distinct Persons in the Godhead, according to the Faith of all sound Christians; and for Proof thereof he does not only bring Scripture, but many strong Reasons, as well from Antiqui∣ty as of later Date. To all which George Whitehead, &c. from the Spirit of their Lord in them, as in p. 22. And here thy An∣tiquity, and thy Reasons, and the Three Per∣sons thou dreams of, which thou would divide out of one, like a Conjurer, are all denied, and thou shut up with them in perpetual Darkness, for the Lake, and the Pit, &c. adding by way of Corroberation respecting Mr. Townsend, p. 26. thus: Thou (Town∣send) art Reserved in Everlasting Chains, under Darkness, for Everlasting Fire,— shut out from God among the Dogs and Sor∣cerers. Having by this time not only discovered the Snake, but given her a deadly Blow, I shall next shew, that the Quakers, respecting their Principles, are the same that ever they were; only I am in Hopes they shall never do so much Hurt in a Hundred Years, as they have done in Fifty, the time of their date: The Sting of Quakerism being taken out, and the Bowels thereof ript up, and their Inside turn'd Out∣ward,
by many Infallible Proofs out of their Impious Books, especially by Reprinting one of them; but let us not be too secure, lest the deadly Wound which she hath received should be healed; and my Counsel is, that as Persecution never did Good, so may it not be used amongst Christians; but yet a good Expedient is very proper, which is to have them examined, whether these things be so or no; and if what has been objected against them be proved upon them, let them be obliged to Retract and Condemn these their Ancient Blasphe∣mous and Heretical Books and Pamphlets, which have poysoned many Thousands of otherwise well-meaning People; and as this will be easie, so will it be one effe∣ctual Means to stop the Gangrene of this Pestilential Disease, and this will be no Persecution. POSTSCRIPT. AND to shew that the Quakers are the same still, notwithstanding their contrary Testimonies, I shall recite some few Passages out of their Writings, viz. I. In their Yearly Epistle, 1696. We cannot (say they) but recommend unto you (our dear Brethren) the holding up the Holy Testimony of Truth, which hath made us to be a People, and that in all Parts of itThen in Damning the Blessed Trinity., for Truth is one. II. The Quakers cleared, &c. p. 7. God is the same, Truth is the same, his People the same, and their Prin∣ciples the same. III. Their Primitive Christianity, &c. Printed 1698. p. 6. Our Principles are now no other than what they were when we were first a People. IV. They have inserted a long Paragraph in the Post-Man, Numb. 568. saying. The Quakers not question∣ing but to acquit their Ancient Friends and their Writings, not being Conscious of deviating in any one Point of Doctrine from what they first heldAnd what they held in 1655. G. W.'s Book Ishmael gives a Sample, for they are all of a Piece.. V. But Jesuit-like G. W. thus saith in his Count. Conv. p. 72. I may (says he) see Cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet our Intentions be the same, &c. FINIS.
A Reply to a Book, Entituled, A Defence of an Apology for the Quakers, in Answer to a Book, Entituled, Quakerism Expos'd, &c. (wrote by Fran. Bugg.) Or some Papers delivered to the King and Parliament. PART III. I Have read and consider'd this Book of John Field's, A Defence, &c. in Answer to the Books and Papers aforesaid; but how far his Book answers his Titlte, will best be understood, by comparing both: For in J. Feild's Book, of 32 Pages in Quarto, I find but 35 Lines of mine cited, which is not one Page of 64 of mine in Octavo, and that not pag'd, and thereby difficult for his Readers to find, in order to compare the Books; a right Trick of a Quaker. Now how this can rightly be call'd an Answer, is a Paradox to me; but however, an Answer they must
have, tho' nothing almost to the purpose, and then tell their poor Hearers Fr. Bugg's Book is answered; Ay, that it is; nay, and repeatedly too, tho' I do not know of one single Book of mine so answered by the Quakers, but that they have left untouched the greatest Part of the Charges objected against them, and Six or Seven Books of mine never so much as pretended to be an∣swer'd. Oh the Polacy and Deceit of the Ringleaders of this Sect! And this has occa∣sioned me to give and take this Advice from a wise and prudent Caution, in a Book, En∣tituled, The Missionaries Arts, &c. wrote against the Jesuits, Printed 1668. p. 32. viz. To distrust every thing they say. For as the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet, late Bishop of Worcester, in his Discourse of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, &c. p. 282. very well observes, that they are as like, as if the Quakers and the Jesuits were Children of one Father, and brought forth by one Mo∣ther, even Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and Cage of every Unclean and Hateful Bird; His Words are these, viz. Any who compares them, (i. e. Jesuits and Quakers) would imagine the Life of Ignatius Loyola had been their great Exem∣plar: I know not (said the Bishop) whe∣ther any of that Innocent and Religious. Order or Jesuits had any Hand in forming this new Society (of Quakers) among us, (as hath been frequently suggested) but if
one may guess the Father by the Child's Likeness, Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of the Jesuits, was at least the Grandfather of the Quakers, &c. And as I do believe the recited Caution, To distrust every thing they (i. e. Jesuits) say, 'tis as applicable to the Quakers; and to demonstrate this, let us but observe how frequent it is with them to blame their Opponents with splitting Sen∣tences, mincing, mangling and curtailing, whilst themselves are ten times more guilty; for instance, I find a Passage in my Book, Quakerism Expos'd, &c. p. 27, 28. 4thly, That you (Quakers) value the Scriptures above any Books in the World, This is false with a Witness, when you in Print tell us, we may as well burn the Bible as your Writings, Truths Defence, p. 2, 104. calling the Scriptures Dust, Death, Ser∣pents Meat, Beastly Ware, and that Preach∣ing out of them is Conjuration. And G. Whitehead tells us in his Book, Truth de∣fending the Quakers, &c. p. 7. That what is spoken by the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater: And ma∣ny of your Books (nay, even that) are said to be given forth from the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost, and from the Mouth of the Lord; how then do you value the Scriptures above any Books in the World? But as Solomon said, Prov. 26.3. A Whip for the Horse, a Bridle for the Ass, and a
Rod for the Fool's Back: And so you must give me Leave to whip this J. Feild for his deep Hypocrisie and Deceit, and I wish it may do him Good; what! to pretend that the Quakers value the Bible above all Books, then consequently above their own. This is such a Lie, that it stabs it self, when you exalt and value your own as of grea∣ter Authority, and as such, are command∣ed by your Teachers to read them in your Meetings, whilst you never read, nor by your Teachers exhorted to read, one Chap∣ter of the Old or New Testament in your Religious Meetings, (if such I may call them) since you were a People; neither is it agreeable to your Ancient Testimony. Nay, farther I am fully perswaded, That should the Government think fit, for a Proof of your Sincerity herein, to enjoin you to read a Chapter of the Bible, at the begin∣ning of your Meetings, (I mean, by such of your Teachers as can read a Chapter, for many of them cannot) you would be so far from submitting to Authority, that you'd first go to Jayl, and then call it Persecution, and Record it as such to Po∣sterity: But would it therefore ever the more be so? I trew not, since it was the Practice of the Jewish, as well as the Christian Churches, in all Ages of the World, &c.
Now in Answer to this long Paragraph, John Feild in his Defence, &c. p. 7. This Fran. Bugg saith is false with a wit∣ness, and so you must give me Leave to whip John Feild for his deep Hypocrisie and Deceit; what! to pretend that the Quakers value the Bible above all Books, then consequently above their own, this is such a Lie, that it stabs it self, &c. This, Reader, is all he recites, neither does he go about to Refute my Reasons for what I said; nay, nor so much as mention them. How then can this be an Answer? Only he re-asserts in the same Page, saying, I do affirm that the Quakers always had, and still have a high Esteem, and true Value for the Holy Scriptures, &c. But this is his own bare Ipse Dixit, without any Refutati∣on of, or once reciting my Arguments for what I said; and therefore this Tool, I am loth to say Fool, must yet be more scourged for his deep Deceit and Hypocrisie. And therefore Christian Reader, I beg of you to dwell a little here, and to consider of the Quakers way of answering Books; you see my Charge, and how I proved it, both from Matter of Fact, and Demonstration; first, They teach the Scriptures are Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, &c. not a Word of it Deny'd or Refuted. Again, That Preaching out of them is Conjuration, not at all by him deny'd. Again, And that by G. Whitehead's Doctrine, That their Sayings,
from their Spirit of Truth, is of greater Authority than the Bible; not a Syl∣lable of it Deny'd or Refuted. Again, You hear they command their Disciples to Read their Own Epistles in their Meetings for Divine Worship; not a Word of it deny'd or justified. Again, That they never, since they were first a People, did so much as read any one Chapter in the Bible in their Religious Meetings; which if they had such an high Esteem, and true Value for the Scriptures, even above theit own Books and Epistles, they surely would, or else they are very Hypocrites indeed, if they will not read, and recommend to be read in their Meetings, to their People, that which is best, most e∣steem'd, and of highest Value, yet you see he cannot say that they do, or ever did read a Chapter in such their Meetings. Now whether this Tool Feild does not deserve to be severely lash'd, as well as his Tutor Geo. Whitehead, in this black Art, let the Reader judge. Thus much then as a Proof, First, Of their not citing the Substance of their Opponent's Position, but by picking Sentences, and break∣ing them in pieces, thereby marring the Sense. Secondly, That the Quakers are guil∣ty of the several things therein charged, else J. Field (who has a Fund to support him in his Charge of Printing) would not so silently pass by all those several Charges, without a Vindication of his dear Friends;
and this being a Figure of all their Answers, I shall pass by many things of the like Na∣ture, and apply my self next to their Suffer∣ings, That being the best Flower in their Garden, and in which they most of all glory; much Good may it do them, since they bring most of it upon themselves, by their obsti∣nately adhering to their blind Guides and the Dictates of their Erroneous Consciences, which has befaln them thorough their Con∣tempt and Neglect of adhering to the Rule of the Sacred Word of God; I mean the Wri∣tings of the Holy Prophets and Apostles, and the Practice of the Primitive Saints and Mar∣tyrs in all Ages. Again, A Defence, &c. p. 21. A Brief Abstract of some Sufferings of the People call'd Quakers, given to Confront Francis Bugg's Diminutive Account, &c. Reply, I find of late some Alteration in the Quakers Arrogant Stile touching them∣selves, it formerly was generally thus, The People of God called Quakers, or Some Prin∣ciples of the Elect People of God call'd Qua∣kers, or from the People of the Lord call'd Quakers, but now of late they are come a Step lower, viz. The People commonly call'd Quakers, or, The People call'd Quakers: I hope the Sermon I prepared for the Quakers (which I took out of their Writings, with no little Study and Pains) have done them some Good, see Pilg. Prog. p. 108, to 127. It was a long Sermon, I confess, but in re∣gard
it turn to a good Account, I think not my labour vain. But why is my Ac∣count of their Sufferings diminutive? Were they not Sufferings? Yea, else they would not have recorded them; were they then not recoraed? Yea, I took them out of their Chronicle, and told them both Book and Page: Well, what then? Oh! but they were of the least Size: No matter for that, if Sufferings, then Meritorious; else why were they so carefully Collected, and put in Order, even to a Row of Pins, a Child's Biggen, a Child's Double Clout, a Woman's Cross-cloth, a Night-cap, a Dung-Fork, and the like; fit to be put into their Martyrology. But to deal plainly, I questi∣on the truth of them; and much more the truth of this Abstract: For to me they ap∣pear like Fox's Miracles in his Journal, Published Thirty or Forty Years after they are said to be wrought: And no Body can tell me where, not when, nor the Persons Names Cured, or any Witnesses to attest them. Even so are the Sufferings of this Abstract. Nor is their one Justices Warrant cited; nor any formal Trial of any one of these Sufferers brought forth, to shew whe∣ther they suffered for the Name of Jesus, or for Righteousness sake? Still, like Fox's Miracles, never an one of which are said to be wrought in the Name of Jesus; but only in his own Name, and by his own Power; like Simon Magus, whom the Samaritans
Adored, even as the Poor Infatuated Qua∣kers Adore this Fox: They (the Samari∣tans) called him (Simon Magus) the Pow∣er of God; so do the Quakers call Fox; and that his Kingdom is Established in Righteous∣ness; and that of the increase thereof there is no End. And for these Reasons, these Sufferings ought to be, even as Fox's Miracles are (and thatby many of the Quakers too) rejected, and held as Fabulous as the Papists Legend. And now, as a further Demonstration, that this Abstract, with all its Appendices, ought to be rejected, and held as a Fabu∣lous Story, I shall give Twelve Reasons in order to Confront John Feild's magnifying their Sufferings; which can be for no other Reason than for which they at first Record them; that is, Pride and Ostentation. And my Reasons shall be grounded upon such a bottom, as all the Quakers that will see with their own Eyes, and read in the Qua∣kers Books, must say Amen to; even upon that lying Spirit which has entred all their Inspired Prophets. And if they can tell 12 Lies, they may tell 12000 Lies; and then what Credit is to be given either to the Miracles of Fox, or the Sufferings of the Quakers? LIE 1. In that they teach by their Books, That their Sufferings are greater, and more unjust, than the Sufferings in the Days of Christ, his Apostles, the Ten Per∣secutions,
or any time since. Burrough's Works, p. 273. LIE 2. (That Sam. Cater, one of their Wordy-windy Teachers, said, and got it re∣corded, That he suffered Twenty Pound, when he did not suffer Twenty Farthings. LIE 3. In that G. Fox, their Apostle, and High-Priest of their Profession, said, He was covered from the World; and that the World neither knew Him, nor his Name; when there was not Ten Men in this King∣dom, whose Names were better known. See their Book, Several Petitions Answer∣ed, p. 30. LIE 4. In that they teach, saying, HE that HATH the same Spirit that raised Jesus from the Dead, is EQUAL with God. Saul's Errand to Damasscus, p. 8. LIE 5. In that they teach, That Geo. Fox was before Languages were. See the Introduct. to their Battledoor, in Folio. LIE 6. In that they teach, That the Thundering Voice answered Geo. Fox, at his Trial in Lancaster Assizes, as in p. 21. of his Book, (and which the Quakers have left out of his Journal) Saying, I have Glorified thee, and will Glorifie thee again: And immediately his Head and Ears was filled with Glory. Thus do they vye it with Christ, not only in saying their Sufferings are grea∣ter than his, his Apostles, and all the Mar∣tyrs; but as there was a Voice from Heaven, from God the Father, speaking to God the
Son, or Second Person in the Trinity; saying, I have Glorifed thee, and will (after the state of Humiliation was past) Glorifie thee again. LIE 7. In that Fox, your Apostle, said, He saw a Pool of Blood, and a Channel of Blood, in the Town of Litchfield; when there was not a Drope of Blood, much less a Channel. See his Journal, p. 53. And the Young Prophets believe him, else they would not have Printed it after his Death in his Journal. LIE 8. In that William Mead, the great Quaker, told William Harris, That this Journal of Fox is a better Book than the Bible. LIE 9. In that G. Fox says, and the Quakers believe it, else they would not have Printed it in his Journal, p. 47. viz. That he saw the Heavens open, (as St. Ste∣phen did) nor that the Quakers had seen David's Sepulchre, so many Thousand Miles off England, as Fox say they did. See Truth's Defence, alias, the Fountain of Lies and Blasphemies. LIE 10. In that Geo. Whitehead teach, in his Book, Truth Defending the Quakers, p. 7. That what is now spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, meaning the Qua∣kers) is of greater Authority than the Holy Scriptures. LIE 11. In that Father Penn in Print Teach, (and whom Geo. Whitehead vindi∣cates
therein; Truth and Innocency Vindi∣cated, &c. p. 52.) That the Person that Suffered (at Jerusalem) was properly the Son of God, we (Quakers, says he) utterly deny. See his Serious Apology, &c. p. 146. LIE 12. In that the Quakers teach, That the Name Jesus and Christ belong to every Believer, as well as to the Head: See Pennington's Questions to Professors, &c. p. 27. When the Lie is so manifest, as that the Name Jesus and Christ do not belong to Geo. Whitehead, nor Will. Penn, so well as it did belong to the Person that Suffered at Jerusalem, which the Quakers utterly deny to be the Son of God: And if not to them too, much less to the Quakers of a lower Form, whom yet they account Belie∣vers; yea, the only Church of Christ: And that they may have full Tale, I'll give them a Baker's Dozen of Lies to confront their dubious and unintelligible Abstract. LIE 13. They teach, Tht there is no Sal∣vation out of the true Church; and that the Quakers are this true Church: And also that in their Church there is no Tares, nor Hypo∣crites; See Josiah Coal's Whore unvailed, First Impression, p. 16, 18, 40, 41, 43. And R. Farns∣worth's, A Rod to drive out the Wild Boars, &c. Printed 1655. p. 13. And to prove this a loud Lie, see the Cage of Unclean Birds, in my Pil. Prog. cap. 14. p. 127, to 145. LIE 14. The Quakers say, They are resolved to Love their Enemeis, and Pray
for their Adversaries; And for proof of this pretence, see John Feild's Defence, &c. p. 11, 19. Saying, I did not say, that Francis Bugg was like Judas, (Contradictory to the stream of the whole Gang) or that Ha∣man and Judas his End might be his; for I pray God it may not — We are resolved to love our Enemeis, Bless them that Curse us, do Good to, and Pray for them that Persecute us &c. Oh! John, as this is contrary to thy Natural Temper, so it is to the Spirit of Quakerism; else you are changed, and not the same that ever you were. No, John, I take this as a Piece of Flattery, a sudden Mood, a Fit that will over, and be gone presently. Nay, John is yet more kind, (for I'll give the Devil his due) p. 11. ibid. I am persuaded (the Quakers) never design∣ed (Fran. Bugg) any harm: O! John, I see thy Cloven Foot; and will keep out of harms way as near as I can; and therefore D. do thy worst, But to prove this a Lie, spoken in Hypo∣crisie, to glos over their Malicious Spirit, which is the most revengeful of the Seven Evil Spirtis which possesses the Leaders of this Sect; and which is as contrary to their Ancient Principles as Light is contrary to Darkness; see their great Apostle Fox's Book, Truth's Defence, &c. p. 15. who writing against Comelfeild a Minister, and being unwilling to unbosome himself at that time (a fault they are seldom guilty of)
gave him this assurance, touching praying for their Enemies, viz. No Prayers can we send to thee, but for thy Destruction, thou Man of Sin, and Enemy of Christ, &c. This is ac∣cording to their Ancient Principles; and shall I think they are changed? No, not a tittle; they tell us so: And they do not only Pray for the Destruction of their Adversa∣ries, as you have heard; but if their Gover∣nours do not please them to a Hair's Breadth, they'll not mention them in their Prayers to their God; (no matter indeed whether they do or no, for the late King James II. for whom they mos Prayed, his Reign was the shortest Liv'd) for Oliver Cromwell, whom they often saluted with their Familiar Ap∣pellation of Dear Friend, Noble Oliver, and the like Flatteries; yet because he turned them out of the Army, and would nto suffer them to be Justices of the Peace forsooth, Thee and Thou, by Yea and Nay, grew angry and pettish, and would no more mention him in their Prayers to God, than now they do his present Majesty; as may be seen by Edward Burrough's Book in Quarto, Printed 1656. Good Counsel and Advice rejected, p. 15. And these things are not right, that such who have been Faithful in their Trust for many Years, and hazarded Life and Li∣berty for Conscience sake, which they cannot now Possess; but are cast out for the exercise of their pure Consciences; consider of it, when such are cast out of their Places,
p. 16. of Judicatories in thy Government, and out of thy Armies; for I know the Lord hath Cursed them (the King and Royal Party) and thou hast had Dominion given thee of God to break them in Pieces: And what thou hast done their King, (i. e. King Charles II.) should not be reckoned against thee by the Lord, if thou art Faithful to what he requires of theeBy the Quaker Prophets, then they would Ac∣quit the Murther. p. 20. Though we the People of God, do not Envy thy Person nor Government; — Yet, Friend, the want of our Prayers to God for thee, is worse to thee than all the Plotting of all wicked Men: And how can we mentionNor do they ever mention K. Will. III. in their Prayers. thee in our Prayers to God for thee, except it be to be de∣livered from thee, &c. Here is then no Pen∣ny (or what is Equivolent) no Pater Noster, for either Priest or Governours. See Pil. Prog. p. 78. for more of this. And that they valued themselves as Members of the Army, see their Book stiled, A Dispute with the Teachers of Chesterfeild, &c. Printed 1655. p. 16. It is known (say they) that most of us have adventured Life and Estate for the present Power (or Government); and and at that Day their Cry ran strong against the Clergy and the King; see their Book, News coming out of the North, p. 19. So you (i. e. the Priests) must be cut down with the same Power that cut down the King (i. e. the Sword) who Reigned over the Nation, whose Family was a Nursery for the Papists and Bishops: But
the Beast (that is, the Government and the false Prophets (i. e. the Priesthood) is stand∣ing still. — The same Teachers are stand∣ing still, that was in the time of the King and Bishops. p. 31. Slay Beal, Balaam must be Slain, all the Hirelings must be turned out of the Kingdom, &c. Now I would ask this Knotty Question of John Feild, and his Tutor George Whitehead, Whether this was not raising the Monster Persecution? And do desire them not to pass silently over it, as they do most of the Charge Objected against them; but in all Friendliness desire their Answer by Yea, or by Nay. But I cannot forget John Feild's smooth pretence; That the Poor Quakers think or design me no Harm, but Pray for me; and do not mean to compare me to Judas; no, by no means; though it be their Common Text, when they are not able otherwise to answer me: And for a proof thereof, see their Book, A Defence of the People called Quakers, &c. By John Fiddiman, Rich. Ashly, and four more; where, on the Title Page they thus say, And Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went unto the Chief Priests to betray him unto them: And when they heard it, they were glad, and Promised to give him Money; and he sought how he might conveniently betray him, Mark. 14.10, 11.
Ay; but says John Feild in his Defence of his Apology, &c. p. 11. But I did not say that Francis Bugg was like Judas, or that Haman and Judas's End might be like his, for I pray God it may not; I am per∣swaded the Quakers never designed him any Harm. Pag. 19. 'We are resolved to Love our Enemies. And yet the very same J. Feild hath this Passage himself in his Epistle to the Reader, i. e. And when Satan entred into Judas, he went his way, and communed with the Chief Priests and Captains how he might betray him; and they were glad, and covenanted to give him Money. Thus then, tho' not so broad-fac'd as the former, yet it is their common Theme or Text, That any one who opposes and discovers their Errours, is Ju∣das, and themselves Jesus; especially when they know not otherwise how to defend themselves. But tho' they pretend to be all of one Mind and Judgment, and to give forth their Books from the Spirit, or Light within, yet as harmonious as Harp and Har∣row, and agree in concord as Light with Dark∣ness. For, says Fiddeman and Ashby, &c. p. 1. And the Priests Mercenary Agent Bugg; again, p. 21. Francis Bugg their Mercenary Agent. Now as this agrees with the two Verses in the Title-Page, and do shew they meant Francis Bugg to be Judas; yet smooth. J. Feild he denies any such Deisign, he loves me, and prays for me, as if he were as
real a Christian as he is a Quaker. But to make it yet more plain, if more can be, see their Letter to the Clergy, &c. which the Quakers printed under the Sham-Name of a Member of the Church of England, and Published many Thousands of them. Nay, so fond they were of it, that they read it in their Meetings in some Places. Oh! an Excellent Epistle, and which in my small Tract, intituled, The Christian Ministry of the Church of England Vindicated, &c. I have so replied to it, as since I have heard no News of it. Well, but let us hear whe∣ther by them two Texts on their Title-Page, Mark 14.10, 11. they do not mean Francis Bugg, as John Feild pretends. A Letter to the Clergy, &c. p. 6. The High Priests had a Judas at Work for Money, to betray Christ into their Hands for Money. Have not you a Judas at Work now for Mo∣ney? Pray where is the difference between these two Traytors? Why the difference is twofold; the first was a Judas, the latter a Bugg. Secondly, Judas had thirty Pieces of Silver, which was paid by the High Priests; the latter had his Money, not only from the High Priests, but a Recommendation also. I am the larger herein, to shew John Feild the Nature of this Beast that carries their Bell, and how it suits with the Spirit of Quakerism: Only this Defence being designed for the Hands of some Persons which he thought might resent it, and there∣fore
he is now for not calling F. B. Judas; no, by no means; but for Praying for him: Which being rightly interpreted, is as Fox Prayed for the Priests, namely, for my De∣struction: But I thank God, I fear not their Curses, nor regard their Pharisaical Prayers: And this being as great a Lie as most of the other, I shall therewithal con∣clude this Head, thereby confronting John Feild's Abstract of Sufferings. But J. Feild proceeds in his Defence, &c. Now if he prove that those Ministers of that Age, who entred into a Solemn League and Covenant against Prelacy, Kingly Office, House of Lords, &c. were God's Heritage, &c. Reply. I grant, that if any of the Mini∣stry did so, (for he names none) they were so far in the wrong; yet with this difference, The Quakers in those Days did thus much, and much more, and that as Prophets of the most High God, and they tell us they are still the same, Print and Reprint their Books which so teach. But the Publick Ministers, if any such did so, they did not pretend they were led therunto by the Eternal Spirit, that they are the same still, and their Prin∣ciples now no other than they were then: They now are obedient to the King's Laws, they have by their joining in the Associa∣tion, declared him Rightful and Lawful King, they Pray for him in their Assemblies: But the Quakers have in their Books of Divine Authority, as they boast, Anathematiz'd all
Kings since the Days of the Apostles, as Apo∣states, and Spiritual Egyptians: That a Parliament chosen by the most Voices, were not like to act for God, or the Good of his People: And they tell us they are the same still, only they word the Matter other∣wise. I grant the Dissenters then were against the Bishops, yet not like the Quakers; for, in their Declaration recited by the Quakers, they were for preserving their Persons from all Violence and Injuries, and for Liberty of Conscience, tho' with some Restriction: But the Quakers, as in Burrough's Works, p. 618. and in R. Hubberthorn's Works, p. 229. assaulted this Declaration, saying; What are you about to make a League and Covenant with Antichrist? Do you look upon them (i. e. the Clergy) to be Ministers of Christ, or of Antichrist? What are you now for tolerating Episcopacy? And if Episco∣pacy, why may not Popery be tolerated, and the like? No, nothing but Blood, and Slaughter, Banishment, and the utter Extir∣pating of the Clergy, would satisfie their blood-thirsty and malicious persecuting Spi∣rit: As in Fox's Book stilled, New coming up out of the North, p. 31. So you must be cut down with the same Power that cut down the King, whose Family was a Nursery for Papists and Bishops; the same Teachers are standing that were in the time of the King, and the same that were in the time of the
Bishops. — Sound the Trumpet, sound an Alarm; call up to the Battel, gather together for the Destruction, draw the Sword, hew down all fruitless Trees which cumber the Ground, cleanse the Land from Filthiness, slay Baal, Balaam must be slain; all the Hire∣lings must be turned out of the Kingdom, &c. This was in Oliver's Time, but you tell us you are the same still, and your Actions manifest the same. For tho' you held in Oliver's Time a Mock-Court, wherein you Tried all the Clergy, and Condemned them; yet when in 1672. you reprinted the Works of your Prophet Burrough, you revived your Trial, and reprinted the same, as in pag. 223. Viz. A Just and Lawful Trial of the Teachers and Ministers of this Age, (1672.) by a perfect Proceeding against them; and they are righteously Examined, justly Weighed, truly Measured, and Condemned, to be contrary to all the Ministers of Christ in former Ages, and to agree and concur with all the false. Prophets and Deceivers; and being brought to the [Quakers] Bar of Justice, these Things are truly charged, and legally proved upon them, and found Guilty, &c. I need not add the Trial,And yet G. W. say he was n skilled i Law-terms, th more Fo he. the Title of the Book setting forth the Quakers Verdict (where my Lob Chief Justice Bur∣rough, the Quaker-Prophet, was both Judge, Witness, Jury and Executioner) is enough to set forth their presumptuous, unwarrant∣able, arbitrary, and extrajudicial Proceed∣ings,
not only against 12, but 1200 Persons. And that it may further appear, that tho' this Quaker-Court was first erected (to shew what they would be at, had they Power) in O. Cromwell's Time; yet in 1672, they to set forth his Skill in Law-Terms, reprinting the same Trial as a Monument of his Righteous Judgment; and that he might make Work on't to some purpose, in p. 273. he joined with the Jews, and all the perse∣cuting Heathen Emperours, against Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs; saying, That the Sufferings of the Quakers were greater, and more unjust than the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs, &c. But still, as one Demonstration more (though I could give twenty) that it was not the Ministers in Oliver's Time only that the Quakers thus Arraigned, Judged, and Condemned, as John Feild would insinuate, but also King Charles the Second his Reign; see W. Smith, another of their Preachers, in his Works printed Anno 1668, p. 161. viz. A General Summons from the Authority of Truth, to all Ecclesiastical Courts and Officers, &c. By which we may see their arrogant Bold∣ness, thus to Summons, Judge, Try, and Condemn, not only the Clergy, but all Courts Ecclesiastical and Officers; not∣withstanding they were Dissenters, a poor illiterate People, that as Burroughs tells us, (in his Epistle to Fox's Mystery) they lay in Barns (like Gypsies:) See then the Im∣pudence
of these Proud, Pragmatical Quaker-Prophets. In my Book Quakerism Exposed, &c. there is this Passage, pag. 28. Now tho' I profess my self a Member of the Church of England, I have often, and do now again tell you, that I am against Persecu∣tion; and will add, That Persecution for the Name of Jesus, or for Righteousness sake, is a Badge of a false Church; of which your Schism in Pensilvania has given a Demonstration; and had you Power in your Hand, (which God grant you may not) I doubt not but we should soon feel your Little Finger as heavy as ever you felt the Parliament's Loins; witness your Indict∣ing me in the Old Bailey, your Persecuting G. Keith: But I hope all Suffering is not Persecution. Shall Men Fire Houses, and Poyson Rivers, and not be controll'd, limited, nay, punished, if they will follow their own Light, blind Zeal and Imagina∣tions? In like manner, such as poyson the Streams of the Christian Religion, subvert the Faith, undermine Christianity, broach and maintain damnable Errours, denying the Lord that bought them, as you have done; I hope then it is not raising Perse∣cution, to have you Examined, and your Errours censured; which is the main thing you fear, whilst you would make the World believe you fear Persecution.
In answer to this, John Feild, in his De∣fence, &c. p. 3. recites thus much, viz. I do profess my self a Member of the Church of England, I have often, and do again tell you that I am against Persecution; and will add, That Persecution for Righteousness sake, is a Badge of a False Church, &c. But these Words (with many others, as by comparing you may see) for the Name of Jesus he has dropt, as not for his turn. And in this, tho' John Feild was a Tool, yet he was no Fool; for he knew very well, that no Quakers ever suffered in England for the Name of Jesus: Neither was there (in their time) ever known, that an Act Parliament was made, or a Justice's Warrant ever signed, to persecute any Man for the Name of Jesus. And I now anew do declare, That I am against Persecution, and do refer the Rea∣der to my Book, The Picture of Quakerism drawn to the Life, &c. pag. 73, to 125. for my Judgment in that Case. But there is one Passage I may not let slip in Geo. Whitehead's Truth and Innocency Vindicated, &c. p. 44. Such Records are not intended to make the Governors nor Go∣vernment odious for Persecution to Posterity. — Neither do I know of any among us, that have so threatned to publish to After-ages, &c. Reply. But Ah, George, what is become of thy Sincerity, that canst thus Lie in the Face of the Government? What dost not
thou know W. Penn? Is he not still among you? And tho' others be dead, yet their Books are still among you. I am now turn∣ing thee upside down, even thy Inside out∣ward; therefore hold up thy Chin and draw near me, that I may take off thy Mask of Sincerity, and shew thy foul Inside. Read the Picture of Quakerism, p. 102, 103. where divers of your Books are quoted, that do so threaten; particularly, W. Penn's Judas and the Jews. &c. p. 41. Our faithful Chro∣nicles (says he) of the Bloody Tragedies of that Professing Generation will tell future Ages other things. Now, George, is not this a Threat? Yes sure. Only Sam. Cater's, and other Sham-Sufferings, are discovered, which will despoil your Chronicle. Again, in his Rejoinder, p. 410. New Provocations (says Penn) may give fresh occasion for their Hi∣story to come abroad to the Nation more com∣pendiously than ever. See also R. Barkley's Anarchy, &c. p. 42. That as thro' our Faith∣ful Testimony in the Hand of the Lord, that Antichristian and Apostatized Generation, the National Ministry, hath received a deadly Blow, by our discovering and witnes∣sing against their forced Maintenance and Tythes, against which we have testified by many cruel Sufferings, of all kinds, as our Chronicles shall make known to Generations to come, &c. What George, is here no Threatning? Dost thou indeed say thou knowest of none
among you that have an intent to publish your Sufferings, to render the Government odious for Persecution? This is such a Lie, that it will wound the Author. And so I turn to John Feild again. In my Book, Quakerism Exposed, &c. there is this Passage, p. 23. But this your Shuffle shewed the Gentry, Justices of Peace, the Clergy and Protestant Dissenters, That your Principles are so destructive to Common Christianity, as that you did not dare to stand the Test: And this, yea, on this, yea, only this, so far as I know, put them upon a Pe∣tition to the Honourable House of Commons, to do that for God and the Christian Reli∣gion, which they could not do; namely, to Examine your Principles, and Censure your Errours, as to their Wisdom should seem meet: And in this, they (i. e. both the Church of England Men and Protestant Dissenters) are unanimous; and this disturbs you, this perplexes you; and for this your Tool John Feild calls and compares them to Herod and Pilate, Haman and Judas. Upon this, John Feild by way of Prayer, replies, Defence, &c. p. 10. Pray let Fra. Bugg, who asserts this, make it appear to the King and both Houses of Parliament, that this, yea, only this, put them upon it, and that they are unanimous herein: For if so, there is not one of these Sorts, but what is consenting thereto, or hath been actually concerned in the Petition. But if it hath not been so,
then the Parliament may be hereby informed, That he hath not truly represented them∣selves, (i. e. the Parliament;) for they are included in his general Words: And let him tell if he can, what that common Christianity is, that the Quakers Principles are so de∣structive to, &c. Well, John, I have hear'd thy Prayer, and G. W.'s Ishmael herewith reprinted, do tell you, (if what I have hitherto does not) what that common Christianity is which your Prin∣ciples are destructive to, and in a great part shew the Cause of your Shuffle; in that you did not dare to own your Books, and either defend or retract your Blasphemous and Seditious Principles; together with many other Reasons in my said Book, Qua. Expo∣sed, &c. to which I refer the Reader. Nor doth it follow from what I therein said, that every individual Man of all sorts was con∣cerned in the Petition; nor that the Parlia∣ment was at all concerned. What, the Par∣liament Petition the Parliament? No, John, this is a Quibble, which hath no Ground in any Field, but such that bring forth nothing but Thorns or Thistles. But, John, here is more in this Sugge∣stion than every body on first sight will be aware of. For what is it less, than to tell all the Counties, Shires, Cities and Bur∣roughs in England and Wales, that their Representatives are such Friends to your Errours; that they are not unanimous in
and with their Electors, as to have you exa∣mined about them. And not only so, but the Protestant Churches abroad, who are Scan∣dalized by your pernicious Errours; if you be (as your selves boast) Recognized Prote∣stants. And this, John, I take to be Scanda∣lous to our English Protestant Parliament, who profess Faith in our Lord Jesus, which you testifie was not the Son of God; which is a Damnable Errour, denying the Lord that bought you with the Price of his most Pre∣cious Blood, if you would accept thereof on Gospel-Terms. And from this Scandal there needs be no other Vindication, than the Good and Christian Laws already made, and their fre∣quent Votes in Parliament, and the Humble Address made to the King's Majesty, in the Year 1697. which not only gave me Encou∣ragement to Charge and Challenge you; and when you threw that off, and Challenged the Clergy, it likewise incouraged them to Charge you: And when you shuffled and evaded their Charge, it gave them Encouragement for the Petition, that they might Examine you; an Abstract thereof is as followeth, viz.
The Humble Address of the House of Commons to the KING. May it please Your Majesty. WE your Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Sub∣jects, the Commons in Parliament Assembled, do, with great Joy and Comfort, remember, the many Testimonies which your Majesty hath given us of your Sincerity and Zeal for the true Reformed Religion, as established in this Kingdom, and in particular we beg leave to present to your Majesty our most Humble and Thankful Acknowledgments for the late Gracious De∣claration your Majesty has made to us from the Throne, that you would effectually discourage Prophaneness and Immorality, &c. — We do further, in all Humility, beseech your Majesty, that your Majesty would give such effectual Orders, as to your Royal Wisdom shall seem fit, for the suppressing all Pernicious Books and Pamphlets, which contain in them Impious Doctrine against the Holy Tri∣nity, and other Fundamental Articles of our Faith, tending to the Subversion of the Christian Religion, and that the Authors and Publishers thereof may be Discountenanced and Punished, &c. And to the end that the Quakers may see the Zeal of our Government, against the Errors contained in their Books; and not to presume to Discourse as they do; as if they, and they only, were the White Hen's Chick∣ens and the only Favourites, as I can give parti∣cular Demonstrations, both by what I have heard with my Ears from some of their Young Disciples, (who, as the Old Cocks Crow, the Young ones Learn) as well as I have obser∣ved
from Credible Information, I shall recite His Majesties most Gracious Answer to the foregoing Address, which is as fol∣loweth, viz. Gentlemen, I Cannot but be very well plea∣sed with an Address of this Nature; and I will give immediate Directions in the several Particu∣lars you desire: But I could wish some more Effectual Provision were made for the suppressing those Per∣nicious Books and Pamphlets which your Address takes notice of. By this time the Quakers thought them∣selves concerned, being Conscious to them∣selves, (as well they might) that no People in the King's Dominion, no, not the Mug∣gletonians, were so obnoxious to the Cen∣sure of the King and Parliament, as them∣selves: Upon which they bestirred them∣selves, like the Magicians in Moses's time, to bring forth a likeness: And therefore when there was a Bill Prepa∣ring, they Printed a Paper, and presented it
to the House of Commons by way of In∣structions; in which there were these Words, viz. WHereas the Bill enacts, That if any Person or Per∣sons, &c. shall deny any of the Persons in the Holy Trinity to be God, and make it punishable by the same Bill, were it not more safe and plain to put it in Scripture Terms, as instead of Deny any one of the Persons to be God, to insert, If any one shall deny any of the Three, that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, or the Holy Ghost to be God? 1 John 5.7. Now if the Quakers can but bend the Parliament to their Bow, then they'll agree; (but as for them, they cannot condescend a Hair's Breadth, as one of their Teachers, Patrick Livingston, formerly Taught). For, say they, The Father is Light, the Son is Light, and the Holy Ghost is Light: Nay, if they desire three or four Persons more ad∣ded; as that the Door is Light, the Elect Stone is Light, the Vine is Light, the Blood is Light, the Water is Light, they'll al∣low all; and all these are One, no one of which was before or after the other; nor one greater or lesser than another; and yet all this while they mean not a Word accord∣ing to the Scriptures, and the common be∣lief of all Sound Christians, but Reduce all to their Light within. But still fearing what might happen, and to guard their Errors, they soon presented His Majesty with a Paper; and this put
me upon undergoing the Charge of Re∣printing one of their Books intirely, that so I may set them in their True Light, to be seen and read of all Men: And as it is my Duty, so by my Reasonable Service to God and my Country; though by some my Words may be despised, Eccles. 9.16. A Copy of the Quakers Paper is as followeth. viz. To King William III. over England, &c. The Grateful Acknowledgment of the People Commonly called Quakers, Humbly Presented. May it please the King. SEeing the most High God, who rules in the King∣doms of MenDan. 5.21., and appointeth over it whomsoever he will, hath by his over-ruling Power and Providence, placed thee in Dominion and Dignity over these Realms, and by his Divine Favour has signally preserved and de∣livered thee from many Great and Eminent Dangers, and Graciously turned the Calamity of War into the desired Mercy of Peace, we heartily wish that we, and all others concerned, may be truly Sensible, and hum∣bly Thankful to Almighty God for the same, that the Peace may be lasting, and a perpetual Blessing. And now, O King, the God of Peace having return∣ed thee in Safety, it is Cause of Joy to all them that fear him, to hear thy good and seasonable Resolution, effectually to discourage Prophaneness and Immorality, Righteousness being that which exalteth a Nation. And as the King has been Tenderly Inclined to give Ease and Liberty of Conscience to his Subjects of different Per∣swasions, (of whose Favour we have largely partaken) so we esteem it our Duty Gratefully to Commemorate,
and Acknowledge the same, earnestly beseeching Al∣mighty God to assist the King, to prosecute and effect these his just and good Inclinations, that his Days may be Happy and Peaceable, and hereafter he may partake of a lasting Kingdom that will never fade away. London, the 7th of the 11th Month, 1697. Signed in Behalf of the said People, by us, George Whitehead Peter Bowen Will. Mead Gilbert Layty John. Edge Daniel Quane Tim. Emmerson Thomas Hawes Samuel Jobson Theod. Eccleston Nicholas Gates Will. Ingram Will. Onkingate Thomas Lower John Paine John Butcher Will. Macket Rich. Needham John Vaughton John Hound Michael Russel Jof. Wilkinson Joseph Wyeth John Hall Josiah Ellis. Now by this fair and smooth Paper, who would think but the Quakers would have Signed the Association, pursuant to the Act of Parliament; Intituled, An Act for the better Security of His Majesties Royal Per∣son and Government, &c. Oh! no, by no means: For they tell you in their Paper, Intituled, The Ancient Testimony and Principle of the People called Quakers Renewed, with respect to the King and Government; and touching the present Association, Dated the 23d of
March 1695/6 viz. And whereas we the said People are required to sign the said Association; we sincerely declare, That our refusing so to do, is not out of any dis∣satisfaction to the King and Government; nor in Opposition to his being declared Rightful, and Lawful King of these Realms; but purely because we cannot for Conscience sake, Fight, Kill, or Revenge, either for our selves or any Man else. Oh! no, by no means, this they could not be brought to; and the Riddle I have unfolded in my Pil. Prog. &c. 2d Edition, p. 192, to 199. For as they yet never made one Publick Ad, dress to His Majesty from thir Yearly Meet∣ing, that great and dangerous Body; nor one Prayer, that I could ever hear of, either in their Books or in their Meetings; nor ever yet wrote one Book in Favour of the Go∣vernment: But did all these in the late Reign. But still there is one Clause in this Paper worth Notice, i. e. 'As the King has been tenderly inclined to give Ease and Liberty of Conscience, &c. And I pray is it inconsistant with His Majesties Tenderness to give Liber∣ty of Conscience to His Protestant Dissenters, who hold the Fundamentals of the Chri∣stian Faith, joined in the Association to pre∣serve his Majesties Royal Person and Go∣vernment: And Pray heartily for him in their Meetings. And to Curb and Restrain such as will doneither; but hold such horrid Pernicious and Destructive Principles, both to Church and State, and even to Humane
Society? No sure, God hath given him both Wisdom and Conduct; and he knows how to make a difference, and distingush be∣tween such as Subvert the Faith, undermine Christianity, and Damn the Ever-Blessed Trinity to the Pit of Hell; and such who make it their Business to Instruct their Peo∣ple in the Fundamentals of Christianity; as is well expressed in divers Laws, parti∣cularly in that wherein is this Clause, viz. Provided, and be it enacted, That no Quaker, or Reputed Quaker, shall by Vir∣tue of this Act, be qualified or permitted to give Evidence on any Criminal Causes to Serve on any Juries, or bear any Office or Place of [Trust or] Profit, in the Government; any thing in this Act con∣tained to the contrary; in any wise not∣withstanding. And for this Clause all true Protestants have good cause to be Humbly thankful to God, the King and the Parliament; and that for more Reasons than I think meet here to enumerate. But notwithstanding the Quakers Tempo∣rizing Paper above recited, the King's Maje∣sty as a Nursing-Father to the Church, and Spouse of Christ; and as a Zealous Defender of the Faith, once delivered to the Saints, put forth his Royal Proclamation from his Court at Kensington, the 24th of Feb. 1697.
which we have read both at Church and Courts of Judicature: An Abstract thereof is as followeth, viz. By the KING, A PROCLAMATION. WILLIAM REX. WHereas we cannot but be deeply sensible of the great Goodness of Almighty God, in putting an end to a Long, Bloody, and Expensive War, by the Conclusion of an Honourable Peace, so we are not less touched with a Resentment, that notwithstanding this, and many other great Blessings and Deliverances, Impie∣ty, Prophaneness, and Immorality, do still abound in this our Kingdom; and whereas nothing can prove a greater Dishonour to a well-ordered Government, where the Christian Faith is professed, nor is likelier to pro∣voke God to withdraw his Mercy and Blessings from us, and instead thereof, to inflict Heavy and Severe Judg∣ments upon this Kingdom, than the open and avowed Practice of Vice, Immorality, and Prophaneness, which amongst many Men has too much prevailed in this our Kingdom of late Years, to the high Displeasure of Al∣mighty God, the great Scandal of Christianity, and the ill and fatal Example of the rest of our loving Subjects, who have been soberly Educated, and whose Inclinati∣ons would lead them to the Exercise of Piety and Vir∣tue, did they not daily find such frequent and repeated Instances of dissolute Living, Prophaneness, and Impie∣ty, &c. — And whereas several Wicked and Prophane Per∣sons have presumed to Print and Publish several Perni∣cious Books and Pamphlets, which contain in them Impi∣ous Doctrines against the Holy Trinity, and other Fun∣damental Articles of our Faith, tending to the Subversi∣on of the Christian Religion: Therefore for the Pu∣nishing the Authors and Publishers thereof, and for the preventing such Impious Books and Pamphlets being
Published and Printed for the future, we do hereby strictly Charge and Prohibit all Persons, that they do not presume to Write, Print, or Publish any such Per∣nicious Books or Pamphlets, under the Pain of our High Displeasure, and of being Punished according to the uttermost Severity of the Law: And We do hereby strictly Charge and Require all Our Loving Subjects to Discover and Apprehend such Person or Persons whom they shall Know to be the Authors or Publishers of any such Books or Pamphlets, and to bring them before some Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, in order that they may be proceeded against according to Law. God save the KING. For these and the like Reasons, the Nor∣folk Clergy did Accept the Quakers Chal∣lenge, did meet them at the time perfixed; and there did endeavour to shew them their Errors, and would have convinced them thereof, and then had them Retracted their Errors; and thereby to have merited the Indulgence of the Government, and the Love of their Christian Neighbours. But they refusing all this Labour of Love and Good Will; boasting they were Protestants, and so Recognized; and with all boldness re∣jected all their Endeavours of Conviction; up∣on which the Gentry in Norfolk (some of which were there) and many Justices of the Peace, and others; Signed a Petition (as they also in the County of Suffolk have done) waiting a seasonable Opportunity to present the same. A Copy thereof, excepting Names, is as followeth, viz.
To the Honourable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled; the Humble Pe∣tition of the Justices of the Peace, and Grand-Juries of the said County of Norfolk in Session Assembled; in behalf of them∣selves, and the Body of this County at large. Humbly sheweth, THAT We cannot without Resentment take No∣tice of the Growth and Daily Increase of a Sect of People among Us, called Quakers, and the Mischiefs and Dangers from thence threatning this Nation. It is too observable with what restless Zeal their de∣luding Teachers, and (as may well be suspected) many Romish Emissaries under their Vizar and Disguise, daily ramble into all parts of these Kingdoms, and boldly spread their Venemous Doctrine every where, attemp∣ting to Infect and Shock the Minds of Weak and Unsta∣ble Protestants, and Assuming to themselves Rules of Discipline, Powers in Matters of Religion, and Forms of Government, repugnant to the Established Laws of the Kingdom, contrary to the very Acts of Toleration and not allowed to any other Dissenters, vouching in all their Practices Divine Inspiration for their Warrant, and their Indulgence of the Government for their In∣demnity. How apparently their Blasphemous Books and Perni∣cious Principles tend to subvert the Fundamentals of Christianity, and the undermining the Civil Govern∣ment, are sufficiently demonstrable. The Publishing whereof by pretended Permission of Authority We hum∣bly conceive to be of most dangerous Consequence. We therefore obliged in Duty to God and Our Coun∣try, do humbly pray, That you will vouchsafe to take these Matters into your Care and Consideration, that (with whatever Tenderness to the Persons and Estates of these People) their said Principles and Practices may be strictly Examined, and Censured, or Suppressed, as they shall appear to deserve, and as in your great Wis∣dom
shall seem expedient; and that our true Christian Religion (more dear to us than our Lives) may be De∣fended and Preserved to all Posterity, free from Popish Superstition, and unpolluted with Enthusiastical Inno∣vation. Thus have I recited the Petition, and that for these Reasons following, viz. 1. Because it is nothing but what is agree∣able to the Mind and Pleasure of the King's Majesty, and his Honourable House of Com∣mons; and thereby no Dishonour to the Peti∣tioners. 2. Because that when the Petition is Pre∣sented, every Member may have one of them in his Custody to Consider of it; and the Reason that put them upon so doing. 3. Because there are more Petitions of the same Nature prepared, and preparing, as this find Acceptance; when a convenient oppor∣tunity offer it self. 4. To let the World see how reasonable a thing it is; and not such a monstrous thing as the Quakers have represented it, even to raise up the Monster Persecution. 5. Because it is nothing but what they conceive to be their Duty to God and their Country, to acquaint that great Assembly, with the Grievances of the County; and that as the most proper place for a Remedy. 6. And Lastly, that the Contents are agree∣able to the Laws of the Land; and particu∣larly to the very Act of Tolleration: And to manifest the same, I may recite a Branch there∣of, which is as followeth, viz.
Provided alway, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; that neither this Act, nor any Clause, Article, or Thing herein contained, shall extend, or be construed to ex∣tend to give any Ease, Benefit or Advantage to any Papist, or Popish Recusant what∣soever; or that any Person that shall deny in his Preaching or Writing the Do∣ctrine of the Blessed Trinity, as it is de∣clared in the aforesaid Article of Religion. I have likewise Discoursed with some of the most Eminent of the Protestant Dissen∣ters; and with their own Mouths they have declared that they are sorrowfully affected to think that the Quakers should be joined with them in the Act of Toleration; and to see Christianity suffer so deeply by their Antiscriptural Doctrine: And not only so, but I have a Testimony well Attested of their Abhorrence of their Blasphemous Tenets. The substance of which is as follows, viz. THat the Quakers render the Holy Scripture to be of no more Authority than Aesop's Fables: That the Blood of Christ is no better than the Blood of another Saint: That the Quakers are the Spawn of the Ranters: That the Quakers owning Christ is no other than a My∣stical Romance: The the Tendency of all the Quakers Reasoning about Instituted Religion is to Debauch Mankind *: that their Principles improved are destru∣ctive to all Humane Society: That their Teachers are Cheats and Impostors, and Implacable Enemies to the Christian Religion, &c.
Here then is the unanimous Consent of all sound Protestants, the King's Majesty, and his Honourable House of Commons, and the Laws of the Land. What remains now, but Examination, and for that too we have some Encouragement from the Quakers themselves, if they mean as they say. See An Apology for the Quakers, by J. Feild, &c. p. 7. Examine (say they) the Doctrine of your Neighbours the Quakers, blame not be∣fore thou hast examined the matter; first un∣derstand, and then rebuke, &c. Again, George Whitehead to the same purpose, in his Book, Truth and Innocency vindicated, &c. p. 69. Let our Books (says George) be compared, to evince them more fully, and clear our Inno∣cency, &c. Now whereas the Quakers themselves (if they be sincere in what they say) seem to be willing to have their Books, and the Doctrine contained in them, come under Examination, in order to be cleared from the Objections against them; and as this is highly reasonable on their parts, so it will (I humbly conceive) be a means to put a stop to the Gangrene of Quakerism; (as also answer the Request of many Thousands, who are earnestly solici∣tous to have their Books Examined, and their Errours Censured, who yet are not for Persecution, nor any Alteration in the Act of Toleration;) so is it also a Method pursuant to their own Terms and Proposi∣tion, and with which they cannot reasonably be offended.
And thereupon I do most humbly pray, That our Superiours (if it may seem good in their sight, in Answer to the Quakers Request, and the Peoples Prayer) would appoint, some Judicious Learned Men to give us an Equal Hearing, and the Quakers Books an Impartial Examination: And if I do not make a full Proof of what I Charge them with, let me suffer any Punishment (for my Default) which our Government shall think fit. But then on the other hand, if I do make good my Charge, (as an Equi∣valent to my Suffering, in case I do not) let the Quakers be obliged to Retract and Con∣demn such Books of theirs as do contain such Impious Doctrines, as I have, or yet shall both Charge and Prove: And this is all I desire, and which I believe would be a Gene∣ral Satisfaction to the Nation, as well as for the Good of the Quakers themselves. But remembring a Saying of Festus a Roman Governour, tho' in a contrary Case, Acts 25.27. For it seemeth a thing unrea∣sonable to send a Prisoner, and not withal to signifie the Crimes laid against him. And so it seems to be unreasonable in me, to de∣sire the Examination of the Quakers Books, and not signifie the Errours (at least some of them) contained in them; and especially, since it is at the Quakers earnest Request: For say they in their Book, A Defence of an Apology, &c. pag. 7. Pray let Francis Bugg make it appear to the King, and both
Houses of Parliament, that (our Shuffle at West-Dereham in Norfolk) put the Gentry, Clergy, and Protestant Dissenters, upon their Petition to the House of Commons; and that they are unanimous therein. — And let him (Francis Bugg) tell, if he can, what he means by that Common Christianity, which the Quakers Principles are so destru∣ctive to. As to the first, that is, That the Justices of Peace, the Gentry, the Clergy, and Pro∣testant Dissenters are unanimous herein, I have already shewed: And as to the second Part, that is, what I mean by that Com∣mon Christianity, which the Quakers Prin∣ciples are sodestructive to, I shall at his viz. J. Feild's, Prayer and Request, shew in the next place. For wherein I can find his Prayers and Request reasonable, I hope I shall be ready to gratifie him. For I believe with the Gentry, the Justices, the Clergy, the Pro∣testant Dissenters, and all other Christians, That Jesus Christ, who was Born at Beth∣lehem of Judea, of the B. Virgin Mary, was the Son of God, that he was Crucified, Dead and Buried, that he Rose again the third Day, and Ascended into Heaven, and there sits at the Right Hand of God, making Intercession for us Sinners, who lay hold on him by Faith, and live in Obedience to him, his Laws, Institutions and Precepts in the Gospel, left upon Record by the Four Evan∣gelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
and others of his Apostles, in their Epistles: And that we ought to Worship and Adore him, together with God the Father and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One God, in the Unity of his Essence. This is the Trinity in Unity, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is One God, blessed for evermore: And this is that Common Christianity which I mean, that the Quakers Principles are so destructive to. Now the next thing I am to tell at the Prayer and Request of John Feild, is, Wherein and whereby their Principles are Destru∣ctive, &c. I. The Quakers deny Jesus of Nazareth, who was Born of the Virgin, and Suffered at Jerusalem, to be the Son of God. II. That they account him only a Vail, a Garment, an outward Vessel; and can (as their Books teach) never call him Christ, and that his Blood was no better than the Blood of another Saint. III. They teach, that their Sufferings are greater, and more unjust, than the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs, in all Ages since. For that (as they teach) the Sufferings of Christ, and his Army of Mar∣tyrs, were inflicted by a Law, and in great part by the due Execution of a Law. IV. That such are False Ministers, who bid People believe in Jesus Christ, as he is in Heaven above, at God's Right Hand; and
that by Preaching Christ in Heaven, the Devil gets his Work done on Earth. V. They teach, That G. Fox was their great Apostle, which said thus of himself; I am the Light of the World, him by whom the World was made, and doth inlighten every Man that cometh into the World. VI. They teach, That the Name Jesus and Christ belongs to every Believer, as well as to the Head Christ, that Suffered, Died, Rose again, &c. VII. And thereupon they teach, That he that, hath the same Spirit that raised Jesus from the Dead, is equal with God. VIII. And in coherence with this Do∣ctrine their Prophet Sol. Eccles taught, That Geo. Fox was a Prophet indeed: And that as it was said of Christ, He was in the World, and the World was made by him; and the World knew him not: So it might be said of G. Fox, as in the 5th Instance. XI. They teach, That G. Fox was the Father of many Nations; that his Being and Habi∣tation was in the Power of the highest, that he Ruled and Governed in Righteousness; that his Kingdom is established in Peace; and that of the Increase thereof there was never to be an End. X. They teach, That the Holy Scriptures are not the written Word of God; but con∣trarywise, that they are Dust, Death, Ser∣pents Meat, Beastly Ware; but that their own Writings are the Word of God, given
forth by Divine Iuspiration, and that they, as such, are of greater Authority than the Bible; and thereupon read them in their Meetings for Divine Worship, whilst they never read in any such Meeting this Fifty Year, one Chapter of the Bible, either in the Old or New Testament: For they teach, They are not the means to work Faith in the Heart, but are a Rotten Foundation. XI. They teach, That Circumcision is as much in force as Water-Baptism; and the Paschal Lamb as Bread and Wine; and their disuse of these two Ordinances for this Fifty Years, shew that they reject them, and al∣lows not of them. XII. And touching the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, they are so far from owning it, as that they Damn them to the Pit of Hell; as in G. Whitehead's Book Ishmael, &c. herein Reprinted, may he seen. Now, John, I having Replied to your Book, A Defence of an Apology, &c. i. e. to the principal parts of it; and shewed your Fa∣lacies, and shallow Subterfuges, as well as in some places answered your Request; I rest, desiring that your self and your Peo∣ple may Consider of it: Repent of your Er∣rors, Retract and Condemn the same, and Pray to God, and the Nation, to forgive you; in which I shall join with you, [And in this you will have no cause to cry out of Persecution] who am your Friend, Fran. Bugg.
An Humble Address to His Majesty King WILLIAM III. over England, &c. by one of the Mean∣est yet most Dutiful Subject FRANCIS BUGG. May it please your Most Excellent Majesty, I Cannot but with great Joy and Comfort Remember your Majesties Repeated As∣surances given to your Loving Subjects, of your Majesties Care and Christian Zeal for the Protestant Religion, as by Law esta∣blished in this Kingdom, by your many and repeated Speeches to your Parliaments; and particularly by your late Gracious Pro∣clamation, consisting of two Parts: In which your Majesties Pious Zeal has been abun∣dantly manifest, First, Against Vice and Prophaneness; and, Secondly, Against such Books as contain in them Impious, Doctrine against the Holy Trinity, and other Funda∣mental Articles of the Christian Faith; and therein have given Encouragement to all your Loving Subjects to discover the Authors of such Books. Wherefore in Obedience to your Majesties Royal Command, as well as my Duty there∣in to God, I have herein Reprinted one of the Quakers Books, of which Geo. White∣head is one of the Authors, to the intent that your Sacred Majesty, and the whole
Kingdom may be presented with a Speci∣men of the Quakers Doctrine. And do most Humbly Pray in the Name of the Church of England, and other your Majesties Dissen∣ting Protestants, that such Care may be taken to suppress the same, (with others of their Books of the same Narure) as to your Roy∣al Wisdom shall seem meet. And as it plea∣sed God Almighty to give King Solomon Wisdom to Execute Justice; so will he en∣due the King with an Understanding Heart to Judge who is in the wrong, and to Punish accordingly: And in this case let not the King Respect Persons in Judgment, but if I be not able to maintain my Charge, then let me bear his Majesties Displeasure, and suffer what Punishment shall be due for the same: But if I do make good my Charge, then do as seems good in your Eye. Thus, with all Dutiful Submission, do I Sign this my Humble Address, this 13th Day of December 1699. Francis Bugg. FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books wrote by Fran. Bugg. 1. DE Christiana Libertate, &c. in 8vo. bound. 2. The Painted Harlot stript and whipt, &c. 4to. 3. Reason against Railing, &c. 4to. 4. Innocency Vindicated, &c. 4to. never Answered. 5. The Quakers Detected, and their Errors Confu∣ted, &c. 4to. 6. A Letter to the Quakers, shewing their frequent Addresses to, and Prayers for the late King Jam. II. and not to King Will. III. 7. Battering Rams against New Rome, &c. 4to. 8. One blow more at New Rome, &c. 4to. 9. New Rome Unmask'd, and her Foundation Sha∣ken, &c. 4to. 10. New Rome Arraigned, and out of her own Mouth Condemned, &c. 4to. 11. A Sheet Presented to the Parliament, 1693. in Answer to the Quakers Allegations, &c. 12. Quakerism Withering, and Christianity Revi∣ving, &c. 8vo. 13. Quakerism Anatomized, &c. 4to. never An∣swered. 14. The Quakers Yearly Meeting impeached on the behalf of the Commons of England, &c. 15. The Quakers set in their true Light, &c. Pre∣sented to the House of Lords, 1696. never answered. 16. A Brief Reply to the Quakers Ancient Testi∣mony, presented to the Lord's House, 1696. never Answered. 17. A Brief History of the Rise, Growth, and Pro∣gress of Quakerism, 8vo. never Answered. 18. The Picture of Quakerism drawn to the Life, 8vo. never Answered. 19. A Sober Expostulation with their Hearers touch∣ing the Mercenary Teachers, never Answered. 20. The Pilgrim's Progress from Quakerism to Chri∣stianity, &c. Printed in 4to. and Reprinted in 8vo. 21. Seventy Queries to several Quakers, &c. never Answered.
22. A Broad Sheet with a Scheme of the Quakers Synod, presented to the Parliament, 1699. 23. Jezebel withstood, and her Daughter, Anne Dowcra publickly Reproved, never Answered. 24. Quakerism Exposed to Publick Censure, &c. 8vo. 25. The Christian Ministry of the Church of Eng∣land vindicated, &c. 8vo. never Answered. 26. A Defence of my Book Quakerism Exposed, &c. Besides three Books I wrote part of. 27. Will. Rogers his Seventh Part of the Christian Quaker distinguished, &c. about 1682. 28. A Looking Glass for the Quakers, in 2 Columns. 29. A Postscript to the Norfolk Clergies Book, i. e. A Brief Discovery some of of the Quakers Blas∣mous and Seditious Principles, &c. ADVERTISEMENT. IF any Person be desirous to have this Book and my former Books, Bound, either them in Quarto or them in Ostavo, or Single, sticht; they may be fur∣nished with all (except them of those Impressions wholly Sold off) at Mr. Janeway's a Bookbinder in St. Paul's Church-yard, next Door to Child's Coffee-House, London. And, Likewise, if any Abler Men (for of such there is very great need) be disposed farther to unmask the Leaders of this Heresie; this is to give notice, that in the Library of Christ-Church Colledge in Oxford, there is, by a Worthy Gentleman, a Divine of the Church of England, bought of me, and given by him for the Service of the Church, of Quakers Books, wrote by the most approved Authors of that Sect, which I think are thus Chained up (from doing any more hurt). First, G. Fox's Journal; next to it Muggleton's Journal or Works, (containing more than 1000 pages 4to.); and I think the best Quaker of the two; next to that G. Fox's Great Mystery, &c. Fol. with near 20 more of his Books; next the Works of Edw. Bur∣roughs, Francis Howgil, Will. Smith, Sam. Fisher; all in great Folio's; next the Works of Jos. Coal, Step.
Smith, R. Hubberthorn, Will. Bayly, Is. Pennington, G. Fox, Junior, in 4to. next divers Books wrote by James Naylor, Will Penn, Christ. Atkinson, G. Whitehead, Sol. Eccles, Tho. Lawson, Christ. Taylor, R. Farnsworth, Geo. Bishop, and divers others; in all near the Num∣ber of Four Hundred, bearing distinct Titles, which may furnish any Person sufficiently with Matter of Fact. The CONTENTS. A Parable of an Island Page 14 In which arose a Sea Monster ibid Who stung many of the Inhabitants ibid The Physicians several Applications Page 15 The Quakers Ingratitude Page 16 The Wounded Peoples Ingratitude Page 17 St. Paul's Example a good President ibid. Anne Docwra's witness touching the Quakers Page 17 R. Sandylan's Letter of Retraction Page 20 Will. Mucklow's witness is true Page 21 Their Singuler way of Answering Books Page 23 Their Sufferings greater and more unjust than the Sufferings of Christ or his Apostles Page 24 They deny Jesus to be the Son of God Page 26 The Author's Apology for his proceedings Page 27 Prayers for their Recovery Page 28 Part the First. Their Contradictory Books hinted at Page 2 How the Quakers and Papists agree Page 4 About chusing of Parliaments Page 9 Their Sentence of all Kings Page 14 Of their denying the Blessed Trinity Page 17, 30 Of their Light within being God Page 20 The Quakers began this Contest Page 23 Of G. Whitehead's owning his Ishmael, his shuffle about it since Page 30 His Blasphemy therein hinted at Page 31 Counsel given him, Acts 8.21, 22, 23. Page 32
The Second Part G. Whitehead's Book Ishmael Reprinted Page 1 The cause of the Quakers Rage discovered Page 2 They deny the Scriptures to be the Word Page 4 They also deny the Scriptures to be the Rule Page 10 Saying they are a Rotten Foundation Page 14 That they are Death, and killeth Page 20 That they do not work Faith Page 24 And to them not necessary Page 29 As a consequence thereof they Damn the B. Trinity to the Pit, and Mr. Townsend the Minister also. Page 22, 26 The Snake deciphered Page 27 Jos. Wyeth wounded and unarmed Page 28 The Snakes Hiss like Serpents Page 29 Another stroke at the Rattle-Snake Page 30 G. Whitehead's Blasphemy explained Page 31 She not changed in Principles proved. Page 32 Part the Third. A Caution to beware of Quakerism Page 2 The Quakers the Off-spring of the Jesuites Page 3 Their Answer to Books horribly falacious Page 5 Of their diminitive Sufferings Page 7 Their Sufferings and Miracles jointly considered Page 8 Twelve Reasons to confront J. Feild's magnify∣ing their Sufferings Page 9 J. Field does not say F. B. is like Judas Page 13 His Hypocrisie therein discovered Page 17 Their not Praying for K. W. III. Page 15 The Quakers greatest Persecutors Page 16 Their Dissimulation thereabout discovered Page 18 Quakers fling at Dissenting Protestants Page 19 The Quakers against Liberty of Conscience Page 20 At first lay in Barns like Gypsies Page 22 Their rendring the Government odious for Per∣secution further Illustrated. Page 24 An Address from the Honourable House of Commons to His Majesty, and his Answer Page 30 Their Printed Paper to the Parliament Page 31 Their Paper to his Majesty Page 32 They debar'dd of Places of Profit Page 35 FINIS
