C1788B R32608 12730279 66435
A SERMON Preached at the CHURCH OF St. Mary in Nottingham: TO THE SOCIETY FOR Reformation of Manners. On July the 6th. being the usu∣al Lecture-Day. By DANIEL CHADWICK Vicar of Arnhall, and one of the Lecturers there. Malachy 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord, spake often one to another. London: Printed for John Richards Bookseller in Nottingham, 1698.
To all that were Au∣ditors; But more especi∣ally to the Gentlemen of the Society for Reforma∣tion of Manners, in the Town and County of Nottingham. THOƲGH I must, and I Hope ever shall, readily own my Self an Encourager of this Happy Work of Reformation; yet durst I never think my Self Wor∣thy to be a Leader as to this weighty Affair in this Place. BƲT as GOD hath been plea∣sed to Honour You, by Calling You forth to Engage in, and Manage this generous, and difficult Ʋnder∣taking; so 'tis You who (under
GOD) called Me forth (though very unworthy) to this (more than ordinary) Imployment. And I ac∣knowledge my Self much bound to GOD, and You all, for doing Me this Honour; as also for Your kind Acceptance of this Mean Ser∣vice. AND as it was at Your Request that I Preached, so that I now Pub∣lish this Discourse; not that I think my Self able to add any Thing to the Labours of those Worthies who have gone before Me in this Way; but to satisfie You, and to let them and the World know, That there are others (as well as themselves (though an Hundred Miles di∣stant from them) who are hearty Well-wishers to that Blessed Design, which they of that Renowned City have set on Foot; and even, to Admiration succesfully managed and promoted; I say promoted;
SINCE it must be thankfully ac∣knowledged, That it was some Sparks from their Holy-Fire, which have warmed, and inflamed us in this colder Climate. AND if this Mite may signifie any Thing as to this Sacred Trea∣sury, I humbly, and thankfully of∣fer it, and the Lord Almighty ac∣cept, and prosper it, NOW Sirs: That GOD would stand by, and strengthen your Hands, and Hearts; may encrease Your number; may stir up all Sorts, and Orders of Men to help at this dead-lift: May all Prejudi∣ces be laid aside, our Differences Composed, our Hearts, Heads, and Hands Ʋnited against this com∣mon, and dangerous Enemy to GOD, and His Church (viz. Looseness, and Prophaneness) may
Holiness, Righteousness, and So∣briety be Encouraged and Practi∣ced by us all, is the Earnest Re∣quest of, SIRS, Your affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant Daniel Chadwick.
A SERMON FOR Reformation of Manners, &c. PSALM 144. Latter Part of the Last Verse. Yea, Happy is the People, whose GOD is the Lord. DAVID in the beginning of this Psalm, having praised GOD for the many Favours vouchsafed to his Person; doth in this Latter Part, Pray for further Favours, not to∣wards
Himself only, but His Peo∣ple also, Ver. 11, &c. And ha∣ving enumerated divers Temporal Blessings contributing thereunto; He, in this last Verse, concludes by way of Epiphonema, or Accla∣mation: Happy is the People that is in such a Case. AND the Truth is, That tho' the Blessings forementioned are not necessary to render a Person Happy, yet are they requisite to make a People Happy; since 'tis apparent, That a Person, if truly Holy, may be truly Happy, al∣though he be Poor, afflicted, and despised; but so cannot a People be said to be, unless they be flou∣rishing, and prosperous, and blest with Peace, and Plenty, with Grandure, and Renown. BUT yet that David might not seem altogether to forget GOD, and Himself in this Mat∣ter;
He tells us further; That though this be a great, yet not the greatest; no, nor the only Happiness; and though a People enjoy these good Things, yet are they not to acquiesce here, but should look further, and higher, and that is, to have GOD to be their LORD: Yea, saith He, Happy is the People, whose GOD is the LORD. WHICH Words are spoken by way of Correction, or Revo∣cation; yet not absolutely (as flatly denying any Happiness in those forementioned Temporals.) But rather Comparatively; that is, That there is somewhat be∣fore them; not unlike that Ex∣pression of our Saviour in the Gospel, Luke 11.28. Yea rather, blessed are all they, who hear the Word of GOD, and keep it. Whence this Conclusion offers it self.
THAT the Enjoyment of GOD as our GOD, is that, and that only which renders a People truly and compleatly Hap∣py: Temporals conduce much to∣wards a Peoples Felicity, and ought therefore thankfully to be acknowledged; yet Temporals without Spirituals, cannot Effect it; but where Temporals, and (especially) Spirituals meet toge∣ther, that Nation is blest indeed, as Moses tells us, Deut. 4.7, 8. For what Nation is there so great, who hath GOD so nigh unto them, as the LORD our GOD is in all Things that we call upon Him for? And what Nation is there so great, that hath Statutes, and Judgments, so Righteous as all this Law, which I set before you this Day? And Da∣vid also, Psal. 33.12. Blessed is the Nation whose GOD is the LORD; and the People whom He hath cho∣sen for His own Inheritance.
BY Way of Explication, we shall briefly Enquire, 1. WHAT this true, and com∣pleat Happiness is? Ans. 'Tis an Aggregation of all good Things: It consists not in any, nor in ma∣ny, nor in any sort of Good; but in an Affluence of all, and every good Thing so far as the Nature, or State of a Person doth require. 2. WHAT is it to enjoy GOD, or to have GOD to be our LORD? Ans. He is in a Sense, the LORD of all Men and Creatures, in general; Acts 10.36. But of some in Particu∣lar; and more especially, of those in Covenant with Him; whom Moses calls a separated People, Exoch 33.16. And a People nigh unto Him, and to whom GOD is said to be nigh: As Deut. 7.4.
The one by those Signs of His Presence; His Holy Word, and Ordinances; and the other, by a suitable, and becoming Conver∣sation. 3. WHAT is that Happiness, which is thus Transcendent? Or wherein doth it exceed all other Happiness? Ans. This is that Happiness which reacheth the Church, as well as State; nay this is the Defence of the one, and the other, the Palladium of a Kingdom: The very Heathens judged themselves safe, whilest they kept their Tutelar Gods a∣mong them; and what need that People fear, who can engage the LORD to be their GOD? Consult at your leasure, Isa. 33.16. Ezek. 35.10. Psalm 46.5, 6, 7. Zech. 2.5. for this Purpose, Yea,
THIS doth extend to Mens Souls, as well as Bodies: A Na∣tion, or Person, may have Peace, and Plenty; and yet, if not Peace with GOD, and Peace in their own Souls, they are far from this Happiness; nay THIS will fetch in all other Blessings so far as shall be conve∣nient for that People: Godliness is profitable to all Things, having the Promises of this Life, and of a better: 1 Tim. 4.8. And our Saviour gives us his Word, That if we seek the Kingdom of GOD, and His Righteousness, in the first Place, all other Things shall be ad∣ded, Mat. 6.33. Yea, further THIS will engage GODS secret, and effectual Blessing up∣on all we are, and have, and do, without which Prosperity is not useless only, but Pernitious; be∣ing
one of those four Evil-daugh∣ters brought forth by good Mo∣thers: Truth begets Hatred, Secu∣rity Danger, Familiarity Con∣tempt, Prosperity Pride, and for∣getfulness of GOD, and our Selves. And lastly, THIS is that Happiness which will render us not only compleat∣ly, but eternally Happy; and when the shining, and dazling Glory, and grandeur of this World shall be in its Wane, This shall be in its Full: As Da∣vids assures us, Psalm 73.22, 23. 4. HOW comes this to pass, That a Religious Person or Peo∣ple are thus Happy above all o∣thers? Ans. 'Tis partly from the Blessed Nature of GOD; and partly from the Happy Nature, and Tendency of Religion.
FROM the Nature of GOD, and more particularly from His Holiness, and Justice: From His Holiness, GOD loves every thing that is GOD-like: Psalm 11.7. The Righteous LORD loveth Righteousness: And His Justice calls for it, He hath promised a Reward to every good, and ver∣tuous Person, and People. NOW as to Persons, their Reward is not always given in to them here; because (as was hin∣ted) there is another Life which will be a more proper Season for Rewards: But as to People, or Societies, they must be either re∣warded in this Life, or not at all, since they shall be dissolved, as such, in this World, and are therefore incapable of a Reward in the other World: And
FROM the Nature of Reli∣gion: Solomon tells us, That Righ∣teousness exalteth a Nation, Prov. 14.34. This is the true Interest, and Glory of a People, 1 Sam. 4.21. And should GOD have no Respect or Reward for Ver∣tue, yet must that People be Happy; since every Vertue, and Branch of Piety doth apparently conduce to their Welfare, and Prosperity: But I hasten to Ap∣plication. WHICH shall be directed to all in General; but to you Gen∣tlemen of the Society for Refor∣mation in particular: GOD hath made us an Happy People, as to Temporals; We have (the Lord be praised) a good, and gracious King; a renowned Heroe for his Valour, and Vertue; a Real, (not only a Titular) Defender of our Faith. We live under, and are
blest with as Happy a Govern∣ment, as any Nation under Hea∣ven (did we but know our own Happiness;) we are ruled by Laws, and not the Lusts of Men: We have Peace abroad, and Peace at home; our Swords are beaten in∣to Plow-shares, and our Spears into Pruning-hooks, and England is like Israel in those Halcion Days of Solomon, 1 Kings 4.25. Every one sitting under his own Vine, and eating the Fruit of his own Fig-tree, Eating, and Drinking, and making Merry: No leading into Captivity; nor any just com∣plaining in our Streets: Our Coin is (almost to Admiration) ren∣dred Current: Nor is it wanting, upon any good Occasion: Our Trade is open, and Thriving; our Church and State Prospe∣rous and Flourishing. GOD hath sent us Primitive Bishops, our Judges are restored
as at the first, and our Councel∣lers and Senators as at the begin∣ning: Our Holy Religion (as Reformed) together with our Li∣berties, and Properties, are secu∣red: Immorality and Prophane∣ness is disowned and disgraced: Piety and Vertue countenanced and advanced: And we have not only a Freedom, but Encourage∣ment to be as good and vertu∣ous as we Will: And is not that People Happy, that is in such a Case? IT hath been a common Say∣ing, That if a Bridge was made over the Sea, all the Women in Europe would come over into England; and I am apt to think that the Men would not be long after them, in regard of those ma∣ny singular Priviledges, and ad∣vantages we (both Men and Wo∣men) in this Happy Kingdom are Partakers of as well for Souls,
as Bodies, above all other Peo∣ple and Countrys in the World. BUT, Sirs, Though this be a great Happiness, and such Bles∣sings (whether National, or Per∣sonal) are thankfully to be ac∣knowledged by all who enjoy them; yet is it not the greatest Happiness, or that wherein we are to acquiesce; since the Text informs us, That there is some∣what more, and better to be look∣ed after than all those amount to: Yea, Happy (saith the Text) is the People, whose GOD is the LORD. AND therefore, if we would be truly and compleatly Happy: And would secure this Happiness to our Selves, and entail it on our Posterity; let us, by all Means, engage GOD to vouch∣safe his most gracious, and favou∣rable Presence in the midst of
us: For which Purpose great Care must be taken for the removal of whatever may Occasion his De∣parture from us; may stop the Current of his Favours towards us; or draw down his Frowns upon us. THIS is a great Truth, That GOD never leaves a Person, or People, till they first leave Him: Nor will He ever Commence Suit against them, till He be appa∣rently wronged by them: And if the LORD have a Controver∣sie with any, 'tis not for any Tri∣vial Matter, Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. The LORD hath a Controversie with the Inhabitants of the Land: Why? Because there is no Truth, nor Mer∣cy, nor Knowledge of GOD in the Land: But Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and Committing Adultery, and Blood toucheth Blood; therefore shall the Land mourn.
SIN is of a separating Nature, Isa. 59.2. 'Tis that dark, and thick Cloud which eclipseth the light of GODS Countenance from us; and Wall of Partition which in∣terrupts all comfortable Corres∣pondences between Heaven and Earth, Jer. 5.25. This hath ever been the only Make-bait, and most destructive Thing since the World began; and we may take it for granted, That there is some Ac∣cursed Thing in the midst of us; when either GODS Blessings are with-drawn from us, or His Judg∣ments sent down upon us, Josh. 7.13. LET us therefore, by all Means, rid our Hands of Sin, (at least, of all crying, clamorous, ruining and scandalous Sins) and let us do it with what Speed we can; since though we may be secure, yet shall we never be Safe, till
this be effected: And the only way to accomplish it is, By true Repentance for Sin past; and a thorough Amendment as to what is amiss for the Future: Nor will the one without the other, an∣swer our Design: We must look back-ward, and we must look forward also, if we expect that GOD should look favourably up∣on us, and become our LORD. 1. LET us look back, and con∣sider how we, and our Fore-fathers have carried it, and we shall find Matter enough for Repentance: Since 'tis too apparent that both they, and we have greatly offend∣ed, and provoked GOD: And, indeed, all Men, and all sorts of Men amongst us must cry guilty, and have Cause to joyn in that acknowledgment, Dan. 9.7. O LORD, to us belongeth Confusion of Face; to our Kings, Queens, Princes; yea, to our Counsellors,
Senators, Ministers, Magistrates, Judges, Gentry, Officers and Peo∣ple, because we have sinned against Thee: Yea, all Parties will be found Transgressors on this Ac∣count. FOR whatever we have pre∣tended, professed, or promised to the Contrary; yet when once we are gotten uppermost, we have shamefully forgotten GOD and our selves: And though we have been ready enough to complain of others, and to cry out, what have such, and such done? Yet would it have been far more be∣coming the very best of us to have looked nearer Home, and to have said, LORD, what have we done? Since as our Saviour saith, in the like Case; Let him that is without Sin (whether Per∣son, or Party) cast the first Stone, John 8.7.
AND therefore, there is great occasion of Praying (over and over again) according to that Petition in the Litany: Remem∣ber not, O LORD, our Offences, nor the Offences of our Fore-fathers; neither take thou Vengeance of our Sins, but spare us, O LORD, &c. AND this, Sirs, is the most likely way to lay a good Foun∣dation upon which we may build our Future Hopes and Expectati∣ons of further Blessings, viz. The Evening of all our old Accounts between GOD and us: Being well assured (as our late most Rd. Tillot. v. 1. p. 131. Father in GOD tells us) That general and cry∣ing Sins of a Nation, if not prevented by a serious and general Repentance, never escape publick Judgments: GOD may, saith he, defer His Wrath for a Time, and give a People longer
Space for Repentance: He may stay till the Iniquities of a Na∣tion be ripe, and full, but, soon∣er, or later, His Vengeance will overtake them; and usually, the longer Punishment is deferr'd, it is the heavier when 'tis Executed: And as we are to look back: so 2. WE are to look forward towards a Reformation: As we are to consider what we have done in Order to the making of our Peace as to Sins past; so must we, no less, consider, what we are to do in Order to the maintaining of that Peace for the Future: And this is what I especially aim now at; In Order to the dispatch of which, I shall endeavour, with what Brevity I can, to give Satis∣faction to these Four Demands. 1. WHO must Reform?
2. WHAT should be Refor∣med? 3. WHAT Inducements are there to this Work? And 4. WHAT Means are proper for this Purpose? 1. WHO, in this Case, are to become Reformers? Ans. All in general; though some, in particular, are more con∣cerned; and therefore, what they said to the Men of Israel, Acts 21.18. I say, in GODS Name to You all, Men of England, Help; Magistrates, Help; Mini∣sters, Help; Gentlemen, Help; Officers, Help; yea, all good People, Help: For, as there are not any among us, but we are more, or less concerned; so nei∣ther is there any, but may, one
way or other, become servicea∣ble on this Account. MAGISTRATES by their Power, and Authority, becoming Terrors to Evil doers, and a Praise to them that Do well: Mi∣nisters, by their exemplary Lives, and sound Doctrine; when the one is Lightning, and the other Thunder (as was said of that great Nazianzen). Gentlemen, by their good Examples, and the laying out themselves, their Parts, their Estates and Interest, for GOD, and the good of others. Officers, by being Vigilant, and Industrious to detect, and delate Offenders, and bring them to Con∣dign Punishment: (And what might not a Constable, or Church-Warden do, if faithful to GOD, and to their Trust, or made any Conscience of their Oaths, and Obligations?)
NOR may Private Persons stand out, or be Excused, since even such also may Help by their earnest Prayers; by their convin∣cing and gaining Conversations; by the well-ordering of Them∣selves and Families; by comfor∣ting, and strengthning the Hearts and Hands of each other, by Christian Reproof, Mat. 3.16. 1 Pet. 2.12. Eph. 5.11. wholsome Instructions, and friendly Admoniti∣ons; and in some Ca∣ses, and at some times, by Infor∣mation against notorious and ob∣stinate Offenders. NOR let any be shye of, or boggle much at that Word or Work of Information on such ac∣count as this; since, however scandalous, and infamous, that Term hath appeared in these late Days, whilest some have been A∣gents for the Devil, and made it
their Design to Ruine Men, and enrich themselves: Yet 'tis no less honourable, and commendable, to Act for GOD, and for the Sal∣vation of Men; nor are we with∣out very good Warrant from GODS Word, in so doing; Ha∣ving both Precepts and Examples in this Matter. Matth. 18.17. Tell it to the Church; If He be stubborn, make his Offence Publick: Yea, not to the Church only, but to the State also; not inform the Minister on∣ly, but the Magistrate too: Deut. 13.8. Thou shall not Consent unto him (that is, to any who should entice thee to Idolatry) nor heark∣en to him; neither shalt thine Eye pitty him (though a near; yea, the nearest Relation) neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou con∣ceal Him: To the End that fit Censures, and temporal Chastise∣ments may be seasonably applyed
for the seasonable Prevention of his Eternal Ruine: Nay, though Estate and Life of a Son lay ap∣parently at Stake, yet were the Parents themselves (among the Jews) obliged to this Office of an Informer, Deut. 21.19. Which how severe soever it seemed to be to the Person; yet was it a kindness to the People, as ver. 21. That all Israel may hear, and fear. And as we are not with∣out Precept; so nor without Ex∣ample. SINCE we find some of no mean Rank or Quality; either for Greatness, or Goodness, who have gone before us in this way, Ezra 9.1, 2. We read that some of the Princes themselves (not the common Rabble, but Men of chief Note among the Jews) did not think it unworthy of, or be∣low themselves to turn Informers in a Case of this Nature; when
the Honour of GOD, and the Welfare of his Church and Peo∣ple call'd them forth thereunto. NAY, and what is further ob∣servable; their great Impartiality and undaunted Courage; for they spared no Sort, nor any Persons of any Sort, of what Rank or Quality soever: They balk nei∣ther Priest nor Levite; no nor Princes, nor Rulers; but accuse them as chief among the Trans∣gressors: Which minds me of what is Reported concerning that great Captain Epaminondas. THAT when his Enemies en∣vied his Greatness and Vertues, they resolved to humble him, by thrusting an Inferiour and mean Office upon him, to which he readily submitted, declaring, That before he quitted it, he doubted not but (through his well-ma∣nagement of it) to render it as
honourable, useful and commen∣dable as any other Office in that Common-wealth; and the Appli∣cation thereof is very easie: But 2. WHAT must we thus en∣deavour to Reform? Ans. Whatever is contrary, and destructive to sound Doctrine, or good Manners: Whatever appa∣rently opposeth the Laws of GOD or Man: Whatever is no∣toriously dishonourable to GOD; a reproach to our Religion, and destructive to our Church or State, whether they be Matters of Opinion or Practice, should be amended. IF any Opinions have a di∣rect or indirect tendency, either towards shaking the Foundations of Christianity; or to debauch the Lives of those who profess it; we are, in our respective Pla∣ces,
strenuously to oppose them; as ever we hope to enjoy this Happiness in the Text: And more Particularly, IF any shall be so bold as to declare, That there is no such Thing as Religion; but that 'tis a meer Fancy and Conceit, a State-Trick, or a piece of Priest∣craft: Or that Men may be saved by any Religion, and that therefore 'tis no Matter what Religion any Man is of, as some have done. IF any shall decry our First-Principles, and ridicule our Pro∣foundest Mysteries of Christiani∣ty, attacking the Holy, and Bles∣sed Trinity: The Divinity, Eter∣nity, the Incarnation and Satis∣faction of our only Lord and Sa∣viour (the very Basis of all our Hope, and Comfort in this World, and that to come) denying (as St. Peter saith, 2 Epist. 2.1.) The
very LORD that bought them; as others have done. IF any shall (on any pretence whatever) advance, and justifie that Impostor Mahomet; and shall vilifie or degrade our Holy Je∣sus; telling us, That many Hi∣storians (but Names not one) as∣sures us that Mahomet was an ho∣nest Man; and that his Design of pretending himself to be a Pro∣phet was only to Restore the be∣lief of the Unity of a Godhead, which, at that Time, was extir∣pated and lost among the Chri∣stians by their new, upstart Do∣ctrines of the Trinity and Incar∣nation; as some now do. Once more, IF any shall cry up Natural Religion in Opposition to all Re∣vealed Religion; or tell us, That we must be guided by the Light within us, and not the Word
without us; and that we are to walk by Reason, and not Faith: If they shall dispute the Divini∣ty or Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, or any Part thereof; if they shall Preach any other Doctrine than what is fetcht from thence, we must Reject them (saith St. John 2 Epist. ver. 10, 11.) Let him be accursed (saith St. Paul, again, and again, Gal. 1.8, 9.) Pool. Which Text (saith an Expositor) looks dreadfully, not only upon the Jew, or Papists; but on many called Protestants amongst us at this Day: And Oh that ever these Things should be told in Gath, or published in Askelon; and that there should be found amongst our selves such filthy Birds, as thus shamefully to defile their own Nests! BUT shall these be so bold as to belch forth these most hor∣rid
and abominable Blasphemies against our most excellent Reli∣gion, and shall we hold our Peace? Oh how shall we answer it to our great LORD and Master? WOULD Turks, Pagans, In∣fidels endure such Affronts as to their False-Worship, and Dung-hill-Gods; and shall we be un∣concerned? Or if we can, will GOD endure it? No sure; He commends the Church of Ephe∣sus for withstanding; and con∣demneth the Church of Perga∣mos for tolerating such dangerous Persons, and pestilent Doctrines as these, Rev. 2.1, 2, 3. and ver. 14, &c. AND as these Doctrines, so all loose and immoral Practices are to be redressed: Oh how E∣pidemical, how impudent and brazen-faced are all sorts of Vi∣ces,
yea, even of the most enor∣mous, among us? Not acted in Corners only, but on the House∣top, nor in the Dark, or in the Night only; but at Noon-day, and in the Face of the Sun; in∣to what Places, or Houses can we go; or into what Company can we, ordinarily, fall, where we do not probably, see, or hear something of this Nature? HOW commonly is that most Holy and Fearful Name of GOD blasphemed by Swearing (and perhaps by Forswearing too) by horrible Cursings and hellish Ex∣ecrations? How is His Holy Day openly prophaned, by Buying and Selling, Tipling and Drink∣ing; Idle-visiting, and needless Travelling: How grosly do Men abuse themselves, and GODS good Creatures by Rioting and Drunkenness; by Chambering and Wantonness, against the
known Laws of GOD and Man? And how rarely are these Offen∣ders enquired after, or laid hold upon? Oh that these Matters wan∣ted Proof. But, 3. WHAT Inducements are there to excite to this difficult and weighty Work? Ans. WE have an unquestion∣able, and a loud Call thereunto; 1. FROM GOD himself, and that both as to his Word and Works: This is the Language of his commanding, promising, threatning Word, this is the Te∣nor of Law and Gospel, to Re∣pent and Amend: And if we ex∣pect his Blessing, we must heark∣en to his Word: And his faith∣ful Ministers have been Calling, and Crying aloud in GODS Name; yea warning, and beseech∣ing Men (sometimes with Tears)
to break off from Sin, to be re∣conciled unto GOD that they may be saved. AND as by his Word, so by his Works: Sometimes by very dreadful Judgments; Fire, Plague, War at home and abroad, and his Rod, as it hath a voice, so this is its especial Errand, Refor∣mation, Lev. 26.23, &c. Amos 4.6, &c. AND sometimes again by sig∣nal, and singular Mercies and Deliverances, formerly and late∣ly; How often, Sirs, have we been as Brands snatcht out of the Fire? And wherefore is all this? Surely, not that we should grow Loose and Wanton, and Pro∣phane; such a return is most ab∣horrent, Jer. 7.10. Should we make no better Improvement of his Blessings than such; we may justly expect the like Measure
from GOD which we find threatned against that untoward People, Judg. 11.12, 13. That He will deliver us no more: Let us rather consider those Words of Ezra 9.13. Shall we again break GODS Commandments after such Deliverances as these? 2. THE King, and our Late Queen of Blessed Memory (who being Dead, yet speaketh) call by those Pious and Strict Injunctions to put the Laws in Execution a∣gainst all scandalous Offenders, and more particularly against those crying Abominations of Cur∣sing, and Swearing, of Sabbath-breaking, Uncleanness, Common-Tipling, and Drunkenness: And surely all Loyal Subjects will o∣bey the Laws, and Commands of their Superiors, especially when so apparently for the good of all in general, and of every one in Particular: Yea, since these things
have been inculcated by an espe∣cial and moving Proclamation, at the Instance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assem∣bled. 3. THE Welfare of Church, and State calls for it; since nei∣ther the one, or other; neither King nor Kingdom, can be long in Safety, unless this Work be promoted: Sin will prove a Worm at the Root of the most flouri∣shing Kingdom; and the Experi∣ence of all Ages, as well as Scrip∣ture, hath made this Good: All along the Old Testament, we find the interchangeable Providences of GOD towards His People Is∣rael ever-more suited to their Man∣ners; and they were constantly Prosperous or afflicted, as Piety and Vertue flourished, or decli∣ned among them.
NOR did GOD use this me∣thod toward His own People on∣ly, but other Nations also: The Roman Empire, whilest the Ver∣tues of that People remain'd firm, was as strong as Iron, according to that Representation, Dan. 2.33. But upon the Dissolution of their Manners, the Iron began to be mixed with miry Clay. FROM whence we may Col∣lect (as our forementioned Re∣verend Author Observes) That GOD will evermore Bless a ver∣tuous, and Blast a vicious Peo∣ple; and therefore if any shall ask that Question, 2 Kings 9.18. Is it Peace? The same Answer may be returned, which we find ver. 22. What hast thou to do with Peace, so long as Sin is abetted, and allowed of by us?
AND as the Kingdom in ge∣neral, so the King in Particular is endangered: Nor is that Threat which looks this way, to be des∣pised, 1 Sam. 12.25. But if ye will not cease to do wickedly, ye shall be Consumed both ye, and your King; nor is it all his Guards that can interpose and Defend him from those Dangers which our Sins expose him un∣to: And how much the Welfare of these Kingdoms is wrapt up in the Welfare of our King, I Hope we are not to Learn. ITS too true, that some may be of another Opinion; and may Conceit that we may be as well, if not better, without Him: But even these will find that true, which the Philosopher said on the like occasion, when the Sun is set, it will be Night notwith∣standing all the Stars: Yea,
4. OUR Religion calls: 'Tis faln among Thieves, is sore woun∣ded, and in no small Danger; Her beautiful Face is so defaced, that She can scarcely be known; exposed to much Contempt, and is dwindled into Froth and Foam: There is indeed, among some of us, Vox & praeterea nihil; or, as we say, A great Cry, and little Wool; Forms, and Shews, but lit∣tle of the Power of Godliness: But as to the Generality of us, there is neither the one, nor the other; neither Fruit nor Leaves of Profession to be found. RELIGION stands on Tip∣Toes (as one of our Worthies long ago com∣plain'd) and the Glory of this our Israel seems to be on the Threshold, Herbert. and upon its Depar∣ture (Ezek. 9.3.) And wo be unto us, if GOD depart from
us, Hos. 9.12. Nay further, 5. CONSCIENCE Calls: The Vows of GOD are upon every one of us; and as GOD hath obliged us, so have we ob∣liged our selves; and thoughsome of us lye under more Oaths and Obligations than others; yet have we all solemnly engaged at our Baptism (which many of us have as solemnly renewed at the Lords Table) not only to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, as to our selves: But to Fight under his Banner, as his faithful Soldiers, a∣gainst the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: And how shall we an∣swer the neglect hereof unto GOD? 6. THE present Season, and juncture of Affairs Calls: And that as it is a Time of great Pro∣vocation, as also of great Expe∣ctation.
SINS of all Sorts cry aloud from all Corners and Quarters, for Vengeance against us, and shall we be silent? The Devil and his Agents are exceeding bu∣sie, and shall we sit still? Sleidan in his Commentaries, tells us, That the Munster Devil was a foolish Devil, because he tempted Men to Looseness and Unclean∣ness; whereas, saith he, he should rather have tempted them to Hy∣pocrisie, and shews of Holiness: But had Sleidan lived in our Days, he would perhaps have changed his Opinion; since the Devil seems to have taken a more effectual Course for the Advance∣ment of his Kingdom. FOR though Hypocrisie be a great Sin (as our forementioned Rd. Author observes) and very o∣dious unto GOD, yet is it not of so pernitious Consequence, as
Prophaneness: For Hypocrisie is a more modest way of sinning; it shews some Reverence to Religi∣on, and doth so far own the worth of it, as to acknowledge that it deserves to be Counterfei∣ted; whereas Prophaneness pro∣claimes open War against it, and endeavours to make a Party to drive it out of the World; so that the Knife seems to be at the Throat, and therefore speak now, or for ever hold your Peace. AND a time of no less Expe∣ctation, as it is a Time of Peace, wherein we have little else to do, but to serve GOD, and our Ge∣neration: Inter Arma silent leges, Wars render Laws unpracticable; but now a Price is put into our Hands; and GOD forbid that we should become Fools in not knowing and considering it: Nay, rather let us imitate the Men of Issachar, 1 Chron. 12.32.
Who were wise, and had Ʋnder∣standing of the Times, and knew what Israel was to do: And cer∣tainly, as the LORD on this account, hath done great Things for us; so GOD, and good Men expect some return of this Nature from us at this Day: And 7. CHRISTIAN Charity calls: And as to the Souls of Men, exposed manifestly to utter Ruine by these profligate, and prophane Courses: How many wretches are Posting towards Hell, and there is no visible way, or probable, (excepting this) to prevent or restrain them? A Mi∣nister of the Sword Preacheth, ordinarily far more effectually, than a Minister of the Word. And also TOWARDS many distres∣sed Families, who might live much more quietly and comfor∣tably,
if such Prodigal Husbands (who Riot away abroad, what should Maintain their Wives and Children at Home) were curbed and restrained. Yea, And this Charity might reach and relieve the Poor also, who might fare much the better by the very Penalties, if duly inflicted, on all common Of∣fenders, as Swearers, Drunkards, Sabbath-breakers, &c. AND consequently our Towns and Parishes hereby eased (as to some part at least) of those Bur∣thens and Taxes, which for their Relief, are imposed: And 'tis ob∣servable (even to admiration) what a short time, in some places, hath effected in this matter: I shall con∣clude this Particular with what a Reve∣rend Author saith to this purpose, Dr. Ashton. not unworthy of Consideration.
'TIS a great Sin and Shame, and worthy of the Correction (as well as Consideration) of the Ma∣gistrate; That a Workman or La∣bourer should be so extravagant, as to spend the fruits of their Six Day Labours, upon the Seventh Day, for which the poor Wife and Children must pinch and starve all the Week after: And when he (whose Duty it was by his honest Labour to provide for his Charge) hath either drunk himself to Death, or for Debt is thrown into Pri∣son, or by Disorder hath disabled himself, then the Parish must bear the burthen, and his honest indu∣strious Neighbours must Cark and Care, be Taxed and Assessed for his Extravagancy. But 4. WHAT Ways and Means are proper for the promoting of this good Work?
Answ. 1. LET us begin this Work at Home, according to our Saviour, Matth. 7.5. Let us cast out the Beam out of our own eyes, before we meddle with the Mote in our Brothers Eye. Let all, but es∣pecially Magistrates and Ministers, be careful to amend what is amiss as to Themselves and Families in the first place: FOR can a Minister Preach heartily, and without blushing, a∣gainst that Sin, which he knows himself (yea, and all his Neigh∣bours also, know him) to be Guilty of? Rom. 2.21. Or, Will a Magistrate break his Shine for haste, to lay hold on a Drun∣kard, a Swearer, &c. if he in∣dulge the same in himself? BUT besides all this, If ever we expect a National Reformation, it must take its first Rise from our
Persons and Families: Since we all know, That Kingdoms con∣sist of Towns; Towns of Fami∣lies, and Families of Persons. 2. UNION; Many hands, we say, makes light work; and two, saith Solomon, are better than one, and a three-fold Cord is not easily broken, Eccl. 4.12. This Trade is not to be driven on but by a Joint-Stock. 'Tis not a Work for a few single Persons; no, nor for some particular Party to Under∣take, since 'tis both weighty and difficult; and therefore all, whose GOD is the LORD, should join their Hands, Heads and Hearts together in this matter: And tho we may disagree in some smaller things, as to matters of Discipline or Modes of Worship, yet is there no reason why, in this, we should not be unanimous.
VIS unita fortior: Even weak things joined together become strong; and strong things, with∣out Union, become weak: Satan's Kingdom is not divided; The De∣vil and his Agents stick together, Psalm 83.3. &c. Those seve∣ral Nations, and different Inte∣terests, lay aside their private Quarrels and Animosities, and Confederate against GOD and his People, and so they do at this day: And is it not high time for us to consult how we may withstand them, as they did on the like occasion? Mal. 3.16. AT this Back-Door of our Un-natural Divisions, have all these Mischiefs of Atheism, Blas∣phemies, Looseness, and all sorts of Baseness broken in upon us; and if these Devils be Cast out, it must be by an United Force: Come therefore, and in pursuance
of our Baptismal Covenant, let us, as Christians, join together; and instead of fighting one against another, let us fight against these Common Enemies of GOD and his Church, The World, the Flesh and the Devil. IT was a rare Example which the Poets tell us of, concerning Castor and Pollux: These Two being Twins, (as they feigned) and the one Born Mortal, and the other Immortal; Pollux to shew his love to his Brother, yielded so far as to take to himself a part of his Brother's Mortality, and to impart to him as much of his own Immortality; being better satisfied to enjoy one half Immor∣tality with the good of his Bro∣ther, than a whole one by him∣self: And was there but some∣what more of this Brotherly Af∣fection, Self-Denial, and Christi∣an Condescension, how would
this Work of Reformation pros∣per! 3. RESOLƲTION; Such as once put their hands to this Plough, must not think of look∣ing back: Let us remember the Work is GOD'S, and let us therefore be neither afraid nor ashamed: Let us (as we may be concerned) mind our Business, and conclude with Esther, chap. 4. ver. 16. If we perish, we perish: Since as Luther said (when en∣gaged about the like Work of Reformation); 'Tis better to fall with Christ, than to stand with Caesar. And for your encourage∣ment, Ponder what GOD him∣self saith, Isai. 51.12. I, even I am he, saith the LORD, that comforteth you; who art thou that thou should be afraid of a Man that shall die, and of the Son of Man which shall be made as Grass?
AS also what he said to Eze∣kiel, chap. 2.6. Son of Man, be not afraid of them, neither be a∣fraid of their Words, though Briars and Thorns be with thee, and thou dwell among Scorpions; be not a∣fraid of their Words, neither be dismayed at their Looks, though they be a rebellious People: And therefore, 4. THERE must be due Consideration as to this Matter; and according to our Saviours Advice, Luke 14.28. Let us sit down, and think before-hand what this Undertaking will cost, and let us accordingly lay-in an extraordinary Measure of Faith, Patience; of Meekness and Self-denial; since this very probably, may be a Time of great layings out: Such must expect (with the blessed Apostles) to go through good Report, and bad Report,
2 Cor. 6.8. Frowns, Threats, Brow-beatings, Scourges of the Tongue (if they escape those of the Hands) yea whole Loads of Calumnies, and Vollies of hard Names; as Hypocrites, Proud, Rude, Factious, Singular (and what not) shall certainly attend them. 5. SINCERITY: Be not only Hearty and Resolute, but Upright in your Ends, as to what you thus do; let the Glo∣ry of GOD, the publick Wel∣fare, and the Salvation of Souls be in your Eye: As we must not do the Work of the LORD negligently, so nor foolishly: Let there be no mixture of Pride, Passion, Hatred, Malice, Faction or Partiality; The Wrath of Man worketh not the Righteousness of GOD, James 1.20. Nor our own Comfort: But Sincerity (whatever befalls us) will keep
up our Heads and Hearts from sinking, and will readily answer for us before GOD and all the World, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoy∣cing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity; not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of GOD we have had our Conversation in the World. 6. DISCRETION: The Wisdom of the Serpent must ac∣company the Innocency of the Dove: As we must not under-do, so nor over-do, our Christian Work: Solomons Caution is not unseasonable, Eccles. 7.16. Be not Righteous over-much, neither be thou over-wise; not too severe, inquisitive, or rigid in Censu∣ring, or punishing beyond Rules of Equity; without due allow∣ances of humane Frailty, Temp∣tations, or other Circumstances, as to Mens Persons, as to the
Places you inspect, &c. conside∣ring that MEN (especially in Matters of Religion) are very apt to run into extreams; and as some are too Cold, so others are too Hot: Some drive on heavily, others fu∣riously: Nor is there any thing (saith one) more natural than for extreams in Religion to be∣get one another; like the Vibra∣tions of a Pendulum, which the more violently you swing it one way; the farther will it return to the other: Oh let Zeal, and Discretion go together! 7. PRAYER and Supplicati∣on unto GOD, that great Wheel which sets all the rest going: In whose Hand are the Tongues, Hands and Hearts of all Men from the highest to the lowest, together with the Issues of all our Undertakings: And three
Things should we especially crave on this Account. 1. THAT He will vouchsafe more of these stout Champions to assert the Truth, and to main∣tain the Principles of our Reli∣gion against all who assault, or undermine it: Hornock. 'Tis to be acknowledged (saith one) as an especial Act of GODS Providence and Goodness to∣wards his Church; that in all A∣ges, as Weeds have sprung up, some Worthies have been raised, who have not slept but have ob∣served, and choked them, oppo∣sing the spreading Infection by the speedy Application of suita∣ble and proper Antidotes. AND the same GOD (his Name be praised) hath not left himself without a Witness in our Days: And therefore, let us Pray, That GOD will send forth
more of these vigilant Labourers into his Vineyard; more burning and shining Lights to dispel those Fogs, and Clouds of Darkness. 2. THAT He will stir up the King, his Councellors; our Senators, and all in Authority under him, together with all o∣thers (as they may be concerned) to exert their Power in Order to the restraining of these threat∣ning Disorders in Church and State; all dangerous Opinions, destructive to true Piety and Ver∣tue; and all Immoral and Scan∣dalous Practices utterly unbecom∣ing Men, and much more Chri∣stians: As the Apostle directs, 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. I exhort that first of all, Prayers and Supplications, and giving of thanks be made for all Men: For Kings (more par∣ticularly) together with all in Au∣thority, that we may lead peaceable and quiet Lives in all Godliness and Honesty.
3. THAT GOD will vouch∣safe an extraordinary measure of his Holy Spirit, and Presence to direct, assist, and prosper you in this weighty and worthy Under∣taking: What Luthers Friend ad∣vised him at the Time of his en∣gaging in that dangerous and dif∣ficult Work of Reformation; I say (in the Name of GOD) to you of this Society; Abi in Cel∣lam, & dic miserere mei; Implore GODS especial Mercy and Bles∣sing upon your Persons, Consul∣tations and Endeavours: I shall conclude with those encouraging Words of David to Solomon, 1 Chron. 22.16. Arise therefore, and be doing, and the LORD be with you: Amen, Amen. So be it, O LORD! FINIS.
Books Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel. THe Fountain of Life open'd, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and Mediatorial Glo∣ry; containing Forty Two Ser∣mons on various Texts. A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, ex∣cellent and immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body, with the necessity of its Separation from it, consider'd and improved. The Method of Grace in bring∣ing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the Father, and ac∣complished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the Spirit unto Gods Elect, being the second Part of Gospel-Redemp∣tion. The Divine Conduct or Myste∣ry of Providence, its Being and
Efficacy asserted and vindicated: All the Methods of Providence in our Course of Life open'd, with Directions how to apply and im∣prove them. Navigation spiritualiz'd, or a new Compass for Seamen, consi∣sting of Thirty Two Points of pleasant Observations, profitable Applications, serious Reflections, all concluded with so many spiri∣tual Poems, &c. Two Treatises, the first of Fear, the second the Righteous Mans Re∣fuge in the evil Day. A Saint indeed, the great Work of a Christian. A Touchstone of Sincerity, or Signs of Grace, and Symptoms of Hypocrisie, being the second Part of the Saint indeed. A Token for Mourners, or boun∣daries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends. Husbandry spiritualiz'd: Or the Heavenly use of Earthly Things. All these Ten by Mr. John Flavel.
