C5226A 15597207 104008
A RA-REE SHOW. To the Tune of I am a Senceless Thing. Leviathan. COme hither, Topham, come, with a hey, with a hey, Bring a Pipe and a Drum, with a ho, Where e're about I go, Attend my Ra-ree show, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Topham. That monstrous Foul Beast, with a hey, with a hey, Has Houses Twain in's Chest, with a ho, O Cooper, Hughs and Snow, Stop Thief with Ra-ree Show, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. For if he should escape, with a hey, with a hey, With Halifaxes Trap with a ho, He'd carry good Dom. Com. Unto the Pope of Rome, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Levi. Be quiet ye Dull Tools, with a hey, with a hey, As other Free-born Fools with a ho, Do not all Gaping stand, To see my Slight of Hand? With a hey, Trany nony nony no. 'Tis not to Rome that I, with a hey, with a hey, Lugg about my Trumpery, with a ho, But Oxford, York, Carlile, And round about the Isle, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. But if they would come out, with a hey, with a hey, Let them first make a Vote, with a ho, To yield up all they have, And Tower Lords to save, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Top. Now that is very hard, with a hey, with a hey, Thou art worse than Cut-nose Guard, with a ho, And Clifford, Danby, Hide, Hallifax does all outride, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Holy Ghost in Bagg of Cloak, with a hey, with a hey, Quaking King in hollow Oak, with a ho, And Rosamond in Bower, All Badges are of Power, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. And Popularity, with a hey, with a hey, Adds Power to Majesty, with a ho, But Dom. Com. in little Ease, Will all the World Displease, With a hey, Trony nony nony no. Levi. Let 'um hate so they fear, with a hey, with a hey, Curst Fox has the best Chear, with a ho, Two States in Blind-house pent, Make brave strong Government, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Top. But Child of Heathen Hobbs, with a hey, with a hey, Remember old Dry Bobbs, with a ho, For Fleecing Englands Flocks, Long Fed with Bits and Knocks, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Levi. What's past, is not to come, with a hey, with a hey, Now Safe is David's Bum, with a ho, Then hey for Oxford ho, Strong Government, Ra-ree Show, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Ra-ree Show is Resoul'd, with a hey, with a hey, This is worse than Disoul'd, with a ho, May the mighty weight at's back Make's Lecherous Loyns to crack, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Me-thinks he seems to Stagger, with a hey, with a hey, Who but now did so Swagger, with a ho, Gods-Fish he's Stuck i'th' Mire, And all the Fat's i'th' Fire, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Help Cooper, Hughs, and Snow, with a hey, with a hey, To pull down Ra-ree Show, with a ho, So, So, the Gyant's down, Let's Masters out of Pound, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. And now you have freed the Nation, with a hey, with a hey, Cram in the Convocation, with a ho, With Pensioners all and Some, Into this Chest of Rome, With a hey, Trany nony nony no, And thrust in six and Twenty, with a hey, with a hey, With Not Guilty, good plenty, with a ho, And hout them hence away, To Cologne or Breda, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. Ha-loo the Hunts begun, with a hey, with a hey, Like Father, Like Son, with a ho, Ra-ree Show in French-Lap, Is gone to take a Nap, And Successor has the Clap, With a hey, Trany nony nony no. London, Printed for B. T. and Sold at his Shop in Pauls Church-yard: For the good of the Publick, 1681.
West-Ward Hoy. A Ra-ree Showe. Ra-ree Shite's
