C5251 07884330 40272
THE DIFFERENCE Between the Present and Future STATE OF OUR BODIES, Considered in a SERMON, By Ieremy Collier, M. A. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1686.
IMPRIMATUR, April 23. 1686. Hen. Maurice, Rmo. P. & D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. à Sacris.
1 Cor. 15. 29. And as we have born the Image of the earthy, so we shall also bear the Image of the hea∣venly. WHether the Soul in the State of Separation acts indepen∣dently of Matter, purely by the strength of her own powers, or whe∣ther in order to the better understanding her self and other Beings, she makes use of a Body of Air shaped out into such Limbs and Sences as she hath occasional employment for; whether or no the want of her old companion is supplied this way, is uncertain. But whatever a∣batements of happiness the pious Soul may suffer for want of a suitable Body between the time of Death, and the Gene∣ral Judgment, then we are sure this incon∣venience will be removed, and it will be repossessed of its antient Seat out of which Violence or Nature had forced it.
Now this certainty of the Resurrection is a Doctrine, which helps the meanest understanding to conceive the Nature of the Happiness of the other World, and consequently must needs prove a great and universal encouragement to the pra∣ctice of our Duty. For in regard we have always been used to dwell in these houses of Clay, the generality would not have been so well able to apprehend the happi∣ness of pure and uncompounded Spirits; but would have been apt to have thought that the loss of their Bodies would have de∣prived them of no small part of themselves; and consequently would not have been so willing to resign them or expose them to hardship and inconvenience upon the ac∣count of Religion: But now since we are assured that this visible part of us, which we are so well acquainted with, shall be quitted only for a time, and then restored us with all desirable advantages; yet Mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and we shall exchange the Image of the earthy for that of the heavenly; what can we more ratio∣nally infer than the last verse of this Chap∣ter?
Wherefore be ye stedfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord in as much as no part of our being is lost, and conse∣quently no part of our labour is in vain in the Lord. That by the Image of the earthy is meant that mortal corruptible body which we have derived to us from Adam, is plain from the verse before the text; The first man was of the earth earthy, the second man is the Lord from Heaven, and then it follows, as we have born the Image of the earthy we shall also bear Image of the Heavenly. Now because the nature of opposite qua∣lities is best discovered by their being com∣pared, therefore that it may the more plain∣ly appear wherein the advantage of chang∣ing the earthy for the heavenly consists; I shall in the First place mention those inconvenien∣cies and defects to which our bodies are subject now. 2. I shall endeavour to prove that the qualities of glorified bodies will be opposed to those defects, and free from those incon∣veniences we are now sensible of.
3. I shall draw some practical conclusi∣ons from the consideration of this difference. 1. Those bodies we now have are in∣convenient upon these following accounts. 1. Because of the weakness and useless∣ness of them when we have them first. 2. Because their best condition is but of a short continuance. 3. Because our being liable to the disor∣ders of passion proceeds in a great mea∣sure from them. 4. Because they make us subject to pain. 5. Because they hinder the operations of the mind in its pursuit after truth and knowledge. 1. They are inconvenient upon the ac∣count of the weakness and usefulness of them when we have them first. Though our deriving our Beings from those of our own Nature, and coming In∣fants into the World, is a great promoter of kindness and good correspondence, and tends very much to support of Government and Society; yet it must be granted, that we lose something (tho not so much) by it ano∣ther way. For the Soul at her first entrance,
by reason of the indisposition of the body, is uncapable of acting rationally, and is for∣ced to wait till she hath fit instruments to work with; and when we do begin to judge of objects, we measure the good and evil of them by the pleasure of inconvenience which the body receives from thence: Now because we are accustomed at first for seve∣ral years together to make our sences Um∣pires of the value of things, this forestalls our judgment, with a good opinion of them, which makes us more inclinable to please them afterwards, and gives our reason a greater trouble in the managing of them than otherwise it would have had. Besides in our Infancy unpleasant and frightful things make a deep impression up∣on us both because of the fluid and pliable nature of the Brain, and because we have not judgment to discover the worst of things nor strength to resist them, and therefore through our own weakness, and the indis∣cretion of those we sometimes happen to converse with; we are apt to take up odd prejudices, and to be possess'd with unac∣countable fears, which the reason of our
whole life often finds impossible to conquer: It must be granted therefore that Adam had a great advantage above his posterity, by being created a perfect man, without run∣ning through the weakness and folly of In∣fancy and Childhood: For in regard his Body was prepared for the Soul to act in at their first meeting; he was not so liable to be imposed upon by ill customs, and sense∣less imaginations, because he was always ca∣pable of judging of them: And therefore his desires and fears must be better propor∣tioned to the nature of things; than they would have been if his reason had come to him byassed and tinctured with those im∣pressions, which the long weakness & unser∣viceableness of his body had made upon it. A 2d Inconvenience of our Bodies is, that the highest condition they are capable of ar∣riving at, is but of a short continuance: They are a considerable part of our lives a work∣ing up into any tolerable degree of useful∣ness, before which time they signifie little more to us than the Bodies of Brutes do; and when they are once fitted for the service of the Soul, and we begin to understand what
they are good for, it is not long before they decline into Age and Indisposition, and that which seem'd to be a Palace before, turns to a Prison, and hath little either of pleasure or convenience in it. For though our Youth is not placed upon such a precipice as imme∣diately to tumble from its highest station in∣to a decrepit condition; yet when life is go∣ing down the Hill, its motion is not so slow, but that it may be perceived in a little time, especially if it be pushed forward by any accidental distemper. 1. The Sences grow flat, and do not enjoy and relish their respective objects with that quickness and eager satisfaction which they formerly did. But if this was all the altera∣tion we were liable to, we ought possibly ra∣ther to account it an advantage than a loss, because the lessening of sensual delights would rebate the edge of our desires, and make them submit to the Laws of Religion with less reluctancy. But the flower of Youth does not only go off quickly, but which is more to be regretted, the fruit of it too; and the abatement of the Sences vigour, is usu∣ally followed with an apparent decay of strength. Thus life, when it is once fermen∣ted
to the height, hath its spirits continually flying off, till it is drawn to the Less, and that part of it only remains which often∣times makes us uneasie both to our selves and others: so that when the mind is em∣barked in any design of considerable length and advantage; it is usually set a shore upon the other World before it hath reached its intended port; or else forced to spend that stock of time and abilities which remains, in stopping the Leakage and piecing up the ruins of the Vessel; which is not only a hin∣drance of the main business, but is likewise a very troublesome employment. A 3. Inconvenience of our bodies consists in their making us subject to passion; That our passions, at least the violence of them, are immediately caused by the motion of the spirits, that is the finer parts of the Blood, will appear, if we consider, that those who have a greater stock of spirits supplied them from youth or intemperance, are soonest over∣born which disorders of this nature. 'Tis true, God made our minds subject to the impressions of Passion upon a very good account; that by such unusual commoti∣ons within us, we might be awakened, and as
it were roused up to pursue those things which are useful, and avoid the contrary, with the greater vigour and industry: For if we had nothing but dry reason and cool Blood to contrive and execute for us, our apprehensions in many cases would be too flow, and our endeavours faint: But not∣withstanding the advantage the Passions were design'd to give us, as they are com∣monly managed, they do more harm than good: For we are apt either to place them upon wrong Objects, to fly them to too high a pitch, or to continue them upon us when they ought to be discharged, which makes us hasty in our Resolutions; injurious and careless in our words and actions; they make us dote almost to Frensy upon trifles, and by being too kindly entertained by us, improve a sudden disgust against our Neigh∣bour into a setled and habitual malice; in∣finite almost are the indecencies and sins which the ill Government of our Passions betrays us to; they discompose the whole frame of mind and body, disquieting the one, and disordering the other; the effects of them are different according to their na∣ture, and the power they have gotten over
our reason; sometimes they make men lan∣guish and pine away with envy or desire; sometimes through an excess of fear they betray them into worse inconveniencies than those they were afraid of: Some are said to have absolutely lost their wits in their anger, and raved themselves into Bedlam; and o∣thers we may observe are over-joyed to per∣fect folly and ridiculousness. Now, though a great part of our present vertue and future reward depends upon the due management of our Passions; neither can they come up to this height which I have mentioned, without our own fault; yet in regard our bodies are the immediate instru∣ments of their violence, we must grant they are inconvenient upon this account: For if our reason was quick enough to appre∣hend and pursue our interest of it self, with∣out being spurred upon duty by Passion; if the mind had sufficient power to command the body upon its utmost, without being concerned with its motions any farther than it thought fit; our condition would be much more perfect and secure: For if we knew we are naturally invincible, we need not give our selves the trouble of stand∣ing
upon our guard, then we should be free from all inward tumults and the ill conse∣quences of them; and then, as the power of Passion declined, that of Reason would grow up and flourish; and the pleasures of the mind would more than counter-ballance those which we lost by shaking off some of our correspondence with the body; and we might have delight equal to those of a cor∣poreal transport without the violence and danger of them. 4. Our bodies are inconvenient, because they make us liable to suffer pain. It must be confessed that the state of se∣paration does not exempt us from having ungrateful perceptions, but in some respects makes us more obnoxious to them if we lye under any moral indisposition: For when the Soul is disengaged from the oppression and soil of the body, it will act upon it self with greater vigour, and make the Springs of Thought go much smarter than they do now; so that ill men will be made much more powerful to torment themselves; in∣somuch that it may be a question whether all the Fire, and Feinds in Hell, are a grea∣ter punishment to the wicked than the guilt
of their own Consciences; besides, the Pas∣sions which I have mentioned, when they are violent, bring an easiness along with them. But then the reason why I distinguish pain from the trouble which proceeds either from passion, or the more abstracted and imme∣diate operations of the mind, is, because the Soul is not only liable to this disturbance purely upon the account of its Union with the Body, but because it is perfectly out of our power to prevent it. For, let a man be never so innocent and compos'd, let Pru∣dence and Religion secure him never so well against Vice and Passion; yet there is no fence against bodily pain: This proceeds from those motions over which the Will hath little or no command; and when we consider what a vast number of parts the Body consists of, many of which are very fine and slenderly tyed together (otherwise they would be unserviceable) and upon this account are easily put into disorder, when we consider how ignorant the generality are of the frame and constitution of their Bo∣dies; of the due proportion, and quality of their nourishment; how careless and immo∣derate they are often in their Labours, Re∣creations
and Passions, to which if we add the sometimes sudden alterations of seasons, & many other unavoidable accidents, when we consider all these things, I say, we have great cause to admire and bless the provi∣dence of God that our bodies are not oftener put out of order than they are. Now, though some decays of the Body are unobserved by us, yet generally when there is any conside∣rable jarr made in the wheels of this curi∣ous Machine; when the harmony of the hu∣mours is disturb'd; when the strings are wound up too hard, or too slack; when any thing of this nature happens, the Soul usu∣ally hath notice of it, which unacceptable news is that which we call pain, which is sometimes so pungent and afflicting, that it makes all worldly blessings insignificant to us, insomuch that there are not many who have experienced any accute distemper, who would not, if it were put to their choice, pre∣fer health and poverty, to violent pains and diseases, though supported and gilded over with never so much wealth and honour. Now if it be asked why God hath made the Soul so deeply sensible of the injuries which the Body receives, I suppose these fol∣lowing
Reasons (without adding any more) may be a sufficient satisfaction to such an en∣quiry. 1. Therefore we may rationally conclude that God hath made the Soul liable to impres∣sions of this nature, that we might be more careful to preserve the body from falling into decay. Pain I observed before was an unwel∣come and grating sense of some injury which the body suffered, now if the Soul was not in∣timately affected with alterations of this nature, and concerned upon its own account to pro∣cure the welfare of its companion; we have reason to believe a great many bodies would be very indifferently provided for. For the mind would be so much taken up with its own busi∣ness, that were it not admonished of the ne∣cessities of the Body by partaking of the incon∣veniencies of them, they would be often neg∣lected; men of Covetous, Ambitious or Con∣templative minds, rather than have their designs, and pleasures interrupted, would be apt to de∣ny the body its due maintenance in eating and sleeping; if they were not importuned, and as it were forced upon justice; by the trouble and uneasiness of watching and abstinence, were it not for the pain of a wound or distemper, we
should often let them run till they were incure∣able: In this case many would serve their bo∣dies as they do their houses, which because they do not feel them smart when they decay, they let them drop for want of timely repairing. A second reason why God made the Soul sen∣sible of bodily pain, may be, that its virtue might have the fairer tryal. To be above the threat∣nings of ill men, and to submit to any pain and hardship, rather than depart from those Opinions and Practices which we believe to be right and necessary, is an argument of true greatness of mind, and the highest testimony of a good man. Now the Body, by laying us open to almost all sorts of injuries we are capable of receiving, gives us an opportunity of exercising our Pa∣tience and Fortitude in suffering in obedience to God's commands. To these virtues the im∣perfection and defenceless state of our Bodies advances us; for, were we proof against all mis∣fortune, we should be uncapable of this honour; for patience supposes us to lye under the sense of a present evil; take away the affliction, and there will be no appearance of the virtue left behind; neither can Fortitude have any place, except we believe our selves within the reach of danger; for what courage can it be to encoun∣ter
any thing, when we know it's impossible for us to be hurt? A third Reason why God hath subjected the Soul to bodily pain, is, for the correction of our vices. Many sins do naturally bring indisposition and diseases upon the Body, the dread and ex∣perience of which does not seldom restrain and bring us off from them: Besides, pain and sick∣ness, by convincing men how insignificant, or rather troublesom their life is to them, & what a slender hold they have of it, are oftentimes a good expedient, not only for the reclaiming those vices which depend upon the ill use of the Body, but of a general Reformation: For, did mens Bodies fret out like their cloaths, without any considerable trouble to those that wore them, we have reason to believe the Soul would fare much the worse for it, and be oftener sent into the other World in an unprovided and forlorn condition. So that without question, we are as much bound to thank God for the infirmities, and pains which flow from our constitution, as for the health and pleasure of it. Besides, we have reason to account it a great mercy that God hath bound the Soul so gently to the Body, that a short struggle, if it happens to prove boisterous,
will let it loose; so that according to Epicurus his Maxim, it's impossible for that pain which is violent to continue long, whereas, had the Union of the Soul and Body been so strong, that a man might have continued under the sharpest torments for some months or years together, how difficult would patience have been then? what an advantage would the worst men have had over the best, and have been able by their cruelty to have almost tyred out the bravest and most resolute virtue. 5. The present constitution of our Bodies is inconvenient, because it hinders the mind in her pursuit after knowledge. Knowledge next to goodness is the highest exaltation of humane nature, and sets us at the greatest distance from the Brutes beneath us: Now that the present condition of our Bodies does hinder our profi∣ciency in this so excellent an accomplishment, appears from what has been said already. As 1. Because we are born Infants, and the bo∣dy is unfit for the Soul to exercise its functions in; in which state of our infancy we pass a great many wrong judgments upon things, so that when we come to the use of our reason, we are not only void of true knowledge, but have
a great many things to unlearn; which mistakes it's very difficult to shake off. Now though these prejudices relate chiefly to our proficiency in the knowledge of natural causes, yet it must be aknowledged in the Second place; That the passions which the Body subjects us to, are sometimes an occasion that we do not examine things with that delibe∣ration and indifferency which is necessary to the finding▪ out moral Truth; and consequently make us inclinable to some practical Opinions rather than others: For according as the parti∣cular Byasse of our Bodies disposes us to any excess of hope or fear, of anger or pleasure; if we are not careful, our apprehensions of Reli∣gion will bend into a compliance with the Ge∣nius and Tendency of these passions. For when Reason is either bribed, or discomposed by the Affections, it is than more likely to pronounce amiss upon things, than when the mind is even and impartial: For example, a man of a me∣lancholick and gloomy temper, if he gives way to it, will be in some danger of perplexing his imagination with infinite and unreasonable fears concerning God Almighty, as if he was a Humoursom or implacable Being; and conse∣quently such a person may be more easily pro∣selyted
to the Doctrines of Superstition, or de∣spair: Whereas another of a bolder and more sanguine Constitution, will be rather tempted to presume too much upon Gods goodness, mag∣nifying his mercy to the prejudice of his wisdom and justice: And if he happens to fall upon ill Books or Company, he will be dispos'd to di∣lute his Creed with Principles of Libertinism, that so he may make it more agreeable to the Complexion of his Body, and reconcile it with the use of unlawful pleasures: But here we must observe that these motives do but incline; they by no means force us upon mistakes; so that then when we are swayed by them, it is our own fault: The reason why I mentioned them, is, that we might take the greater care to enquire into the particular defects, and propensities of our temper; and form our judgment with a suitable caution and suspition of our selves. 3. Bodily pain is likewise no small impedi∣ment to the enlarging our understandings, be∣cause while it continues upon us, it takes off our thoughts from other things, and fixes them only upon that which troubles us: And oftentimes when it is over, it leaves such ill effects behind it by altering the Texture of the Brain or Blood; that the mind hath not fit instruments to assist
it in the work of close and constant Meditation. 4. The generality are forced to spend a great part of their time in providing for the ne∣cessities of life, so that they have little leisure to attend to the improvement of their minds: But let them not be discouraged upon this account if they take care to live well in this World; their utmost curiosity and thirst after knowledge shall be satisfied in the next; without being encum∣bered with that labour and difficulty which at∣tends very inconsiderable Attainments here. Then as the Apostle informs us, We shall know even as we are known, and see God as he is, in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are hid. 1 Cor. 13. Joh. 1. 3. To what hath been said upon this Argument if we add that considerable number of hours which those who are most co∣vetous of their time are obliged to spend in eat∣ing, sleeping and recreation; we shall see that he had great reason for his Opinion, who hath told us, that Art is long, and Life but short. But notwithstanding these inconveniencies with which our bodys are attended in this state of imperfection, we are not to complain as if God had dealt hardly with us; because they are not just such as we could desire them; let us rather consider that if the conveniencies of them were
much less than they are, it was more than God owes us; besides, how impatient soever men may sometimes be under extremity of pain, yet their general behaviour is a plain argument that they have no contemptible Opinion of their Bodies, for they are commonly loath to leave them when they are at their worst condi∣tion: Let us therefore be thankful that God hath made them so commodious for us now, and hath promised to improve them to the utmost of our wishes afterwards; which brings me to the second thing at first propounded, viz. to shew. That the Qualities of Glorified Bodies are opposed to those defects, and free from those in∣conveniencies we are now sensible of. 1. They will be very much refined, and con∣sequently fitter for the Soul to act with. It shall be raised a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. which implies that it shall be changed into an exalted and vigorous condition: All grossness and fe∣culency which adheres to it now, shall be purg∣ed off; all unevenness and roughness of parts will then be filed into an exact serviceableness, and the Soul will no longer labour under the disorders of an unweildy and incompliant con∣stitution: The Body will then be exactly at its
beck, and execute all its commands with plea∣sure, and dispatch. That Quality which we call Heaviness, which hinders our motion, and con∣fines us to the lower part of the World, will then no more molest us; for the Refined Body by its nearer resemblance to the Air about it, the improved Activity of its Spirits, and the greater force the Soul will in all probability have to set them a work. By these advantages we shall be enabled to meet the Lord in the Air, and fly up into the Regions of light and happiness; and that the Soul may be the better accommodated, the Sences will be improved in two respects beyond what they are now. 1. They will be larger, that is, able to take in more objects at a time, and reach them at a father distance than they can now. 2. They will be quicker, that is, whatever notices they convey to the Mind, will be more intimately and vigorously communicated to it: Upon which two accounts they must afford the Soul a much greater pleasure than they do now. And that the Sences will be thus improved, fol∣lows from a principle, which every one that owns the Resurrection must grant, namely, that Glorified Bodies will be endued with far greater Activity than they are at their highest
condition here; now we know men have a more full and delightful use of their sences in their youth than at any other time. Now of all the sences, those of Seeing and Hearing are not only the most instructive to the mind, but likewise the most refined, and as I may say, the most creditable sences: There∣fore we need not question but they will accom∣pany the Bodies of the Saints to Heaven and possibly that of Smelling too; but as for the two other grosser sences, they belong to a State of imperfection, and are too coarse and insig∣nificant to have much employment there; for ought we know they may be changed into two new ones of a more spiritualized and refined nature; which it is not possible for us to under∣stand or conceive till we are possessed of them; which we shall cease to wonder at if we consi∣der that were a man born Deaf or Blind it would be impossible for him to have the Vul∣gar notion of sound or colour: Nay, I may add, he could have no imaginable Idea of these qualities except he received some description of them from others. 2. And as the Bodies of the Saints will be defective or superfluous in nothing, but be ex∣actly fitted for the service of the Soul, so like∣wise
they will be much more splendid & grate∣ful than now they are; which is another property of the Image of the Heavenly: Instead of those obscure and unamiable qualities they appear∣ed in here, they will be decked with light as with a garment, and be cloathed with Majesty and Honour; they will then be all beauty and brightness without any disfiguring blemish, any scars remaining, except of those wounds they have received in their Masters cause, which then probably will shine out with a more ori∣ent and distinguishable lustre. This is indeed to bear the Image of the Heavenly, of which we are assured from more places than the Text. As Philip. 3. 21. the Apostle affirms, Our Saviour shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be like his glorious Body, a representation of which we have at his Transfiguration, though I be∣lieve but a faint one, and yet the Evangelists tell us, his face shone like the Sun, and his Raiment with the Reflection was white and glistering. Mat. 17. Luk. 9. 3. The Bodies of the Saints will be impas∣sible: They will then be fortified against all accidents and diseases, and be no longer subject to any painful or dishonourable alterations; Time and death will have no power over them.
St. Iohn after he hath described the general Resurrection, Rev. 20. in the 21 chap. v. 4. proceeds to mention the unchangeable happi∣ness of the Heavenly Inhabitants, where enlarg∣ing upon their privative advantages, he informs us, that there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away; that is, the states of imperfection and mortality is over, Whereas, did not all things stand at a stay; were not the perfections of the Body permanent and unalterable, secured against all injury and decay; if there was not pain, we may be sure there would be sorrow to lose the least part of so glorious a condition. Now which way our Bodies shall be made immortal, signifies not much to know; pos∣sibly they may have such an advantageous change from the Laws of Motion, from the Figure of their parts, or the temperature of the Climate, as may preserve them from suf∣fering any alteration, or loss of parts; or if the parts do fly off as they do now, it's easie with God to supply them with new ones im∣mediately made fit, without the trouble of eat∣ing, or concoction: But whether by any of these ways, or which of them they will con∣tinue
immortal, whether by the settled course of Providence, or by Miracle, is neither ma∣terial to dispute, nor possible to determine; that they will continue so, we are sure, for as with him that hath made this Promise, nothing is impossible, so likewise he is Faithful and can∣not deny himself. It is more proper for us to prepare our selves by a vertuous Life for so blessed an immortality, than vainly to enquire into the mystery of it: The best way of satis∣fying our curiosity is to endeavour to be ac∣counted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the dead; for we need not doubt but that those who are possessed of this priviledge will understand the causes which make it such; and that the goodness of God will enable the Saints to explain the Philosophy of their happiness. Now from what we experience here, we may in some measure conceive how considera∣ble an addition it will be to our happiness to have our Earthy part refined into such a state of perfection as I have been describing: To have the wisdom and experience of Age without the sickness and uneasiness attending it; and the sprightlyness and vigour of youth separated from its usual rashness and indiscretion. What a
glorious change must it be to have these inob∣sequious, and cadaverous Bodies possessed of the three only desirable qualities; being made to the height of our wishes suitable, il∣lustrious, and immortal? I shall now in the Third place proceed to draw some inferen∣ces from the consideration of the different state of our Bodies here, and hereafter. Therefore the consideration of the frail con∣dition of our Bodies here, and the improve∣ments they will be advanced to hereafter, ought to make us entertain a low opinion of the plea∣sures of sence; both because we are permitted but a short enjoyment of them, and because they are only fit for us while we are in a state of imperfection: We should consider that the Body is not able to provide for it self; it's plea∣sures are not of it's own growth, but must be supplied from Forreign Parts, and consequent∣ly are infallible marks of our want and depen∣dance; and therefore to have a strong desire for, or high Opinion of these things, does but dis∣cover our own weakness to be the greater; and that we preposterously value our selves upon the Poverty of our condition: What are these satisfactions but only short respits from bodily
pain and trouble? for after the uneasiness of hunger and thirst is over, the pleasure of eating and drinking immediately ceases; and to con∣tinue the action any longer is more a burthen, than a refreshment: Those therefore who are capable of the greatest bodily pleasure, must have the strongest sence of want and uneasiness upon them; for unless they are thus prepared, it will be flat and unaffecting to them. Now who would desire a Fever only for the satisfacton of drinking in it; or be in love with extreme poverty because of the unusual pleasure which is then taken in receiving the Charity of others? The Body therefore is only so far to be in∣dulged as is necessary to put it into the best con∣dition to be employed by the Soul; for as it should not be tyrannized over, that being the way to make it both troublesom and unser∣viceable; so on the other side, we should be careful to maintain the Soveraignty of the mind; that whenever Reason and Religion requires it, we may have power to controul our sences, and be pleased with the victory: But on the contrary, to make the Soul a Slave to the Body; to employ the powers of Reason (the Image of the Glorious God) in providing for
the gratification of the Animal Life; is a most degenerous and dangerous abuse of so great a priviledge: And when God hath made us little lower than the Angels, ought we not to blush to make our selves less than the Beasts that pe∣rish? Now that sensuality does degrade us in this manner is apparent, it being unquestion∣ably more scandalous and uncreditable to abuse the use of Reason, than to want it; for the one only argues natural incapacity; which be∣cause it could not be prevented, is no just re∣proach to any Being; but the other besides in∣gratitude to the Doner implies most egregious folly; for what can be more senceless than to be inapprehensive of the Prerogative of our na∣ture, and to misapply and squander away the fairest opportunities of being happy? A man that makes himself a Beggar by ill Menage, and Luxury, is in the true estimation of things a much more despicable person than he that is born to that low condition, and fix∣ed in it by those impotencies and defects of bo∣dy or mind which were irresistably forced up∣on him. The rational Brute therefore is most certainly the meanest, because he stupidly un∣dervalues the dignity of his Being, and employs the highest qualities in the most sordid drud∣gery.
Whereas other creatures act according to the Instincts and Appetities which Providence hath put into them, it being as impossible for them to rise above their natures, as it is disho∣nourable for us to sink below ours. But this practice is not only dishonourable but dange∣rous, for if we give our selves up to the disor∣ders of Appetite, and make our Bodies instru∣mental in sinning; besides the diseases which intemperance often exposes them to here, we shall find the sad consequence of it in the other World; where they will be joined to the Soul only to encrease its misery by putting it into a new capacity of suffering. For the Apostle as∣sures us, if we live after the Flesh, and make Provision to fulfil the Lusts thereof, we shall die, for to be carnally or sensually minded is death, and that we cannot expect to live here∣after except we mortify the deeds of the Body, Rom. 8. 6, 13. Secondly, We ought to be contented with the trouble, the present infirmities of our Bo∣dies may put us to. God hath made our Bodies of a frail Consti∣tution, and liable to many inconveniencies; that we might aspire after a higher and more confirmed happiness; and not place it in the
satisfaction of our sences, which are so easily made unacceptable to us by diseases, or quick∣ly stupified and worn out with Age. Besides, upon the account that our Bodies make us liable to pain and diseases, we have thereby an occasion of exercising many virtues, which otherwise we could not have: If we were not liable to pain and uneasiness, there could be no such thing as a contented Poverty; and an humble Resignation to providence in affli∣ction and distress; the essence of these virtues would be lost in such impregnable circumstan∣ces: For to be contented when a man neither feels, nor fears any evil, is not so much a com∣mendation, as a necessary action; it being as impossible to be troubled when we have what we have a mind to, as to be perfectly pleased when we have not: I confess to be thus fortified against injury and want, argues a great happiness of nature, but a moral per∣fection it is not; and consequently deserves admiration, but not reward. The Honour of our Christian warfare consists in the labori∣ousness and hazard of it, and the strength of our virtue lies in the weakness of our condi∣tion; and though we are made a little lower than the Angels, yet (with all respect be it spo∣ken
to those superiour Beings) upon this account we seem to have some advantage of them; for their station being above the reach of misfortune, makes them incapable of suffering upon the score of Virtue and Religion. We ought not therefore to com∣plain because God hath made our Bodies liable to many inconveniencies here; but to resist the temptations they expose us to, with resolution to bear the pains and infirmi∣ties of them, with submission and contented∣ness, considering that in a discreet and Chri∣stian management of these things, a great part of our obedience, and future reward consists: It is not long before we shall be dismist from this service, and when death shall be swallowed up in Victory, and this mortal shall put on immortality, then it will be a pleasure to survey the difficulties of our past life, and the very thoughts of our for∣mer troubles will be an addition to our hap∣piness. Haec olim meminisse juvabit. And therefore Thirdly, we ought not to be over-time∣rous, lest we should impair the strength of
our Constitution, but lay it out freely upon Religious and Worthy Actions. Health is not chiefly to be desired for the sensual pleasure it affords, but because we are then in the best condition to serve God, and to be useful to the society we live in: Let it not therefore be our great aim to keep our Bodies in Reparation, and ingloriously slum∣ber out our time for fear of wearing them out too fast; but according to our several Stations and Callings, let us diligently em∣ploy them for our own real interest, and that of others; making them contribute to the improvement of Reason, and the exercise of Virtue: If they decay in such service, they will fall with honour, and rise with advan∣tage. The best way of consulting their future advancement is, not to dote upon them now: If we would have them flourish in immor∣tal youth, and beauty hereafter, we must neither be too fond in indulging, nor too cu∣rious in adorning of them: We must not out of an effeminate niceness to preserve their agreeableness, decline any proper austerities, or opportunity of doing good. In short, if we expect these earthy Bodies should bear the Image of the Heavenly, we must employ
them generously and religiously; suffer the inconveniencies of them with Patience and Christian Courage, and please them with temperance and reservedness. FINIS.
