C6557 99825777 30164
The Country-man's Pe∣tition for a Parliament. The Humble Petition of Mr. Barnaby Clod, a well-descend∣ed Person, most Humbly, and most Obediently, and most Sub∣missively shewing, and Expressing, and declaring unto your Great Majesty. THAT whereas, and whereby, and by which, the major, and most greater, and most bigger and most stronger Party, of the most best, and the most ablest, and the most mightiest sort of the People of the Baronage of Whigland, finding, and knowing, and certifying themselves, both heretofore, and for the time past, and now, and then, and at this present time, to be very much, and greatly oppressed, and suppressed, and distressed, and over-charged in all Taxes, Quitrents, and all other Levies and Fines, applotted, and levied, and gathered together, in the said Baronage of Whig∣land, and for further prevention of any, and all, and every such Offence, hence∣forth, hereafter, and for the time to come, the aforesaid, most major, and most greater, and most bigger, and most stronger Party, of the most best, and most ablest, and most mightiest sort of the People, of the Baronage of Whigland aforesaid, have appointed, nominated, constituted, ordain'd, elected, approved, and made choice of me, Mr. Barnaby Clod, to sollicite, intercede, and motion, and make applicati∣on unto your Majestie; looking upon me now, and there, and then, to be the most meetest, and the most eloquent, and most accomplished Spokes-man, within the said Baronage, their grand, and well-bestowed, and better-merited Agent, to repre∣sent, and reprevent, and extortion, for all such, and all much, and the like Grieven∣ces and disturbances. And whereas, and whereupon, your Petitioner, is hereby, finally, and handsomly, and ingenuously, and deservedly appointed, constitu∣ted, ordained, elected, approved, and chosen, to undergo, and undertake, and under∣run, and manage, this huge, big, mighty, great and weighty Service: These are therefore, and shall be the especial, and importunate, and incessant, and indefatiga∣ble Request of me your Petitioner: That your Majesty will be pleased, satisfied, and resolv'd, to give, and grant, and deliver, and bestow unto me the before-recited, and nominated Petitioner, an Order and Warrant to my Lord of Crabtry, and Mr. Captain Yedard Bumkin, Justice of the Peace, and Governour aforesaid, Esq and to Mr. Raafe Yates Justice of the Peace, and Governour aforesaid, Esq or to any four or five, or more, or less, or either or neither, or none of them, All Particulars and Parties as they shall imagine and conceive, consider and suppose, esteem, think fit, and meet, and necessary, convenient, and decent; and then, and there, and where, and whether, to examine, and call to account, for their past, and repast Ex∣tortion, and then, and when, and where, and whether, to establish, elect, chuse, impow∣er and appoint, and authorize, all such, and all much Baylisss, and Applotters, and Gatherers together, as your Petitioner do, or did, or have or had, or shall or will, or may or can, might or would, could or should, or ought to chuse or pitch upon. And withall I desire, that I mine own self, Mr. Barnaby Clod as aforesaid, that they and I, and all and every, and either or neither of the said Parties, shall and will live and die in Cords, and Concords, Concordant discord, Sorrowing, Rejoycing, Dying, Li∣ving, Broken, Healed, Tranquillity, henceforth and hereafter, and for the time past and present, and for now, and for everlasting, &c. LONDON, Printed for C. Tebrock. 1682.
