D1148 R31974 12288089 58828
A DESRIPTION OF HIS MAJESTIES True and Loyal Subjects, Scandalously called TOREYS. THey are such who desire that God would strengthen and unite the Body of this Kingdom, and establish it upon true Foun∣dations, that it may not sink under its own weight, or be exposed to outward Violence. Such who desire to live under his Majesty in Love, Obedience and Loyalty, so that the meanest of them may receive Protection from his Greatness, and the Kingdom flourish under his happy Reign; and that his Sovereign Power be upheld by the Agreement of their minds, the continuance of which they all desire to promote. They are such who desire to be careful of his Safety and Reputa∣tion, for the Defence of which they are willing to venture their Lives and Fortunes, without being suspitious or over-curious. They are such who have a good Esteem of their Princes Vertues, and Enquire not into his Behaviour with any other design than to imitate him in what is Good, and to render themselves by that re∣semblance the more acceptable to him. They are such who not only are willing to submit themselves to his Government, but also to those who he thinks fit to place in Au∣thority
over them, they never murmur at his Choice, nor add to his Cares, but rather strive to lessen them. They are such who behave themselves Reverently in his Presence, not troubling him with tedious discourses, or flattering insinuations: but speaking upon occasion modestly, and with submission. They are such who do not presume to Petition for any thing that may not Lawfully be Granted, and scorn to impose upon their Princes Necessities, but willingly sustain all Taxes, Tolls, Leavies, or other Impositions that may be necessary to their Princes Govern∣ment, that so their Prince may Govern them as Children, not as Slaves, as a Kind and Loving Father, not as a Rigorous and Severe Master. And they Esteeming of him thus are willing to render him such Obe∣dience as is Solid and Sincere, not False and Counterfeit. They are such who desire to demean themselves so, that they may stir up his Affection that on the one side their Duty and Observance, and the other his Love and Justice may strive for Victory. They are such who desire he may settle Peace and Concord through his own Dominions, and Valiantly Resist Invading Enemies: And happily pursue all good Success. They are such who desire he may not Expose himself to Danger unless in such Exploits as is suitable to his Greatness, and in those they desire he may have an happy Issue. They are such who desire to Defend his Person from Treacherous Designs, and his Kingdom from suffering Alterations. Lastly, They are such who are free from Meditating Sedition, or Countenancing Divisions, or Fostering Evil Practices, least in so doing they add Sin to Sin, and heap up Punishment upon Punishment. LONDON: Printed by J. Wallis for Randall Taylor, 1682.
