D2898 R24309 8119167 40895
THE DUTCH Drawn to the LIFE, IN I. An Exact Description and Character of the several Provinces of the Netherlands. II. An Account of their Trade and Industry. III. A well-weigh'd re-search into their Poli∣cy, Government, and Strength. IV. A particular Discourse of their Religion and Customes. V. A close Narrative of the way and Method whereby they made themselves a Free State, under the conduct of the Prince of Aurange: Whereunto is added the Lives of the 5. last Princes. VI. A continued History of the last War, together with their Dealings wit Eng∣land, from the year 1612. to the year 1660. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Johnson, at the Key in St. Pauls Churchyard, and H. Marsh, at the Princes Arms in Chancery lane, 1664.
TO THE READER. Reader, THis Piece is not the Melancholy Conceit, the I∣dle Transport, or the narrow and short Observations of any Single, or Impertinent Person, but an Exact Collection of what the most Sage States-men, the most Reserved Politi∣cians,
the most Judicious Historians, the most Dis∣cerning Travellers, the most Critical and Deep Discoursers have bequeath∣ed us, concerning this great Scene of Wit and Industry, Prudence and Business, Skill and Activity, Expe∣rience and Success: Here are the Profound Courtier Bentivoglio's Exact Cha∣racters and Descriptions; the Apprehensive & Quick Favorite, Overbury, his Weighty Reflexions; the Rational and Publick spi∣rited Writer, Sir John
Burroughs, his Ʋsefull Discoveries; the Ingeni∣ous Travellers, Mr. How∣el, and Mr. Feltham's smart Resentments; the Grave Writer, Mr Shute's Methodical History; Po∣lite Strada's Prudent Me∣moires; Active Stroud, and Scot's solid Conclusi∣ons;—In a word, the Low-Countries give you a short Map and View of what the whole World sheweth you at Large; and this Book is the Quin∣tessence of what whole Vo∣lumes have been taken up
with; What would you know in the Ʋniverse, that you shall not see in Hol∣land? and what would you understand of Holland, that you see not here? both are all in a Little; the Book and the Argument; both Europe in Amster∣dam Print.— Would the Speculativi see whether a Monarchy or a Common-wealth? Here the Question is Decided. Would the Tradesman Thrive? here is the best Exchange. Would the Souldier or Mariner Excell in their way? here
is Skill and Experience; Would the Libertine enjoy his Conscience? here is that Mystery revealed; Would you compare their Strength with ours? here it is done to your hands; Is Trade dead? here is the reason of it; Are we Poor? go to the Dutch, and learn to Improve your own Wealth. What Bishop Williams would say of King James, that I may of the Hollander, when Lively Described, there is not that thing that a Man or Nation need to Learn,
that they cannot Teach. I can wish thee no more Pleasure in the Reading, than I had in the Review of these solid Remarques, when all Holland came to me, as the whole World comes to it, even when I was in Bed, where I read more in an hour, than I shall see while I live: Happy that man that goeth over in one Morning the Jour∣neys of many yeares, and enjoyes at Night, in the re∣collection and contemplati∣on, the Content of an Age. There groweth nothing in
Holland, yet there is the Wealth of the World: here is nothing of my own, and yet here is the substance of what can be said of that Subject; here is for twelve pence, what cost those Au∣thors their Estates; the Hollander ever affords good penny worths, and now is one; Twelve pence a piece, and welcome Gentle∣men.
A DESCRIPTION OF Holland, And The DUTCH Provinces. D. L. YOu are well met this morning, I pray what newes? R. R. The best newes that is, (as the Italian saith) no newes? D. L. But do you not hear what the House did to day?
R. R. Neither have I heard, nei∣ther is it fit I should, it was never well in this Kingdom, as Cardinal Wolsey observed, since publick de∣bates were made the subject of pri∣vate discourses; but the wisdome of this Government hath better provided that none of the great Consultations of that most August and solemn Assembly in the World, should be published without Their leave. D. L. Very fit it is that people should study to be quiet, and follow their own business; the neglect of this last makes men Idle, and the times bad; that of the first makes them turbulent, and the times dangerous. But did you not hear of the Dutch Warre Voted yester∣day? R. R. Why that is it—there cannot a Vote pass at Westminster for the removing of the obstructi∣on of Trade, but it is cryed at London a Dutch Warre: with so little judgement do we discourse
things who are at a distance that it were our greatest prudence not to judge of them at all; but leave those things that are above our le∣vel as improper for our considera∣tion, which is rather distracted than informed by those halfe thoughts of things, all whose cir∣cumstances come not under our cognizance. D. L. What was it then that was Voted, if not the Dutch Warre? R. R. It was Voted by the no∣blest Patriots that ever sat within those Walls, That all obstructions of Trade should be removed; and particularly that the injuries and affronts done us by the Dutch should be enquired into and remedied by all meanes possible, and that they would stand by his most Excellent Majesty in this enquiry and reme∣dy with their Lives and Fortunes. D. L. What should be the reason of this War proceeding towards them in this juncture? R. R. That you must excuseme
in, it being as much as every man can do to give a reason of his own actions: this is visible, Trade is decayed; and there is not a Prince more knowing in the Concernes, nor more tender of the interest of Trade in the Christian world then our Dread Soveraign. D. L. But if it should come to a Warre, is this a proper juncture of time for it? R. R. Leave that to the exact wisdome of our Superiors, who as they are higher, so they see fur∣ther then we: But the Dutch were never worse provided then now, so much they are engaged other wayes by Sea and Land; nor we better; So many superfluous hu∣mours have we to spend upon that Warre, that are troublesome to themselves, and us in a time of peace: for Trade we are agreed with all Forreign Nations; against the Dutch we are agreed among our selves: never was any thing so una∣nimously applauded by men of all
perswasions and interests, as a Dutch Warre, which is the univer∣sal Wish of the people; if it were as well the resolve of their Supe∣riours. D. L. I perceive you are reser∣ved as to any further search into the bottome of this business; will you be pleased who are equally con∣versant in Books, and Men, to give me that light into their Country, Government, Customs, Strength, Treasure, Religion, Trade and In∣terest in the Sea, together with the way they made themselves a free State at first, and that whereby they have preserved themselves since. And of any thing that may passe between us of that Subject. R. R. With all my heart, but that my occasions calling me aside, I must remit you to those Persons who have lived upon the place and can best satisfie you. D. L. I pray how many are the United Provinces? C. B. Seven, Viz. the Dukedom
of Gelder-Land, the Counties of Holland and Zealand, and the Lord∣ships of Ʋtrecht, Friezland, Overyssel, and Groninghen, and some part of Brahant and Flanders. D. L. How situated. C. B. By the Sea Northward, and by Germany Eastward, upon Cleves, Leige, Flanders and Brabant, South∣ward. D. L. Sir, if it be not too much pains to you, how do the 17. Provin∣ces as they call them, lie particularly? P. H. The seventeen Provinces called Belgium, are bounded on the East, with West-Phalen, Gulicke, Cleve Tryers in Germany, on the West with the main Ocean, that divides them from Brittain; on the North with the River Ems, which parts them from East Friezland, on the South with Picardy & Champagne in France; on the South-East with Lorrain; ha∣ving the Lordship of West Friezland the Earldome of Zuphten, and the e∣state of Groyning, Overyssel, and part of Ʋtrecht added to it of late, they
are 1000. Italian or 250. German miles in compasse; situate under the temperate Zone, under the 7, 8, & 9, climates; the longest day in the mid∣dest of the seventh Climate, being 16 houres, and in the middest of the ninth almost seventeen. D. L. What kind of Aire have they? P. H. More wholesome then for∣merly, partly by the wonderfull increase of the Inhabitants, and part∣ly by the incredible industry of the people, who by draining the Marsh∣es, and converting the standing wa∣ters into running streams, have pur∣ged the Aire of many grosse and un∣healthy vapours which did thence usually arise in times foregoing. D. L. How is it inhabited? P. H. It is competently popu∣lous, containing wel-nigh 3. million of men wel-proportioned, great lo∣vers of our English Beer, unmindful of good turnes and injuries, of good wit for inventing, and of indefatiga∣ble industry in perfecting their in∣ventions,
making of Cloath, Arras, Dornix, Clocks, Watches, the Mar∣riners Compass, Musick and its In∣struments, were either invented by them, as were Chariots, Laying on Colours in Oyl, the working of Pi∣ctures in Glass; the making of Wor∣steds, Sayes, Tapestries, the making of which, and other Stuffes being driven out of their Countrey by the Duke of Alva, they first taught the English: The Women generally are of a good Complexion, wel-pro∣portioned, especially in the Leg and Foot, honourers of virtue, active and familiar; both within doores and without, they govern all, which considering the natural desire of Women to bear Rule, maketh them too imperious and burthensome. D. L. What are the Commodities of this Countrey? P. H. Linnen, Scarlet, Worsted, Sayes, Silkes, Velvets, Armour, Ropes, Cables, Butter and Cheese of which excepting, the two last none Native but Manufactures, out
of the materials of other Regions. D. L. But what commodity yield∣eth them most benefit? P. H. Herrins and Cod, which they take in the Northern, or the narrow Seas, of the first whereof they make to our shame, besides the Adven∣turers gaines 440000l. yearly, and of the last 150000l. D. L. VVhat are they most emi∣nent for? P. H. 1. For Navigation, being bred on the Sea from their youth, and knowing no other Countrey, their Noort being the fourth that compassed the VVorld, and their Maier the first that passed the streight that beareth his name. D. L. What is the state of Reli∣gion and Learning in those parts. P. H. 1. The pure Religion and undefiled, was planted there by Willibrode an English man, 1300. yeares ago; and now is either the Reformed that is countenanced (though other professions are tole∣rated by the Estates general, or the
Seven Provinces that cast off the Yoke of Spain; or the Roman Catholicks which is permited in the Provinces remaining under the King of Spain. 2. For Learning, Erasmus, Lipsius, the two great Scalligers, Agncola, Lemnius, the Douzas, Ortelius, Mer∣cator, Cassander, Harmin, Vossim, Grotius; Natives of this Country, have been the great Restorers of it to the World: and their four Uni∣versities, Groyning, Herderwiche, Francher, and Leyden profess it. D. L. The Rivers of the Coun∣try good Sir. P. H. The Rivers are chiefly 4. 1. Rhone, which rising among the Grisons in the Alpes, and going by Constance, Basil, Spire, Wormes, &c. sends one Stream to the Maes, ano∣ther by Arnem, Ʋtrecht and Holland, to Leyden, a third called Secle, through Ʋtrecht and Holland, to the Sea between Dort and Rotterdam; and a fourth called Yssel by Zuphten and Daventen, between Guelderland
and Over-Yssel to the Ocean neer Amsterdam: to this River they cast their Children of Old, where if they were legitimated they swimed, if Bastards they sink: 2. Mosa, or Maes, rising at the Mountaines Vauge neer Lorrain, sends its streame with a part of Rhene by Grone and Dort to the Brill, where it falls with such violence that the water runs fresh for some miles together: 3. Ems dividing the two Friezlands; 4. Scaldis, rising in Picardy, and Artois into the Sea, a little above Antwerp. D. L. How do they secure their Levell and Marsh grounds from the Sea? P. H. The Shore is much worn in Holland and Zealand, where it is now defended with Banks and Ram∣pires painfully made, and charge∣ably maintained, being ten Ells in heighth, and 25. in bredth, at bot∣tome made of the hardest Clay that can be gotten, in the inside stuffed with Wood and Stone, on the out∣side
covered with Mats, strong and thick made. D. L. How do you divide the Seventeen Provinces? P. H. I divide them either, I. As Anciently, into two Bishop∣pricks: 1. Leige or Luikhe, 2. Cambray. Into Four Dukedomes, 1. Lim∣burgh, 2. Luxemburgh, 3. Guelder∣land, 4. Brabant. Into One Marquisate, viz. Of the Holy Empire. Into Seven Earledomes, 1. Flan∣ders, 2. Artois, 3. Hainalt, 4. Na∣mor, 5. Zuphten, 6. Holland, 7. Zealand. Into Five Baronies, 1. West-Friezland, 2. Ʋtrecht, 3. Over-Ysel, 4. Machlin, 5. Groyning. II. As Now: 1. Into the 11. Provinces under the King of Spain; 1. Flanders, 2. Artois, 3. Hainalt, 4. Cambray, 5. Namour, 6. Luxen∣burgh, 7. Limburgh, 8. Luikhe or Leige, 9. Brabant, 10. the Mar∣quisate, 11. Machlyn. 2. Into the six under the States
of Holland; viz. 1. Holland, 2. Zea∣land, 3. West-Friezland, 4. Ʋtrecht, 5. Over-Ysel, 6. Guelderland, Zuph∣ten and Groyning. D. L. How doth Holland lie? P. H. Holland quasi Hollow Land, from its Bogs, or Hoyland from its hay hath Zuiderzee, Ʋtrecht, and some part of Guelderland on the East; the German Ocean on the VVest Zealand and Brabant on the South, and lieth so low that Ramparts only keep it from Inundation, and its Industry by infinite Dikes and Channels from being uninhabitable in compasse 180 miles every part of it within 3. hours journey from the Sea; divided to South and North Holland, and con∣taining 23. walled Towns, and 400. Villages. D. L. Your description of North Holland? P. H. North Holland lieth between the Rhine and the Zuiderzee, and hath in it, 1. Amsterdam a rich mart and haven Town that can buy 300. sayle of Commodities in six hours,
and seeth a 100. Ships going in and out at a Tide; scituate on the Gulph Tie, and the Channel Amstel (whence Amsteldame) built in Piles like Venice famous for its old Towns and new VValls; for its great variety of Re∣ligion, and more of Trade since the decay of Antwerp: 2. Alkmar famous for its sence, its Butter & Cheese, & eminent for the defeat the Inhabi∣tants gave the Duke D'Alva, meerly because he had left them no way to escape: 3. Harlem a pleasant City on the Meer, where Tullie's Offices was first Printed: 4. Nanden and its strong Castle: 5. Enchuisen a Town on the point of the Gulph Zuiderzee that was serviceable in the first revolt in cutting off the sup∣plies of Amsterdam: 6. Zurin and its rich Haven and many Dikes: 7. Edam and its Ships and Cheese: 8. Medemlecke and its excellent Pa∣storage, though unwalled, yet enjoy∣ing the privilege of a walled Town. D. L. A word of South Holland? P. H. South Holland lieth next to
the middle Channel of the Rhine, (passing from Ʋtrecht to Leyden) and Zealand, and is eminent for these Ci∣ties: 1. Dort, a large, Former¦ly a stabl of Rhe∣nish Wines. rich and well peopled Town, an Island of late no∣ted for its Synod 1618. about the Arminian Tenets: 2. Gorichem, rich by its daily market of Butter and Cheese, and eminent for its fair Ca∣stle and high Steeple, from whence you see 22. walled Townes, besides a number of Villages: 3. Rotterdam a strong, fair, wel-traded Town on the Dike, Ratter and Erasmus his birth place: 4. Schoon haven on the Lecke, and its fair haven: 5. Goud well fortified on the River Yssel, one of the sixth principal Townes: 6. Outwater: 7. Ysselstain eminent for Cordage: 8. Leiden an University 1564 that hath a strong Built tey say by Hengist Castle, 41. Islands, 104. stone Bridges, and 40. wooden: 9. Old Viawen: 10. Heus∣den: 11. Lerdum: 12. Delph 1 Who whose said that he was Christ. 2. that his Doctrine and not the Law or Gospel could save men. 3. That he had been kept in a place unknown. 4 That he was to restore Israel, not by death or tribulation, but by Love and grace; binding his Disciples, 1. to conceal his name, 2. his descent, 3. not to discover his Religion to any man in Basil. When he died 1556. his Goods were confiscate, and his Bones ta∣ken up and burnt. Da∣vid George birth place, whose Churches are goodly, Streets speci∣ous, cloathing-trade considerable.
D. L. Is not the Hague one of the Cities? P. H. No, it chooseth rather to be the Village (though very large as containing 2000. Housholds, in Gucciardines time) then the second City, and is famous for the resi∣dence of the States general, neer which is Egmond and the Arx Brit∣tan, which Caligula erected when he drew up his Army in Battle array to take Cochleshels. D. L. Methinks I hear not Or be∣fore. yet of the Cautionary Towns delivered to the English 1572? P. H. They are Brill and Flushing, lying in one of the six Islands belon∣ging to Holland called the Vourne, which we chose for the command they had on the passage to Gerteu∣burgh
and the rest of Brabant, as also on Delfe, Dort, Rotterdam, with the Isles Weerengeh, and Texel that safe and capacious Bay. D. L. I pray proceed to Zealand. P. H. Zealand consisteth of seven Islands, the remainder of Eighteen, the Sea hath swallowed up, and in them 300. Townes, and is divided on the West from England, by the Ocean from Flanders and Brabant by the right and left branch of the River Scheld from Holland by the Flache, containing eight Towns, and an 100. Villages; the Aire unwhole∣some, the water salt, the Land good for Pasture, Corn, Mador and Cori∣ander, Wood scarce, the defect whereof is supplied with Holland Turfes, and Scotch Coales. D. L. Which are the seven Islands? P. H. 1. Walcheren Southwest of Sluis, 10. Dutch, and 40. Italian Miles round, having the strong, capa∣cious & fair Middleburgh in it, which since Antwerps decay is an English Emporium; 2. Flushing the Key to
the Netherlands, and one of our Cautions till When it was by King Ja. delivered up, the E. of Leicest. Sir Philip Sidneys brother then Go∣vernour. 1616. 3. Ramme and its fair Haven, whence 500. Sayle set out at a time; 4. Vere, whence the right Honourable the Earle of Oxfords Family. 2. South Beverland, between Walcheren and Brabant, 20. Dutch Miles compass before the Sea im∣paired it; having in it Tergoes Northward, a strong well pri∣vileged Town; 2. Romerswall East∣ward, an Island preserved with much charge; a Woody Country, plea∣sant for Hunting and Hawking. 3. Poor and Overflowed, North Beverland between South Beverland. 4. Little Wolfers, Dihe, Schowen, and two Villages, these are its Western Islands. 5. Schowen, 6. Dutch Miles round, wherein are 1. the Salt and Mader Town Lemnius the Phy∣losopher and Phisi∣cian, na∣tive place. Sirickzed. 6. Duve, or From the Doves in it. Doveland, between Schowen and Tolen, 4. Dutch miles, with much charge preserved with its Farmes and Villages.
7. Tollen, from the Eorts Toll paid in its chief Town, and Saint Marcius his Dyke; these are the Eastern Islands? D. L. Of West Friezland briefly? P. H. West Friezland hath on the East Groylingland and Westphalen: On the South Overyssel and Zuider∣zee, N. and W. the Sea. The Water, Aire, and Fire are unhealthy or defective here; the Pasture and Cattel very good. It containes first, Westergoe with its Francher a Schola, Illustry, Slaveren a Hanse Town, Harlington a good Haven, and Spe∣che a fair Town. 2. Ostrego, with 1. Len-warden and its Chancery Court; two Dockes neer Groyning, Frisius his Birth place; 11. Towns, 345. Villages in all; to this Pro∣vince belongeth the Isle of Sche∣lincke, where they take the Dog-fish thus, The men dance in Beasts Skins, and the Fish taken with the sport come out of the water, between whom and the water they set their Trayls and catch them.
D. L. Shall I intreat your infor∣mation concerning Ʋtrecht. P. H. Ʋtrecht hath on the East Guelderland, on the West, North, and South Holland, more fruitfull and dry then Holland, containing 70. Villages, 5. walled Towns; viz. 1. supposed to be Ba∣tavodu∣cum spo∣ken of in Tacitus Wicke well built and for∣tified, on the midle channel of the Rhine; 2. Rhenen and its Turfes; 3. Armesfort on Ems; 4. Montfort on Yssel strong and pleasant; 5. Ʋtretch, called Ʋltra trajectum, from the Ferry there, with its fair Churches and Monasteries, its well contrived Houses and Vaults, and its wonderful scituation within a dayes journey of fifty Walled Towns. D. L. Over-Yssel I suppose is founded on the East with Westphalen; on the West with Zuiderzee; on the North with West-Friezland; on the South with Guelderland: a plain Morish Country, divided to Tuent, Yssel and Drent, containing 11. towns, and an 100. Villages, whereof the
chief are, 1. Daventer, 2. Swoll, two strong Hanse Townes on the Yssel, taken by the Earle of Leicester 1586. 3. Emen a large fair and inaccessible Town, 4. Oldensel, 5. the Castle Vallen hoven, standing on the Zuider∣zee, the residence of the Governour and the Councell. But please you to instruct me concerning Guelder∣land, Zupbten and Groyning. P. H. Guelderland bounded on the East with Cleveland and Zuphten, on the West with Holland & Ʋtrecht, on the North with Over-Yssel and the Zuiderzee, and on the South with Brabant and Gulicke; is flat, Woody, and fruitful; and divided 1. to Velune within Zuiderzee and the Rhine; barren, but healthful and populous; 2. to Betuwe between the Rhine and Wael (so fruitful that there was a Guelderland Bull sold in Antwerp Ao. 1570. that weighed 3200. pound:) containing 300. Villages and 16. Walled Towns; as 1. Nimegent, (in Latine Novioma∣gus,) an Imperial Town, & one of the
sieges of the Empire, that had liber∣ty to Coyne for a Glovefull of Pep∣per offered at Aix or Aquisgrave; well fortified and peopled under whose jurisdiction are, 2. Trel, 3. Bemel, 4. Gheut, 5. the Fort St. Andrews, 6. Rivermond on Ruer, as it falls to the Maes, well peopled, and strong by art and nature; ha∣ving under its jurisdiction six more Towns, whereof strong, Geldres that was never conquered is one, and Arnhem where is the Yssel Dort, or the Which Drusius to keep his Souldiers from idle∣ness dig'd. Fossa drusiana is another, and the School Horderwiche a third, &c. D. L. Zuphten Sir. P. H. Zuphten hath Eastward Westphalen, Westward Velluwe of Guelderland, Northward Over-yssel, and Southward Cleveland; and hath twelve Cities, whereof Zuisden. Zuphten (called so because of its Southern situation among the Fennes,) on the shore of Yssel hath the River Berhel in the middest of it; a Town indif∣ferently well built for its private
and publick Edifices; before which Sir Philip Sedney received his deaths wound. D. L. The Situation of Groyning∣land? P. H. Groyningland hath East∣ward East-Friezland, Westward West-Friezland, Northward the Ocean, and Southward Over-yssel, wedged in between the Friezlands, whereof the chief is, 1. Old havyn, 2. Groyning its self a rich, great, and well built Town between some streames which add to its pleasure and security having absolute power in all causes, Civil and Criminal without appeal. D. L. I have given you too much trouble already, yet willingly would I be instructed how this Country was Governed from time to time untill they were setled a free State? P. H. They were governed by their respective Earles and Dukes of several Families, untill by Mar∣rages and other contracts they fell to the House of Burgundy, and after
to that of Austria, which governed them in a way of Monarchy, onely allowing them their particular pri∣vileges and constitutions untill Philip the good first, and Philip the second of Spain afterwards attemp∣ted the alteration of their constitu∣tion to the hazard of his own Do∣minion, and aiming at an absolute command, lost all. D. L. What loss might these six Provinces be to him? P. H. He lost first at Antwerp 100000. Crowns for measuring Corn; 2. The Noventate some∣times given amounting to 150000. Crowns per mensem; 3. Their rich Presents, whereof one to King Philip came to 40. millions of Flo∣rens; 4. He lost 60000. men, with an infinite number of Shipping which he had at his command; with his greatest Bulwarke against France, and his best Card for England; be∣sides 400000. men, and an hundred millions of Crowns in the gaining of them.
D. L. I pray how came King Philip to loose these Provinces? P. H. Charles the Emperour his Father at his Death commended these people to his kindness as the chief supporters of his State and Glory if pleased, and his ruine if provoked; And they to obtain his favour presented him at his first en∣trance on the Government with a grant of 40. millions of Florens, as before was said; but his ambition and zeal forgot his own Interest, his Fathers Councel, and their kindness; and designed to overthrow the Privileges his Predecessors had granted and sworn to, (viz. 1. That no Strangers should govern them; 2. That no Clergy should be landed among them; 3. That no Levies should be made without their con∣sent; And 4. that upon breach of these Privileges and declaration thereof they might chuse a new Prince, &c.) and make way for an Arbitrary Government. To which end envying so base a
people such liberty, and fearing the Reformation, to gratifie the Popes humour and his own design, he sends Old Alva, who had been 60. years a Souldier, with a large Army, a larger Commission, and the Inquisi∣tion to be their Viceroy, Count Egmond the Souldiers Favourite closed with him to his ruine, for he beheaded him a while after; the Prince of Aurange opposed him saying, He had rather be a Prince without an House, then a Count with∣out an Head. If these two had a∣greed they had kept out Alva, but falling out, the Prince retires to Nassaw in High Germany, untill Alva's oppressions, cruelties, and inquisition had forced the people to a defensive Warre, wherein Prince William, and his brother Lodowicke assist them with various success a∣gainst Alva, Requiescens and Don John successive Viceroyes untill taking the peoples Oath and re∣nouncing the pretensions of Spain, they were assisted from England, so
that the Spaniard was glad to Treat with them as a Free State, 1609. D. L. How could they so long withstand so Puissant a Monarchy? P. H. 1. By the long Warres they were Disciplined and made active; and indeed it is against the Spartans and the Turkes rule to wage Warre long with any one Nation. 2. By their Fortifications, where∣of one costeth the King of Spain (who hath no plenty of men,) more Soul∣dirers and Money then five pitched fields. D. L. I have heard that England had as much title to the Provinces of Holland, Hernall, &c. as Spain. P. H. They say indeed that we might rather claime them in right of Philippa King Edward the thirds Wife, who was the Earle of those Provinces Eldest Daughter, then the Spaniard in right of Margaret who was onely his younger Daughter. D. L. Which of the two Nether∣land is most considerable, the Spa∣nish,
or the Commonwealth. P. H. The first is largest, but the last best peopled and Trade, and consequently most rich and power∣ful, able to draw 30000. to the Field at an hours warning, and raise 500000l per annum to maintain them; and as an instance for their power at Sea, though the King of Denmarke took 108. Ships of theirs one year, yet they could spare an hundred the next for the expedition against Spain and its Armado. D. L. Are these six Provinces under any one Government? P. H. No, every Province is ab∣solute in it self onely, sometimes they consult together, but can do nothing untill their Consultations are approved of by every Province, whose President, Governour and Councellors by order of their re∣spective States manage their Go∣vernment, onely they have a gene∣ral Councel at the Hague. D. L. Are there any Noble men among them?
P. H. Not above three Families, who yet live like Clowns, least the high Shoones envy, who hate nothing more then a Gentle-man, observe them. D. L. Which of these Countries send out most Shipping? P. H. Holland and Zealand, whence you may see 800. Sayle at a time bound for the East, besides as many for the Western and Southern Coasts, besides 2000. Bugsen, Doog-booten, and Crabbins, wherewith they fish for Herrins, Cod and Sal∣mon, and make yearly three Voya∣ges: the Towns and Villages a∣bounding in Women and Children that Weave Nets, and men that build Ships. D. L. Sir you have seen the Hague the most eminent Town of Holland, I pray describe it. W. S. The Hague is rich in wealth, pleasant in Gardens, Stately in Buildings, and noble for her Inha∣bitants, having 2500. great Houses, among which there is none more
magnificent then the Court of Holland built 1249. by William Earle of Holland, like a Castle with Dikes and Gates; it is alwaies guar∣ded; on the Northside whereof stands a stately Fish-Pond, pleasantly environed with high Trees on Vi∣verberg, or the Fish-Ponds Hill: within this Building is a Hall of Irish Wood, hung with Booksellers, and Painters shops, with Silver-Coat Armours, Trumpets, and Ensignes which hang there in great number, won at Turne, Hout, and Flanders: there is the Governour of Holland, Zealand, and Westfriezland, there are the Courts of Justice, the States-Chamber for the Province, and for the Union, whether all Causes are brought by appeal, and finally de∣termined; here resides the Court Fiscall of Brabant, the States gene∣ral, the Estates of Holland and West-Friezland, the Councell of State, the Masters of the Chamber accounts of Holland, the Councell of Warre, &c. every of these having their
Chambers apart: Hard by there is a Park 1500. Pales long, full of Oakes, Elmes, Ash, and other Trees; on whose Boughes Birds of all sorts Sing sweetly, under which Deeres, Hares and Conies run; Princes, Earles, Lords, Councellors, Advocates, and all sorts of people walk; Not far from this Park are pleasant Lakes at once the pleasure and the profit of that place, not far from that you come to shady walks, that have at once the revenue and the content of Hea∣ven; one hour you meet here the States man and the Merchant grave∣ly walking, another while the youth pleasantly playing, at a little distance further of time and place the Soul∣diery exercising, and by them the VVomen Landring, and if you please to walk a little further, you will see all Europe floating on the one hand by water, and carried on the other by Land to this great Mort of Chri∣stendome for Trade and for intel∣ligence.
CHAP. II. Of the Civill Government of the Ʋnited Provinces. D. L. I Pray how are the United Governed? C. B. Having cast off their Prince, and the three Estates of Nobility, Clergy and Commonalty; the supream Authority is vested in their Nobility and Citizens; and is an Aristocrasy, or a Democrasy, as either of those Interests pre∣vail. D. L. Are the Clergy wholly excluded? C. B. Yea, unless it be in the Province of Ʋtrecht, where the Ecclesiasticks are of their Councels. D. L. Is there no shadow of Monarchy there? C. B. Yes, they grant so much executive Power to the Governors
of each Province as make them lit∣tle less than Monarchs. D. L. How is Holland Governed? C. B. By the Nobility, and the Burgesses of Eighteen Cityes, Dort, Harlem, Delfe, Leyden, Am∣sterdam, Der-Goud, Rotterdam, Gorchom, Scheedam, Schon-Hoven, Brill, Allmar, Horn, Enkusen, Edam, Manacdam, Med-Embliche, and Purmerent; which do at once over∣power the Nobility and engage the whole Commonalty. D. L. How is every particular City Governed? C. B. 1. By yearly Burgomasters which manage the Government; 2. The Sheriffes and Scout masters, that administer justice in Causes Criminal and Civil; The Treasu∣rer that ordereth the Revenue; and the Doctors Advocates or Pension∣ers that are of Councell. 2. By a general Councell of Justice to whom they appeale from the respective Magistrates. D. L. No appealing from that Councell.
C. B. No, but there may be more Judges added, and the Case re∣viewed. D. L. How are their general Affaires managed, and their Trea∣sury disposed of in the Province of Holland? C. B. By the Assembly of the Estates called three or four times a year, and made up of one Advocate and one Pensioner, of each of the Eighteen Cities, and the Nobility, who as one City tied together by the rule of right rea∣son, and the publick good unani∣mously agree in all publick Con∣cernes, the lesser part being con∣cluded by the major, without force which availes not among them who are equal in liberty. D. L. Who executes their De∣crees, and disposeth their Money? C. B. Another Assembly depu∣ted by them to put in execution their Orders, and to call them to∣gether when there is occasion. D. L. What Power hath the
Governour of Holland? C. B. Much honour and power: the Militia is at his dispose, their safety depends on his Care, of three men they propose he names all Officers; and any fault he may pardon; wherefore his respect is no less than that of a Prince. D. L. Are all the other Provin∣ces so Governed? C. B. Yes, save that the popu∣lacy is more prevalent in some pla∣ces than in others, and that some∣times one Governour commands two or three Provinces. D L. But how is the Union of all the Estates Governed? C. B. By a general Assembly of the Estates of the seven Provinces consisting of the Nobility and the City Deputies. D. L. How and when are they called? C. B. They are called by a De∣puty standing Councell, which they leave to execute their Decrees by Summons to each Province, onely
when such Grand Affaires are on foot, as concern the Interest of the whole Union, as Warre, Peace, Truce, making or breaking Leagues, laying on, or taking off new Impo∣sition, &c. D. L. How do they debate things? C. B. The Deputies of each Pro∣vince by way of Committee debate matters among themselves, and then give their Votes not as parti∣cular men but as representatives, so that there are but seven Votes of the seven Provinces in all, who must all agree before any matter be concluded. D. L. But what if some Provin∣ces differ? C. B. They depute some Mem∣bers of the Assembly to perswade them to yield their private Opini∣ons and concerns to common in∣terest and reason. D. L. What become of their Resolves? C. B. A Councell of State made
up of the Deputies of each Province is appointed by the States general to represent them to put their Decrees in execution, and upon any emergent Difficulty to inti∣mate the necessity of the general Assembly, this Councell is called the Councell of the States general; and as the great Assembly is distin∣guished to seven Votes according to the seven Provinces it repre∣sents, and guided by a President Weekly chosen out of each Province. D. L. Are there any more Councels there? C. B. Yes, three more under this Councel of the States general; Viz. 1. One of State to manage the Army, and its pay by Land, some of whose Members alwayes attend the General; and are ordered to assist in the resolutions of highest concern to the Union, and is made up of Deputies; 2. Another of the common Treasury of the Union; 3. A third of the Admiralty which
manageth their maritime affaires and Incomes, consisting of six Mem∣bers, four whereof are in Holland, one in Zealand, and one in Friez∣land, these Councels are frequent∣ly charged according to the consti∣tution of each Province. D. L. Is there no one person over all these Councels? C. B. Yes, the Prince of Aurange, who hath the chief management of their Forces by Sea and Land. D. L. Where do these Councels sit? C. B. Mostly at the Hague, which is most conveniently situated to diffuse Advisces, Orders and Laws, to fill the Provinces. D. L. How fitly is the particular Government of each Province proportionated to the general Government of all; and that to the particular interests of each Province; by what conformity and mutual knots of government the united Provinces are tied together, and jointly concur in what con∣cernes
the common Interest? But is it much altered from their former constitution? C. B. As little as can be, rather by augmenting each Councel to oblige all parties, than by alter∣ing any to confound them. D. L. My Ingenious Friend, that saw their Countrey, what think you of their Government? D. F. The Countries Govern∣ment is popular, and there had need many to rule that Rabble: Tell them of Monarchy but in jest, and they will cut your throat in earnest; the very name they think beares tyranny in its forehead; and they hate it more than a Jew doeth Images, a Woman old age, or a Non-conformist a Surplice, not a man among them hath authority by Inheritance, for that were the way in time to parcel out their Coun∣try to Families: they are chosen Magistrates, as the King chuseth Sheriffes, not for their Wit but Wealth; which they so over-affect
that Myne here, shall walk the Streets as Usurers go to Bawdy-Houses all alone and Melancholly. D. L. I pray informe me what is the strength of the united Provinces? C. B. Their strength is either by Land or by Sea. D. L. I pray Sir what is their Strength by Land? C. B. 1. The Sea, the Mause, the Rhein, the Yssel, especially Zealand, and Holland, which is made up of Impregnable Islands; and also Low and Moresh, that it is Invincible: the Great Boy of Europe, not such another Marsh in the World; a National Quagmire, that they can overflow at plea∣sure. 2. The natural and artificial strength of their Frontier Cities, as Sluce Impregnable for its low Scituation, and strong Fortificati∣ons; the strong Fort of Lillo in Brabant, Berghen, ap-Zone, Breda, Gatrinburgh, Heusden, Grave, and
Crevecour, the Forts of St. Andrews Worden, Niminghen, and Schinty, and the Sconces on the Rivers; As strong as industry and Nature can make them: every Town hath its Garrison, and the Keyes of the Gates in the night time are not trusted but in the State-House. 3. Their Ammunition is plenti∣full, their Armes, Engines, and Warlike Instruments ready, their Provision full, the whole Country lying so Linked together, with natural and artificial Rivers that it can furnish each part in a moment. 4. Their excellent Discipline, that makes Holland the School of Europe: and so furnisheth them with vast Armies of home bred Souldiers, and Forreigners to the number of 60000. in the Field, and 30000. in Garrisons; their In-land men are their best Souldiers, they of Holland and Zealand are the best Sea-men; their Forreigners are the best Commanders: they make
use of the French for Activity, of the English for Valour; of the Scots for Subtlety; and of the Germans for Order and Discipline: and they keep all way 20000. in Pay; and allow a 1000l. a day ex∣traordinary in time of Warr. D. L. Methinks Warre should undo them? O. F. Of all the World they are the people that thrive and grow rich by Warre, which is the Worlds ruine, and their support; so strong is their Shipping, so open their Sea, so fortified their Towns and Country, by reason of their Lowness and Irrigulation.
CHAP. III. Of their Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment. D. L. PLease you to proceed to their Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment. T. S. Having at once shaken off the yoke of Spain and Rome, as they un∣happily fell into a Commonwealth on the one hand, so they settled in a Classical way on the other: for the Ministers that promoted their Re∣formation being addicted to Mr. Calvin, and his Platform at Geneva, established that among them, rather as that which suited with their In∣terest and Constitution, than as what corresponded with truth: they cannot have the Primitive Church Government if they would, and our men that pretend to a Con∣formity with them, as the reason of their Non-conformity with us, will
not have it thought they could—where every Burgess is a King, its fit every Minister should be a Bi∣shop.— D. L. But how do they govern their Church? T. S. 1. They that are Supreme in the State, are so in the Church, and they will not endure two Juris∣dictions. 2. Under them in every Province the Ministers meet, and propose to them what they judge fit to be en∣acted. 3. In every Province there are sixteen particular Classes, where those matters are considered of that are to be proposed to the General Assembly. 4. The General Assembly meets twice a year, the Classical once a month. 5. The Ministers are divided to three sorts, 1. Pastors and Doctors, that teach and instruct; 2. Elders, that rule and over-see; 3. Deacons, that dispose of their Mony.
D. L. How do they admit their Ministers? T. S. After four years study, 1. They Examine, 2. They impose on them a Sermon, and a Discourse upon some Polemical Subjects, af∣ter which, with Prayer and Fasting, by the Magistrates consent, they admit them to the Ministry, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. D. L. How do they maintain them? T. S. With Pensions, not exceed∣ing an 100l. a year, whereby they keep them within compass, and de∣pendance, yet providing for their Wives maintenance, and their Chil∣drens Education. D. L. What is the Ministers work there? T. S. 1. He prayes; 2. He reads the Word; 3. He explains by way of Exposition, Catechizing, and Preaching; 4. He Baptizeth the Christians Children upon examina∣tion of the Parents and Sureties;
upon competent warning given, he administreth the Sacrament of the Lords Supper four times a year, viz. the 1. Sunday of April, July, October, and January, to those who regard the Discipline, and are Ca∣techized every one in his own Pa∣rish after 15 dayes warning: and this the people receive sitting or standing by a Table near the Pul∣pit. 5. He marrieth a Widow with∣in six months after her Husbands decease: or a Maid when her Guar∣dians allow it after Banes thrice asked with Prayer and Exhortation. Ne∣ver upon a Sunday. 6. Upon in∣vitation, he shall go and visit the sick, and advise how to settle his Estate for this World, and prepare himself for another. 7. He shall accompany the bodies of the faith∣ful, without Prayer, Sermon, or sound of Bell, to the Grave, which must be alwayes in the Churchyard, and not in the Church. 8. He must reside in his Parish Consistory, and assist them in Church censure thus:
1. By Admonishing, 2. By Exclu∣ding from the Lords Supper; and at last by Excommunication, where∣in they proceed thus: The first Sun∣day they pray for the man, naming neither his person nor fault: the second they name his person, but not his crime: the third, the Per∣son is named, his offence published, and he excommunicated, not to be received but upon sincere Repen∣tance, testified by a reformed Con∣versation, whereof the people are told one Sunday by the Minister, and the next by the Penitent him∣self, declaring his Confession before the Pulpit. 9. He presides in the Consistory, to gather Voices, to pronounce sentence, to keep the order of debates, to refer greater matters to the greater Assemblies, to register their Acts; to denounce their sentence, and conclude all with Prayer; and this every Sun∣day. 10. The Ministers are delega∣ted by the Parochial Consistories, to be in the Classical Assemblies, and
by the Classical Assemblies, to be of the Provincial Synod: and by the Provincial Synod upon extraordi∣nary occasions, (as that of the Re∣monstrancy, Controversie, and Bar∣nevells Rebellion, in pursuance at Dort of it) for a General Meeting, advertizing each other before hand, what is likely to be proposed in the General Assembly. D. L. How is the Lords Day ob∣served? T. S. Two Sermons they have upon it, in their rather handsome, than Magnificent Churches, but the peoples noise in playing, especially at theit Kirhe masts or Wakes, drowneth that of the Minister in preaching. In the Morning they are close and demure, but in the Af∣ternoon their shops fly open, their wheel-barrows go up and down the streets, and they are in the heat of their business. D. L. What Religion do they countenance? T. S. They countenance only
Calvinisme, but for Trades sake they Tolerate all others, except the Papists, which is the reason why the treasure and stock of most Nations is transported thither, where there is full Liberty of Conscience: you may be what Devil you will there, so you be but peaceable: for Am∣sterdam is an University of all Re∣ligions, which grow here confu∣sedly (like stocks in a Nursery) without either Order or Pruning. If you be unsettled in your Re∣ligion, you may here try all, and take at last what you like best; If you fancy none, you have a Pat∣tern to follow of two that would be a Church to themselves: It's the Fair of all the Sects, where all the Pedlars of Religion have leave to vend their Toyes, their Ribbands, and Phanatique Rat∣tles: their Republick is more to them than Heaven; and God may be more safely offended there than the States General.
CHAP. IV. The Dutch Customes. D. L. HOw is it the Dutch are alwayes gainers by War? B. P. 1. It increaseth their Ship∣ping, stirring them to exceed their Adversaries by Sea, as far as he ex∣ceedeth them by Land, threatning his Indies, and blocking his Havens, while he assaults their Country: for (besides their general Contri∣butions at home, and their aid from abroad (where they are supported to check the Spanish Greatness) as his Indies furnish him with means to assault, so they supply them with means to defend his Designes upon: Europe being diverted to his de∣fence in Asia, Affrica and America; More of them live on the Sea (where dwell whole Families) than on the Land. 2. By their Excise, which riseth
with their charge, the more mony they pay, the more they receive a∣gain, in that insensible, but profita∣ble way: what is Exhaled up in Clouds, falls back again in Showers: what the Souldier receives in pay, he payes in Drink: their very ene∣mies, though they hate the State, yet love their Liquor, and pay Ex∣cise: the most Idle, Slothful, and and most Improvident, that selleth his blood for Drink, and his flesh for Bread, serves at his own charge, for every pay day he payeth his Sutler, and he the Common Purse. D. L. What do they most taxe? B. P. Foreign Beer, &c. 1. To limit the excess of foreign impor∣tations: 2. That their Commodi∣ties may be more vendible: 3. To draw in every man to contribute to the wars, those that would not o∣therwise part with a farthing, wil∣lingly laying out their mony, as they think upon their Lusts, but as the State hath contrived, upon the Publick good: but they have those
Commodities in time of War in Gross, which in time of Peace they must take in the Retail. 4. They keep up that Concord by Warr, which would fall asunder in Peace. 5. They oblige Foreign Nations by ballancing the Austrian Power, which they should disoblige, by Peace with him. D. L. But how do they manage their Wars & Trade at a cheaper rate than others? B. P. First, they go with less charge, their Ships requiring fewer men, and those men all sharing in the Design, are contented with courser fare; and as they go through all Difficulties with Patience, so they husband all expences with thrift: nothing like concerning the Commonalty in all Designs. 2. They carry abroad no Coyn of their own, furnishing themselves elsewhere: Coyn is the blood of a Commonwealth: but other Com∣modities they can spare. 3. They carry thence the commo∣dities
of one place to another, and are the common Carriers of Chri∣stendome, bringing home the while the most Staple Commodities of each Country: 4. They trade there upon the best and most free conditions: 5. Their Industry and Prudence having besides got more strength in the Indies, than any other people. D. L. Which way do the English keep them under? B. P. By commanding the Nar∣row-sea, their Coast and ours. D. L. How do they keep in their Waters? B. P. By strong mounds they keep it in, and by Art they make it ser∣viceable to their trades and carria∣ges, which they convey to and fro very easily, subtilly, and cheaply: yea, the Winds serve them, and an Artificial Engine with one man, shall do the work of an hundred: their Channels are so well contrived, that they are not only Draines to
their Ground, High wayes to their Carriages, but Ornaments to their Cities. D. L. What are the Dutch for publick works? B P. Very Liberal and Noble, as appears by their stately Streets and Buildings, their pleasant Walks, their planted High wayes, which are fenced with such orderly Hedg∣rows, that the whole Country is but one shady Walk by the River side, a Paradise: they having no useless Common, but what (by the common consent of publick spirited Magistrates and people) is turned to profit or pleasure: when as we have more barren Common than they have Land. D. L. How do the poor live a∣mong them? B. P. Every body workes there, and not a man begs but by stealth, rather making signes then speaking, whole Families having starved there because they would not be burthensome.
D. L. VVhat Provision do they make for their sick and aged Poor? B. P. So carefull are they, that they make not Beggers by relieving them; that they search their hou∣ses, and upon due examination of their Case, 1. They Prentise their Children if they have any, teaching them their Trades freely, and directing them by turnes; suffering them not to loyter, but feeding dispatching, and sending them away presently. 2. They have neat and distinct Almes-Houses for Men and VVo∣men, which a man would think were rather rich Merchants habita∣tions then poor Almsmens dwelings. 3. They have VVase-Houses such as Christ-church in London, &c. to bring up Orphans in, to Trades, Learning, or what they are most inclined to, for the service of the Commonwealth: providing like∣wise for their women Portions when of age. 4. Their Guest-house, for sick and
poor men and women are well furnished with all Necessaries, atten∣dance, Phisick, and what heart can wish. 5. Their Dul-houses, or Bedlams, for the distracted; Their Tucht-houses, or Houses of Corrections for the stuborn & idle, are generally fair with all meanes used to reclaime the first to their Wits, the other to their Honesties: the Rents and Governments whereof are in the hands of the publick Magistrates. 6. In their Lumbards, or Loan houses, the poor have Mony upon any Pawn for a reasonable rate, viz. six in the Hundred, with convenient time of payment. D. L. A word I pray of their frugality whereby they maintaine all this charge. B. P. 1. Their Diet is homely, and of every mans own providing; 2. They spend more time then mo∣ney in Drinking, improving that time to business too; 3. They traffick for others Superfluities, but
not their own; 4. Their Apparel is plaine and manlike, alwayes of one fashion; 5. Their ambition is solid for realities rather then ima∣ginations to serve the publick State rather then private humours; much better is it (say they) to be port of Holland in possession then Titu∣lor King of Jerusalem: 6. Their Lawes are strictly executed, and no forfeitures left to the corrupt dis∣posal of an Officer, but all bestowed upon the publick: 7. Usury is a stranger amongst them, every man laying out his estate upon the com∣mon Traffick: 8. No Idleness there and so no Thieves, which is more restrained there by Whipping, then here by Hanging: 9. If any man gaines extraordinary by money, the tenth of his gain is the Common-wealths; Usurers escaping not there as here, scot-free: 10. A man un∣done by Casualty, they set up again; a man cast into Prison the Creditor must maintain; A man troubled with a shifting Adversary, a quick
tryal relieves: 10. Add to this the blessing of God, which they implore before any consultation upon extra∣ordinary State matters, upon their Bid-dayes as they call them: 11. All men debate, and all contribute to the publick Affaires as concerned both by advice and purse: 12. Their Resolutions are secret and sudden: 13. They allow all Opinions at home, and converse with all men abroad for the publick benefit; maxime being to winke at singular inconveniences to avoid universal mischiefes. D. L. Would it be any advantage to us to observe their wayes? B. P. Yes, for we see where-ever they settle in England, as in Norwich, &c. the Government of that place is most strict; the people within 20. mile most employed, our Manu∣factures best improved, and the poor best provided for: for where the Dutch are they relieve our poor, and we never are troubled with theirs.
A RIDLE. The Lyon slept securely while the Hunters laid their toyles for him, the Pismire stung and awaked him; he starts up resolutely and checks the presumptuous Pismire; the Pismire cried, my Lord look about you; He did so, and spread the snare of the Hunters, he broke it, & securing all avenues at Home, he looks abroad, and saith, Laesa patientia fit furor; abused patience turnes fury. D. L. I pray what are the funda∣mental constitution of their State? B. P. 1: That no Countess mar∣ry without the States good liking. 2. That all Officers be Natives. 3. That the Estates assemble at pleasure. 4. No impositions be raised or removed but by publick consent. 5. That all publick Writings should be in Dutch. 6. That their Coyn be disposed of by a Commitee of Merchants. 7. That none sell his Possession without publick consent.
8. That no Offices be Hereditary. 9. That every place should be competently salaried. 10. That no man serve a forreign Prince without leave. 11. That there be an yearly esti∣mate of Estate and Persons. 12. That there be constant allow∣ance for Residents, Agents, &c. 13. That every City be Fortified and Garrisoned. 14. That none be forced to serve out of his Province. D. L. What are the reasons that we had to assist them at first? B. P. First, the security of the Protestant Religion against the Pope: Second, Of England against Spain, whom we chose rather to engage in his own Country, then in ours: Thirdly, The opening of Trade, encroached upon by the Spaniards: Fourth, The ballancing of Europe. D. L. 1. When they steal away our Coyn; 2. When they engross our trade, & bringing it to that pass that we break by hundreds.
D. L. What were the Reasons in brief for the Hollanders Revolt from the King of Spain? B. P. 1. The breach of their Privileges, which, that King swore either to observe, or quit his Domi∣nion. 2. Charles the Fifth and his Son Philip the Second's design to new model their Government. 3. The Novenal Aid of 800000l. demand at his Coronation by Philip. 4. The Kings remote Residence in Spain. 5. His weak or cruel Substitutes; as the Dutchess of Parma, Cardinal Granvill, Duke D'Alva, the great Commander of Castile. 6. The inquisition and Bishops designed for those Provinces, May the 11. 1565. with power to questi∣on all men for all matters, and swear them to discover one another; the chiefest Nobility and Merchants be∣ing enrolled in the Black Book. 7. The neglect of their Petitions. 8. The Spainish Embassadour
D'Allanaes Letters taken, wherein it was advised that the Netherlands should be impoverished first, and then kept under; that their Nobili∣ty should be trepanned, and patriots cut off; that their Priveliges should be declared forfeited; that they should be necessitated to Re∣bellion and them justly to be de∣stroyed. 9. Alva's boast that he had 18000. to be executed. 10. His disarming, impoverishing and engarrisoning the Country in order to those Butcheries of milli∣ons, he caused afterwards his Ran∣sacks, desolatious, Banishments, and Confiscations. 11. His keeping of the King at distance from his people. 12. His suborning of Witnesses, and seting illegal and extraordinary wayes of proceeding. 13. His seizures of all the pub∣lick treasure that paid the poor, the Ministers, the Almes-houses, &c. 14. His exactions of the hun∣dredth,
twentith, and the tenth penny; and so driving all trade out of that Country by his oppressions of the Natives, and his seizures on strangers Goods. 15. Don John's plot by indulging to betray them, discovered in an intercepted Letter of Don John wherein all their traines and me∣thod were laid open. 16. The King of Spains disclai∣mer of his real right by usurping more, and setting up a Councel of troubles not tied nor limited to any instructions, but invested with liberty freely to give sentence in any thing at pleasure.
CHAP. V. The private Qualities, Condition, and Carriage of the Dutch. D. L. WHat is the Dutch man's private Condition, Quality and Carriage? O. F. Viz. The Dutch are usually of large Statures, handsome and fair Aspects, stronge and able bo∣dies, their minds are not less vigo∣rous then their bodies; their tem∣per is resolute, their spirit undaun∣ted, their nature open and pleasant, their callings beneficial and industri∣ous; their Genious apt to all Arts, especially the Mechanical and Manu∣al: their Ambition is their liberty and privilege, which they have maintained this hundred years with much blood and treasure: their ex∣penses frngal, to the saving of an Egge-shell, they maintaining it for a maxime that a thing lasts longer mended then new: their respects
and considerations are narrow and restrained; their way is active & stir∣ring, and Provision is made for their necessitous people, but none for the idle, who must work there or they shall not eat; the time they spend is in eating well, and drinking much, and prating most: The truth is (saith my ingenious Author) the compleatest Drinker in Europe is your English Gallant, there is no such consumer of Liquor as the quaffing of his Healths; the Dutch were good at it, but now they have got a custome of pra∣ting over their pots, they sip, and laugh, and tell their tale; and in a Tavern are more prodigal of their time then of their Wine, they drink as if they were short winded, and as it were eat their drink by morsells and let it down by piece meals, rather besieging then assaulting their braines; in a word we are Drinkers, they are soakers; an English man is sooner, a Dutch man longer drunk.
Their recreation is warlike, and they are taught to be Souldiers be∣fore they have attained to be men; Nay (saith my ingenious and noble friend) as if they placed a Religion in Armes, every Sunday is conclu∣ded with the Train-bands marching through the City. They are rather cunning then wise, crafty then cunning, and close then either; their Commonwealth being managed rather by the subtle∣ty of Trads men, then the policy of States men: their Intelligence is as spreading as their Traffick, and their Traffick as large as the World; there being no Nation under heaven to the bottom of whose Counsels, Interests and concernes they have not insinuated themselves. Their Religion sits loose to them and is their profession rather then their practise, wherein they are too noble a people to be hypocrites, and too civil to be profane, and so pru∣dent as to observe a mean not proud∣ly boasting their Religion as their
shew, but humbly owning it as their duty; they are Jewes of the New Testament, that have changed onely the Law for the Gospel. Their Language though it differ from the higher Germany, yet hath it the same ground, and is as old as Babel, & although harsh yet of so lof∣ty signification & so full a tongue, as made Goropius Becanus maintain it for the speech of Adam in Paradise; Steven of Bruges reckoneth up 2170 Monosillables which being expoun∣ded, richly grace that tongue; a Tongue as large as Europe, spoken in Germany, Denmarke, Norway, Sweden, and England; (for most of our old words are Dutch,) and so little altered that it is in a manner the same it was 2000. years ago, without the too much mingled bor∣rowings of their Neighbour Nati∣ons. Every thing about them is neat but themselves, the first thing in their houses is a Looking-glass, wherein sure the Landlord seldome
sees his face: their Vessels are mar∣shalled so orderly as if they were rather for shew then use, ornaments rather then utensils; the Dutch mans Building is not large, but neat; handsome on the outside, on the inside hung with Pictures, not Tapistry, he that hath not bread to eat hath a Picture; Were the knackes of all their Houses set to∣gether, there would not be such another Bartholomew-Fair in Eu∣rope; the Hogen paints well yet he ever writes under his sign what it is: His Chambers are but several sand∣boxes, and there you must either go out to spit, or blush when you see the Map brought. Their Beds are no other but land Cabines, high enough to need a Lad∣der or staires, up once, you are walled in with Wainscot, and that is (saith my Friend) good discretion to avoid the trouble of making your Will every night, for once falling out else you would break your neck perfectly; But if you die in it, this
comfore you will leave your friends that you died in clean Linnen. Their Habitations are kept handsomer then their bodies, and their bodies then their soules: at first sight you find the And-Irons shut up in Net work, next you have the Warming-pan maffled in Italian work, next that the Sconce clad in Cambrick, and like a Crown advanced in the midle of the house. D. L. You have satisfied me as to their private conditions and qua∣lities. I pray what is their Car∣riage? O. F. 1. Clownish and blunt to men, respecting neither person, nor Apparel; they gaze at, and envy, but never reverence a Gentlemen. 2. Chast and modest to their Women, being strangers to the two fomentors of Lust, idleness and Courtship; alwayes doing less then they speak, and speaking less then they think. D. L. But their Women have an ill name?
O. F. A Dutch Womans full veins and high blood makes her Gamesome but not Mercenary, entertaining Gallants, rather then entertained by them; but if a man once in pub∣lick discovereth their private fa∣vours, or pretend to any more then is civil, she falls off like a Fairy wealth disclosed, and turnes like beer with lightning to a sowreness, which neither art nor labour can never make sweet again. D. I. What is their temper? O. F. Hardy, head-strong, chur∣lish, and testy, their will is their rea∣son, the Commonwealth God with them; Warr is their Paradice, peace is their Hell, the Spaniard is the Devil they hate; you may sooner convert a Jew to Christianity, turn an old Baud Puritan, then convince a Dutch man of reason. D. L. How do these rough hewen pieces model their Commonwealth? O. F. Not a man of them but may be a States-man, for they have all this gift not to be too nice consci∣enced:
It is a noble Testimony that so grave an Historian as Tacitus hath left of them upon record these 1500. years, deliberant dum fingere nesciunt, constituunt dum errare non possunt. They deliberat when they cannot dissemble, and resolve when they cannot erre. D. L. What is their behaviour towards Strangers? O. F. 1. They are seldome decei∣ved, for they will trust no body; 2. They may alwayes deceive, for you must trust them as for instances if you travel to ask a bill of Parti∣culars is to purre in a Wasps Nests; you must pay what they ask as sure as if it were the assessement of a Subsidy; 3. Complement is an idle∣ness, those busie people were never skilled in: they are half Marred be∣ing Saylors; & being Souldiers they are quite spoiled, for then they would let a Jew build a City where Harlem-mere is and after cousen them of it; 4. They shall abuse a stranger for nothing, and after a few
base termes scortch one another to a Carbonado, or as they do their Roches when they fry them; 5. They love none but those that do for them, and when they leave off they neglect them; they have no Friends but their Kindred, which at every Wedding feast meet among themselves like tribes. D. L. I pray what is their Carri∣age among themselves? O. F. They are all equal, no way to know Master or Mistress but to take them in bed together; it may be those are they; otherwise Mal∣kie can prate as much, laugh as loud, be as bold, and sit as well as Mistress; your man may be sawcy, and you must not strike him, your Schollar untoward, you must not whip him; the Son asketh his Fathers blessing by clapping him on the back, & bid∣ding him good night, & his Mothers by kissing her and saying god-boy. D. L. But how do they look, and go? O. F. They are their own dis∣guizes,
and their own Cloaths so thick and tanned their faces; their women have good faces e∣nough if they did not marre them with making their Ear-wyres, and so nipt in their Cheekes that you would think some fairy had done them a mischief, and pinched them behind with tongues; their dressings are so backward that they have much more crown then face: Men and women saith the ingenious Travelour, are Starched so blew, that if once they grow old, you would verily be∣lieve you saw winter walking up to the neck in a barrel of Indigo; and therefore they raile at Eng∣land for spending no more Blew∣ing; your man among them is else clad tollerably, unless he in∣clines to the Sea fashion, and then are his Breeches yawning at the knees, as if they were about to swallow his Legges unmercifully. The VVomans Hood is close, her breast open; her Gown wide, her Rings many, her little Keyes and
Chaines more; and the man and womans fashion is more constant then their faith. D. L. A word Sir of their meals or diet? O. F. 1. They eat much, and spend little; 2. Roots and stock∣fish are staple commodities in their houses, and if they have Flesh they can keep it hot more dayes then a Pig in Pye-corner; salt Meates and sowre Cream sugared is their de∣light. Their Cookery is natural, and an artificial dressing of Meat you can perswade them to neither with love or money; you must have pa∣tience at their Tables to stay till break of day, to pledge every man about you, and to sit with a woman of each side of you, carrying away in the morning it may be instead of Sweet-meates a piece of Apple-Pie in your pocket.
CHAP. VI. Our Right to the Narrow Seas. D. L. I Pray will you make out what Right we have to the Narrow Seas in few words. I. S. 1. The Seas that surrounds our Island, whether the Scottish, the Brittish, the Irish, or Ger∣man were possessed, and secured by the Brittains, who fished so much upon them that they burnished the Hilts of their Swords with such Fishes Teeth as they took; and tra∣ded so considerably that none came amongst them but Merchant. 2. Those Seas were by them transmitted with their Countries to the Romans upon the Conquest, who as they managed the Govern∣ment of the Land by Presidents, so they did that at Sea by an Archigu∣bernasy, or chief Governour and Admiral; who secured Commerce, took prizes, looked on the Coasts
of Spain, Italy, and Affrica it self. 3. After the Romans, the Saxons succeeded to this Right and Domi∣nion, and commanded the Sea un∣der a Count of the Saxon shore, i. e. (whatever Panarollus saith to the contrary) the Sea-shore, Octa and Ebista under Vortigerne and Hen∣gist commanding these Seas, the Saxons and Danes keeping a nume∣rous Navy to that purpose, by such tributes and duties as they imposed upon their Vassals particularly Dane-gelt for the Guard of the Sea; Edgar and Canutus stiling them∣selves Soveraign of the Sea. 4. The Right and Dominion of the Seas passed with this Nation to the Normans, as appears 1. From their government, the custody of the seas alwaies being under an admiral by Commissions from the several Kings maintained by tributes, paid in con∣sideration of the said Custody; 2. From their right in all the Isalnds lying on the Sea before the French shore; 3. From leave asked alwaies
and granted by Forreigners of the English to pass those seas. D. L. I pray who asked leave? I. S. The Kings of Denmarke, and Sweden, the Hans-Towns in Queen Elizabeths time; the Hollan∣ders and Zealanders themselves not daring to Fish before they asked leave of Scarborough; and King James proclaiming May 6. 1610. that none Fish upon the English or the Irish Sea without leave obtained at every year at least renewed, from the Commissioners appointed for this purpose at London. But 4. our Right to the Sea ap∣pears from the Limits we set to such Forreigners (as Moderators of the sea) as are at emnity with one another, and at amity with the English. 5. From publick Records where∣in the Dominion of the sea is ascri∣bed to the Kings of England by the King himself, and the Estates of Parliament, with very great deli∣beration, and in such express words
as these; Lords Of the English Sea on every side, all people accounted us Sove∣raigns of the Seas; that our Soveraign Lord the King and his Illustrious Pro∣genitors being Lords of the Seas would impose a tribute upon all stran∣gers: the Kings of England have by right of their Dominions been Lords of the Sea: (these are the words of all Europe by their Commissioners at Paris;) and made Lawes, Statutes, and restraints of Armes upon them, together with Admiralls that they should preserve their superiority over the same. 7. From the Laws and most re∣ceived Customs of England that make the Seas the patrimony of England; and the King of the old Custome of England, Lord of the nar∣row Seas; and his Soveraignty there so ancient; they make the four Seas to be equivalent with those words within or without the King∣dome; De mer appurtenant au Roy l'Angleterre: the Sea belonging to the King of England.
8. From the Coyn called Rose-Nobles, of which it is said four things our Noble sheweth to me, King, Ship, Sword, power of the Sea. 9. From the Custome of striking sayl upon our Coasts to our Ships time out of mind. 10. From the acknowledgement of the Flemings and others by sup∣plication, to our Kings as Soveraigns of the Sea, since Edward the thirds time. 11. From the Licenses upon re∣cord granted to the French and Fle∣mings, with their limited number of Boates to Fish upon our Coasts. 12. From the prerogative where∣by all wreckes and royal Fishes, as VVhales, Sturgeons taken in our Seas are due to the King of Eng∣land onely, or unto such unto whom by special charter they have gran∣ted the same, stat. Ed. 3. 17. toge∣ther with all things floating upon the said Sea all Flostan, Flostan is things that float; Jestan Goods in danger cast out; Ligan all Weights: things sunk. Jestan, and Ligan, as our Lawyers speak.
D. L. How far doth this Domini∣on and Right of Ours extend? I. S. All along the Brittish Coast as far as the Mediterranean, yea the Coasts of Friezland by the Danes confession, and our claimes, was part of our Royalty. D. L. I thought the Water was as common as the Aire. I S. No! for the Jewes had the Soveraignty of the Waters that washed the Holy Land by the Law of God, Ezek. 47. 10. and the Ro∣mans of the Mediterraneans by the Law of Nations, Plut. in Pomp. King Minos claimed Crete and its Sea; the seven Nations of the Fast and South commanded those Seas, as the Lydians, Lord of the Seas, &c. Selden p. 59. the Corinthians, the Phaenicians, the Lacaedemonians, and Athenians; the four Emperours were said to be Lords of much Land and of much Sea; and the common enjoyment of it was abolished as an unjust thing by the Eastern constitu∣tions; the Venetians held the Adri∣atique;
the Genoes the Ligusticke; the Tuscans the Tyrrhene; and Rome Tiber, and the Sea adjoyning. The Portugals are in antient Re∣cords called Lords of Commerce, Navigation, and the Sea; and the Spainish of the Firme-land and Oce∣an; the King of France is declared supream Lord of the Sea that flow∣eth about his Kingdome; as are the Danes, the Swedes, the Pole, and Turkes: neither is the Aire less ap∣propriate then the Sea; yea the ve∣ry Hollanders themselves discounte∣nanced Grotius and his Book of the communities of the Elements: And to conclude all the foresaid Venetians Ao. 1508. in a publick de∣bate with Ferdinand then Empe∣rour carried the propriety of the Adriatique Gulph.
CHAP. VII. The Inestimable benefit the Dutch make of the Brittish Seas. D. L. WIll you shew me the advantage the Dutch make of our Seas? I. B. Yes, our Seas yield inesti∣mable treasure to those that take paines therein all the year; For, The Summer Fishing, for Herring beginneth about Midsommer, and lasteth some part of August. The Winter Fishing for Herring lasteth from September to the midst of Nvember, both which extend in place from Boughones in Scotland to the Thames mouth. The Fishing for Cod at Alamby wirlington, and White-haven near Lancashire, from Easter till Whit∣sontide. The Fishing for Hake at Aberdeny, Abvswhich, and other places be∣tween Wales and Ireland, from
Whitsontide to Saint James-tide. The Fishing of Cod and Ling a∣bout Padstow within the Land, and of Severn, from Christmas to Mid∣lent. The Fishing for Cod on the West part of Ireland, frequented by those of Giscay, Galicia, and Portugal from the beginning of April untill the end of June. The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North, and Northeast of Ire∣land, from Christmas untill Michael∣mas. The Fishing for Pilchers on the West Coast of England, from St. James-tide untill Michaelmas. The Fishing for Cod and Ling, upon the Northeast of England, from Easter untill Midsummer. The Fishing of great staple Ling, and many other sorts of Fish lying about the Islands of Scotland, and in the several parts of the Brittish Seas all the year long. D. L. To shew the benefit of our Fish trade I pray shew me some in∣stances?
J. B. In September, not many years since upon the Coast of Devon shire neer Minigall 500. Tun of Fish were taken in one day. And about the same time three thousand pound worth of Fish in one day were taken at St. Joes in Cornewall by small Boates, and other poor provisions. Our five-men-boates, and Cables adventuring in a calm to land amongst the Holland Busses not far from Robin Hoods Bay, returned to Whitby full fraught with Herrings, and reported that they saw some of those Busses take 10. 20. 24. lasts at a draught of Herrings, and returned into their own Country, 40. 50. and 100. Lasts of Herrings in one Busse. Our Fleet of Colliers not many years since returned from Newcastle laden with Coales about the Well, near Flamborough head, and Scarbo∣rough, met with such multitudes of Cod, & Ling, and Herring, that one amongst the rest with certain ship∣ookes, and other like Instruments
drew up as much Cod and Ling in a little space of time, as were sold well near forasmuch as her whole lading of Coal. And many hundred of Ships might have been there la∣den in two dayes and two nights. D. L. I pray shew me particular∣ly of the advantages the Hollanders make of their Fishing upon our Coasts? J. B. Sir John Burroughes recko∣ned up eight sorts of advantages: 1. In Shipping; 2. In Marriners; 3. In Trade; 4. In Townes and Fortifications; 5. In power extern; or abroad; 6. In publick Revenue 7. In private Wealth; 8. In all manner of provisions, and store of things necessary. D. L. How do they encrease their Shipping by our Fishing? J. B. Besides 700. Strand boats, 4000. Evars, and 400. Sallits, Dri∣vers and Tod-boates, wherewith the Hollanders ply upon their own Coasts, every one of those imploy∣ing another to fetch salt, and carry
their Fish into other Countries, be∣ing in all 3000. Sailes, maintaining and setting on work at least 4000. persons, Fishers, Trades men, Wo∣men and Children. They have 100. Doyer boates of 150 Tunes a piece, or thereabouts. 700. Pincks and Well-boates, from 60. to 100. tunes a piece; which altogether Fish up∣on the Coasts of England and Scot∣land for Cod and Ling onely. And each of these employ another Vessel for providing of Salt, and transport∣ing of their Fish, making in all 1600. Ships, which maintaines and em∣ploy persons of all sorts, 4000. at least. For the Herring season they have 1600. Busses at the least, all of them Fishing onely upon our coasts, from Boughonness in Scotland to the mouth of Thames. And every one of these maketh work for three other Ships that at∣tend her; the one to bring in Salt from Forreign parts, another to carry the said Salt and Cask to the
Busses, and to bring back their Her∣rins, and the third to transport the said Fish into forreign Countries: So that the total number of Ships and Busses paying the Herring faire is 6400. whereby every Busse one with another, imployeth forty men, Marriners and Fishers within her own hold, and the rest ten men a piece, which amounteth to 112000. Fishers and Marriners. All which maintaine double, if not treble, so many Tradesmen, Women and Children a land. Moreover they have 400. other Vessels at least, that take Herring at Yarmouth, and there sell them for ready money: so that the Hollanders (besides 300. Ships before mentio∣ned, Fishing upon their own Shores) have at least 4800 Shipes onely maintained by the Seas of great Brittain, by which meanes princi∣pally, Holland being not so big as one of our Shires of England, con∣taing not above 28. miles in length, and three in bredth; hath encrea∣sed
the number of their Shipping to at least 10000. Saile, being more then are in England, France, Spain, Portngal, Italy, Denmarke, Poland, Sweden, and Russia. And to this num∣ber they add every day, although their Country it self, affords them neither Materials, nor Victuals, nor Merchandize to be accounted of towards their setting forth. Besides these of Holland, Lubeck, have 700. great Ships, Hamborough 600. Emb∣den 400. whereunto the Ships of Bremern, Biscay, portugal, Spain, and France, which for the most part Fish in our Seas; and it will appear that 10000. Saile for forreign Ves∣sels and above are imployed and maintained by Fishing upon our Coasts. So that in Holland there are built 1000 Saile at the least, to sup∣ply shipwracks, and augment their store; which as the prime and common Nursery, is the chiefest means onely to encrease their number. D. L. How do the Dutch encrease their Marriners.
J. B. The number of Ships fish∣ing on our Coasts as being aforesaid, 8400. if we allow but twenty per∣sons to every Ship one with another the total of Marriners and Fishers amounteth to 168000 out of which number they daily furnish their lon∣ger voyages to all parts of the World; for by this meanes they are not onely enabled to brook the Seas and to know the use of the Tackles and Compass, but are likewise in∣structed in the Principles of Navi∣gation, and Pilotage, insomuch as from hence their greatest Naviga∣tors have had their Education and breeding. D. L. How do the Dutch encrease their Trade? J. B. By reason of these multi∣tudes of Ships and Marriners they have extended their Trade to all parts of the World, exporting for the most part in all their Voyages our Herring, and other Fish for the maintenance of the same; in exchange whereof they return the several
Commodities of other Countries. From the southern parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal, for our Herrings they return Oyles, Wines, Pruines, Honey, Wooles, &c. and with store of Coine in Spain. From the Straights, Velvets, Sattins, and all sorts of Silkes, Allames, Currans, Oyles, and all Grocery Ware, with much money. From the East Countries for our Herrings, and other French and Italian Commodities before retur∣ned, they bring Home, Corne, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tarre, Sope∣ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clap∣board, Wainscot, Timber, Deale∣board, Dollers, and Hungary Gilders. From Germany for Herrings, and other salt Fish, Iron, Steel, Glass, Milstones, Rhenish Wines, Button∣plate for Armour, with other Mu∣nition, Silkes, Velvets, Rashes, Fustians, Baratees, and such like Frankeford Commodities, with store of Rix-Dollers. From Brabant they return for
the most part ready money with some Tapistryes, and Hullship; yea some of our Herring are carried as far as Brasile. And that which is more strange and greatly to our shame, they have 4 hundred Ships with Fish, in which our men of Yarmouth within Ken, almost at Land do vent our Herrings amongst us here in England, and make us pay for the Fish taken upon our own Coast ready money, where∣with they store their own Country. D. L. How do the Dutch by fish∣ing on our Seas encrease their Townes and Forts? J. B. By this their large extent of Trade they are became as it were Citizens of the whole World, whereby they have so enlarged their Townes, that most of them within 400. years that are full as great again as they were before; Amster∣dam, Leyden, and Midleburgh, having been lately twice enlarged, and their Streets, and buildings so fair, and orderly set forth, that for beauty
and strength they may compare with any other in the World, upon which they bestow infinite summes of Mo∣ney; all originally flowing from the bounty of the Sea, from whence by their labour and industry they de∣rive the beginning of all that Wealth and greatness; and particularly for the Havens of the aforesaid Townes, whereof some of them cast 40. 50. or 100000l. Their Fortifications also both for number and strength, upon which they have bestowed in∣finite summes of money, may com∣pare with any other whatsoever. D. L. How do the Dutch by Fish∣ing in our Coast encrease their po∣wer abroad? J. B. Such being then the num∣ber of the Ships and Marriners, and so great their Trade, occasioned principally by their Fishing; they have not onely strengthened and fortified themselves at home, to re∣pell all forreign invasions, as lately in the Warr between them and Spain, but have likewise stretched
their power into the East, and West-Indies in many places, whereof they are Lords of the Sea Coasts, and have likewise Fortified upon the Maine, where the Kings and people are at their Devotion. And more then this, all neighbouring Princes in their differences (by reason of this their power at Sea,) are glad to have them of their party: so that next to the English they are now be∣come the most redoubted Nation at Sea of any other whatsoever. D. L. How do the Dutch by Fish∣ing on our Coasts encrease their publick Revenue? I. B. That may appear in that a∣bove thirty years since, over and above the Customs of other Mer∣chandize, Excises, Licenses, Waftage and Lastage, there was payed to the State for custome of Herring and o∣ther salt Fish above 300000. pound in one year, besides the tenth Fish, and Cask payed for Waftage, which cometh at the least to as much more among the Hollanders onely, where∣unto
the tenth of other Nation be∣ing added it amounteth to a far greater summe. We are likewise to know that great part of their Fish is sold in o∣ther Countries for ready money, for which they commonly export of the finest Gold and Silver, and com∣ing home recoine it of a baser allay under their own stampe, which is not a small means to augment their publick treasure. D. L. How do the Dutch by Fish∣ing on our Seas encrease their pri∣vate wealth? J. B. That will appear to be ex∣ceeding great by these following particulars: During the Warrs between the King of Spain and the Hollanders before the last Truce, Dunkirke by taking, spoiling, and burning the Busses of Holland, and setting great ransome upon their Fishermen, en∣forced them to compound for great summs that they might Fish quietly for one year, whereupon the next
year after the Fishermen agreed a∣mongst themselves to pay a Doller upon every Last of Herrins, towards the maintenance of certain Ships of Warr to waft and secure them in their Fishing, by reason whereof there was a Record kept of the several Lasts of Herrins taken that year, and it appeared thereby that in one halfe a year there were taken 30000. Lasts of Herrins which at 16. 20. 30. pound per Last a∣mounteth to 3600000 and at 16. 20. 30. pound the Last they ordinarily sold, then transported into other Countries, it cometh at least to 5000000 l. whereunto if we add the Herrings taken by other Nations, to∣gether with the Cod, Ling, Hake, and the Fish taken by the Hollanders and other our Neighbours upon the Brittish Coasts all the year long, the total will evidently arise to be above 1000000 l. The great trade of Fishing em∣ploying so many men at Sea must necessarily maintaine as great a
number of Trades men and Artifi∣cers by Land, as Spinners, Hemp∣winders to make Cables, Cordage, Yarne twine for Nets, Weavers to make Saile Cloaths, Cecive Pachers, Tollers Dressers, and Couchers to sort and make the Herring lawful Merchandize; Tanners to Tan their Sailes and Nets; and Coopers to make Caskes, Block and Bowl ma∣kers for Shipes; Keelemen and La∣bourers for carrying and removing their Fish; Sawyers for plantiers, Carpenters, Shipwrights, Smiths, Carmen, Boatmen, Brewers, Bakers, and others that cannot otherwise live with their Wives, Children and Families; every Orphan, Servant, or poor man may venture their stock in Fishing Voyages, which affords them extraordinary encrease, and is duly paid according to the propor∣tion of their gain. D. L. How do they encrease their Provision? J. B. Though there be nothing in Holland but Hops, Madder, But∣ter
and Cheese; yet by fishing they have plentiful of all manner of pro∣vision for necessity, as Corne, Beef, Mutton, Hides, Cloathes; for luxury as Wines, Silkes, Spices, or defence as Pitch, Tarre, Cordage, Timber; all which they have not onely in competent proportion for their use, but are likewise able from their se∣veral Magazines to supply their Neighbour Country. D. L. Might we not thrive as well as they upon our own Fish? J. B. We might no doubt, and have those Fish for nothing that we pay them for, repairing thereby 230. small Fisher Towns decayed for want of that improve∣ment; and adding both honour, strength, and riches to our King and Country, which how easily it may be done will appear by some few Observations following. By erecting two hundred and fifty Busses of reasonable strength and bigness there will be employ∣ment made for 1000. Ships, and for
at least 10000. Fishermen and Mar∣riners at Sea, and consequently for as many Tradesmen, and Labourers at Land. The Herrings taken by the Busses will afford his Majesty 200000 l. yearly custome outward; and for Commodities returned inward 30000 l. and above. We have Timber sufficient, and at reasonable rates growing in our own Kingdome for the building of Busses, every Shire affordeth har∣dy and able men fit for such imploy∣ment who now live poorly, and idle at home. We have Victuals in great plenty sold at easie rates, without payment of Excises, or impost. Our Shores and Harbours are near the places where the Fish do haunt. For Drink, or Nets, salting and packing our fish, and for succour in stress of Weather, we may bring our Fish to Land, salt and pack it, and from some parts of his Majesties
Dominions be at our Markets in France, Spain, or Italy before the Hollander can arrive in Holland. We have meanes to transport our Fish into some Northern Countries where the Hollander seldome or ne∣ver come. And though we had as many Busses as the Hollanders, yet is their vent for all, or more, for in East and Northern Countries where the Hollanders seldome or never come. And though we had as many Busses as the Hollanders, yet is there vent for all, or more, for in the East and Northern Countries and in many other places, Herrins are eve∣ry daies meat, winter and summer, as well to draw on drink as to satis∣fie hunger; and in most places the greatest part of the year they be scarce to be had; for presently after Michaelmas the Sound and Rivers are frozen up, so as no Herrings can be transported into twenty King∣domes, and free States untill July, which is for thirty weeks space to∣gether, so that when Lent comes
there are few to be bought for mo∣ney. Lastly, since by care and in∣dustry we gained cloathing from the Flemmings, doubtless so by the same meanes we may as easily grow ex∣pert in the art of Fishing, and in time make it a staple Commodity of our own. D. L. What are the general de∣fects that hinder our improvement of our Fishing? J. B. 1. General liberty of eat∣ing Flesh, contrary to old custome, and the statute Laws provided for observing Fish dayes, from whence our scarcity and dearth of fish pro∣ceedeth; for where Flesh is ordi∣narily spent fish will not be bought, and want of sale decayeth all trade, Gaine being the nurse of Industry. 2. Want of order and discretion in our fishing, every man being left to himself, and permited to fish as best liketh him; whereas amongst the Hollanders two of the best ex∣perienced Fishermen are appoin∣ted to guide the rest of the Fleet,
all others being bound to follow them, and to cast their Lines accor∣ding to their direction. 3. The Hollanders and other Na∣tions set forth with their Busses in June to find the Shoale of fish, and having found it, dwell amongst it till November, whereas we stay till the Herring come home to our road steads, and sometimes suffer them to pass by ere we look out, our Herring-fishing containing onely seven weekes at the most, and theirs twenty. 4. The Hollanders Busses are great and strong, and able to brook foul weather, whereas our Cables, Cracsers and Boates being small, and thin sided, are easily swallowed by a rough Sea, not daring to adventure far in fair weather, by reason of their weakness for fear of stormes. 5. The Hollanders are industri∣ous, and no sooner are discharged of loading, but presently put forth for more, and seek for Markets abroad as well as at home; whereas our
English after they had been once at Sea, do commonly never return a∣gain untill all the money taken for their Fish be spent, and they in debt seeking onely to serve the next Market. The Hollanders have certain Merchants who during the Herring season do onely come to the places where the Busses arrive, and joyning together in several companies, do presently agree for the lading of 30. or 40. Busses at once, and so being discharged tey may speedily re∣turne to then former Shipping; whereas our Fishermen are uncer∣tain of their Chapmen, and forced to spend much time in putting off their Fish by parcells. D. L. What Lawes were there made to recover this trade? J. B. It was enacted 33. Hen. 8. Because the English Fishermen dwelling on the Sea Coasts did leave off their trade of Fishing in our Seas, and went the halfe Seas over, and there upon the Seas did buy fish
of Pickards, Flemmings, Normans, Zealanders; by reason whereof ma∣ny incommodities did grow to the Realme, viz. The decay of the wealth and prosperity as well of the Cinque Ports, and Members of the same as of other Coast Towns by the Sea side, which were builded, and inhabited by great multitudes of people, by reason of using and exercising the craft and feat of fish∣ing. Secondly, the decay of a great number of Boates and Ships. And thirdly, the decay of many good Marriners, both able in body by their diligence, labour, and conti∣nual exercise of fishing, and expert by reason thereof in the knowledge of the Sea Coasts, as well within this Realme as in other parts be∣yond the Seas. It was therefore enacted that no manner of persons, English, Denizens, or strangers at that time, or any time after dwelling in England, should buy any Fish of any Strangers in the said Ports of Flanders, Zealand, Picardy, France,
or upon the Sea between shore and shore, &c. This Act by many Continuances was continued from Parliament to Parliament untill the first of Queen Mary, and from thence to the end of the next Parliament and then expired. R. V. How did the Hollanders encrease in Power and Wealths? J. H. It will be a wonderfull thing to see what a mighty subsi∣stence of Wealth, and a huge Na∣vigable power that State is come to, by a rare unparalleld industry; For I dare avouch that the Roman Commonwealth, (though she had her head as well knit in her Infancy as any that ever was) did not come near her, in so short a progress of time, to such a growth of strength. But it seemes all things conspired to raise Holland to this pass: First, the humour of the people, being patient and industrious, and of a genious more inclinable to a Demo∣cratical Government then to a Mo∣narchy:
Add hereunto the quality of the Country, being every where halfe cut, and as it were inlayed with water, and thereby much for∣tified, and made in many places in∣accessible; so that if need were, Holland could turn her self into a huge pond when she list. Hereunto concurred a further advantage of scituation, having be∣hind her the Baltique Sea, which af∣fords her all kind of Materials for Shipping, and for all kind of Nutri∣ment and Military Forces, England and France, both swarming with superfluous people, suspectfull of the Spainish greatness, and so not un∣willing to contribute Auxiliary strength for mutual security and conservation. Navigation and Mercautile Ne∣gotiation, are two Poles whereon the State doth move, and to both these it seemes Nature her self hath expresly deigned both Country and People; them by an extraordi∣nary kind of propensity, the Coun∣try
by apt position, for having no land to manure it, they plow the very bowels of the deep, the wrink∣led forehead of Neptune being the furrowes that yields them encrease. Moreover, there being great Rivers that slice and cut the Coun∣try up and down to disgorge them∣selves into the Ocean, those Rivers may be said to pay them tribute, as well as to the Sea; which Rivers branching themselves into large and bearing streams, did so fitly serve one another, and all the whole, that it may be said, Nature in the frame of humane bodies did not discover more art in distributing the veines and arteries, for the ea∣sily conveyance of the mass of blood into each part, as she hath shewed here in dispersing those waters so orderly for Traffick. These Rivers bring her what the large content of Germany, and other Eastern Countries afford, and she lying between them and the Sea, furnisheth them with all far fetched
Indian, Affrica, and Spainish Com∣modities. Here you shall see the most indust∣rious people upon earth making a rare virtue of necessity, for the same thing which makes a Parret speak, makes them to labour; For having nothing of their own, yet they bound with all things, and may be said, to live by the idleness of some of Neighbours, I am loath to name here who they are. Here you shall find a people grow rich also by that which useth to im∣poverish others, even by Warrs, for prizes and booties abroad, go to make a good part of their wealth. Yet in conversation they are but heavy, of a homely outside, and slow in action, which slowness carrieth with it a notable perseverence, and this may be imputed to the quality of that mould of earth, whereon they dwell, which may be said to be a kind of standing pool of Aire: and which is known to have such a force of assimilation, that when
people of a more vivacious temper come to mingle with them at the second Generation, they seem to participate of the soile and aire, and degenerate into meer Hollanders; the like is found daily in Horses and Dogs, and all other Animals. Occulta est Batavae quaedam vis insita terrae One remarkable piece of policy I forgot, that we should observe in the united Provinces, viz. Why in so small an extent of ground they have so many rich well built and po∣pulous Townes amongst them; one of the principal reasons is, because they oppropriate some staple mate∣rial Commodity to every one of the great Towns, as Amsterdam hath the Trade of the East and West-Indies, Rotterdam the English Cloth, Dort the Rhenish Wines, Trevers the Sets Trade, the Hague the Resi∣dence of the Prince, and the States, Haerlam subsists by Knitting and Dying, &c. which is a very laudable course, not to suffer one place to
swallow the wealth and traffick of the whole; like the spleen in the natural body, whose swelling makes all the rest of the Members languish. D. L. I pray what is their Re∣venue? O. F. Their Excise is an unwasted Mine, which with the infiniteness of their Traffick, and their unwea∣ried industry is paid them by every part of the World, the Sea yields them by two sorts of Fishes onely Herrins and Cod 60000l. a year, for which they go out sometimes 7. or 8000. Boates at once, and are able to set out twice as many Ships: their Merchandize amounting forty years ago to a million, whereas Eng∣land which is twice as big in compass hath not half so much. D. L. How do they amass so much Treasure? O. F. Whether it be from the na∣ture of their Country, where they must work or perish; or their geni∣us adapted to such a situation, or their own parcimonious inclination
and education; or their transcen∣dent Activity or close habitation that compact and fortifie their vir∣tues they are young and old; man and woman (for all souls are there Masculine,) the most industrious and deligent people on earth, and in their several wayes contribute to the publick Treasury. D. L. How do they raise and dis∣pose of their Revenue? C. B. They raise one year with the other for the common charge of the Union, (besides the extraordinary Impositions that rise and fall with their occasions) 3200000. Crownes, i. e. 800000. upon the particular Provinces, Holland contributing half, Zealand a fifth part, and Friezland about a tenth. D. L. Their charge is great con∣sidering the small Circuit of their Ground? C. B. 1. Their Traffick makes good what is wanting in their Land, the commodiousness for the Sea, the
narrowness of their ground, and the industry of the Inhabitants, the defects of nature. 2. But the people bear it pati∣ently because their liberty could not long endure without Armes, nor Armes without stipends, nor their stipends without impositions, and the united Provinces will al∣waies so apprehend the Power of Spain, or their other enemies, as they will easily be perswaded, to be alwaies prepared for Warr that so they may the easier evade all new hazards. 3. They put forty dayes in the Souldiers moneth for pay, and so save a great deal of money, and pay exactly which prevents a great deal of disorder incident to more needy Armies. 4. They raise the money to maintain the Banks and Channels of each Province, and out of their Treasuries advance a publick Stock. D. L. But a word Sir of their strength by Sea?
C. B. As they equal all Europe in Trade, so they exceed it in the number of their Ships; which people as it were the Mediterranean Seas, especially before Amsterdam that hath engrossed the Western trade of Antwerp, and that Eastern of Lisbon; and is the staple as Rotterdam is the Arsenal of that Country which is entrenched with the Sea, and Bull worked with Ships: they have no Timber growing, yet they sell Timber to most Nations, besides what they use themselves: they are dull by Land, but water∣devils at Sea, being all Seamen born, and bred either in Merchandizing, or Sea-faring, and like Frogs can live both of Land and Water; not a Country Ʋriester or Waterman but can handle an Oare, steer a Boat, raise a Mast, and bear you out in the roughest streights you come at; Sailers among them are as common as Beggers among us: they can drink, raile, swear, nigle, streat and be lowsy alike; but a mess of
their Knaves is worth a million of ours, for they in a boisterous rude∣ness can work, live and toile; Whereas ours will rather laze themselves to poverty, and like Cabbages left out in Winter rot away in the loathsomeless of a nauseous sloath; in Fleets they can fight close and rather hazard all then save some while others perish, but single they will slag and fear like Birds in a Bush, when the Sparrow-hawks bills are heard. Their Fisher Boates pre∣pare them for the Ships, and fishing fits them for fighting. D. L. No doubt but Amsterdam, Middleburgh, &c. are full of Sea∣men, because so full of trade in Merchandizing, or shipping, but how do they furnish themselves with Necessaries? C. B. Holland hath no Corn yet plentifull granaries; no hemp or Flax, yet store of Cordage and Lin∣nen; no Wool or Cattel, yet abun∣dance of Cloath and Provision of all
sorts, not a stick of Wood, yet more Ships then all Europe besides. But that which compleats their strength and power at Sea is their skill in Navigation, not a Climate Star or wind but they understand, not a Sea but their youth are car∣ried to, nor a streight or passage but they are shewed: so that they can en∣gross the Indies, Basile, the Portugal, cousen the Spaniard abuse the Eng∣lish, and carry all at Sea before them; Onely a Turkish man of Warr is as dreadful to them as a Falcon to a Mallord, against whom their best remedies is to steal a∣way. L. M. But there is a Gentleman that can give you the exactest ac∣count of any man concerning that Countrey, having been seven years Leiger there. Sir, I pray, you can tell what makes that State so pro∣sperous. T. O. All things concurred for the rising and maintaining of this State, the disposition of the people
being, as mutinous, so industrious and frugall; The nature of the Country every where fortifiable with water; the scituation of it having behind them the Baltique Sea, which yields them all materials for ships, and many other commo∣dities. L. M. Good Sir, the manner of their Government? T. O. For the manner of their Government, they have upon oc∣casion an Assembly of the General States, like our Parliament, being composed of those which are sent from every Province upon sum∣mons, and what these enact, stands for Law; then is there besides a Councel of State, residing for the most part at the Hague, which at∣tend daily occasions, being rather imployed upon Affairs of State, than of particular Justice. The most po∣tent in this Counsel was Barnavil, by reason of his Advocates in Holland, and besides both these, every Pro∣vince and great Town have particu∣lar
Counsels of their own, to all which Assemblies, as well of the ge∣neral States, as the rest, the Gen∣try is called for order sake; But the State indeed is Democratical, the Merchant and the Tradesman being predominant, the Gentlemen now but few and poor, and even at the beginning the Prince of Orange saw it safer to rely upon the Towns than them, Neither are the Gen∣try so much ingaged in the cause, the people having more advantage in a Free State, than in a Monar∣chy. Their care in Government is ve∣ry exact and particular, by reason that every one hath an immediate interest in the State, such is the equality of Justice, that it renders every man satisfied, such the pub∣lick Regularity, as a man may see their Laws were made to Guide, not to Entrap, such their Exactness in casting the expence of an Army, as that it shall be equally far from superfluity and want, and as much
order and certainty in their acts of War, as in ours of Peace, teaching it to be both Civil and Rich, and they still retain that sign of a Com∣monwealth yet uncorrupted, pri∣vate Poverty, and publick Wealth, for no one private man there is ex∣ceeding Rich, and few very Poor, and no State more sumptuous in all publick things. But the question is, whether this being a Free State will as well sub∣sist in Peace, as it hath done hither∣to in War, Peace leaving every one to attend his particular Wealth, when Fear while the War lasts, makes them concur for their com∣mon safety, and Zealand upon the least security, hath been ever envi∣ous at the predominancy of Holland, and Ʋtrecht ready to mutiny for Religion; and besides, it is a doubt whether the same care and sincerity would continue if they were at their consistence, as appears yet whilst they are but in rising. The Revenue of this State ari∣seth
chiefly from the Earl of Hollands Demesnes, the confiscated Church Livings, the rising and falling of money, which they use with much advantage, their Fishing upon our Coasts, and those of Norway, Con∣tribution out of the enemies Coun∣trey, Taxes upon all things at home, and Imposition upon all Merchandizes ftom abroad; their expences upon their Ambassadors, their shipping, their ditches, their rampiers and munition, and com∣monly they have in pay by Sea and Land 60000 men. L. M. If it be not too trouble∣some to you, a word or two of their Strength, Discipline & War. T. O. For their Strength, the nature of the Countrey makes them able to defend themselves long by Land; neither could any thing have indangered them so much as the last great frost, had not the Treaty been then on foot, because the Enemy being then Master of the field, that renders their Ditches, Marshes, and
Rivers, as firm Ground, and by Sea they are able to offend any o∣ther. There belong to the State 2000 Vessels of all sorts, so that if the Spaniard were entirely beaten out of those parts, the King of England and France would take as much pains to suppress, as ever they did to raise them; for being our Ene∣mies, they are able to give us the Law at Sea, and eat us out of all Trade, much more the French, ha∣ving at this time three ships for our one, though none so good as our best. Now that whereupon the most part of their Revenue and Strength depends is their Traffick, in which mistery of State they are at this day the wisest, for all the Commo∣dities which this part of the World wants and the Indies have, is Spice, Silk, Jewels, Gold, they are be∣come the Conveyors of them to the rest of Christendom except us; as the Venitians were of old, and all
those Commodities that these Nor∣thern Countreys abound with, and those Southern stand in need of, they likewise convey thither, which was the ancient Trade of the Easter∣lings; And this they do, having little to export of their own, by buying of their Neighbour Coun∣treys the former, and selling them again what they bring back at their own prises, and so consequently live upon the idleness of others; And to this purpose their scituation serves fitly, for the River of the Rhene, the Maze, and Skeld end all in their Dominions, and the Bal∣tique Sea lyes not far from them, all which affords them whatever the great Continent of Germany, Russia and Poland yields; then they again lying between Germany and the Sea, do furnish it back with all Commo∣dities foreign. To remember some pieces of their Discipline, as patterns of the rest, The Watches at Night are ne∣ver all of one Nation, so that they
can hardly concur to give up any one Town. The Commissaries are no where so strict upon Musters, and where he finds a company, thither he re∣duceth them, so that when an Army marcheth, the List and the Poll are never far disagreeing. Their Army is ever well Cloath∣ed, well Armed, and had never yet occasion to mutiny for Pay or Victu∣als. The Souldiers commit no where fewer Insolencies upon the Burgers, fewer Robberies upon the Coun∣trey, nor the Officers fewer Deceits upon the Souldiers. And lastly, they provide well that their General shall have small means to invade their Liberties; For first, their Army is composed of many Nations, which have their several Commanders, and the Commanders are disposed by the States them∣selves, not by the General; And secondly, he hath never an implicite Commission left to Discretion, but
by reason their Countrey hath no great bounds, receives daily com∣mands what to do. L. M. Your Judgement of the place and people. T. O. The Territory containes six entire Provinces, Holland, Zea∣land, Ʋtrecht, Groninghen, Over-Yssel, and Friezland, and certain Towns in Brabant and Flanders, the ground of which is for the most part fruitful, the Towns no where so equally Beautiful, Rich and Strong, which equality grows by reason that they appropriate some one Staple Commoditie to every Town of note; onely Amsterdam not on∣ly passeth them all, but even Sevil, Lisbon, or any other Mart Town in Christendome; and to it is appro∣priated the Trade of the East Indies, where they maintain commonly for∣ty ships, besides which, there go twice a year from it, and the ad∣joyning Towns, a great Fleet to the Baltique Sea; upon the fall of An∣twerp that rose rather than Middle∣borough,
though it stand at the same Rivers mouth, and is their second Mart Town, to which is appropria∣ted our English Cloth. Concerning the People, they are neither much Devout, nor much Wicked, given all to Drink, and e∣minently to no other Vice; hard in bargaining, but just; surly and re∣spectless, as in all Democracies; thrifty, industrious, and cleanly, dishartened upon the least ill suc∣cess, and insolent upon good; in∣ventive in manufactures, cunning in Traffick, and generally for mat∣ter of Action; that natural slow∣ness of theirs suits better by reason of the advisedness and perseverance it brings with it, than the rashness and changeableness of the French and Florentine Wits; and the equallity of spirits which is among them and the Switzers, renders them so fit for a Democracie, which kind of Go∣vernment, Nations of more subtile Wits being once come to a con∣sistent greatness have seldome long endured.
CHAP. VIII. The Lives and Characters of the Princes of Aurange. D. L. THe Affaires of Holland depending so much up∣on the Princes of Aurange, will you be pleased to recollect the History of those renowned Princes? T. S. 1475. Lewis of Chalon was invested by King Lewis with the ab∣solute Principality of Aurange, which is on the Northwest of Province, and subject to the King of France. 1480. He dieth and leaveth his Estate and Government to his vali∣ant and active Successor William Chalon, whose Interest abroad and Prowess at home, was so consider∣able, that Lewis the 11. could not think himself secure, untill he had submitted his Estate to him in the Parliament of Daulphin, and Mar∣ried his Cozen, upon which submis∣sion and alliance he receives his E∣state
again in Capite from his Sove∣raign, Which being much improved, he bequeathed to John Chalon; who was able to justifie the King of France his Jealousie, and make himself so considerable that France feared him, when an enemy, the Duke of Burgundy, courted him for a friend, in whose service he died; And, 1496. Left his Patrimony and authority to Philibert Chalon his Nephew who was Heir to his Reso∣lutions as well as to his Estate, and died as faithful a servant to the House of Austria under Charles, as he to the House of Burgundy under Philip the Good: These Princes were born to assist afflicted States, to relieve oppressed Princes, to sup∣port tottering Crownes, and rescue lost Liberties; especially if we con∣sider how the Chalon male Line failed in Philibert, and the honour of Nassaw was wreathen with the glory of Aurange.
1500. For Philibert onely Sister being Married to Rene Nassau as he himself was devoted to him, Renes Son Henry Nassau is adopted by Philibert, who failing of an Heir of his body, would have one of his Virtues; and as Queen Elizabeth said that her Throne was the Throne of Kings; so he ordered that his Principalities should be the inheritances of Nobles. Henry was born a Prince and bred a Souldier, his blood enobling his Name and his actions his blood; the brave man being resolved first to deserve, and then to inherit his Dominions; he as nobly served the King of Spain to chastise his Sub∣jects Rebellion as his Successors did the people to oppose his Tiranny; he fought but against licentiousness, and they but for liberty; he be∣stowed his own Revenue in his Masters service, and his Masters sa∣lary in his Souldiers encouragement carrying nothing out of the Nether∣lands but the glory of Conquest
and Integrity: Having taught Spain and Flanders six things, 1. how to Intrench and Fortifie double; 2. how to retreat safely; 3. how to embatle the Foot; 4. Deep se∣curely; 5. how to bear a charge undauntingly and return it home; 6. how to tire an Army with un∣wearied surprizes; and 7. how to conquer with kindness. He died before Luxemburgh, falling the un∣expressible joy of his enemies, and unuterable sorrow of his friends; but that, 1544. His Cosen William suc∣ceeded him in his Estate and Glory, his Heir by his Will and his Peoples Vote, whose expectation of this Prince was no less then his merit which promised much and perfor∣med more: Born he was at Dellen∣burgh, and bred in Germany with Count Mansfield who learned in one School what they might practise in contrary Camps; honourable was his possession in France, noble in Germany, but large and rich in the
Low Countries; whose Religion now reformed, provoked the Pope, as their Privileges now enlar∣ged vexed Charles the Emperour into some close Overtures, as it did his Son Philip to open attempts upon them; an inquisition is set up, impositions are enhanced, strangers (as de Sylon, de Feria) & Tirants (as D'Alva and Granvill) are set over them; Goods are confifcated, E∣states seized, Freemen outlawed, and a multitude of honest Inhabi∣tants are put to death; the people groan under this, and fear worse; much troubled were the Common∣alty, more the Nobility, whereof among many that were eminent for birth, valour, and adherency, two were most considerable, 1. Lamorall, Count Egmont a Souldier, and William Prince of Aurange a States∣man, the one trusted with the high∣est commands, the other famous for most eminent services, first at St. Quintin, and then at Graveling; the Prince of Aurange was popular,
wary, wise, a great master of speech, and no less of Councel; his carriage and behaviour plausible; of whom it was a question whether he was more able in comprehending busi∣ness or morewary in managing them: Egmont was rather a man of Warr then peace, one of a candid nature and obliging; converse and popu∣lar too, but among the Souldiers in the fields rather then among the vulgar within the Walls, fitter for the preferments of Campe then Court: The Prince of Aurange un∣derstanding while he was Hostage for King Philip in France, that those two Princes designed the extirpa∣tion of the Protestant Religion, communicates the Plot to the Fle∣mish Nobility in a seasonable juncture, when they were impover∣ished by the Emperour Charles when present with them, slighted by the continual absence of Philip, and awed by the surintendency of strangers; when the Churchmen were unsatisfied with new erect∣ed
Bishoprickes upon the ruines of Monasteries; when all were amazed to see Germans and Spaniards brought into their Counsels, Forts, and Garrisons; when France was divi∣ded in its self under young Francis; England reformed by Queen Eliza∣beth, and the Protestant Princes threatned by the greatness of Austria watched all opportunities to diminish it. King Philip finding his Dominions large but unsetled, retires to the middest of them, as the heart to dispense vigour and influence to all the Party; and (waving the Dut∣chess of Lorrain whom the Prince and the States desired) setled Mar∣garet of Parma, with Cardinal Gran∣vill in the Government; but before his departure he might see discon∣tent in the faces, and discern rebel∣lion in the Harangues, of the Depu∣ties he called together at Gaunt, and if he saw it not, his Courtiers did upon a good token that when one of them urged to him the danger of
these Provinces if he moderated not his Edicts concerning Religion, he answered, That he would rather be without Kingdomes then enjoy them with Heresy: dangerous it was to refuse these Dutchmen least those Provinces might revolt, more dan∣gerous to endulge them least all his Dominions would set up liberty, the Edicts are confirmed; the old constitution is established; a juncto is privately marked out, the Dut∣chess is instructed, and the King is bound for Spain, when the Go∣verness and her Cardinal find griev∣ances swelling up the publick dis∣content, and improve them by their juncto cabals, their absolute autho∣rity and arbitrary Government, especially Granvills imperiousnes, who was a man of great experience, and of greater animosity; for hereup∣on grave William, the Prince, Horne the Admiral, and valient Egmont the Souldier suggested first more pri∣vately to the Nobility how their Counsels were excluded, and then
more publickly to the people, how their Privileges were endangered, adding to the Governess her self, (who in strait between the strict injunctions of Spain, and the bitter complaints of the people, had no o∣ther refuge but her promises) that an Assembly of Estates was the one∣ly remedy, a motion ill resented in its self, the ill humours of that Country being never likely to do well in a general Assembly, where they might rather confederate then break, and worse, as proceeding from Aurange, whom Granvill re∣presents as crafty and ambitious, occasioning a stricter execution of the Edicts untill authority is bafled, liberty declared; Libells are pub∣lished and under the notion of commerce the Protestant Religion is every day improved, liberty of Conscience is challenged, and the Privileges of their Country are pleaded for; the Prince of Aurange first had correspondence and then made alliance with the Admiral,
the Governour gives way to the new Alterations; the Cardinal rageth, the Nobility agree upon one Live∣ry, which was a course to unite themselves, and deride the Cardi∣nal, against whom they drew so ma∣ny complaints, contrived so many designs, by disowning and disparage∣ing him and his Confederates, that the King allaying the vigor of his former resolutions, according to the temper of the people, recalled Granvil, to the present satisfaction of all Flanders; but Viglio and Bar∣lemont going their way, & the Coun∣cil of Trents Decrees being publish∣ed, the Prince of Aurange now alli∣ed with the most eminent Luthe∣rans, proposed, that matters of Government and Religion might be transacted in the Council of State, which the Dutchess oppo∣sing, as prejudicial to his Majesty and her self, the Council is divided, the execution of the Edicts is stop∣ped; the Protestants increase; Count Egmont is sent to Spain, with
instructions from him, to discover the bottom of their disorders; the King is resolved; the Dutchess calls a Conference of Bishops, Divines, and Lawyers, at Brussels; the Inqui∣sition is brought in; their sense of what they suffered, and the appre∣hensions of what they feared, forced the people to a Confederacy, con∣trived by Philip Mornishies Lord of St. Aldegond; a Covenant is taken, and published, all sorts are engaged; the design is applauded, fears and jealousies are increased; the Prince of Orange and the other Nobility debate matters at Breda, under the notion of a marriage; they assem∣ble at Brussels, present their suppli∣cation, aggravate the grievances, (particularly Brederode a Noble per∣son, of an active spirit and a voluble tongue, at Count Collemberghs house, April 3. 1566.) with great applause: they go in order to the Regent, and Petition, appealing to God and Men, that they had done what lay in their power: and ta∣king
occasion from the word Gueux, or Beggars, as they were called by Barlemont, they cried out, Long live the King, long live the Gueux, and by this Bread, by this Salt, by this Budget, the Gueux will from their tenets never budge; yea, the Medal at their Girdles is, true to the King, even to the Budget. The Liberty of other Nations is Printed, Protestant Sermons are publickly Preached, the Edict is se∣verely injoyned, the people flock after the Novelties, and arm them∣selves against the Law, the Gover∣nours of the Provinces draw off from the Dutches; the Prince of Orange now things are ripe, distracts the Counsel and the King in Spain; summons the Estates privately to Getrinberge in Liege; they resolve to stand to their Liberty; they con∣clude that nothing was to be ex∣pected from Spain but delays; they demolish Idolatrous Monuments, defaced the Churches, affronted the Priests, and being rather inci∣ted
than moderated by the Prince of Orange his expedients, his water a flame: the Tumult began by few, was desired by many, and approved by all; all the Calvinisme of Europe was in Antwerp, and all Antwerp was engaged at first, and by their exam∣ple all the Provinces, so that the Dutchess is with much ado perswa∣ded by Orange and Egmont to stay at Brussels to countenance their pro∣ceedings. The Discontented were so nu∣merous, that they were reated with, and yielded to, in point of In∣dulgence and Liberty, each grant weakening authority, and strength∣ening the tumult; which Orange, under pretence of appeasing, im∣proved; the Regent is in arms, the Confederates consult, Antwerp is reduced, and the whole Country inclined to Peace: the Reformers are discounteranced in Spain, the Prince of Orange for eseeing it im∣possible to please the King and serve his Country, in those troublesome
times, would have retired, but be∣ing disswaded by the Regent, he and his brother Lodowick comply with the present humors, keep their Protestant correspondencies in Eu∣rope, meet with other Nobility at Terramode in Brabant, near Antwerp; Count William discovering and opening the Spanish design, incited to Arms; Egmont reflecting on the weakness and poverty of the Pro∣vinces, his own services and great Family, and the power of Spain, was inclined to the peace and tran∣quillity of his Countrey, in which temper the Assembly broke up, Egmont being really, and Orange feignedly for Peace. D. L. How began the War? C. B. By the Dutchess her reso∣lution in order to the execution of her Edicts to ingarrison Valentiennes and Antwerp, both which places, af∣ter much debate among the multi∣tude, opposed it. D. L. What thought they of this in Spain?
C. B. Count Ferza was for In∣dulgence that might break, rather than for force that would unite them; Alva is for Authority that should give Law to Flanders, ra∣ther than Clemency, that received Laws from them; and for an Army rather than an Amnesty; whose ex∣perience, seconded with Granviles, and the news from Flanders, fixed the unresolved King upon a great Army under Alva, a souldier from his cradle, very rigid in Aspect, more in Nature, haughty in Peace, more in War; he musters at Mil∣lain 12000 foot and 3000 horse, and marcheth without interruption to Lucemberg, wch he ingarrisoned; the Country amazed to hear of, more to see his Forces, and ready to sub∣mit, Orange and his brother flyeth, Egmmt and Horn are privately secu∣red in Flanders, Montigns and Berg∣her in Spain: and their Secretaries that could discover all transactions he wracked; the Dutchess remo∣ved her self: he sets up a new Tri∣bunal
of Justice, cites the Nobility before him, upon pain of being pro∣claimed Traitors; the Markets run with bloud, for his Executions were publick; the Countrey was but one great prison, kept in by his new forts and cittadels; the Nobility fly to Aurange, and the people to England, some decline his Juris∣diction by appealing to the King, others who had estates in Germany, to the Emperour; Breda the Prince of Orange's chief Town he secured; his eldest Son, a youth at Lovain, he took, his goods were confiscated; Despair arms the Confederates, and and pitty and interest from Eng∣land, now engaged with Spain, as∣sists them; and it was but appearing in Flanders, and the harrazed Coun∣trey would flock in to them: the Princes of Germany and the Hans Towns assist them, both out of In∣terest and Conscience, equally a∣gainst the house of Austria and the Pope: a Diet is kept; the slow pro∣ceedures of it are quenched by the
Active Prince, imprinting that Vi∣gor on other breasts that enflamed his own; the English were to enter Friezeland, the Germans Brabant, the Hugonits the Walloon side: disbanded souldiers are entertained; Prince Lodowick entereth Frieze∣land, Lumay and Villiers surprize Gelderland, but are prevented at Ruremond, and pursued, notwith∣standing Londonios Advise, not to provoke too many enemies, as far as Liege, where they are over∣thrown; no better success have they at Graves, a convenient place for their purpose, and at Brussels a∣gainst the Dukes person. But Lo∣dowick had 10000 foot, 3000 horse, and the Prince as many more. But one Balthazar Gerard, set on by the Jesuits, and recommended to his Highness by Monsieur du Pre, my Lord Mansfield, under pretence of being a Martyrs son, and offering some useful Blanks he had got from the enemy, got himself first to his Chamber, and then to his Bosome,
untill he had shot him as he came from Dinner; so that he said no more but, my God! take pitty of my soul, and this poor people. A most Wise, Constant, Magnanimous, Patient, and Excellent Prince, his Motto being Mediis tranquillus in undis.— Prince Maurice succeeded him at 17 year old, with this Inscription, tandem fit surculus arbor, his con∣duct and the Earl of Leicester, in the general Government of the Provin∣ces, where after many incursions into the enemies Countrey, the taking of Breda, that was bestowed on the Prince, the relief of Nordan, the reduction of Steenberguen, the siege of Zutphen, the subduing of Groeninguen, the Prince of Parma's defeat in the Betuwe, the settlement of the Eastern and Western trade, the great Victory on the plain cal∣led Tresche-Heyde; he brought the Spaniard to a Peace, the English to a League, and his own people to a peaceable submission to his Govern∣ment,
and so died full of Honour and Dayes; leaving the Principality to Count Henry of Nassaw that great States-man, that designed an Alliance with all Europe, and a Marriage with England, whose Daughter he honoured as his Prin∣cess, rather than his Daughter in Law: he dying when his designs were most ripe, for settlement with Barnevell, and Grotius his assistance, left his son Prince William heir to his power and design, but not to his success, for his enterprize on Am∣sterdam failed a little before he died; and left his hopefull son William that now Governs, whom Holland is jealous of, and uncivil to, but all the rest of the Provinces and people honour, according to his own, and his great Ancestors merit and ser∣vice; whom universal love and vote, his Predecessors service, his Countreys interest, his own emi∣nence and his Allies power, will ad∣vance to no less grandeur and pow∣er than any of his Renowned Fore∣fathers.
CHAP. IX. Concerning our last Wars, and other transactions with the Dutch, from 1612. to 1660. F. M. HOw have we agreed with the Hollanders since they were a Free State? R. B. Pretty well, only we clash∣ed sometimes about the East-Indi∣an Trade, and the Fishing upon the Narrow Seas. F. M. What clashing had we with them about the Trade beyond the Line? R. B. They, not contented with the ordinary course of a fair Trade, took divers Islands, built several Forts, and endeavoured a new Do∣minion over us, and those Moluc∣cos, Banda, Amboyna, &c. exercising new Jurisdictions, &c. F. M. How were these differences put up?
R. B. It was like to be a breach, but in the year 1613. the States sent their Ambassadours with full power to offer any satisfaction, and when that succeeded not, in the year 1615. they offered more in a Trea∣ty at the Hague, touching the diffe∣rences between the English and Dutch in the East-Indies; and at last in a third Treaty at London, in the year 1619. there was a full and solemn composition made of all the said differences, and a fair or∣der set for the future proceeding in both Companies, as well in the course of their Trade and Com∣merce, as otherwise. F. M. What was the next breach? R. B. That at Amboyna, which King James had not time, nor King Charles opportunity or power to require satisfaction, for his Subjects in England being as insolent in de∣nying him assistance, as his ene∣mies were in offering him affronts, as if they had both combi∣ned,
and Ingratitude abroad had gone hand in hand with treason at home; for one Turner said that we had better die by a forreign ene∣my then submit to home slavery. F. M. But did that excellent Prince of famous memory agree with them all his reign? R. B. The Hollanders and others encroaching upon the Fishers and other our Rights in the Narrow Seas, yea things coming to that pass by their observation of the un∣toward humour of the English at home, that they disputed our Right by Grotius; his Sacred Majesty thought fit not one∣ly to employ Mr. Selden to cleare the Right; but the Earle of Lindsey as Admiral, and the Earle of Essex as Vice-Admiral, with 40. Saile set out with the Shipmoney to secure it; whereby the English puissance was rendered so considerable, and trade so safe in the eyes of forreign Princes, that the King of Spain thought it his safest course to in∣trust
his Bullion in our Bottoms, which was coined in England, to the great benefit of the Kings Mint, and of all the Merchants also, whose Commodities were exchanged thereby, and the rest of the money paid over by exchange to Flanders; whereupon the Hollander courted his Majesty with Presents, 1. of Am∣bergrease, 2. transparent China Basons, 3. a Clock, and 4. the Origi∣nals of Tintoret and Titian. And in the year 1636. the King considering the good effects of his late Fleet, sets out another con∣sisting of 60. Saile of good Ships un∣der the Earle of Northumberlands Command, who going Northwards scoured the Seas of the Dutch Busses, seizing some, sinking others, and enforcing the rest to fly; so re∣ducing them all to a precarious con∣dition of entreating the favour of Fishing by the Kings Commission, which he was the readier to indulge them, because he looked upon them as the most likely instruments for his
Nephews Restauration to the Palatinate. L. M. But was there not some difference about the Dutch Fight with the Spanish Admiral upon our Coast? R. B. Our Historians say that our reputation was hereby greatly Sir Rich∣ard Baker continu∣ed. impaired for suffering the Hollan∣ders to fall upon the Spaniards in our Seas; and they say likewise that they doubting that we might resent the affront done us in that action, were willing to keep us so busied that we should have no opportunity of retaliation and to that end they ac∣commodated the Scots, they say, with all manner of warlike provisions. But that excellent Prince, then whom many might make greater shewes, none had greater affections for Reli∣gion, minding as well the common interest of Protestants abroad as that more particular of Englishmen at home, made a strict alliance with that state by the Marriage of his Daugh∣ter with the Prince of Orange, and
yet when our neighbour Dutch-men minded their interest, and were al∣most Masters at Sea in the Northern Fishing, which because so far, and of so small a return, they went away with the whole benefit; upon our Fishmongers complaint he encou∣raged several overtures and pro∣jects concerning Busses for our own Coasts service, the prevention of strangers, and the improvement of the Narrow Seas, and withal he broke the confederacy that was en∣tred into between the Hollanders and the French before Dunkirke. L. M. But what did they during the Warrs in England? R. B. They sent Embassadours to the Parliament to declare that the high and mighty States of the Uni∣ted Provinces had sent them to me∣diate a reconciliation, that they might concurr together for the ex∣tirpation of Popery, and the set∣ling of the Protestant Religion. Here they remained (saith Mr. Sanderson how truly I know not,)
pretending a peace, but in earnest to settle trade, and see which way the game went, and as he adds, the King knew their minds; and then they urged very hard for the King, whom they had saved, had their Embassadour (as the same Author hath it) been as true to his trust as They were to the King. After the Kings Death they broke with the English, and when Oliver St. John and Walter Strickland were sent into Holland they were affron∣ted and ill used by the common people, and thereupon return in discontent: Hereupon forsooth a new Act is made for the encourage∣ment of Shipping and Navigation. Which the Hollanders apprehen∣ding highly prejudicial to their trade, they laboured with all their might what by fair Messages, and what with threats to get repealed, but when they saw all their endea∣vours were in vain, they were dis∣covered to meditate hostility; Dorislaus is Executed there; the
Kings Interest was hopefull in Scot∣land, and the Prince of Auranges therefore prevalent there; the Lord Newport comes over to feel the pulse and look into the strength, preparations and temper of the English; here the old duty of Her∣ring-Fissing was demanded, the o∣pening of the Scheld Custome free from Middleburgh to Antwerp is ur∣ged, the right of the Flagge is insisted on, the business of Amboyna revi∣ved, and their Ships in several pla∣ces upon the foresaid act taken. As an Omen of the Warr, the Statehouse at Amsterdam is burned, a Sea Fight is seen at the mouth of the Maes; they resolve to try our pulses, and 150. Saile are equipped under Trump, while we had but 25. Saile in the Downs under Blake; they re∣fuse to strike saile upon Captain Youngs demand till he had given them some Broadsides; they set on Blake and beat him, yet not with∣out loss, in so much as the States excused the action, and though in
vain renewed the Treaty, declaring before the searcher of hearts (they are their own words) That they were so far from owning the late-engagement that they were asto∣nished at the fatal newes of it, in∣treating a peace upon the pledges of their Religion, and liberty; signed J. Cates, G. Schaes, P. Vau∣derperre; We replying our Civili∣ties to them, and their great prepa∣rations for Warr; Notwithstanding these pretences for peace voted pre∣sent satisfaction for the charges we had been at, and security for the time to come; it comes to a Warr, they get in between Sr George Askew who was abroad, & our Navy which was going out at home, Trump se∣cures their Merchants, draweth to∣wards Blake that had spoiled their Herring Busses, and tolled them for the tenth; the Freeboates are bui∣sie on both sides, George Askew and they engage in a drawn battle, he is thereupon discharged; the Hollan∣ders espouse the Kings quarrel to
strengthen their own; the Prince of Aurange is Stad-holder, or chief Governour; St. Johns gives the States these parting words, My Lords you have an eye upon the event of Affaires in Scotland, and therefore refuse the friendship we offer; that business will be over and you will re∣pent. Accordingly they sent more Embassadours, and more submissive termes when his Majesty was over∣thrown; De wit and Ruiter joine. they brave and dare Ayscue, but are drawn out of their advantages by Blake, and beaten with the loss of 12. Ships to their own Harbours; the Hollanders mutiny, their Fisher∣men are taken in whole sholes; yet in three moneths do they equip an∣other great Fleet under Van Trump, who understanding our Fleet was not recruted, surprized Blake in the Downes, took and sunk 15. of his 40. Saile, and twice boarded him∣self, pursuing him to every Haven and sending his Ships home to teach them the new model of them: Van
Trump himself wearing a Broom in his maintop, intimating that he would sweep the narrow Seas of all English Shipping; and his Masters setting out Edicts every day against the English trade, as the Common people did Pictures, Songs, and by-words of the late Victory. But Blake is recruited and made 80. Saile strong, wherewith though with much loss he brushed Trump before Portland, Weymouth, and Bulloign to the loss of 11. Ships, 1500. men, whereof Blake's resolu∣tion was remarkable, and Trumps conduct more; whose fortune failed in bringing his Ships on with success, but his skill did not in bringing them off with honour into Legorne, where he sunk and took most of the Ships under Captain Badily, and Appleton: their Letters mediate a peace, yet their preparations are mighty for Warr. Trump is abroad, with 89. Ships to secure the Eastern & Western Fleets; he battereth Dover, while we visit
their Coast with an 100. Saile; at last Blake, Monke, and Dean meet and discover Trump scouring all before him; they engage, Dean is cut off in the midle by my Lord Monke, who takes no further notice of it but that the body should be remo∣ved; yet Trump escapes but nar∣rowly to Dunkirke, Lawson pursu∣eth them, Trump turnes upon him, Blake comes in, the Dutch fly, and their whole Navy is confounded; they hang a white Flagg, and send a messenger to make way for a trea∣ty, their Trade is at a stand, the Souldiers mutiny for money, nd are well paid; the Lords States come to the Ports themselves to see them set out; yet four Embassa∣dours are sent to England, while De wit and Trump meet; my Lord Monke drawes up to them in the re∣solution with 30. Saile, and cries to 'um again; Friday they engage with equal success; Sunday (the wea∣ther clearing up) they fight again, Van Trump is killed, and the
Dutch beaten and pursued to the Texel, having but one Flagge standing. We lost 1300. men slain and wounded; they 4500. reco∣vering but with 90. Ships of 120. into the Texel: An arbitration is set up, the right of the Flag is ac∣knowledged, the Prince of Aurange is neglected, and a Peace conclud∣ed, wch lasted till his Majesties return. L. M. How did his Majesty and they part, after the entertainment 1660. R. B. He said that he had so much kindness for them, that he would be jealous of them, if they gave a greater part of their amity to any Prince than to him, seeing he lo∣ved them more than all the Princes beside, adding withall these words; Sirs, Whereas I leave here in your hands the Princess my Sister, and the Prince of Aurange, two persons who are extremely Dear to me; I pray you, Sirs, take their Interest to heart, and cause them to resent the effects of the Favour in the occasions which the Princess my
Sister shall request of you, either for her self, or the Prince her Son, assuring you that all the Effects of your good-will shall be acknowledged of me, as if I had received them in my own Person. CHARLES REX. This they recorded in the Regi∣sters of the States Generall, and of the Province of Holland, In Per∣petuam rei memoriam. FINIS.
