F1263 12676733 65578
The Church wounded and rent By a Spirit of Division, Held forth In a short account of some sad differences hath been of late in the Church of Scotland, with the occasion, grounds, and too evident product therof whose wounds are bleeding to this day. Togither with some vindication of the truth, and principles of our Church in this present state of things from unjust revilings and reproach; And a few words in the close with respect to what are the greatest concerns of Christians exercise and duty in these times. Heb. 10: 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering: (for he is faithfull that promised.) Philip. 3. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. Philip. 2. 2. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain glory, but in Lowliness of mind let each esteem other beter then themselves. James 3. 16. For where invying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. 1 Thessal. Now we exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are unruly comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. Printed M.DC.LXXXI.
THE PREFACE. IT will be acknowledged by all, who have any serious impression of the truth, on their spirits, what sore, and trying times, we are now fallen in, and how deplo∣rably sad the present state of religion is almost every where; yea what need seems for our being awake with some deeper apprehensions, of what may be com∣ing, and of so many presages, that this night, is not yet at the darkest, but one of the sorest conflicts which the reformed Churches have hitherto mett with, may be on a very near approach: of which one remarkably sad, and most threatning presage, is now too obvious in this late astonishing rent, and breach, hath been in the Church of Scotland, so impetuously driven and fomented by some there, to the furthest scandal, and reproach of the truth, and giving the adversary, such occasion to blasphem; Thus hath there been so sore wound∣ings of religion, and the holy spirit of God greatly provoked, and greived thereby. I confesse such a tryal would have been litle either feared, or ap∣prehended in a time, when so hot a furnace hath been set up amongst us, and that the Church had smarted, and been so sore brunt, with the offence, which followed upon former breakings; yea when it is so joyntly acknow∣ledged, how much the honour of Christ the spreading of the Gospel, and edifica∣tione of the Church, is concerned, and in the highest measure prejugded herein; this is a sad subject, which should call each to that serious inquiry, and tryal of their own work, and frame of spirit, in such a day, as may lead in to peace, and assurance of heart, before the Lord in this mater; and to be seriously affected with what we have seen following thereon (yea might have been feared, with the first breaking up of this strange rent) of the spirit of error, and delusion, in the Holy righteousness of God, now with such pre∣valence over some, whose work had been, to put the Church in a flame and unsetle others, as they can find no ground where to fix themselves, but are like to shake loose all principles, and run that length as is incompatible, not only with Christian but humane society. Some few things, with respect thereto I would premit now in the entry, to be considered. 1. First what light, doe thus break forth, out of the very bowels of such confusion, both for conviction, and confirming of us in the truth; if we be but
serious observes of the work of the Lord in this day; and I would yet hope may tend to put some Deeper impression of these things on this generation, when as with one audible voice from heaven, so much hath occurred, to seal our instruction herein. 1. That none thus so easily adventure, after what we have seen on such a publick rent, and breach of the Church as this, and to hazard on a precipice, and rock▪ on which so many hath dashed, and been broke, and where the losing of communion in love, hath not long wanted a sad breach in the unity of faith. 2. That there may be now more fear, and dread, of managing differences in judgment within the Church, with that bitterness, and passion, as hath too visibly been of late, to stumble, and be∣get wrath, more then conviction; or to make ane offering of such strange fire; the truth and cause of God can be promot only by these meanes, and that spirit, which he doeth himself require. 3. That Professors of the truth, be more deeply pressed about the ground work, and for a solid founding on the great fundation-truths, and principles of religion, when this sad want may be so visibly now read, on all our distempers, and make us yet fear where some great pretences, to religion may end. Here is one of the sadest judg∣ments of the time, much Ignorance of the truth, and rule of the Gospel; with a louse and unstable mind, tho with greatest confidence otherwise, amongst too many under a Profession of godliness this day; through which the tempter hath gotten such advantage, yea on some whose affection and tenderness of spirit, I dar not question, but thought they could not run too far at a distance from what they judged wrong, not fearing a destroying snare on the other hand, and that corruption of the mind by error, is no lesse mortall then in the life and practice; yea which is too sadly obvious less hope of a cure, where such a leprosy is once broke forth in the head. 4. And have we not now seen, for our furthest conviction herein, that none lift up themselves above that which is meet, upon the repute, and credit of their profession; before him who is no respecter of persons, and resisteth the proud, to so sever a smiting, and thrusting down of their Brethren, and fellow-servants, as hath too obviously been in these late differences; and without that suteable fear, and dread, leist these whom they gave so sore a thrust to, under the warrant o some opprobrious designation, be such, whom Jesus Christ will own, and finds his servants, and messengers, thus lye a bleeding under that wound. 5. I would hope also, that such a witness of the jealousy, and displeasure of the Lord, against despysers and revilers of the Ministers of the Gospel, may have more weight on the conscience of many after this; when with so discer∣nable and awfull a voice, this I humbly judge, hath been spoke and may be applyed, to all such who professe the truth, and the generations yet
to come, to fear, and dread, to give thus the authority of the Son of God, the supreme head of his Church, so publick ane affront in the Ministry of his ser∣vants, as this party hath of late done, in our Church; or rise up in such a conspiracy againe; and no pretences when tryed at that bar of the scriptures of truth can possibly bear out. 6. And should not this clear the spotless way of the Lord, and seall our instruction from what we have seen; that when no an∣swerable fruit is to such a season of the meanes of the Gospel, as hes been of late, nor ane embracing the truth in its simplicity, and with desyre after the sincere milk of the word, as might have been hoped for; but a seeking more after new and strange doctrine, and to follow these things which tended not to edify; that so sad and dark ane ecclipse should follow; Tho I hope some blessed fruit of these times past, shall be yet found and abide with many. O that after this a more fervent, and serious respect to the ordinances of Christ, might yet revive in our Land, and a keeping close by this appointed way, not only to beget, but to confirme, feed, and make the saints perfect, Ephes. 4: 12. I hope such as under these meanes hath known a neir, and sensible fellowship with Jesus Christ, with that ineffably sweet and fragant savour of his name; and that surely he feeds his people there; cannot at so easy a rate be taken off these breasts, as too many of late hath been. It is sure the more true growth, and livly the work of grace, is on the soul, the more felt need, and desyre will be then after the ordinances of Christ; and it may be feared besides all we have seen, if so sad a falling off from those, be still owned as to reject the message of truth, from such known, godly, and eminently qualified Mini∣sters of Christ, to his Church, upon that pretence of the late indulgence, leist they lose even what they had once attained, when thus out of the way of the Lord, and from under his promise for protection, and being keeped, from the prevalence of that spirit of error, and delusion, which by the very same entry hath now got such visible power on others. I nothing doubt but many hath beene ingadged herein without fear or apprension of such hazard, and as judging it duty; and that some whose appearance this way hath had most weight and credit with others, their heart would have trembled, at what hath beene now seen to follow thereupon, whilst the tendencie and product of such things hath out-rune so much their intent; but it should be mater of grief to all what ground we have thus lost, and what the great ad∣versary of the Church hath gained, to prejudge the interest of the Gos∣pel. 2. I must premit this further to be considered, that it is not so much want of light, as of practice, which is the greatest let to the Churches cure; and I would humbly offer some few, things where both unquestionable duty, and
the remedy of these sore distempers now amongst us, are joyntly obvious, as we might yet hope to see another appearance on the Church, when these are in earnest followed. 1. To keep closse by the scripture, with a sincere humble inquiry for light there, and a more intire reference, to its alone decision. It is sure the conscience must be no rule to us, nor can alter the nature of things, to make that good, which is evill, but must have a rule for its selve; nor is it further the voice of God, then it is truely inlightened; yea nothing hes beene more threatning to the Church, then the strong impulses of one erring con∣science; which seldome keeps within any bounds. And tho I would desyre with the furthest tenderness to speak in this present case, so far as a necessare owning of the truth can admit, yet I must say, it hath beene to me, one of the astonishing things of this day, How such violence in driving this sad rent in our Church, and on these grounds as hath beene pretended, could seek shelter under this patrociny, of the Scriptures of truth, or plead its war∣rant from that blessed rule of the Gospel, which is so expresse, plaine, and full herein; and what should meane this strange halting, if the Lord be God let us follow him and subject wholly to his word, for at that bar only, I hope it is, we desyre to appear and be tryed: what a sweet testimo∣ny will this then be on the soul of a dying Christian, that the truth was so dear to them, as no preingadgment, nor any interest of their supposed cre∣dit, did interpose between the authority of his word, and their conscience, or betwixt their conscience, and a declaring the same to the world both for giv∣ing glory to the truth, and the advantage, and edification of others; yea this from some of greatest repute in the Church, hath tended to transmit their memorie with a most sweet savour, and credit to after times. 2. A serious inquiry and tryall by all of their own way with much fear, and jealou∣sy of themselves should be a blessed ingredient in our cure and relieffe this day, when snairs and hazards are so thick spread: and I think it may be now further convincing, that whatever be the case of our Church, such a way and methode, was no sutable cure, as did visibly tend to inflame the wound, more then to heal, nor that the wrath of man, worketh the righteousness of God: I hope a second inquiry, and tryal, by any of a serious spirit, will let them yet clearly see, that such pretences they founded on, can never ju∣stify this late rent, and falling of thus from Church fellowship, where not only they could continue without sinne, but with much hope of a blessing. 3. And doeth not here both the rule of duty and our relieffe in this sad case, con∣vincingly meet, in a seeking to overcome evill, and privat injuries with good. It is true this is a specialy pungent tryal and will not want some conflict, but I am sure is found one of the choisest opportunities of a Christians life, for
theirafter peace, yea the more wrestling may thus be upon special provocations and with some peculiar aggravating circumstances, to reach this blessed vi∣ctory over themselves, the more comfort and joy will be, upon their after thoughts heirof, and I am sure thus is greater advantage, for a just vindica∣tion by Christians of themselves whilst pressed thereto, as this is with least bitterness or recrimination followed. 4. It is clear that the spirit of God ex∣presly cals for keeping a distance with such things as may tend to engender striffe, and debate in the Church, and not to edifie, as our dutie; and I think it may be too seen, how sad influence this hath had, to break the comfort and edification, of Christian fellowship, where once professors of religion hath beene involved in such a way. There was no such practice, or custome, in these first pure times of the Church, whilst the Apostles lived, and was specially ad∣verted to then; but if any be contentious we have no such custome in the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 5. It is duty also, for the furthest convincing tenderness to be used by such, who through grace, have beene keeped fixed, for restoring of others with the spirit of meekness, and according to the rule, of some putting a difference; great peace should thus follow upon a tender bearing with the frowardness, and revilings of any, under these saddistempers, upon this designe, and for being thus all things to all; to gaine one from the error of his way, is a greater victory then to gaine a city. I find in the life of blessed muscu∣lus, this followed with much success in dealing with some at Ausburgh, who wer then under a sad sad prevalence of the spirrit of error, by seaking first to gaine on their heart & affection and then to deal with their conscience, which prov∣ed at last effectual. 6. It is sure we are now called in this present tryal not to be secure as to what further growth so strange a contagion may have; when the Apostle sheweth a litle leaven leaveneth the wholl lump, 1. Cor. 5, 6. Which as a destroying plague, may thus quickly spread from one house, to a city and thence thrugh the wholl land yea it is known how small the rise of Quakerisme was within these few years in the Churches of Britaine. Nor are these light or small things hath beene now with a strange confidence owned by some of that way, or what may be feared of its further prevalence if the Lord doe not graciously prevent and rebuke such a spirit which hath thus troubled the poor Church. 7. There needs much advertence also on the other hand, that there be a continued fear, and no coolness, from this sad extreme, in our watching of the Churches hazard from open adversaries, and to what assault may be yet made to the rights and liberties of the Kingdome of our blessed Lord, the alone supreme head, and King of his Church; but that thus an equall fear, and jealousy be keeped up, so as the truth lose no ground upon either hand. Reader for this present publick appearance I shall us but a few words it may
be easy to judge how sad a part it is in a time when al humours are so much aloft, and what may be expected this way if there be not from another airt to suport against the contradiction of men; but this I must say I have beene stated under circumstances, and with some surprising call hereto, as I hope, could obviat the most sharpe reflections of any who are this day unbayased in such a case, but I forbear herein to speak more particularly; only as to the occasion of my moving further upon this subject, was from that which is contained in the first Section which upon some desyre and aime for a serious and sober communing upon these differences in our Church, was directed to some few friends; and did choise that way by writ, to prevent any erruption might be of heat, as too usually there is hazard of, in verball reasoning upon such things; and since I found it so frequently challenged how any could oppose themselve to what is owned and asserted in that History of the In∣dulgence, as that which they judged enough to answer al; in such a case, I was enforced to touch it a litle, tho in a very few words, whic I designe as far as possible, and now in such ane unpleasing essay; yet I humbly judge with that evidence of the truth, as may shew the mistake and invalidity of these grounds, on which so strange a superstructure when seriously pon∣dered and weighed, hath beene raised; Nor have yet found more urged u∣pon the mater by any on this head then what is made use of there. It is sure no times past hath beene ever with so intire ane onnesse in judgment as no occasion of difference did fall out amongst the truly godly in some concerne of the truth; but it is sad that so dreadfull a hazard of occasioning a breach in the Church this way, is not yet credit upon tryal, until some have once tryed it themselves. My great unfitness to move in such a case, was just ground of fear, besides much aversion otherwayes to intermedle with so sad, and unpleasing a subject, but being pressed herein, I hope I may say, it was, with a serious aim, and inquiry after the truth; and to be confirmed by Scripture-light in a matter of such great publick contest; and with some desire to prevent the stumblings of many as may now be much feared on these amazing and shaking things, that have since followed on this breach; for what incongruity may be judged, in the close anent some thing practical, and the Churches hazard from Popery, with such a subject; I thought was so far suteable, as I am sure a greater weight thereof, would be found ane effectuall meane to take off these sad unedifieing debates. There are some considerable mistakes at the press both in words, and in the pointing, but I hope are such as the discerning Reader can notice, without darkning the sence, and will pardon.
SECTION I. THough I have much aversion to move in any controversies, especially where friends so truely dear on every side are thus interested, & when our distempers so sadly prevail, as most seem not in case to bear mutual∣ly freedome in these things, so as this present breach would seem al∣most beyond hope, if some blessed touch of the great healers hand do not marvellously surprise us in this day, beside the crowd and noise now may be feared, is so great, as to shut all access for a being heard on such a subject. And for my self I may say, I have been struck with that terrour of these sad imbittering animosi∣ties, and heats now amongst us, as to judge it no less desireable to find an hiding place from the strife of tongues, than from the pride and violence of men; yet since it is sure, true friendship and love gaines more by freedome and openness of heart with others, than to keep at a distance. Besides that sad impression of this deplo∣rable breach and rent in our Church hath pressed me to write these few lines, not for debate or contending, I may say, in the least; but for the truths sake in a sober and humble reasoning, with some exoneration of my own spirit in a few pro∣posals, with the grounds thereof, which without prejudice or offence I would desire, yea obtest to be seriously pondered. And I hope, I may humbly adventure to say, it hath been with some desire to prove my own heart in this matter, before him who is the grear searcher thereof, and under some present constraint of light have now write this, as I durst not (though they were my dying words with peace or quiet of spirit retreat here) But before I offer these proposals, I would desire to premit some few concessions, which I hope on every hand (what ever be the pre∣sent differences) will be acknowledged. 1. That there must be no coolness or indifferency in any interest of the truth under the greatest hazard, this being so invaluable, as there cannot be too dear a purchass thereof; yea that truths comparatively small may be great in their season, so as a testimony thereto, with greatest respect is then necessarily called for, when a publick opposition is made to the same. 2. That this great truth of the visible Kingdome of Jesus Christ over his Church, and its independance on the Magistrat, and his being the alone supreame head and Lawgiver thereto, is of such high concerne and elevation, as we should not count our life dear (if called of the Lord to be offered up as a Sacrifice thereon) yea that a publick testimony should be then more specially owned thereto, with a clear and distinct sound, when so visibly opposed, as in this day. 3. That is must on all hands be confessed a sad decay of a true publick spirit now amongst us, and of that zeal, integrity and watchfulness for the things of God, and deep impression of the Covenant with God these nations are so solemnely engaged to, as hath formerly been with too sad and unsensible a wearing out from
under former impressions of duty in this long continued triall now in the Church, and that success which seemes to wait on a sinful course, for which all of us have cause for being deeply humbled before the Lord this day. 4. I would hope also this will not be under debate, that an endeavour for a safe union (and without any prejudice to the truth) amongst these who have been hel∣ped in this day to witness and suffer against prelacy, and are one in the great con∣cernes of truth & godliness, is both a commanded and indispensibly necessary duty, and will be found as expresly charged upon us, as any duty I know in the Scripture. 5. That there may be differences in a purely Reformed Church in matters of truth consistent with mutuall edification, and without any division or breach amongst such, yea that such will be still here, whilst we know but in part. 6. This concession I hope may not come under question, that it is a part of our guilt this day, our not being more suteably affected with both the sin and judgment of this present rent and division, as we ought: when our Master hath so expresly told, that a Kingdome divided against it self cannot stand, and no less thus threatned than the utter dissolution of such a Church. 7. That there is now need of more closs correspondence, and personall freedome with greatest tenderness to be managed in this present difference with other, since they may thus tear one another at a distance, before they understand them, and that prejudice thus entertained with personal reflections, and alienating of affection must necessarily tend on every hand to widen the breach. 8. That this deplorable rent now amongst the godly hath that sad gravamen therewith, that it is a striving and devouring one another in the furnace, whilst so sore pressed otherwise under the cross, yea in the publick view of all our Adversaries, who so eagerly thus watch for our halting. 9. That there is a great hazard in credulity, and easy entertaining reports to the prejudice of others in a time, when too many seem designedly to tread in the dark this way, as if it were to promot a party, rather than to seek the truth, and follow an interest on the ruine and fall of the repute of others, who have had a most sweet savour in the Church of Christ, and been much blessed for the edification of many: this we may fear is one of the provoking evils in this time, and as a smoak in his no∣strils, who hath said, such as sow discord amongst brethren are an abomination unto him Pro. 6: 19. and hath cursed such as smiteth his neighbour secretly Deut. 27: 24. which may be no less sad and sore by smiting by the tongue, than by the sword. 10. I hope this also will be mutually granted, that a safe managing of differences and rents amongst the godly in so breaking a time as this, is one of the most difficult things in Christianity, so hard it is to get our own spirits kept out, to reach that tender and due regard to present circumstances for publick edification; yea to be kept in an humble and spirituall frame in such a case, and to have the life of grace kept in vigorous exercise, so as thus to have pride, wrath, and bitterness of spirit made to melt down in meekness, humility and love. Having premitted these few, Concessions, which may be found of some weight in this sad case, we are now in, I must humbly offer these following Proposals to be considered. PROP. I. Should we not with greatest fear and trembling look on a breach and rent of the Church, and amongst the truely godly in this day on these grounds? 1. That it so expresly controlls the authority of our great Master, who hath enjoy∣ned by such reitereated commands, love and concord amongst his Disciples, so as I
can find no duty in the New Testament with more frequent obtestations and argu∣ments pressed than this. And though it is unquestionable, that some must be more culpable in the cause of the difference than others, yet doth he press thus with such vehemency, and without any such reserve, to sist, untill there should be an intire onness in judgment amongst themselves, else there were no such difficulty or neid of it to be thus pressed. 2. That it was his dying charge Joh. 15: 17. to love one another, and to guard against any breach amongst themselves, and seemes to have been the thing his heart was most fixt on, when he was to leave the world, as a witness of their being his Disciples, and that the world might know him to be sent of God, Joh. 17: 21. and thus be for a testimony to the truth of the Gospel, and to enforce a conviction of the excellency of Christianity and doctrine thereof on the greatest Atheists. 3. And may we not see these prejudices, which follow on a formed and growing breach of the Church, are oft such, as the cause and occasion thereof do bear no proportion thereto, when brought to the Test of that great rule of Chri∣stian love in its due latitude, as prescribed by our blessed Master; yea that thus there is a being so sadly engaged in disputings & sidings with parties, with such exasperation of spirit, and neglecting of these offices of love we ow to others. 4. That we may see such a sad rent, the more it is followed, the more it becomes a labyrinth and maze, and no way found thus to get out, but that by which they first entered. 5. That conspicuous beacon also, which in all ages hath been set hereon, may make us tremble hereat, and how this hath resolved not only into strife, debate, confu∣sion and disturbances both publick and private, but to hazard the very ruine and dissolution of such a Church. We find Salvian shewing that this was one of the saddest presages of that desolating stroak, that came upon the Affricain Churches, and we may see the very first visible degenerating of Christianity in the primitive times begin here, for it is at such a breach the envious one waits to sow his tares; and how rare is a stop, or fixing found in such a current, but like the breaking in of waters, doth carry many a further length than they ever intended. It is known on what grounds that sad breach by Labadie and his party began here in the Belgick Church, with whom many went in the simplicity of their heart, and by such a designed cure to the offence was then taken by them, did but heighten the di∣stemper, and occasioned so much prejudice against the power and truth of godliness in this land. PROP. II. May we on any safe ground break up Church fellowship and com∣munion so far with those who have accepted the late indulgence, as not to hear or receive the publick ordinances from them as being such: I must propose this on these grounds. 1. That hereby no approbation of the Indulgence can be necessarily inferred, and the ground of offence can never be owned such, as to pollute the or∣dinances, or make communion with these in the least sinfull to us. But it would be adverted on what side the most dangerous and destructive inconveniences are, and hazard of the greatest offence hereby to the Church. 2. That we must still own these as our brethren (what ever be the present difference) with whom we are one (we hope) in Christ, and in the great concernes of truth and godliness, in the same doctrine and principles of the Church: for in these we differ not in Thesi, what ever the application hereof is matter of difference; yea should be tender to judge, in so far as they profess (whom we so assuredly know to be both serious and godly) in their opposition both to the Prelatick and Erastian Adversary. 3. That
they are such we must own to be the undoabted Ministers of Christ, cloathed with a Ministeriall power to preach and dispense the ordinances, ere ever this Indulgence was on foot, these being Acts of their office, which flowes from no convey or grant of the Magistrat to such places; and that be vertue of their office and calling, the peoples tey standeth still in force to hear them, with respect to that primary rela∣tion they were under, as Officers of the Church universall. 4. That this cannot be made practicable, except we take the very Government of the Church off its hinges, without a declarative sentence; since upon the matter it is to draw out one of the highest censures against so considerable a party of the Ministry, yea to exercea critick and juridicall power some way, not only over these who are indulged, but over must of the whole Non-Conformists, who are still free and enforced in con∣science to own such in their Ministry. 5. That this should be a departing from an union once acknowledged in our fellowship and communion with them in the pu∣blick ordinances. It hath been hitherto publickly owned, that if the whole Church had been so far left, as to some sad compliance for a time that way, and thus the peoplefixt under the Ministry of such, that even on an after disco∣very of the evil thereof, there would not be allowed the same necessity, or expediency of separation, or for refusall to hear them, as there is now in our case for a non-compliance with that party, and keeping thus at a continued di∣stance, which was a ground had such weight with our worthy Ancestors in the former times of prelacy, when it was not brought in at once, but by degrees into the Church, and thus found it not safe and easy to break up so far, as not to have Chruch fellowship in receiving the publick ordinances then from such, though a most vigorous opposition to the sinfulness of that way was still followed, 6. Be∣cause this might quickly tend to a casting off of most, if not the whole of the stand∣ing non-conforme Ministry now in the Church, who have been helped to stand and withstand against Prelacy, and to open such a doore for any of the people at their pleasure to quite or turn off the Ministers of the Gospel, without any fixed or previous cognition in such a case. And Oh! how hard, or difficult will it be found to set bounds, or fix new landmarks, when once the old are taken up, may be easily judged. PROP. III. Is such a refusall to hear these Ministers who are indulged, now owned, because it is simpliciter unlawfull, or on that ground of its expediency, and for edification? I would hope, none yet dare come to own the first; but for the second of expediency in such a present case, I must humbly judge such a practice would seem very unanswerable thereunto, on these grounds. 1. That this sad effect hath so visibly followed thereon, to break up that sweet edifying fellowship, which was formerly amongst Christians in many places, so as these who were wount to walk together, and keep Christian converse, for building up one another in the truth, can now hardly joyn or pray together, 2. That none seem to have gained by this late heightned breach, except the publick Adversary, yea ad a dash to these publick meetings in the fields thus given, which here to fore were so eminently blessed, whilst thus such open contradiction of late in preaching hath too evidently brought a stumbling to the weak, and a reproach on the way of the Lord, as we may fear shall not in haste be taken off. 3. That thus the prelatick party seems more hardned, and to have less reckoning of that heavy charge of perjury and defection from the truth, when so great a part of Non-Conforme Ministers
they find publickly classed with them, who yet are otherwise known to be both able and godly; yea which hath been sadly regrated, that the edge of that wounted zeal which was against Prelacy and the common Adversary, hath been thus blunted in a more hot pursute of the other party. 4. The shaking and stumbling of many, which I must here write with a sad remembrance of a Christian, who I durst not but say but was truely serious, who spake to me almost weeping, when I was last in our Country, of being put to that through this late breach and visible contradicti∣ons in publick preaching; yea that some had openly declared there were scarce four faithfull Ministers of the Church to be found, that they knew not what, or whom to credit, but like to be shaken in the very foundation. And I must humbly judge, if this breach should grow, I know no gain will ever recompense the Kings dammage herein, I mean of our King and head in the edification of his people. Yea who are there, if not fixt and established by grace, that can look on these devou∣ring heats and breakings amongst both Christians and Ministers in this day, but are in hazard to take prejudice at the whole of Religion, and must needs judge that these cannot be the fruits of the Spirit of Christ. 5. I must yet add on this ground of expediency, if it would seem to engage the multitude in these controversies, and make this their business, ere many such know what the solide work and exercise of godliness is, or what either the principles and power of Religion means, and why is that so expresly commanded Rom. 14: 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtfull disputations. It is sure, that it much concernes all who preach the Gospel, to know the message they deliver be suted for solide edification, and in bearing testimony to the truth in this day, which is so unquestionably a duty, that yet it be with such a grave ministerial seriousness and Christian wisdome, as it may commend the truth to the conscience of the people, so as this duty be neither ne∣glected, nor unsuteably managed, otherwise a light and too ordinary a way in speaking on so grave a concerne, or on publick differences, without some con∣vincing and suteable weight herein, and when it is with personal reflections, we may fear would stumble much more then convince, as would seem a thrust rather at the persons of some, than at their way, and to gain an interest to a party more than for the truth. PROP. IV. Are not such expresly called, yea with an intense study to unite so far for the truths sake, and in following clear uncontroverted duties, who are otherwise like minded in things of the Lord, what ever now may be in difference amongst us, so as that union should not, nor ought to sist, untill a through onness of judgment be attained in this present controversy (which were so much to be de∣sired) upon these grounds. 1. That the Scripture clearly determines this; so far as we have attained, to walk by the same rule, and mind the same things, however even in some matters of truth not one, Phil. 3: 15. 16. and with hope, that the Lord in due time may graciously convince such who are in the present difference most culpable. And I should hope, that more tender and affectionat condescendence in the way of deal∣ing with such might tend more to reclaime and recover, than any violent and per∣emptory way. 2. Because, if such an uniting in unquestionable duties should cease, untill there be a full union in judgment amongst the truely godly, what times of the Church have been favourable, that we could then ever hope, or essay any concord in duty. 3. That it is sure, the most eminent Instruments in the work of the Gospel, both in the primitive times, and since the Reformation, have been
oft at a very sad difference amongst themselves in the matters of truth, whose con∣currence otherwise in carrying on the work of the Lord, hath been most remarkea∣bly sealed with a blessing. 4. That a bearing and forbearing in many differences of judgment amongst the godly for the Churches peace, and without any involvement in the sin of others, hath not been hitherto questioned by the greatest lights and witnesses to the truth in these late times, especially where both the doctrine and Government of the Church hath been in the great and weighty concernes thereof adhered to. Thus blessed Calvin doth so pressingly obtest the English Congrega∣tion at Francfort for a tender bearing and mutuall forbearing amongst themselves, in that present difference was then, with respect to the circumstances they stood under, and for the truths sake, though he was far from owning that party in that wherein the rest of their brethren had been sohighly grieved. PROP. V. Is it not one of the great concernes and trials of Christian wisdome in the Church, how to apply the rule in things lawful and commanded, with a due regard to edification in such a case. I propose this on these grounds. 1. The express warrant of the Scripture, 1 Cor. 10: 23. all things are lawfull, but not expedient, all things are lawfull, but edify not. 2. That this hath been one of the greatest depths of Satan to turn men over in the managing of a duty on another sad extreame, as the very way to break it, but he that handleth a matter wisely shall find good. The way of the Lord, and a closs adhering to his truth doth never of it self occasion a breach in the Church, but what our corruption, and unsuteable following of duty doth on either hand occasion; nor is there any jarre, except what is from our selves betwixt zeal and Christian prudence, since these are both expresly enjoyned, and equally obliging by the holy Ghost, nor can they ever part, but with a sad prejudice to the truth. There is a holy contemperature of zeal, meekness and love, all which being from one and the same spirit, do with a sweet onness necessarily concurre for the same end. Nor can I possibly reconcile a being professedly hot in the one, with being cold and unconcerned in the other, except I should quite the revealed rule of our duty for both. 3. Because the truth may get a very sore thrust by the manner of our contending for it: the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, and both should be seriously adverted to, that the cause of God be neither neglected, nor yet pre∣juged, through a non-suteable following thereof. A wound needs both a tender and skilfull hand to handle it, else it were easy to destroy, where the case and pre∣sent constitution of the patient is not considered a right. O! if that Scripture were more practically owned, for a humble tender condescendence in our dealing with others for the truths sake, I was all things to all, that I might gain some. Our bitter, hot and unadvised expressions may some times wrong the interest of our blessed Master more, than we may find easy with our furthest work to recover. PROP. VI. Is there not ground both to fear and watch against a giving any thrust at the credit and repute of the Ministers of Christin our Church, who in this hour of tentation, and after many sore wrestlings and differences, have yet ob∣tained mercy to stand and suffer against prelacy, what ever cause they may have to weep before the Lord over themselves for saddest failings and unanswerableness to the work of their day? I most propose this on these grounds. 1. Though I would be far from judging it to be designed, yet ex intentione operis, is it not too visibly inductive concurring with the same end, and interest both of the Prela∣tick party and Quakers, and thus may give a sadder thrust, than is apprehended, at
the propheticall, as well as the kingly office of our blessed head? 2. That this upon the matter is some way all one, as to silence them and cast them out of the Church: since it must needs tend to disable and render them useless in their Masters work, what ever tends to break their credit, as Ministers of the Gospel. And should it not be deeply considered, if the charge be such, and of that necessity to follow for making them in a manner contemptible to the people, as the labour and fervice of such this day in the vineyard of the Lord may amount to. 3. What help thus can the poor ignorant and impenitent sinners have for their cure, if thus im∣pressed and taught to turn their back on so many serious and godly Ministers, whose work hath had a convincing seal on many? And I hope with greatest desire would seek the saving of souls, yea when the prophane, drunkards, swearers and worldlings shall thus flee under such a patrociny, that many if not most of the non-conforme Ministers of the Church are neither to be heard, nor owned, how sad should this be? Or if they go that length, as to hear, yet with having them in such contempt, as without any dread or fear to slight their ministeriall exhortations. And Oh! the souls of many thus in hazard to be undone, and to run to their own destruction, and take such advantage, when so much is given to revile Ministers known to be unquestionably godly, and fixed in the Government of the Church, when they would seek to draw them to repentance. This is no personall interest, nor will it be found a light or small matter, pretend who will to the contrary, to give a publick thrust at the credit of a Minister of Jesus Christ, who may yet have some service for his Master under his hand, and whose sin being blotted out shall be for ever hid in the day of their appearance before the great judge. Or thus rake up what we may hope he hath covered. I remember what I heard pressed in the time of the late diffe∣rence about the publick resolutions after a communion before a most solemne audi∣tory, and by one of the greatest Ministers of Christ I know then; yea when to the conviction of all he was owned with greatest evidence of the presence of God. I think, saith he, as to the sad differences now in the Church, we should with Shem and Japhet take the mantle, and with our eyes shut go backward, and lay it upon Noah, yet was he in his judgment fixt against the resolution. 4. Hath not the greatest strength which error and seduction have got in the Church of Brittain, most visibly followed on the reproach and subtile breaking of the credit of the Ministers of Christ? And what doth the Popish Adversary more visibly designe than this? As Conzen a Jesuite Polit. 2. cap. 18. writes,that the surest way to reduce the Church to Popery, was to have their great aim against the Ministers of the Re∣formed Churches, by blasting of their reputation, as well as persecuting of their persons. 5. And how sad may this be judged for such, after many years tossings, and being exposed to many sore difficulties, to be made to suffer at last more from friends, than publick Adversaries, and thus be under both these rods at once. I write this, I hope I may say, without the least countenancing of whatever hath been matter of grief or offence in the practice of any; but that I am pressed from that due respect I ow both to the persons and Ministry of known able and godly Ministers, and straiching the principles of the Church. 6. I must further add, that I fear it be found a guilt lying heavy on Scotland, and on many Professors there, beyond most of the Reformed Churches this day, a high and daring contempt of the Ministers of Christ there, without respect to their former sufferings, integrity and weight in the Church, with a designed spreading and agreaging their infirmities, because of the
differences from them: for which we may yet fear this sin be write in our judgment by the Lord his recalling further his despised Messingers. And now whilst it seemes the plague of the time for many to hate and revile the Ministry of Christ, need they be thus further killed and hardned with prejudice against such a remedy, and that these even by their friends should be thus put to do their work with grief and not with joy? I shall but further add, that it would be deeply pondered, how far the credit of the truth, which is of more concerne than our souls are worth, hath been exposed to saddest reproach; how much reall exercise of soul in the serious and internall work of Religion hath been made of late to resolve in imbittering debates, and as it were a drawing into parties. Oh! how must our care be yet further write in letters of blood? That Rabies Theologorum, as it was tearmed in the German Church, was such as made some eminent Ministers of Christ then to long for death, to get out of such a flame into that land of peace. We may not quite the least of truth for the peace and concord of the Church, nor can these be ever in opposite tearmes, but as we make them, and I may with some confidence say, that what is now here writen, hath been with a serious desire in respect to both; but I hope some may speak in the words of Bucer, that for a safe healing, and to have it made effectuall to a broken and rent Church now, they would judge it of that concerne, as if called and helped of the Lord herein, to lay down their life for the same, and thus for their brethren. I have been in some measure pressed to write this, if I could with that single regard to the interest of the Lord thus deal with my own conscience, and others. And though I designed in as few words as possible, to speak my heart herein, yet must add a few things more on a subject, though very sad, yet of much weight and import. 1. That it may be too visibly the great want which is this day in the serious work of Christianity, and gives the saddest rise to these high distempers now amongst us, that if these graces of the spirit were in more lively exercise, the love of Christ, humility, patience and meekness, a putting on of bowells of mercy, tenderness and compassion, as the Elect of God towards these we differ from, with more severe self judging, and suteable fear in judging, and condemning others, we are commanded to have; this present difference should never have come to a formed breach in the Church; yea thus more advantage to the truth, and a more clear testi∣mony kept up thereto by a spirit of love. It hath been astonishing to see imbittering heats and animosity, with such sore thrusts at a distance to break the credit of others, which are so visible corruptions of corruption, yet plead a patrociny for the same. O my friends, why is it so? The zeal of God must be for the Churches edification, and also bring us thus under a constraint for union: the wisdom that is from above, and is pure, is peaceable, gentle and easy to be intreated, without hypocrisy and without partiality. And do any feele the comforts and sealings of the spirit with a dividing and imbittered temper? It was a sad rebuke the Disciples of Christ got, though on a just resentment they had of the wrong done their Master, but that tended more to destroy, than to gain, you know not of what spirit you are. 2. Have we not hitherto seen, that on a small remove and secession in our Church fellowship, such have made more haste than good speed, nor have found it easy af∣ter to fixe, untill they have been a length their heart would some time have trembled
at; yea thus besides the wounding the heart of the godly, darkning the glory of Gospel, and shaking the faith of many, have been forced to run on saddest incon∣veniences and new principles to maintain their way. What ever length the difference about the publick resolutions of late came to (which was a visible presage of the stroak that after came) yet was there no dashing on such a rock as this is now. And we may know, that what ever tends to divide amongst the godly, or betwixt peo∣ple and Ministers, gets but too easy an hearing oft amongst many, it is so sib to our corruption, and one of the strongest lusts of the flesh. 3. Is there not an undoubted necessity this day to essay to the farthest an union and healing in the Church, when of no less import, than the keeping up of the worship of God, the salvation of the people, the credit of the Gospel, and a pre∣venting the stumbling of many now in such visible hazard, which are more than our souls are worth? And can we see how these shall be safe, if this breach be still widned? The longer continuance will make it the more difficult to heal, when on all hands we are made to mourn, and see the issue, which we would not formerly believe; and is not this a strange rent and distemper in a day, when the Lord hath cast us all down, that our great work should be to bear down others, with such a pronness to take offence, as well as there is in giving it, is one of the high provoking causes of wrath and judgment, which as in greatest letters, I must say, hath been write before our eyes in the late providences of this time. 4. Since each is concerned to prove his own heart and work herein, and what may be his accession to so highly a provoking guilt and stroak as threatens no less than an utter quenching the light of the Gospel in Scotland, and to be overwhelmed with Popery, Atheisme, and all ungodliness, which so much gain ground by our breach. It were well, if there could be so impartiall a search herein, and triall more of our selves, than by rolling it over on others, what may be our part therein; and if these things bring not a sad involvement in such a guilt. 1. When there is no tender abstaining from harsh censuring of others. 2. When there is a pressing more of that which tends to divide, than what there is to unite, and in how far we are still one in our former principles. 3. When high prejudice, and alienation of af∣fection is not closly watched against, which like the predominant humour of the jaundice, will quickly present all things in the same colours, and make it difficult to judge of the way of others we differ from, without a sad by ass. 4. When con∣tendings even for the truth are more passionat and breaking, than with humble seri∣ousness to be rationally convincing and healing, which is so unlike the way of the Lord, and in being defamed, yet to intreat. 5. When there is not some study to walk closs together in so far as we are one, and mutually convinced, which I am sure would help to come more neer in what is now the matter of difference, I must here confess for my self, it hath been heavy on my spirit, that I did not with more seriousness, and according to my small measure move herein, when last in my own countrey, and had so neer a prospect of these deplorable confusions, nor have been under that suteable weight, as such a time calls for, when the Church there is as strugling betwixt life and death, though I may say, it hath oft made me covet a hiding and more abstractness from so sad a noise: but O blessed they, to whom it it shall be given to stand in such  breach this day, so as it may be convincingly evident the zeal of God, and a healing spirit do most sweetly concurre. 5. And what can we possibly answer to our own conscience, and to all the
Reformed Churches this day, yea at the appearing of Jesus Christ, that now the poor Church of Scotland, when in the furnace, and so long in a suffering condition, is like to be more ruined by our selves, than by other Adversaries; and such a sore rent now amongst these, who are still one in doctrine, worship and Government, and we hope have access to the Father by the same spirit, as have in a sad measure broke up Church fellowship in the Gospell ordinances, and in the most concerning duties of Christian society amongst many; yea this to be still growing, and yet no essay nor endeavour to prevent such a ruine, that is like to be entailed even on the offspring, and what may be the thought of the generation that succeeds, when so deplorable a history shall be put on record. SECTION II. IT may be strange and matter of astonishment this day, what so severe a stretching of that controversy about the late Indulgence, in our Church, and bringing things to such ane extreme, can possibly meane? As though no party else were to contend with, when the whole of Religion, is like to be swallowed up betwixt Popery, Prelacy, and Atheisme, and that the peace and true edification of the Church were now so low and cheap, as to sacrifice them upon such ane account; yea, while so many are in that hazard to be shaken, as they are like to lose all setted perswasion of the truth: but since such stresse hath been by some layed on these grounds adduced in the late History of the Indulgence, for not hearing, or receaving the ordinances of the Gospell, from such Ministers as have accepted thereof, to a further widening thus of the breach; and, that I have been expresly referred thereto, as a full answer to what is held forth in the forgoing Paper, or whatever can be said to the con∣trary; I was pressed to some perusall thereof, so far as to know whence a conclusion so strange, and of so high and universall concern to all the Churches, could possibly be inferred or established by any, who admit the Truth and Authrity of the Scriptures, and these principles wherein we have hitherto walked. But ere I touch this more particularly, I must, to prevent mistakes, premitt some few things in the entry. First, That it is sure the question of Separation is one of the most difficult things, and lyes more in the dark, then most things that are controverted; and that all acts of extremity, such as this, should be with greatest reluctation, and on convincing and necessary grounds followed; nor can we ever see such away hath in any time been blessed, (how favourable soever it might seem in the eyes of some) which hath tended to perplex and precipitantly to break a poor Church and how sad a mark is put thereon, by the holy Ghost, may be read Jude vers. 19. Secondly, Though some seem too visibly unconcerned, and in stead of being su∣tably affected, to account this growing breach rather ane ornament and matter of boasting; yet, when seriously considered, of such import is it, and that question anent Church fellowship and communion; as this may be truly called, Articulus stantis & cadentis Ecclesiae, and upon no lesse hazard now, (if grace doe not marve∣lously prevent) then the dissolution of a Nationall Church: and is not that James 3. 16. written in greatest letters this day before us, that where strife is there is confusion
and every evill work, and that thus both the work of conversion and interest of the Gospell is most visibly obstructed. Thirdly, We must take no measure of present duty, from the event, but what∣ever proposalls or essayes should be for any composure or healing now in the Church, I hope, I may say, it is no sinfull tampering, or with any ceding or lati∣tude in the least, in the matter of God; but let truth still have the first place, for I should reckon any such peace with greatest terrour, which might cause a breach with God: have salt in your selfes, and peace one with another. Fourthly, It is not the case of the Indulgence, or the acceptance thereof by any of our Brethren, that is now the controversy amongst us, nor is here touched further, then a necessary opposing, so strange and unjust inferences, as hath been made thence, to make this difference seem greater then it is; and for renting the poor Church; but it is known when that design of the Magistrate was set on foot, what sutable and serious freedome (in the opportune season) was used to prevent any di∣viding among us, and to keep of any concurrence therewith, yet with that due and tender respect to there Ministry, with whom we herein differed, to prevent any publick rent or breach, and as we judged these most sutably consistent, so it is sure, the thoughts of such things, we now see, and of such a spirit as is now aloft would have made our hearts then tremble. Fiftly, I doubt not that this great duty will be acknowledged by all, if it had a sutable weight on us, in such a day, to adore the holy and spotlesse righteousnesse of God in what he hath done, and ly in the dust before him, against whom we have sinned, and be much in humble and serious selfjudging; for we should tremble either to justifie or extenuate the sad declinings which hath been in our Church, in these later times, from that first love, tenderness and zeall for God, and the great con∣cerns of his truth; yea mourn, that so sad a faint hath been among us, and despondency of spirit, for such a sutable, unite, and solemne appearance, as was called for in bearing testimony against these invasions made on the Kindome of our blessed Master, whilst many opportunities hath been too visibly lost of this great duty by us al. Sixtly, Yet upon the other hand we must not shut our eyes, nor conceall such a ground of hope, and token for good, that the Lord will not destroy, but dwell in our land, that he hath accepted a testimony by the sufferings of his poor people, even of all ranks now for these years past, who have cheerfully endured, with much long-suffering, some unto death, banishment, imprisonment, and the spoiling of their goods, as I may adventure to say, upon this account a greater testimony hath not been given to the way of the Lord, and his truth in our Church, since the first begun Reformation from Popery; yea, that what ever be these sad deplorable dif∣ferences now amongst us, yet are they not stated upon a publick disowning of any principle of truth either in doctrine, worship, or Government; and hopes, that many of these who are most severly reflected on by some, would through grace, (if called to publick confession, of the glorious headship and supremacy, of our blessed Head, King, and Lawgiver to his Church,) not account their life dear unto the death, to be offered up as a sacrifice thereon: Wherein I judge as is meet, and with more peace of minde now when I write this, then to judge with that severity, and per∣emtorinesse, which have been by some, against their Brethren, and fellow-servants this day. I shall but add, that what is here touched, hath been with some desire and aime, to keep a distance from any personall reflections, or to provoke and give a
thrust at the repute of any; but Oh, if a delivering ourselfes up to the truth, were reckoned to be the greatest Victory, and however provoked or injured, yet by ma∣nifestation of the truth to their consciences, in a humble, tender, and convincing way to deall with such; surely, this should be matter of peace and joy in the shutting up of our dayes, and not to have recompenced evill with evill, but to have thus en∣deavoured the gaining the soul of their Brother, by overcoming evill with good. Having premitted these, I must touch alittle some grounds layed down in that history of the Indulgence, for not hearing of the indulged Ministers; and such mea∣sures as seem to have been taken, for a stretching this difference so far, as to break of Church communion and fellowship with these, whom yet they dare not but own as the Messengers of Christ to his Church; which I must say upon some serious re∣flection, hath been astonishing to see, so high a charge and arguments adduced there, and with such confidence followed, which, if fearched unto, by any seri∣ous and unbyassed Reader, may enforce them to see, the conclusion would seem to have been established befor the premisses; though in this as to the tendency there∣of, and these sad and deplorable consequences that are like to follow, I hope, was neither designed, nor forseen by the Author, to whose memory, (if such as is pretended to be) I doe own great respects, and to have no further reflection on what is there, then the truth, which must have preference to all, indispensibly requires. First, We may see in stead of Arguments, some high and confident assertions, where I must say, the enditement goes above the evidence; and that (1.) There is both ane imposing of a sense upon their Brethrens practise, and a being judge also themselfes; and such a sense, as these who have been known most averse from any acceptance of that Indulgence, yet can neither see nor admitt; but how hard is it, in a dividing time, when all humors are so much aloft, to censure without slander. (2.) Here is a pressing of that sense on this practise, which themselves doe with a professed abhorrence disown; whose candour and sincerity otherwayes, in the greatest concerns of Religion, I hope, none dare debate; and how sad is it, when deductions, and inferences, are rather forced, then found, from the way of others, and a designe more to defame, and make things worse, then they are to reclaime: and to urge things beyond their due weight: there is a rigide and severe prosecution even in things lawfull, that brings much scandall on Religion, and the way of the Lord, so as to make many scarr and take a judgment thereof by this practise, which yet, is so full of a holy sweetnesse and condescendence. (3.) What is held forth there, as it too obviously exceeds, so it is a divesting of the matter, of these just extenuating circumstances that it is capable of, whilst no censure should extend further according to the rule, then what necessarly must be inferred from the fact: for that 1 Cor. 13. commanded Charity, which thinketh no evill of our Brother, so also reasoneth no evill, so as to put ane harder construction then it can justly hear, as if there were some desire, to have such ane advantage to speak evill, and inter∣prete doubtfull things in the worst sense. Secondly, For these multiplied divisions of many arguments, and a strange em∣peachment of ane accumulative defection from the truth, and falling in with Eras∣tianisme; I confess was astonishing, what such a heaping up of these should meane, with so visible a coincidence upon the matter, as if to repeat the very same thing, though in another form twenty, or thirty times over, could thus have the more weight: but we know, arguments must be weighed, and not numbered.
Thirtly, And is there not to visible a tendency of all these high aggravations, and reasonings there upon, to cause a further breach, and stretch this difference, beyond, either what was needfull, or expedient, for edification, in making that a stumbling block for many to break themselfes on, which was not so before; and thus in shunning one extreme, hath rushed both themselfes, and others, one another, as is like, (if the Lord prevenr not) to cause a further stated division in other points of truth; and to what a sad extreme now are things thus come; when it is so expresly declared in the preface to that History, that he can pray for nothing else in behalf of the indulged Ministers, but repentance, and untill that, may have no sute else to God in their behalf; which is ane expresse denying to pray for the successe of their Mini∣stry, and edification of the people, untill they be once convinced, and have changed their judgment: yea, thus could not joine with such in prayer, upon any other sute that they should put up for themselfes, before the Lord. I should wish this had been so cautioned, as any safe or warrantable sense, could have been put on so strange ane assertion, otherwise the communion of the saints, and the doctrine of the Church herein, must undeniably be made void. Fourthly, That here is a most sad, and unwarrantable overstretching of this controversy, (in so high a charge, as is thus brought, of Erastianisme, and ane ex∣presse formall, receiving of their Ministry from Magistrate) I must humbly judge, is unanswerable on these grounds. (1.) That thus, is charged upon them and their practise, for having yeelded up more to the Magistrate, then is so much, as once sought or required by them, in that Act of Indulgence; since that which is expresly shewed there, is, that they allow and permitt such the publick exercise of their Ministry, in these respective places where they should be confyned, to be without hazard of law. (2.) Because, (and, I hope, none will question it) their Mini∣stry, and the validity thereof, and that they did also exercise the same, notwith∣standing of any hazard from the law, before any such Indulgence was, is sufficiently known. (3.) Whatever difference hath been in the application, yet their publick adherence, to the same principles, in the point controverted is undenyable, only they judge their practise herein, to be consistent therewith, whilst questioned by others, which is the very state of this present case. (4.) I hope none dare judge these our Brethren (whatever difference of judgment be herein) or charge them with wilfull errour, or controuling their light and conscience in this matter, but that they have walked accordingly; (and I must so judge as is meet) but if any will assume ane authority both to judge, and passe sentence on the conscience of such, whom they know to be serious, tender, and judicious, in the matters of truth; I cannot answer this, but must leave them to answer that great infallible rule of the Scriptures of truth herein; but I must say, the putting of so a strange a gravamen, and exaggerating of this practise so far beyond all bounds, hath seemd strange to mee, how possibly such could be without some fear and dread, (how light so ever it seem now to some) of being found guilty of a sad breach of the ninth command: and since all should prove their own work, I humbly think, they should be as competent judges in the truth of their profession, and of what they have so solemnly declared, as any else. (5.) Here also is a visible opposing of them to themselfes, in so far as their declaration before the Councill, and set down in that History is evident, and hath these very words publickly, before the Magistrate: (We have receaved our Ministry from Jesus Christ, with full prescriptions from him, for regulating us therein,
and must be accountable to him,) and if these so publickly owned this, and spoke the same in truth, and sincerity; then these strange assertions so frequently renewed there, even to the readers nauseating, upon such ane account of there having taken their Ministry from the Magistrate, must be undenyably false: besides its known (and should we deny what is just to our Brethren upon such ane account,) their practicall witness, and counteracting of any instructions imposed on them by the Magistrate. Fiftly, There seems much endeavour to invalidate any declaration, which was then given before the Councell, upon the omission of that clause, only, and that though they owned their Ministry to be from Jesus Christ, and to receave directions from him for the exercise thereof, that, yet, this clause, only, was deliberatly left out, and the Authors of that History seems the more pressed herein, else their whole scope were frustrate, since none could debate this to have been then, a full and clear confession of their Ministry, as from Christ alone, and independant on the Magistrate, and therefore are concerned to prove, that this, only, was a de∣liberate omission, which I must confesse a strange reasoning to any discerning Reader, that page 130. argum. 12. they with such confidence say, it is apparent the indulged did deliberatly shun to say, they had there Ministry only from Christ, and yet page 24. when they give the reason why this was deliberatly done, because it was designed by some, (sayes the Author) if I be not misinformed: and must the whole stresse of most of their arguments, be layed over upon their designe, and intention herein, and no lesse then a judiciall for faulture of their Ministry thence inferred, whilst they are, yet, put to confesse ane uncertainty, whither they were rightly enformed anent this, yea, or no, or if this omission was truly deliberate: and since this is a publick fixing, a most high scandall on so many Ministers of Christ, it would have been expected to be with the furthest evidence to convince others, and that they are in case for the full, and judiciall, out making thereof, when required; if they would give that measure they expect from others, and which the Scripture indispensibly requires in such a case. Sixtly, It is strange, so sudden a determining, and publishing the private judgings of some, in a matter of such weight and universall concern, without so much as a previous communicating in Councill herein, with the must tender of their Brethren, whom they would in charity judge to be serious, and have the Councill of God with them, yea, this without laying down any such convincing grounds, as were ne∣cessary to justifie so strange a practise, as the departure from fellowship in the publick ordinances, with so great a part of the Church; as though this had no weight in this day, for the spirit of the Prophets being subject to the Prophets. I must say, though some should own an revelation, or extraordinary impulse in this, yet, so far, it might have been judged, they might have keept of, as not to vent the same in ane disorderly and unsutable way; or adventure to bring in so strange a practise, and of so publick concern in the Church, without the Church; or to exerce their private judgment, over the whole of their Brethren. The Apostle Paull, tho imme∣diatly called by Christ, yet would goe up to Jerusalem to conferre with the Brethren; nor would Paull and Barnabas together, adventure to determine in that difference at An∣tioch, untill it was brought to the Apostles: the same spirit which leads unto all truth, does also lead unto Humility, and to the furthest tender condescendence in Brethrens dealling with other; nor should it be light, whatever may be the private thoughts
of some, in a matter of truth, to doe any thing precipitantly which may disturb the Church: and now when it is strugling as if between life and death, was this a time to drive with such heat this present breach, and in a way to defame, more then to convince and gaine, and with such a height of severe reflection on all that comes not to their measure this way, as if to be pious, and peacable at once, were wholly inconsistent. Sevently, And what should it meane, or is it sutable to that candour and tender respect, which we owe to the Author of the late Apology, to set down these argu∣ments which he hath there for not hearing of the Curats, for not hearing the in∣dulged; and herein, to oppose him to himself, and his own expresly declared sense to the countrary, whilst now by his death he cannot answer. But his own words there, I hope, will not be denyed, which yow may read pag. 128. and there also see, a vigorous opposition to the indulgence yet without any breach or dividing from these worthy Ministers, who have accepted thereof, are no wayes incon∣sistent. Amongst the many designes aimed at, (said that Author) in this indul∣gence, and in part obtained, we know the breakings and dividing of our party was a principall one; but, we hope, without the fruit our Adversaries expected; for whatever difference there hash been, and yet is among us, in our practise in re∣lation to the indulgence, we are all agreed in our preceeding exceptions against it, and if there had been accesse for representing the same to the Rulers, our unani∣mity and concord in these had been more discovered and known to the world; there is no change with us, of our known and professed judgment anent the Go∣vernment of the Church, in its distinction from, and independency on the Ma∣gistrate; some who take hold on all occasions to reproach us, are pleased to re∣present their acceptance of this indulgence, as contradictory to, and inconsistent with our former professed principles in Church Government; yet, any that con∣siders what was shortly hinted at in the Councell, at the receiving of this indul∣gence, and what was more largly declared by them, to their congregations at first entry, will be sufficiently convinced of our constant adherence to former princi∣ples, which by this acceptance is not at all changed: thus for he. Eightly, But if the declared judgments, and authority of some may influence any to a more implicite falling in with this way; I must yet further crave leave, to oppose the judgment of one, who, I suppose, may have the same weight and au∣thority in this case, it is the Author of the true Non-conformist, who in his clearing the duty of forbearance to hear the Curats, hath these words which I cited, in the first Paper, Page 196. I freely acknowledge, that if God had permitted this whole Church to slide into the present evills of Prelacy, and thereafter had blessed it with a discovery; yet, I would not admitt in that condition the same necessity and expediency of separation, that I now finde, to plead with for a non complyance, in as much as our present non-complyance, was not only a more seasonable and safe duty, but also was attended with a faithfull and edifying adherence, to our true and sent Teachers. And page 194. hath these words, that separation is a de∣parting from ane union, once acknowledged, even in these things, that are in themselfes not condemned, and thus does most expresly determine, the unwar∣rantableness of falling of from Church fellowship with the indulged Ministers on that head, after so known and acknowledged union with these in the publick or∣dinances, even after the acceptance of the indulgence, till of late, but that you
may know, what is the sense and declared judgment of this Author, in this case, I shall give you now further his own words, pag. 487. opposing himself herein to these sharp reflections of G. B. But you doe not only make your Non-conformist to cede as it were to your reasonings; but in a manner to own the late pretended indulgence, as flowing from the supremacy, as on purpose to fix on these few Ministers of ours, who have been thereby restored, at least a constructive appro∣bation of this evill. And there in the following page has these words. But not to lose time in these triflings, I differ from your Non-conformist, and am so much against the supremacy, that I abominate the indulgence under this name, but that God has disposed the King to restore in any measure what was so sinfully taken away, we account it a great blessing, wishing that he may be in such manner sa∣tisfied with the fruits of this course, as may more and more convince him of its righteousness, and encourage him to its prosecution. But if you, or any think, by this poor and scant restitution, to bribe the Lords people, to the rest of your usurpations; we trust the Lord will deliver his own; and that as hitherto, our Ministers has looked upon themselfes as such, neither of Man, nor only by Man; but by Jesus Christ and God the Father; so they will accordingly acquit them∣selfes, and in a speciall manner testify for his right and ordinance, against all invasi∣ons; and that so much the more, as the hard condition of the present times, hath engaged them to an seeming allowance of that of which they ought to purge them∣selfes in the first place: thus you see what is the declared judgment of that Author in this present case, yea, how far he is a length herein; and I hope non will question his speaking his light, and judgment in this sincerly; but that we may see different judgments and apprehentions in this case should not seeme so strange now in the Church. Nintly, But since so great a weight is layed on this, that the indulged Ministers are in the same classe, and case, with these who are Prelatick, yea, seems rather to hold them out as worse; I must now affer some few things on this head, for any discerning Reader to considere. (1.) How visibly this hath tended, to a sad heigh∣tening the present breach; that the just grounds, whereon we have keept such a di∣stance from the hearing of such, hath not been more weighed, and understood; and how these can give no possible warrant, to make the same inference in this present controversy. (2.) That the stretching of this by some to so great a height, as to take arguments hence, for forbearing to hear, so many eminently godly and able Non-conformed Ministers, upon this head of the indulgence; would truly seem, as if designed, rather to weaken its strenth against the Prelatick party, and give such, to sad ane advantage against us, in this day. (3.) Since it is not in thesi, or without a due consideration of these speciall grounds, and just concurrence of cir∣cumstances in the complex case now of our Church, this can be understood for not hearing of the Curats, but as such, which in a speciall way must be stated by it self: (for it might otherwise tend, to a sad prejudice to the truth, and publick interest of the Reformed Churches, and run unawares on a very evident precipice) I must therefore beseech and obtest, that this may be more adverted to, and that we may know how sutably to give a reason, of our light and practise herein, upon clear and evident grounds for which I shall offer these. (1.) That with the late erection of Prelacy, there was then no departure from any acknowledged union with such, but a simple Non-complyance, and a publick owning and adhering to these faithfull
Non-conformed Ministers, under whom they had been formerly sed; though it is true, that not a few after, when their heart was touched by the word, fell more of from hearing of such, upon so discernible difference, they found among them, and the Non conformed Ministers. (2.) That here is no dark or controverted case, in our Church, as to the evill and dreadfulnesse of Prelacy, and of any accession to strengthen that interest, but that wherein we are explicitly sworn to by the oath of God, to endeavour, in our severall places and stations, the extirpation of, and thus, should be pressed to keep at furthest distance from any tendency, to strenthen the same; yea, while such severe acts and threatenings of the Councill, hath been issued out there upon, does make this the more a case of confession, tho they should be easily satisfied this day if all should forbear to hear the indulged. (3.) That forbearance now to hear the Curats, is in a case, wherein the previous cognition, and authoritative judgment of the Church of Scotland, and generall assemblies thereof, hath by a judiciall procedure, been so expresse and full thereanent; yea, though not the same individuall persons, yet in the very same case, conformity to Prelacy hath been upon a clear, publick, and judiciall tryall, most solemnly judged and sentenced, by the indicatories of our Church; which sheweth the great dispa∣rity betwixt this, and a few private persons, taking on them, to judge and sentence their Brethren, upon a practise under such debate this day, among the most seriously godly in the land, yea, this in expresse opposition to the judgment of most of the Non-conformists in our Church. (4.) This discernible difference is here also, and may be convincing to all, as we are on all hands so fully one in acknowledging of the truth, as we can debate these sad differences among us, upon common prin∣ciples which are mutually consented to, and does not divide in the same center, whilst by the Conformists there is so publick and professed among of Prelacy, as both there principles and practise are stated in ane expresse opposition. (5.) It is unde∣nyable likewayes, that the intrusion of most of such as are Conformists, amongst these where they fixed, can have no place here; since, so far as I know, none that accepted the indulgence, have wanted some expresse call from, and consent of both the Eldership and people, and however, that act of the Councell was antece∣dent thereto, yet, were they neither commanded nor obliged, to any election of these more then of others, by that act; but hath it left to their own consent, whether to call them or not. (6.) Nor can it be said, that such who were indulged, (ex∣cept these who hath that liberty to their own congregations) did come under any further relation, but to exerce their Ministry there, upon mutuall consent, where they had more free and peacable accesse, and without prejudice, to any former re∣lation, or tye, to their congregations. Lastly I must further adde, with some astonishement at what is declared intent of these arguments, adduced there that it is to vindicate the practice of such as scruple to own or hear any indulged Ministers, & thus to fix them who were bot hesitant before, to a fur∣ther falling of from the hearing of such, the tendency of which & whether this would lead, I must judge hath not been apprehended or advented to, and that these sad conse∣quences would necessarily fallow thereon; first to lay a stumbling block in the way of many thousands of the people, who had no such scruple herein so far as to prejudge, & weaken their edification by their Ministry; yea thus frustrat that success and fruit their work of the Gospell might have; and Oh! must the scrupling of some few be thus publickly vindicated, at so dear a rate as the too visible hazard of so many
immortall souls in taking them either wholly off or marring their profit in the publick ordinances dispensed by so many able, and serious Ministers of Christ; and how very sad a consequence is this also to fix perpetuat a formed rent in the Church, by laying thus down dividing principles (I must say not according to the doctrine of Christ that we have receaved) to salve a dividing practice, which otherwise we might hope, should have ere now worn out; but there they expresly fix the unlawfulness of hearing any of these, so long as that case exist of their being indulged except upon that supposall which I hope through grace shall never take place of there being no preaching Ministry els in the whole Church, and thus doeth lay down a new rule, and precedent buit with that disadvantage that I humbly judge its greatest weight, and inforcement most be from the authority of the imposers, though of such ane import as upon the matter it is noe less then to sentence; yea, some way unchurch all these congregations who own & adhere to their Ministry. I thought it a grave remark of a choise and eminent Minister of Christ, in thir late times upon this head; I could, sayes he, relate many sad stories of persons professing godliness, who out of dislike begane at first to separate from our Church meetings, and after many changes are turned now some Quakers, some Ranters and Atheists, these are his very words with this reason he did give thereof, that such as fall off from the publick worship are like a Man tumbling down a hill that never leaves, till he come to the bottom. SECTION III. BUt that there may be, upon such sad differences, a right understanding of the question, and a moving on clear grounds; which hath been rendered so perplex & dark, by to visible essayes, for making things seem greater then they are: I must come more near, to touch this present controversy; and Oh! what can this meane, the poor Church all in a flame, yea, almost to a being utterly broke, and the cause so litle understood, but many thus thrusting at others in the dark, and I am sure, when mens eyes shall be opened, and these muddy waters become clear, that such, as shall be keept from a being swallowed up, in that whirlepit of error, and delu∣sion; will then wonder, how their spirits should have been thus entangled, in so high breakings, and animosities, on such a ground as this; and be enforced to see, that it was not so much, upon the matter of any difference, in light, and judgment, as a dividing spirit, which in the holy righteousnesse of God, is now too much aloft: this is indeed, a great and boisterous winde, which is renting the poor Church, but the Lord is not there; except that wee may see it, one of the saddest tokens of his displeasure. But, since on a clear stating of this controversy, the issue, and a right judging thereof, necessarily depends; and that we may understand, wherein the present difference does mostly; I shall offer some important questions, on this account, to be considered. QUEST. I. What the indulgence is? About which, so high, and continued a breach, is thus in our Church: for I have found a strange noise and clamor, by some, upon this account, who did not yet understand, what this truly was; besides,
that astonishment that it causeth to strangers abroad, about what the Church of Scot∣land, is this day, in such a flame. I shall give but this short, and plain account of it. It was ane order, and appointment of the Magistrate, to some Non-con∣formed Ministers, who were expresly named; to repaire to such places, and re∣maine there confined; permitting, and allowing them to preach, and exerce the others parts of their ministeriall function, in the said respective places, or parishes, where they were thus confined. This is the very substance, of the last act of in∣dulgence, of date Sept. 3. 1672. and the former Act of Indulgence, which preceeded some years before that, being upon the matter, one, and the same, only without any sentence of Confinement, I need not further mention, that about the acceptance of this, there was some difference in judgment, amongst the most serious both Chri∣stians and Ministers in our Church, and with some free, plain, and tender com∣muning among themselfes, upon such ane account; but, I may say, without any designed tendency, to any such breach, as some of late have made it their very work to promote. QUEST. II. It may be needfull to know, how far there is yet, ane undeny∣able onnesse and agreement, among the true Non-conformed Ministers, and Profes∣sours of our Church, notwithstanding of this present difference, about the accept∣ing of the Indulgence, to which I must answer, in these few. (1.) That we are one, in a joint confession, and publick owning of the same doctrine, worship, and Government, as formerly: whatever by all of us, should be sadly regrated, as to the want of that freedome, in such a publick testimoy thereto, before Adversa∣ries; as these sad encroachments hath been made, upon the Government of the Church, established by our blessed Head and Master, did in this day require. (2.) That whatever hath been thus wanting in practise, (Oh! that we could truly mourn over the same) yet, are we still one, and agreed upon both sides, in a de∣clared, and, I hope, serious disowning, both Prelacy, and Erastianisme as con∣trary to the Scripture. (3.) In this also are we one, that whatever the Magistrate hath assumed; yet, that he hath no just right and power, or is in the least proper for him, to judge of the spirituall condition and state of the people, as to the fitted∣nesse of Ministers for labouring amongst them; and thus to make application of per∣sons to particular places, for the exercise of their Ministry there; which is alone proper and competent, to the ordering and cognition of the Church; this, so far, as I know, is upon no side either owned or approven. (4.) Herein likewayes, doe we jointly agree, that to none it belongs, but to our blessed Head and Lawgiver, to prescribe, and give rules to his servants, for the exercise of their Ministry; and that these rules, we can only own and acknowledge, which he hath given, for the same, to us, in the Scripture. QUEST. III. I know it is of greatest weight, now to be considered, and, wherein the state of this controversy much lyes; if there be ground, or warrant from the Scripture, and doctrine of the Reformed Churches, to break of Church com∣munion with these who have accepted of this late Indulgence, and refuse such as the Ministers of Christ, and by his autority, dispensers of the mystery of the Gospell, upon this present difference, now held forth. I know, they doe not assert in that History of the Indulgence, this to be simpliciter sinfull, to hear either such, or the Curats, but it is only in case, that no preaching Ministry were else in the land; otherwayes doth most expresly allow, and warrant a forbearing to hear such, as these, who
hath fallen under no lesse, then a judiciall forfeiture of their Ministry, in so far, as they have accepted of that Indulgence: and herein, doth in effect impose upon the conscience of the people, to rack and disquiet their minde; so as many through fear and ignorance upon this account, knowes not what to doe. Now to this question, I must give this plain and expresse answer, that it seemes a most convincingly sinfull, and offensive practise, without any just cause, or warrant followed; which, I here offer, to demonstrate, from these following grounds. I. That no Scripture command, or warrant is for the same, from the example of our blessed Lord, nor was ever taught by his Prophets, & Apostles, & therefore ane unjust and offensive rent. I hope, this none dar debate, that the Scripture is the alone instrument, and Rule of Church Government, and to this Law, and Testimony, we must take ourselfes, under every debateable case theranent; yea that any mini∣steriall power given to us, is only executive, and declarative, to apply the revealed will of the Lord unto his people, by a clear discovery thereof; and what is not ac∣cording to that rule, none may admitt, though under the patrociny of ane Angell: but that, for this practise we have no Scripture warrant, is most clear. (1.) From the example of our blessed head himself, while he was here, upon the earth, and that respect, he did expresly own to the prescribed worship, of the Jewish Church; yea, that such was his blessed way, as no visible rent was by disciples, from the publick ordinances, even then, when the dreadfull declinings of that Church, was so great a length. (2.) We see what both the Prophets and Apostles taught, and what was their practise in this case, that as on the one hand, they sought to keep the people at furthest distance from all idolatry and false worship; so upon the other hand did give no warrant, but expresly to the contrary, as to any departure from the publick worship, where it was not corrupted, notwithstanding of these sad declinings of the Church otherwise; and I crave any to shew ane instance to the contrary. (3.) Nothing can be more evident, then the care the Apostle had to keep the Church of Corinth from dashing on such a rock, to such as doe but seriously read and consider these Epistles: nor doth our blessed Master, to the seven Churches, give the least ground or warrant, as to any falling of, or secession, from the publick assemblies, notwithstanding of so sad a charge, as is there given against some of these Churches: but we may see, how concerned the Apostle was against this, as one of the publick evills and scandalls, then breaking up in the Church, Heb. 10: 25. the forsaking of the assemblies, for the publick worship of God, as the manner of some was then: and Oh! what can it mean? thus to rack the consciences of the people, and impose such new terms and conditions of Church communion, as neither the Scrip∣ture, nor examples of the purest Reformed Churches since the Apostles time, did ever warrant; for which, I must here humbly challenge, any, who are otherwise minded, to let us see, where the signature of one Scripture command is, for what they impose; or what divine precept is violated by hearing the indulged; or if such a cure, and remedy, was ever taught by the great healer, as this practise, of admit∣ting no composure and uniting in controverted duties, untill there be a full onnesse of judgment among us; or thus to break and disquiet a poor Church, (as though some had no work else) almost outwearied with these sad, and perpetuall contendings, for making void their Ministry, which hath been and, I hope, yet shall be owned of the Lord for his peoples edification. II. Ground, to demonstrate the unwarrantablenesse of this practise, is this; that
it is expresly contrare to that established order of Christ in his Church, as the proper re∣medy, and releife, for any publick offences, Matt. 18: 15. and which is so ex∣presse a rule given in this case, as can admit of no alteration; as also to that, 1 Cor. 14: 40. that all things should be done in order and decency: nor can there be any hesita∣tion herein, whether this practise and way, which is thus taken by some, does not controll the same; thus to withdraw, and impose (upon the matter) so high and publick a censure on others, by their private judgment and authority, except they will adventure to determine on the rule, and these ancient Scripture bounds which are there set to us; but as it is sure, the things of Christ, must be by his warrant only, & no latitude else given us, but to observe he whatsoever commands Mat. 28 last: yea, that no healing or cure will ever be to the Church, but by his appointed means; so it is undenyable, that to withdraw from Church fellowship, in such a manner as this, is a most high and spirituall censure. Yea, not to eat with a scandalous Brother, must be understood as ane act of judgment, and does suppose some previous tryall, else, there should be no fixed rule; but for each to be his own judge in pulling of his Brother to shame; and, thus no bounds could be fixed, to prevent endlesse breakings and rents in the Church. Its true, a publick releife is not, as formerly, now accessible, but as there is yet, through grace, a faithfull Ministry in our Church, who hath the authority of Jesus Christ, to cognosce and judge of the matters of his house, and to whom, the power of the keyes, both of doctrine and discipline, is by his own warrant committ, (whatever essayes hath been, and still are, to make such contemptible before the people, yea, some way, I must say, no lesse thus to exauctorate them, and controll their commission this day, then hath been by pu∣blick Adversaries.) So is there also, some sutable exoneration that each Christian may have, in the case of publick offence, (when there is not such accesse by the Church) to spread forth the same before the Lord, to endeavour in their capacity and station how to convince, gain, and restore such with the spirit of meeknesse, and thus use personall freedome and tendernesse in dealing with others; wherein, I am sure, both more peace, and advantage to these they deall with, should be thus reached; then by any such highly disorderly way, and unwarrantable severity, as is now adventured on by some. III. Ground, to clear the unwarrantablenesse of this practise, is, that it is so ex∣presly contrare to that approven and commended practise in the Church, Rev. 2: 2. that they hath tryed such who called themselfes Apostles, and were not, but had found them lyars; where as it is most clear that this was a judiciall tryall, and in a legall and or∣derly way, of such, before any declarative sentence, and for this end is adduced by the greatest interpreters, to prove the necessity thereof, but this, as I have for∣merly touched, can give no advantage, in that case of the Conformists, to Prelacy, where besides other grounds mentioned, the antecedent judgment of our Church, hath been so full, clear, and harmonious, there upon: whilst I touch this, I must cite the words and authority of blessed Mr Rutherfurd, in his divine right of Church Government page 378. We grant, sayes he, that each should eschew false Teachers, and all that walk inordinatly, but that every one, should shun these, whom in his private judgment he conceives to be such, before he rebuke, and labour to gaine, and in case of obstinacy, then to tell the Church, is forbid∣den Mat. 18. and Lev. 19: 19. for if this sayes he, should be allowed, that I might unbrother, and cast out of heart and fellowship, every one whom I offend at,
and conceaves to walk inordinatly; were first a pathway to perpetuall Schismes. 2. A violation of all Laws of Christian fraternity and communion. 3. A dissolving and breaking all Church communion; and, it is strange, sayes he, that some would have Christs order keeped, in private offences done by one Brother to another, and not the same in publick offences where one may offend a whole Church. IV. Ground, this is a practise which is stated against the very rule, nature, and end of Church communion, in falling of from hearing upon that head of the indulgence, which may be demonstrable to any on these grounds. (1.) That according to this rule, the sin nor notoriely of corruption in Church offices, does not corrupt or defile the ordinances, because these are the ordinances of Christ; otherwayes they should have a necessary dependance on, and be of more or lesse value according to the dis∣pensers: but I grant, that may detract from our joy and comfort in partaking there∣of, which yet does no way reach the validity of the ordinances. (2.) That it is sure, sad differences both in judgment and practise in the Church, may be consi∣stent with the nature and ends of that blessed unity, which Christ doth require there, and with a keeping of from partaking of the sin of others. (3.) That Church Acts even of these, who are not Pastors according to Gods heart, tho externally called, may be to themselfes unprofitable, and yet edifying to the Hearers; nor can a grei∣ving and offensive practise make their authority or acts void, since such may have au∣thority, who have not approbation from the Lord, in dispensing his ordinances; and will any adventure to say, that Jesus Christ hath either disowned, or withdrawen from the Ministry of our Brethren who are thus deserted by many; which, I con∣fesse, is to me both sad and astonishing, to see many now withdraw, and rather keep their own house, then concurre in publick worship with such, where Christ in the power and efficacy of his word is yet to be seen; if this be the cure, that some pretends for our present distemper, I must say, its more sad then the disease. (4.) If Church fellowship be truly understood, it will not be so easy to break of there, as many judged, since all other safe meanes must needs be first essayed; nor may we fasten a publick scandall on others, especially upon officers of the Church, without the furthest advantage to make it evident both to themselfes, and convincing even to the conscience of others, 1 Tim. 5: 19. it is not a privilege of order only, but of office, that Ministers have to speak in the name of the Lord, who hath said, he that de∣spiseth you, despiseth me; and to reject such, is a higher guilt, then to reject the same word in the mouth of a private Christian, for they are the Messengers of the Lord of hosts, and bears his impresse. (5.) This is a practise, as hath therewith a fixing of such terms and conditions of Church communion, which hath not been, nor can be found in any preceeding records, since the times of the Apostles; and I judge it on speciall cause of these sad breakings now among us, and that so many contend as them that beat the air; their mistake and ignorance of the true nature, and rule, of externall communion in the Church; for if this should be considered, upon clear Scripture evidence, as it was in the first planting of the Christian Church, I should not then fear any publick rent on this late difference; and that which is a necessary condition of Church communion, I hope, must plead some Scripture warrant for its imposition. I know some will plead, that this is but a departure in some degree, of Church-fellowship, which is both a poor and unwarrantable Apology; since both the rule is thus far deserted, and no ground to know where they may fix af∣ter;
but we have to visible ane account this day, where this sad course hath al∣ready landed. V. Ground, that is sad a and unwarrantable practise, which tends to cause division in the Church, contrary to the doctrine we have receaved, Rom. 15. which, I am sure, may be to evident, pretend any to the contrarie what they will, upon these grounds. (1.) That whatever was the first rise, or occasion of the offence, cannot be owned as the proper cause of such a formed rent, as this now is; since most sad offences hath been without any such effect, especially when it was more upon practise, then on any principles of truth; and the killing of a patient by poy∣son, through mistake of the true medicine, can never be charged on this, that the body was before in a sad distemper; nor a misapplication of the meanes to cure a wound, when it hath caused a gangren in the body, be justly charged on the first giving of the wound, since this otherwayes might have been safely healed. (2.) We know that for severall years after that accepting of the indulgence, that difference both in jugdment and practise among us, yet did cause no such effect; but the work of the Gospell did then must discernibly prosper, untill such violent essayes these two years now past, hath been for bringing things to such ane extreme. And Oh! from that sad period may be too discernibly dated, some further degree of the Lords departure from among us, and these deplorable effects of much blood, devastation, reproach, weakening of the interest of Religion, strenthening of the hands of Ad∣versaries, beyond all that hath been in former times, and which hath encreased our bonds more, then all our Adversaries could ever doe. (3.) If so severe a stretching of this late difference, and loading of the practise of others, with that which it could not bear; if a carnall and violent way of following this debate, a high crying up of such in whom their own image, more then the image of Christ did appear, and peremtory imposing their judgment, without the least tender condescendence to these that differed from them, doe necessarily tend to engender division in the Church, and have ane undoubted causality from the very nature thereof to this end; then it may be known, yea, (I dare appeall any discerning Christian in the Church) at whose door this must be layed, and who hath most actively moved to put the poor Church in such a flame, and this not upon any principle of truth, which was on either side disowned; but upon contraverted deductions, from a different practise, and application thereof: this may be no lesse amazing, then it is sad, that the way of some now seems more how to dispatch things by censure, and revilings, then by arguments, and by high words and invectives to exulcerate, more then rationally to convince; but a sharp censurer and a self searcher does rarely meet in one, though none more usually needs the tender construction of others, then such; this hath been to known an evill in our Church. VI. Ground, this practise seemes ane expresse violation & breach of Covenant, wherein we are so solemnly engaged before the Lord, which, I know not, how any possibly can evade, when we are no lesse solemnly engaged there, against Schism, then either Prelacy or Erastianisme; and, if this be not ane unwarrantable Schism, and renting of the Church, I know no such charge could have been given against any since the primitive times, and that on these grounds. (1.) That by Schisme is not to be un∣derstood a dividing from the doctrine, but from the communion of the Church, and that it tends to a disyointing from the body, thus we finde, even in the most pure times of the Church, these put in a peculiar class, and looked on with no lesse dread
and fear, as such, who did oppose the doctrine of the Church; and it is but to manifest, that in all times, the most destroying errors hath been still grafted on this stock, whilst on the other hand, the more near fellowship with our blessed head is keept up, and where the life and power of godlinesse is much in exercise, the more hath this sad rock been keept of; as the more near the lines are to the center, the more near are they, and close to one another. (2.) It is clear also from the Apostles dealing with the Church of Corinth, and about which he used such sharpnesse that they took a divided way of communicating and going about other duties, as tending to make a breach and Schism then, in that Church, whatever gave the rise thereto: se 1 Cor. 11: 18, 19. yea, does thus rebuke them, not only that some said they were of Paull, and others of Apollos, but even these that said they were of Christ, so far as this upon the manner was in a contentious and divided way, since of him, and him alone must the whole Church be named. (3.) It hath not hetherto been under debate, from the Scripture, and doctrine of the Reformed Church thereannent, to be ane unquestionable Schisme, where there is a departure from that union in the publick worship and ordinances of the Gospell in which they had formerly walked, and thus a dividing and designed falling off from the same, without any just cause or warrant from the Scripture, to a publick disturbance of that order appointed by Christ in his house, yea contrary to that commanded love, tenderness, prudence and for∣bearance so expresly required of Church members towards one ane other, and to his blessed authority who has so clearly warranted such a forbearing with these, as in some things may be contrary minded, upon different apprehensions of the truth, so far as both love amongst themselfes, the publick peace of the Church, may not be thus disturbed; it is sure the choisest of the saints doeth carry to heaven with them, both errors, mistakes and prophesieing in part, and some overclouding must still be of the brightest stares while they shine here; Oh! if that now which is the present cause of these differences were but once brought to that rule of the word should it not in∣force many to be a wonder to themselfes at the strange way they have been upon, and whether they have been carried in this deplorable rent of whose seriousness otherwise I doe not question. VII. Ground, this is a practise contrary to most expresse Scripture commands, for forbearance and condescendence among the godly in breaking times, which we may not only see, Rom. 14: 3, 4, 5. Eph. 4: 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 9: 19. 20. but that it was for this end the Spirit of God doe enjoine the same, that there may be no breach or rent in the Body of Christ, about which he hath so tender a care, and is such a forbearance, as we finde expresly commanded in this very case, upon a controverted practise of the Church, and difference of judgment therein, whatever upon the one side might be more cul∣pable herein then upon the other, as is clear in that debate about meats, 1 Cor. 11. and Oh! what can it mean? Whiles both our duty and remedy doth here meet at once, yet, this should have so litle weight with us, at this day: for if such a commanded forbearance can have no place among these who are one and agreed in this same prin∣ciples even in the point controverted, and only differ in the application, yea are mutually perswaded of others sincerity; I know no place then it could have ever had, since there was a Christian Church: which hath put me to some astonish∣ment, what the peremtory way of some can intend, and to obstruct ane union in the way of the Lord only fought, without ceding in any truth, or being put to con∣demn any thing they judge lawfull, or approve what they judge sinfull, in the way
of others; and if this be denyed, I would desire then to know what sinfull com∣plyance, or yeelding in any concerne of the truth, can be herein challenged; or if such a suteable essay hash yet been for a tender, serious communeing, with such they keep so great a distance with; to meet and concurre in what are uncontroverted duties in such a day. But oh! the temper of this time seems more now in passion than argument, which is so naturall and pleasing an evill, as the most expresse autho∣rity of the Scripture is not like to restraine. I must adde this further to be considered, if such a departure from Church fellowship should be admitdon this head of the late indulgence, and the discretive judgment, of any (which can only be pretended here) stretched to such a hight as without the Church to impose this, which is of so publik and universal concerne on the con∣science of the people, these consequences of greatest import must need follow. 1. To breake up Church fellowship and communion with most all the Reformed Churches this day; yea is a caice and practice under these circumstances it is now stated, as will finde no precedent, even from such, who have formerly most pleaded for sepa∣ration who did never own this on any such ground as a different practice, upon va∣rious apprehensions thereof, among such who are most intirely one in the same doctrine and principles. 2. This also must follow to withdrauw from Fellowship in hearing of the most choice and eminent Non-conforme Ministers now in the Church of England, whose liberty they had for a peaceable accesse to their publick meetings some years now past, was of that same nature, and in als expresse termes one with this indulgence. Yea it must necessarily tend like wayes to fall of communion in publick with the whole Ministry of the Belgick Church, which to the furthest conviction of any who will question this can be demonstrat on clearest ground. 3. Nothing can be more evidently contrair then this practice is to the known judgments of the old Non-conformists, yea of such who have been most eminent both in the Churches of Old and New-England of the congregational judgment, whose tender respect to guard against any dashing on such a rock as this, they have published to the world, which I forbear to set down here only to avoide prolixity. But I must yet speak a few words more on this so important a caice, and obtest (I hope I may say with most tender respect) such who in some simplicity of heart hath been carried so strainge a length in these differences, and may not be aware of the hazard, and on what a precipice they are thus led to consider. 1. If ther be no caus to fear, lest theyr resolution be fixt before their light, and a serious tryall of theyr way, and motion herein, since the sincerity of our aime can make none approven in that where a declining is in the matter from the rule. 2. And that the example and authority of none can bear weight with the conscience upon an after search of what they have done, sinc each must prove his own worke, yea it is sure non would take poy∣sone upon the credit or repute of others, nor can the wisdom of words add any weight to the word of truth. 3. Is there not much cause to fear (that without preventing grace) division is at such a height, as it shall at last end in dissolution. Julian knew this to well, when as one of the greatest means he followed for the undoing of Chri∣stianity was not only to tollerat but to foment differences among Christians. 4. And what can such fore breakings as these mean, for sure it is one of two that either we do not center in Christ, and are unite by the same spirit with him, or that we are thus under some dreadfull prevalence of temptation; It is not the lines that are streight but such as are drawn crooked from the center, which do justle and tread on other.
5. Should it not be a strainge contradiction, for a profest contending, upon the Kingdom, and supremacy of our blest head, over his Church; by a visible controlling of the authority of his Laws over our conscience and practice, and can this be under debate where there is so sad an exceeding of these Scripture bounds sett to us, in mutuall contendings in such differences as these now are, for which, I shall but offer these express commands given in such a caice to be considered which I may say could not possibly but restraine any such rupture and schisme now in our Church, if some suteable weight thereof were on our spirits; Phil. 2: 3. Eph. 4: 31. Rom. 14. 3, 4. James 3. vers. 6. Hath not in all times the Churches hazard been more from the right then the left hand, and from such a party as lyes in ambush to enter at every breach; I mean the spirit of errour and delusion, than from open assaults yea is there any mean could have been essayed more sad for the opening such a door, then this to divide the Church, and godly among themselfs. 7.  whither hath this tyde carried some, I am sure much beyond their own thoughts and what deplorable effects have thus been of late in so strainge a keeping this breach up with these who are partakers of the same precious faith, and when much more is yet to unite, then to dis∣joine, shall there yet be further dashing on such a rock whereon so remarkable a beacon in these known sad and dismall consequences hes been set up before us, yea no essay for a binding up of such wounds which are now like to bleed unto death. 8. What strange pleasure must it be that is more in bitter contendings (I fear) then to live in the practise of these great truths we know; or what true gain can be thus projected for our masters interest; it is sur such a delight, sould be greatest paine to any serious, and tender spirit. Yea have not such intemperat heats yet spent their strengh under these strange chainges which have of late gone over, as might have brought some sutable cool atlast to this fever. 9. Are professors of the truth in such a manner now prest to adorne the profession thereof, as formerly, and under such a weight how great, great a thing it is for any to be eternally saved though never more cause to walk under fear of this, then in the present age, or where moe in a way of profession, and with much of the forme of godliness hath been in hazard to perish, and come short of heaven, yea with lesse accesse to be convinc'd or to bear faithful dealling with their conscience then seems now; and do but consider whom yow prejudge most in withdrawing from the Ministry of these, who I hope shall be ouned of the Lord as his messingers to the Church and darre own no other resentment both of greife and sorrow upon the visible hazard of such as seem not to be awarre thereof them∣selves. 10. Yow know that expresse command of watching with a godly jealousy against any strainge doctrine, Heb. 13: 3. and it's but too known how eager a grasping is by many more at what seems new and strange, then what may edify; nor hath such oft apprehended the hazard of some plausible error, untill it came to a more formed complexion, as is now. 11. What advantage is thus given to the Prelatick party for that charge of separation against the whole Non-conformists this day, and though with clearest evidence we can evince the injustnesse thereof; yet knows not how to ansuer on your behalf when we are reproved. 12. Are we not both called and taught, to trye the spirits whither they be of God, by clearest Scripture light: and that the impulse and motions of the spirit of grace, must assuredly tend to compose and sanctify the whole frame of the soul with a humble tender submisnesse to the tryall of the word herein, and is it not expresly shewed what the fruits of the spirit and flesh are. Galat. 21. 22. 2 Tim. 1. 2. 3. vers. and how farre the way of the Lord is from
any irregular or impetuous courses; yea such as may seem incompatible with the very use and exercise of reason. These words of Luther in the second tome of his epistles, ar of much weight: sayes he in your tryal and decerning the spirits ye would trye whither they can prove their calling in what is strange or extraordinary either in their judgment or practice, for God never sent any but they were either called by men, in his appointed way, or declared by signes, no not his own son, and in no wayes, may we accept the calling of any upon such a warrant of some singular impulses or revelation. I must yet beseech this further, to be layd to heart; that if any thing can be known by its native and visible effects, we may then read in greatest Letters, what a Babel of confusion and disorder, with dividing both of hearts and tongues hath followed on this late astonishing rent, and Schisme in our Church, yea when thus taken off any certaine rule, for hearing and joining in the publick Ordinances, knowes not where to finde themselfs, or to be in one measure in such a caice. I desire to speake this with a tender respect to such, who I darre not question hath had a serious regard to the truth yet hath not been awarre of the subtilty of this snare, and with hope that upon serious after thoughts some more fixt uniting both in judgment and heart may yet follow amongst all who are indeed lovers of the truth, in our Church; with some more suiteable fear to dash againe on such a rock; yea to see how true and sweet a consistence, may be betwixt Zeal and fervency for the Lord, and that humble fear and tendernesse in our private judgment in such a difference, as this, where on no side the truth is denyed; so as to keep of any publick rent in the Church. QUEST. IV. Which may be yet needful to touch on these late publick differences, if it be either matter of duty, or expedient and for edification, to bring these in pu∣blick and engadge the people therein; and if some forbearance thus by Ministers of the Gospel, be not in such a time and under these circumstances we stand, called for. For clearing of which, I hope there is no debate; upon that great duty of a faithful and free wairning against publick sins, and though with a suiteable prudence, yet im∣partially to apply the rule against them, and to shew both the duties and dangers of the time; but I humbly judge, no justleing will be found here, with a tender ab∣stinence and forbearance in such a caice as this, where a different judgment and practice is now, amongst the most serious godly and faithful Ministers, in our Church who yet does so jointly concurre and are one in the same truth; upon these grounds. 1. That this can not be pleaded as a publick Testimony to the truth; as it thus reflects on the practice of their Brethren, with whom they differ on whom no disouning or opposing of the same. Without the furthest breach of charity can be thus fixt; nor is this before any such as are the known and publick adversaries thereto, or upon any visible hazard, Luke 21: 12. When you shall be brought before Kings and ru∣lers for my names sake, this shall turne to you for a testimony, but I must say the ten∣dencie of such ordinare and publick reflections is rather like to darken the credit and beauty of so great and honourable an appearance, as a Testimony indeed for the truth is; and if these necessare requisites thereto, according to the Scripture, were this day more understood, there could not be so ordinare a pretending of this. 2. I would know wherein this way is usefull or expedient to most of hearers who can so little judge on these things. We are indeed called to declaire the whole counsell of God, Acts. 20: 27. But this is most evidently qualified by the same Apostle, verse 20. that he kept nothing back hereof which might be profitable for them, and thus expresly showes what bounds Ministers hath sett herein by the holy Ghost in their
delivering of the message of God to his Church that it be not only truth but such as may be for the edification of these they preach to. 3. Since it is clear that positive duties do not binde ad semper. and no cause can be now pleaded in this caice for guarding against any present snare or hazard to the Church should not the inconve∣nience which the contentious keeping up of these differences may occasion have more weight with us which the Apostle so sharply rebukes, 1 Cor. 11: 16. But if any seem to be contentious we have no such custome nor in the Church of God; and oh! that the losse and gaine herein were more impartially weighted, what both the Lucrum cessans and Damnum emergens hath been this way. 4. And is this so small a thing as may seem to some, to bring in publick, and before the Church so high a charge of Era∣stianisme and defection from the truth against these their Brethren who are thus as expressely pointed at as they were named, since it is sure there can be no publick re∣buke and admonition before the people as this most evidently is, but as a publick Church censure and juridical act of Discipline, yea which is no lesse manifest then that of excommunication, and if so publick a violation of that order which our blessed head hath expressely fixt for his Church, be so lightly regarded; where are we. Nor can this be, pretended as a doctrinal reproof which is such an applying of the rule against sins of the time must as stil leave the particular application thereof to their own conscience who are thus guiltie, without any expresse designing of particular persones, where no judicial procedour and conviction by the Church hes gone before, but here is a most publick and expresse fixing of so sad a scandal even before the Church, against so many particular Ministers of the Gospel (who are still labouring in the vineyard of the Lord) as if they were designed by name. 5. And are not these un∣questionable requisites for a publick reproofe, not only their calling thereto, that it be orderly, and upon clearest evidence but that this be not exposed to any prejudicate exception, from their way who do thus reprove, which may be on too just ground feared this day that some have put themselves out of the furthest capacitie to edifie by any such mean, from their own unsuteable manageing hereof. 6, What if these who are thus so openly reflected upon should take the same freedom for publick con∣tradiction? Wherein would this quickly resolve, but a furder growing scandall, to ruine the Church and make way for the endlesse debatings, which as the Apostle showes does rather engender Questions then any godly edifying in the faith. We know the Apostle Paul withstood Peter to the face, but it is observable on what ground it was stated, that when Peter knew the differences then amongst these of the Jews and Gentiles who beleeved was such as should cause no rent or dividing the∣reon; yet to please the Jews had withdrawn and separat from fellowship with the be∣leeving Gentiles, yea that this rent was like to grow so as Barnabas also was drawn into the same dissimulation and thus a sad and ruining breach like to follow. 7. Should we not be to the furthest tender of unsettling of the spirits of the people when so much allready shaken and in that manner now racked and tossed to and fro with every winde of Doctrine as many are like to losse all persuasion of the truth, yea when it is so hard and all most impossible to keep some within any bounds; and whilest thus the triumph of adversaries and strengthening the hands of the ungodly upon such strainge reflections, brought in publick, does visibly gaine ground; and what interest can be thus pretended for the Church of Christ in so publick a going to Law with their Brethren before so watching an adversary, whose strength must needs lye in our breach. 8. Is not also the bringing things thus to such an extream, of
that visible tendencie, as to bring under question the validitie of their Ministerial acts amongst the people, by so publick a thrust at the credit and repute of their Ministry, which is so far an exposing of many to the hazard both of atheisme and errour, besides the weakening such in the publick work of the Lord, who are so known able Ministers of Christ. I shall adde no further but a humble and serious appeal to their own con∣science, who may have judged this their duty, if on deeper reflection hereon; a tender abstinence and forbearance this way and to keep of any dashing on such a rock as hath been allready touched, untill light and conviction from the Lord yet further break up should not be their own peace, and comfort as well as the publick peace of the Church in that day when their eyes shall become dim, and the keepers of the house begin to tremble. SECTION IV. WHen such sad use is now like to be made of these times, as to give the truth and credit thereof (which above all things should be dear to us) a Deaths wound, were it possible, by reproach; I hope it will not be incongruous to such a subject, to speak yet a few words more; for answering some high pretences for pre∣judice and stumbling, which seem now most publickly to be owned yea not only thus to break and undo themselves but to involve others in the same ruine; Not that the truth needs the witness or respects of men to commend the same▪ which as the sun in it's strength keeps its course amidst all the dark clouds which can interveen; but in a day of such blasphemy and reproach, we should require justice at the barre of mens own conscience herein, if there can be any cause for stumbling at the holy and unspotted wayes of the Lord, but what is from themselfs, and from their seeking after such a latitude in their principles, as might sure that liberty, which they take thus in their practice. Now with some respect their to, I shall offer these eight grounds which are at this day most pretented. 1. These strange intestine conflicts and Differences in judgment that we are now in the Church, and among professors of the truth as though they were not the Children of the same house, for ANSWER, I hope these things when seriously pondered may silence any such reflection on the way of truth, which I shall but leave to mens con∣science. 1. That our blest Lord hath with clearest evidence layd down such sure and fixt grounds, in his own word for the peace and concord of his Church, and fol∣lowers, with these expresse rules and provision for the same as there can be no known ground for such sad and deploreable breakings, but what mens own corrup∣tion and declining from the rule doth occasion. 2. It is must clear that one of the greatest of the Lawes of God to which with the furthest reiterat inforcements our obedience is required for preventing the Churches hazard on this rock, is that Law of charity, and love, for the Godly amongst themselves, so as without this he will accept no mans service, 1 Cor. 13. And is such the Apostle presses, above all things to put on charity; which is the bond of perfection, Coloss. 3: 13, 14. 3. I hope it is un∣denyable also that these principles of union and love are so firmely fixt, as might be consistent both with some various apprehensions, and difference in judgment amongst
his people here, who are unite in himself and in the great concerns of truth and godlyness, so as upon such an accompt the peace and concord of his Church should not be suspended, since it is here we know but in part; and as all have not the same helps, so not the same capacity for understanding of many things, which may cause some dif∣ference in the Church. Not that we should think opinions are free, or errors in judg∣ment not to be seriously watched against als well as corruption in practice since it is not only through sanctification of the spirit, but beleef of the truth we are appointed to life. 4. For this end likewayes hath our blest head set such bounds and measures to his people in the manageing of these differences which may fall in as that there should be no fear of any sad rent or breach where a due respect unto these is had, and to walk according to the rule, and spirit of the gospel, and oh! that these great com∣mands, Rom. 14: 3, 4. Philip. 2: 3. were more seriously pondered, there could not but be some more lawfull regard to keep of such bitter and offensive breakings, as may be oft seen amongst us. 5. Nor is there cause to fear any breach from the most serious and servent contending for the truth, and closse adherence thereto which should be dearer to us then our life and can admitt no latitude or ceding there, when the re∣vealed rule of our duty herein is observed that this be managed with a humble ten∣der condescendence and cedeing in our own things, to one another, for oh! there hath our saddest contests, and a nimosity their greatest strength this day. It were well if such a blest contending, and striving lawfully, as the Apostle shewes were thus studied, that it be in the way of the Lord and by means of his own appoint∣ment; by purenesse, by long suffering, by the word of truth, by the armour of God on the right hadn and on the left &c. And where these are not mens study and practice they must live in an expresse contradiction to these principles which yet they darre not disown, yea in so farre becomes not only a just matter of grief, but a spot in the fel∣lowship of the saints. 6. Whatever sad differences be oft amongst these, which both their darknesse of minde, and contrariety of natural dispositions, may influence, yet does not still that blest unity of the spirit stand fixt and sure, by which the whole race of the saints are unite in a new and spirituall nature, In these sweet & sensible communi∣cations of the spirit, and do all meet in one blest center, yea so near an intercourse of souls and Sympathy does result thence (however the sad prevalence of corruption may for some time darken the same) as no union and concord like this is in all the so∣cities of the earth, and may be such a witness to the truth of christianity, as to silence even the greatest Atheist. 7. Yea may we not have here a special confirming evi∣dence of the certainty of the truth, that notwithstanding of such differences both in judgment, and practice, with so sore prejudice and estrangement of heart and diffe∣rences of naturall temper and disposition of amongst the Godly, yet this hath in∣forced from all these an undoubted assent, to the most great and weighty concerns of religion, yea to a joint acknowledging of the same principle about which some difference may be in the application thereof to some particular caice. 8. I shall but adde, that it's known what sweet harmony and onenesse of heart hath sometimes been among such as did Professe the truth, of all ranks in our Church, and in a fixt adherence to the same cause, and how it was at a sad ebb, that some differences broke up amongst the most eminently godly both Ministers and professors there, for some time on that head of the publick resolutions, though without any formed breach or schisme, but after among such who thus differed, a most sweet con∣cord and concurrence in a joint opposition against prelacy and to suffer rather then
in the least to consent thereto did follow: yea though since amongst the most serious Non-conformists, a greater freedom hath been in the judgment and practice of some, then others, for hearing of Conformists to prelacie, yet so farre as I know hath it been with a due and tender respect, as was suteable, to keep of either dividing or alienation in such a caice: but oh! it must be confest to what a hight have these late confusions, and breaches amongst us come and what fewel this hath been to a great increase of sin; yet is there one ground to hope when almost there seemes no com∣forting signe els, that he who hath seen our wayes, can he all them also, by a marvellous surpriseal of grace. 2. Prejudice it, which is by some highly entertained in these times for their own breaking is the perplexedness and hesitation they are in what way to choice when the truth seems now involved in such a confusion of different judgments and such visible contradictions amongst professors thereof. For Answer, if no thing were to shake or offend there should then be no tryed establishment, yet since this seems one of the saddest diseases of the time in many's being soon saken in minde with such wa∣vering and unsettledness in the truth I must speak a few words thereto to witness what greatest advantage such as desire to walk in the light may have to hold fast the profession of their faith without wavering and for the furthest quiet and assuring of their heart therein on these grounds. 1. That the Scripture is so near, these living oracles of truth, which do with so clear and distinct a sound speake if men had but ears to hear. 2. That the Lord hath given to his people a spirit of discerning in some greater and lesser measure so as to prove all things by a serious personal tryal, yea that none needs receive the truth upon trust or to lean on the authority or example of any herein but to judge their own eyes and conscience should be als faithfull to them as any. 3. He hath given also as a special help a fixt Ministry to his Church yea for this very end Ephes. 4: 14. that we should henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro with every winde of doctrine, and therefor with a divine mission hath given such spiritual gifts as the necessity and service of the Church may require for interpreting and clearing up of what may be the counsel and minde of the Lord to his Church according to his own word. 4. That the most weighty things of re∣ligion both as to faith and practice are not interested in most of these sad contests, which are now amongst but he hath so graciously condescended that what we should most live by should not cost us so dear and that the greatest subtilties and most in∣tricate controversies which are so oft in the Church ye most out of our way, yea such as should cause no trouble or disquiet of minde herein. 5. Is not also most clearly sheued us, how we may know our being led and kept in the way of truth, and what should qualify, and make us meet for the blest conduct and teachings of the spirit by his word, such as a holy fear, and sincere resignation of the soul thereto, meekness, humility with a fixt and serious resolving to close therewith, how crosse however it should be to our own private affection and credit. 6. There is this advan∣tage to know that blest and approven way, wherein we may have peace, as that in which the footsteps of the saints and so innunerable a company, hath gone before who received the spirit this way, and with greatest assurance did know the truth of that seal on their own soul, so as after no new or strange light we need to inquire. 7. And hath not the meanest of the saints these peculiar , and marks whereby to discerne the way of truth in a dark and trying time, by plainest Scripture light, both for clearing and confirming of their minde herein. 1. That we should follow these
things, which tend to peace and to edify Rom. 14. 19. For thus surely does the way of truth tend to build and not to cast doune: and if many caices which some does now agitat, with much disquiet both to themselfs and others, were more brought to that great rule of solid edification, I should not fear that so much time should be lost therein. 2. It is sure the way of truth, must be stil rationally convincing such as doth persuad by teaching, and to fix and clear the judgment before the will, by mani∣festation of the truth to mens conscience for thus we are taught, and be alwayes ready; to render a reason of the hope that is in yow with all meeknesse and fear. 1 Pet. 3. 15. 3. Such is this blest way as it is cautious, and advertant to hazard on each hand, and to guard against the dephts of Satan as well as to resist his fury, a way which lyeth betuixt ex∣treams either on the right or left hand, for thus we are taught 2 Cor. 6. 7. 2 Cor. 11. 14 2 Thess. 2. 2. 4. It is such a way as leadeth us to regard the special varying of a caice, as to some present duty with a due respect and ballancing of circumstances: and to see that the same way at all times is not to be followed in our practice, since what may be most requisite and edifiing some time and in one caice, may be destructive in another, for this hath the Holy Ghost shewed that all things are lawful but not expe∣dient 1 Cor. 10. 23. 5. Thus we may know and discerne the truth and way thereof which is according to godliness, Tit. 1. 1. when it is such as visibly tend, by its power and efficacy on the heart, to heal the distempers of the minde and judgment, and by practical obedience to a more full assurance of understanding in themselves; and may thus see its very native result and tendence, is to make professours of the truth, humble, meek, sober and temperat in their personal conversation, yea tender to provoke or excite the corruption of any. 6. Is ther not this necessare tendence also of the revealed way of truth, to walk wisely towards such as are without Col. 4. 5. and with the furthest tender respect to prevent their being further alienat or hardened in their aversion from the way of the Lord, which I must say should be one of the most weighty concerns of a Christians study, for adorning the profession of the Gospel in sueh a day. 7. I shall but add this more, what advantage a christian may thus have for true peace and quiet on such a reflection of having kept guard against any hid personal prejudice or such a byasse which the preingadgment of their judgment in the present caice, and that influence their interest in a divided party might have occasioned, yea thus of some tender respect to the Purity als well as the peace of their own conscience that there may be no private interest or setting up of such a stumbling block before their eyes as to darken their judgment herein. 3. Ground which I fear in these times may be much made use of by many for their own stumbling is that strange spirit and to visible eruptions of pride, bitterness and passion with which these contests and differences in judgments amongst professours of the truth are so oft followed. For Answer whatever sad occasion be thus given of offence, yet can there be none for taking prejudice or any reflecting thus on religion except men will put out the very eyes both of their reason and conscience, when it is so clear 1. How visible a contradiction any such sad appearances of pride, bitternesse and wrath are to the designe and intent of the Gospel, which is for the furthest self abasing, to subdue and mortify such lusts and thus prevent any exorbitancy that way: as that which is not only to adorne a christian walk but is a most essential part of our sancti∣fication: and is not the authority of the rule herein such on their conscience, whom yow may most thus challenge, as they are even inforced to seek a cover and hiding of these evills, which they know to be their shame, and cannot bear the light being thus
judged in themselfs and so conscious of their deformity. 2. Is not the reliefe also and antidote to so dreadfull a poison most clearly held forth to us, how to watch against this which both hath so subtile and forcible an infection, and deep rooting in mens nature. 3. Or can yow challenge the least shaddow of Latitude, from our blest Lawgiver, and the lawes of his Kingdom, herein, which are so expresse not only against any open eruption of such evills, but against the most secret convoy, and intertainement thereof in the heart, yea that, on no lesse hazrd then of being shut out for ever from that Land, which is above, we must both watch and wrestle against the same; for such is the straite and narrow way, and so many low entries there, as none possibly can get through without a humble, and subdued Spirit, and as little children to receive the Kingdom of God. 4. Can prejudice so farre overcome mens conscience, as not to see the excellency of a Christian spirit, and the undoubted reality thereof, which hath so brightly shined and I hope yet doth (to silence the greatest reproacher) in many convincing examples of humility, meeknesse and in the conquest of their passions and forgiving of injuries, as a convincing witness to the world of ther being thus transformed into his blest image of whom as the great pattern set before us we are to Learne. 5. And should not tenderness and compa∣sion be more suteable then prejudice and stumbling at such a sight yow thus chal∣lenge, when nothing can be more visibly contraire to the very use of reason then any such sad eruption of pride, bitterness, and wrath, which is so sore a disease and a fever of the minde, and causeth such disorder, sad, and tumultuous rysings there, as they are made their own punishment and the very mean to frustrat that end they most follow, yea in no way could more gratify and give the greatest advantage to such they contend with and to put themselfs in the pouer of every one to be∣come their tormentor. 6. Yow little know what sharp and bitter reflections such may oft have on themselfs upon any sad appearance this way or advantage, their corruption hath got under some sad assault, yea such, as even the sense of a sealed pardon on thir soul can not sometimes blunt the sharp edge of this grief and indignation against themselves. 7. And may yow not clearly see what visible detest such are even inforced to have at the appearance of these evills in others; which thus hath a sad outbreaking in their own practice; as convincingly showes their way must contradict both their own judgment and principles. 8. I shall but further adde, what great incitements and clearest discovery doth the Scripture afford, of that blest way, which was never known, nor attaind by nature, how to get such prevailing evills subdued; yea how to improve injuries to the greatest advantage, and thus by overcoming, to gaine the most glorious and desireable victory and revenge, on such who have injured them, by humble and tender forbearance, and what a sueet facility might be found this way, when the first wave, and assault is whose once broke and resisted but greatest strength still lyes in the first assault. 4. Ground and pretence for prejudic in these times, is that so little evidence seems of tenderness and a convincing serious practice even in their way who have a name & repute of religion with such abounding offences, as gives occasion not only to question the sincerity of their profession, bot to stumble at the very forme and appearance of godliness. ANSW: though nothing should be more dreadfull then for any to make the truth accessory to their sin, or take thus shelter under its patiociny, yet since it is so great a concern to vindict pure, and undefiled religion, and the spotles rule, and pattern thereof in a day of such reproach, and when any advantage is so eagerly
sought and followed for this end, I would but offer some few things, to plead with their conscience who thus, are in more hazard to undo and break them∣selfes, then to hurt the credit of the truth. 1. If there should not be more to shake and stumble if such offences were not in the Church of Christ when so expressly for∣told as the Scripture els should want a most convincing seall and witness thereto, yea when, thus yow may see that not only an empty show and the hypocrisy of some bot the recorded blemishes and falling of the saints their, to be demonstrative and con∣firming of the truth, als well as the bright est evidences, and lustre of their grace. 2. I confesse it were a suteable inference, for none to engadge with the profession of godliness without the power and how dreadfull a part such acts, who live stangers thereto but how strange, and astonishing were it for such, as are ungodly thus to justify their own way. 3. If yow stumble here, and embrace no religion until yow finde no offences amongst the professours thereof, then ye must have none, but turne Athiest, bot your conscience herein, must needs tell yow (silence it as yow wid) that the truth, and principles of godliness, bindes men over with the greatest tyes and engadgments to holyness, purity, candor and righteousness, even in all our dealing with men, under the severest threatnmgs and oh! must the glory, and honour of the truth, which is according to godliness, thus come under reproach and suffer from the untender, and unansuerable practice of any who profess the same, 4. Can yow posibly debate this (which might both silence and make men ashamed of such a challenge) that under any pretences, which have ever been to religion, in the world it is the doctrine of Christ only, which indispensibly requires truth and sincerity of the heart herein, and that the conformity of our duties on the matter to the rule, is not enowgh without a serious respect to the quality of the principles of our acting, that it be in faith, and from the love of Christ, which is so essentiall a requisite therto, yea that this is so framed as to correspond with the inward man, to exerce an authority over the conscience, and our most retired thougths, als well as actings, and to put shame and terrour on such whose glorying is in appearance, bot not in heart. 5. Yow know likewayes that the most select societies of such who ever yet profest the truth and since there hath been a Church on the earth, did never want a sad mix∣ture, yea these feu choised difciples of our blest Master, was not only with a Judas but a falling Peter, and a misbeleeuing Thomas mong them and should this have been a ground then for prejudice at the truth of christianity in its first dauning when by such a constitution our great Master would have it known what his Church whilst here upon the earth will be even in the purest times thereof. 6. Will ye not allow that measure which we finde in the primitive times, the Christians did require of their heathen adversaries, upon any publict offences which were then objected to them, to give but that allouance, which they did to their philosophers, and such as profest morall vertue, amongst them, which was not to charge the corruption and offences, of the practice of any, on the rule of their profession; whilst yow have these further inforcements of this, that yow know upon your own conscience what a sore burthen and grief these are to such, who are tender, and sincere in following of the truth, and how evident their discountenance of any such appearance is, yea may not the establishment of Church discipline, and censure, with such express rules herein by our blest head, convince and silence these who reproach. 7. Let some who pretend most, to stumble on such an accompt, speak but their own heart, if these be not much more their trouble, and torment whose walk does most
convincingly tend, to adorne the profession of the Gospel, whose sincere, and serious embracement of the truth hes been with such visible outward dissadvantage, and no privat interest, to sway them herein, as they ar enforced to see this, for none pos∣sibly could conceive, how this should be on any other ground, then the known pover and certainty therof on their soul. 8. Are not such whose way is thus the ground of your challenge, most visibly condemned by their own avoued principles, yea what ever essayes hath been to personat serious godliness, by a false show yet is it not most convincing, even to such as look but at a distance, that native lustre, self evidencing light, with that sweet savour and efficacy, which accompanies the same, as no possible invention, or art could ever reach, no more then to make a dead picture live. Oh! that such a day of reproach as this and that sad woe the world is so unsensible of, because of offences, might more suteably affect our hearts and that it is with so visible adeclining ow, in the Church, and mens grouing weary of the simplicity of the truth; these sweet paths, and footsteps of serious godlyness, love and zeall for God, self denyall, and contempt of the world, seems to be all most overgrown and worne out amongst many professours in this age. 5. Ground that I fear some may be ready this day to break and stumble on is, these high pretences of zeall and fervency, for the truth in the way of so me as would seem most visibly to crosse and interfer, with the most known principles of Christian prudence, yea that due necessar use of mens reasone which the Scripture, does so indispensibly require. ANSW. though the zeall of God, and faithfullness for his interest even with the most convincing evidence of the truth thereof to mens conscience is that which the world cannot bear; yet I hope these things when seriously considered may silence any publict reflection herein. 1. That the greatest want which may be now matter of grief in all the Churches, is that of pure zeal and love to Jesus Christ, and his truth and of such a spirit to follow the Lord fully, and oh! our fall hath been too great and universall from that first love which was wont to shine, and burne in these who profest the truth to be hid this day, and seems one of the saddest presages of a dark night, yet coming on when with a continued light, the heat, and power there∣of is so farre gone. 2. But to silence any such reflection it may be demonstrable to the furthest; that the true and native tendence of the zeall of God, and fervency in his work, can cause no breaking or disorder, nor hath any irregular, violent motion or scorching heat therwith, but where ever this most brightly shines, there also does a humble tender condescendence to convince and gaine most evidently appear; how by manifestation of the truth to mens conscience, to prevent any ground may be thus taken of offence; who is offended, and I burne not, was the temper of that blessed mans spirit, when he was burning in zeall for God, and thus carried him out that he might be all things to all, that he might gaine some: for such should be the greatest acrimony and sharpness, of these who should be the salt of the earth that it may allwayes tend to season, to preserve, and recover, and not to destroy. 3. And is not Christian wisdom, and prudence a peece of our sanctification, and a true and native result of pure zeall, and love to Christ; o as the more a Christian, the more tender thus to keep by the rules and to walk circumspectly not as fools, but as wise (and is not mens folly stil a fruit of their own corruption) nor can the truth of godliness be vigourously exerted, boto farre, it will cause also snch a sweet composure, and even temper of spirit, as to watch with an equall advertance, to extreams upon either hand. 4. It needs be no strange thing, or give any advantage to bring true Zeall, under
discredit that there may be a more impetuo us motion, and making haste by some when they are out of the way, then they were formerly for the truth; it being too evi∣dent, such as are once under the influence of delusion; are also in that dreadfull hazard to be as winds carried about with a tempest; but such is purezeal that tho it increas the streame, it does not overflow its bankes; nor wil breake the least comand, for vindication of the greatest truth. 5. There is such an indissoluble tye by the Holy Ghost betuixt true zeall, and that Christian moderation; which we should make known to all, as none may divide; but as the one tends to give life, and intensness of Duty, so is the other to rest∣taine all exorbitancy, and keep this in its proper channell; and that none be carried out, beyond these just bounds, & measures which are so expressly set to us by the rule, but so as that it be without any lukewarmness or abatement of servency in spirit for serving the Lord; for where on either hand these are divided, the credit of the truth, and true interest of the Church, must then needs suffer, and get a sor wound. 6. Ground of stumbling and offence which too visibly many are like to break on, yea to take prejudice allmost against the whole ministry of our Church, is that these who have had greatest weight and acceptance in the work of the Gospell and hath endured so much under many assaults, these years past, in their opposition to prelacy with some unansuerable conviction hereof; I hope to the conscience of all, and with a continued adherence to former principles, are yet with such reproach, so publictly thus fol∣lowed even by professed friends. ANSW. Though I hope the perusall of what hath been already touched on this subject may have some weight both for clearing, and in some measure to silence thes strange hightened prejudice of some this way; yet since this is one of the greatest tryalls of a Minister of Christ, both on the account of their work and the credit of their blest Master, who accounted them worthy to put into his service, and that many are thus in hazard to be shaken, I must yet further speak but a few things thereto; 1. That what ever may be their part who hath taken most liberty this way, yet should we reckon it is our sins, that is their strength; and much unansuerableness to so high and holy a calling; for which the holy God doth thus call to a humble, and serious self judging before him, and more deep tryall of our own hearts and way with that fear least our sins should finde us out, if we be not con∣cerned to finde them and lay the same to heart; tho I hope such yet, darre with some confidence, leave their cause before the Lord, to plead herein against the unjust reproach of men. 2. It'should be no strange thing now what in all tymes, hath been the lot of the most serious Ministers of Christ even when they have had a most sweet, and sensible seall of his acceptance in their work, to have no other requittall from men, then contempt, and hatred, who yet for the truths sake, have with the furthest tenderness sought to gaine such to the way of the Lord; yea have had the tryall, of such extreams as to be reviled by these who sometimes would have plucked out almost their eyes for them. 3. But it is sure the Holy Ghost hath with no lesse expresseness put a guard about the repute and credit of a Minister of Christ, then about their calling, for which read 1 Tim. 5. 19. 1. Thess 5. 12. 13. yea these are so straitely conjoined, as what ever tend to discredit their persones, must needs tend also to weaken the weight, and authority of their message, on the conscience of the hearers; and is this of small regard now with many, and to be without any dread least in so farre, the blood of souls, be charged on them in the day of the Lord; who by such notour reflections and without any just caus or calling thereto, did thus beget such a prejudice, and contempt, as to have the lesse reckoning made of the word of
truth delivered by them. In this I must here exoner my own conscience upon so publict a sin and of such sad conseqence to the Churches hazard which seems so little to touch this day. 4. Hath it been yet ever seen that where the Ministers of Christ, hath had no suteable weight and acceptance of their persons, for their works sake, in any place bot there also was a most visible abatement of peoples respect and love to the truth and of any true grouth amongst them under the ordinances, nor know I an advantage which the envyous man could more desire, to sow tares in the vineyard of the Lord, then this is when prejudice jealousy, and disrespect, comes once to any height, what ever pretences it may go under against such who are in deed the messen∣gers of truth, and dispensers of his ordinances. 5. And I hope there is just ground to account such the undoubted Ministers of Christ, in our Church and who shall be thus owned in the day of his appearance; yea who have had a convincing seall to their ministry on the hearts of many, who for ministeriall abilities soundness in the faith and being made examplary to others in humility, tenderness of walk love and fervent desire for gaineing of souls to Christ, would have been reckoned with the highest respect in the first primitive times of the Church, who yet hath been this day exposed to the furthest revilings of some. And tho it is not the naked testimony or respects of men that by such would be either sought, or satisfying, but how to have this inforced on their conscience, by a convincing witness, and example of a serious Ministe∣riall practice, yet should it not be strange that such be to the furthest concerned to ma∣nitaine the credit, & authority of their ministry, which is not theirs but their Masters. 7. Ground of prejudice, against the truth which is now highly pretended, is not only upon the strainge and highly irregular actings, by some, as may seem visibly inductive to greatest confusion and disorder, bot that these have been owned and supported by such prin∣ciples congruous thereto, as seem in compatible both with the practice, and profession, hither∣to of our Church. ANSW. Whatever advantage hath been given by any thus to re∣flect which (I may with some confidence say in behalf of the most serious Non con∣formists of our Church) have been as a sword in there bones even beyond their own personall sufferrings because of the voice of him who reproacheth, yet since many are thus ready to stumble and knows not, what a sore woe and judgment, offences are to such as make so sad an use thereof: yea which may be feared this day, are glad of any advantage herein: and that where such a poisenous cloud of prejudice interveens, and a prejudicat impression of the truth, and of serious godliness, is the glasse, there cannot but be very sad reflections thereon: I must yet crave leave in a few words, as a witness to the truth of our profession, and for a just vindication offer these things to be considered, by the conscience of our greatest Adversaries herein. 1. That we should seek no greater favour, but that upon clearest evidence, from the tryall and judgment of the Scriptures of truth, (which we are ready to render, to all that ask) there might be such free access to a publict, and serious reasoning herein, as that the truth might be heard for it self, judging it no less our concerne to convince mens judg∣ment, for commending the way of the Lord to their conscience, then to engadge the affections. 2. That it is, in no new, or strainge caice, we are now stated; and do own no other judgment and principles this day, then what are expresly acknow∣ledged by the most purely Reformed Churches of Christ, since the Reformation, and is that good and old way, and the same truth for which our worthy predcessours did by their wrestling prayers and sufferings so vigourously contend yea wherein so innumerable a company of most serious solid and tender Christians have been sealed
and found such abounding comforts of the spirit of truth upon their suffering and testimony upon the same. 3. That it is no privat interest, or, for our own things no temporall honour greatness or riches in this world that such sore wrestlings by the godly in our Church hath been, which I hope may now have some conviction and witness on the conscience of our Adversaries, and how such have not wanted an very obvious and alluring baite this way, may be easy to judge if some greater interest did not preponder at of being to dear a purchase at so sad a rate of unfaith∣fullness, to our blessed Lord and Master in his truth. 4. That it hath been no matter of indifference, or any small and triviall interest, such have been concerned in these late tryalls to appear for, bot for the lawes, and interest, of Christ, and the rights and liberties his Kingdom, which after some blest and confortable possession so long yea with the furthest concurrence of the civil lawes herein we should reckon as our birth right; and inheritance, whatever sad short coming have been by all in that measure of the testimony of our fathers thereto, against such invasion on so great an interest as hath been in these tymes. 5. We have confidence to say, that we own no doctrine, or principles but what tends to give all due respect and obedience to the Magistrate, without detracting from his just rights and power, bot to gave unto Cesar the things that are Cesars yea without the least denying to the Christian Magistrat, whatever with any Scripture warrant, we may allow, of an externall objectively, eccle∣siastick power such as is cumulative for the truth not against it; bot that he can have no power formaly ecclesiastick, and what is purely Spirituall or any immediat power of cognition in matters simply ecclesiastick antecedent to the judgment of the Church, which is so incompatible with the order and Governement established by him, who is the alone head and Lawgiver to his own house, whose Kingdom is not of this world. 6. We may say with a humble appeal to their conscience wo do most reproach, that it is for no preheminence or to be Lords over Gods heritage or owning any power bot what is ministeriall to declare and execute our Masters will, and such a power which hes the inward man for its proper object and the true edification of the body of Christ for its peculiar end, wherein we own a speciall regard to be had in the whole exercise and application thereof, and in dealing with the conscience of gainsayers, that it be with greatest tenderness, and Christian prudence, such as may most tend to edifie and gaine upon their conscjence; and therefor, are privat, essayes expresly appointed to go before a publict, and judicial procedour. And if any just ground of offence hath been given in the excess of some this way let it cause no reflection on that blest and beautiful order in the house of the Lord our God appointed by himself, yea which with grief upon any convincing evident thereof we should to the furthest dissown. 7. It is evident that these sacred tyes of our oath and covenant with God, we are so solemnly engadged in, containe no other duties or obligations, then what the Scripture indi∣spensibly obleidges to, and are stated on these great concerns of truth and righte∣ousness. 8. We can also witness with some quiet and assurance that the great anne and concerne of the most serious Non-conforme Ministers of Christ, in our Church, in their adventuring to preach the Gospel not withstanding of any prohibitions by the present Law hath been upon no sactious or privat designe, bot under constraint of duty, upon so pressing a call and necessity of the people, as these unto whom the dispensation, of the Gospel and ordinances, is commit, and a necessity thus laide upon them with some serious aime, and desire, I hope, to pursne this end, and to sheu the indispensible nead of imbracing that blest offer of reconciliation by Christ:
as also to presse holiness, and give warning of any share when it is evident the people might be in hazard thereby. Nor dare our respect to the persons of any in the least, ballance with the interest of truth here, for a publick disowning with grief what ever in their way have given just cause of offence, and stumbling in such a time. 9. It is the revealed truth of the Scripture, which we do expresly own as the alone formal object of our Faith; and that it is there each should come to prove his work, bot a that it be ust and warrantable on the matter according to these unchangeable rules, of truth and righteousness, and to know our warrand and calling herein: else no security could be from the greatest confusion and irregularity among men. 10. That extraordinare motions, or impulses, must be no rule or warrand of duty, nor for any going beyond these express bounds, set to us in the word, by which they must be known and tryed; for God hath assigned to each their station, and calling, and that a serious and tender regard should be against all exorbitance in the excess als well as any sinfull deficience or neglect therein. And I hope whatever be found un∣auswerable this dy in the practice of any to these known principles and doctrine of our Church which are confessed and most universally adhered to by the non-Conformists there as we do, with grief disown, so I have confi∣dence there cannot want some testimony thereto even on the conscience of our greatest adversaries. 8. I must nere yet add on strange ground of quarrell and prejudice; that a serious adherence to the Government and Kingdom of Christ over his Church, for which the au∣thority of his Lawes and institution is so unanswerably clear, should be judged incompa∣tible with the civill interest, and security of the state. For ANSW. if men shut their own eyes, where the Scripture is so clear; and hath thus shewed us, not only what is just, but what is good, and how assuredly this is the greatest concerne of a Nation to have the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the rights thereof establisht; and kept up, when the vey express intent and tendence thereof is to promote and transmit both the purity and power of godliness to the present and succeeding ages, I confesse there can be no reasoning, then in such a caice, but if principles of self love, to our temporall advantage and such pretended respect to the publick interest of the Land, bear any weight; I would but plead a little, with a serious appeal to these princi∣ples, which our adversaries do yet own, and assent to; if the truth, and serious practice of godliness and these means which are necessarily directing thereto, be not visibly the great interest and safety of a Nation, and to have the furthest awe and re∣verence thereof kept up; upon these grounds. 1. Because thus is the greatest inforce∣ment of civill duties, by a religious tye, and on principles of conscience. 2. That this tends to the furthest advance and improvement of human nature; both to make human society sweet and desireable, and for a more vigouous and true im∣provement of mens naturall abilities, for the publick good interest of that place. 3. And can this be a publick grievance, which brings the greatest inforcements to sincerity, candor, and truth; which as it is essentially necessar for the establishment of justice, and moral righteousness, so tends to beget true mutuall assurance both in words, and actings amongst men? and how possibly can a Nation be safe; or any true intercourse and security in our personall concerns, where truth, and godliness hath no due respect there. 4. Is it not thus the duties of our severall relations are most promote, yea which gives the greatest security to civill Government, and sets home on mens hearts their obligations to Magistracy as the Ordinance of God; not from
fear, but for conscience sake, and it is little known, what hid pledges, such as are truly godly are of the peace and safty of the Land they are in. 5. Can the blest tendencie of truth and godliness, be under debae; to subdue the diseases of the minde; and re∣straine these exorbitances of pride, envy, wrath, ambition, &c beyond the furthest reach of all humane Lawes, which hath stil so deplorable effects every where, and raised too visibly, most of these storms, and tempests which are in the world, and causeth so dreadfull disorders amongst men. 6. It is sure also the way of truth, must needs lead men to be quiet, and do their own business, yea for such as are in that condi∣tion; to work with their own hands 1 Thess. 5: 11. and to abide in that calling, in which the Lord hath placed them; and to painfulness and industry therein, to be no busy medlers in the affaires of others; and that no man go about to defraud his brother, that none render evill for evill unto any, which as they are most express Scripture com∣mands, must demonstratively witness this like wayes, what a publick blessing, truth and godliness, is to the Land wherein it is kept up; I shall only add this more, what regard even on politick grounds should be to that which so necessarily brings there∣with, the love of our neighbour, and to do unto others, as we would be dealt with, by them, as also tenderness to the afflicted, a compassionat spirit to relieve such as are in distresse, with hospitality to strangers▪ which must needs have a vigourous exercise there, where the love of the truth is intertained, as being so essentiall a part of our obedience to the Gospell. SECTION V. AFter some thoughts on this sad and unpleasing subject of the late differences in our Church. I would desire yet in the shutting up thereof to speak a few words, on a more practicall concern, that might lead in, and leave the Reader on another sent, and inquiry, which I fear in this strange croud and noise hath been of publick de∣bates, by too many be much lost, and shall touch this in thes 4. particulars: O that with a blessing from him who can serve himself of the meanest things it might be made a word in season to my in such times. 1. To consider what may most contribute to a Christians joy and solid peace upon, an after reckoning with their own conscience as to their way, in this winnowing time when such hot contendings hes been in the Church, for which I would humbly offer these. 1. what sweet peace will then be in having been kept closs at home with a tender and jealous eye over the frame and temper of their ovvn spirits, since we cannot but see where the strength of these strange paroxismes, of heat, and bitterness, amongst Pro∣fessors of the truth does now most lye, that it is from these jarring corruptions upon the heart, more then from any differences of light and judgement and which no eager disputes but a tender and lively practice in being exercised to Godliness can effectually cure, & then we might both hope for a blest healing composure under these different measures of light amongst Christian, and for a tender and humble reasoning in things wherein they differ, when thus a more near conformity to the Spirit, and rule of the Gospell, is once reached, which must needs subject the Soul, to account it our greatest honour, to be overcome by the truth. 2. That they have been kept from any such
precipitant judgment of others, as usually follow on such debates; and their spirit kept under some blest aw, and restraint, of these suddain, violent, commotions, and truptions of passions as runs such unto most sad undecencies, to discredit the profes∣sion of the truth, discompose themselfs, and wound their own conscience. 3. That they have been tender of practising that themselves which they have condemned in others by any such aime more how to revile, then reclaime; and to a heightning, ra∣ther then healing of this strange breach. 4. That the fleeing of one extream, hath still been with some regard of being kept from running on any other & of there having had impartial respect to entertaine what ever is justly approveable, and according to the rule, upon eitheir hand; yea not only with a humble ceding in personal injuries, and such a tender managing of their own necessar vindication upon the revilings of others as might tend to convince more then to provoke; but that they have this testimony, they did in earnest pray for such, and seek their mercy, and reclaming from the Lord 5. That no pretences or personal respects hath shut their eyes upon any visible hazard to the truth, and of having been kept on a serious watch agaist the dephits and subtility of Satan, on the right hand, no lesse then on the left; which we might have seen too evidently in this late amazeing breach. 1. By an overbending to break, and take of from unquestionable duty by somes exacting on the conscience of others, according to their measures and dictates, beyond the expresse bounds and warrand of the word. 2. By such a strange coincidence of seeming extreams; that what hath been intentionally followed by open adversaries should be no lesse vigourously carried on by others ex in∣tentione operis so as to run thus cross (I doubt not) to their own thoughts; to obstruct the spreading of the gospel and bring the truth and profession thereof under discredit, and I must add a too visible tendence of this way, to such a precipice of resolving their light, and confidence on extraordinare motions; without a humble enquiry, and tryall thereof, by the Scripture; so as some in outrunning, the revealed rule of du∣ty hath stumbled on the dark mountaines ere they were aware; and lost their feet, in seeking of wings to flee; as may be for a sad warning to after times. 2. This were a most suteable study in such a day; how to walk wisely, towards such as are without, and what might most tend to gaine respect to the truth; to convince, and prevaile with mens conscience, even of known and publict adversaries now in a time of so great reproach; and it is sure these should be special advantages for such ane end. 1. When the truth of holiness, in convincing and visible realities of a Christians practise, as are present before mens eyes does appear, which was the glory of the Church in the primitive times, who were then the first fruits of the Gospel among the gentiles, that it was said, they did not speak great things, but live them; and which was then specially noted by adversaries: see how the Christians love, one another; for then did the love of Christ bear rule in his peoples heart; but how sad an account is recorded in some ages after, that no times had been more fertile of religions; than these and of great contests this way, but none more barren of religion; in the truth and so∣lidity thereof; whilst it seemed rather the notion of religion, most conversed with in such a Day, then with the thing it self. 2. When this doth appear, under great tribulation; for it is then both religion, and these who professe it, are at once proved; and is assuredly one of the choicest opportunities of a Christians life to convince the world; but oh it seems such a prospect of Christianity, is now rare, as the saints have had in former times or; or such a conjunction, as this when they received the word under great affliction, but with a greater joy, and comfort of the Holy Ghost. 3. When a se∣rious
and tender way, is followed by christians, to gaine more upon mens judgment, by a humble, and rational account from the Scripture of their hope, and practise, then by a more confident, and severe imposing, upon their faith since it is sure, the premisses, and conclusion must be still relative, and the truth much more hurt then helped when it is not in a convincing way, commended to the conscience even of adversaries. It is not sufferings; but the cause that makes the martyre; that it be indeed for the truth, and no just ground of offence, be by any given to darken the credit thereof, and here there must be no redeming of the personall repute of any, at so high a rate, as a publick dash, and prejudice to the honour, and credit of the way of the Lord, in this day. 4. This also were a speciall advantage, for gaining respect to the truth, when in the room of sore and bitter compleanings; the voice of joy, and thanksgiving, may be heard, amongst such as own the way of the Lord this day; even under all their griefs and pressures other wayes. I write this under some con∣viction, how rare such a study, seems now to adorne the profession of the Gospel: though it is sure, none ever sought to finde the comfort, and mercy of their lot, for an excitement to this blest excercise of praise; but found cause for it, and how to be faithfull, in a lesser measure, but they found more added; and how great a want this is, and hinderance to the prayers of the Church, this day is more then we seem to lay to heart; yea how much thus the world is tempted, to judge religion, only a dead forme; and that Christians do not in truth beleeve, what they beleeve, yea that they are few, if any, on the earth, who walk suteably to such a hope, and assurance of the glory, which is to come. I am sure, as no serious and wise observer, but might finde their being under some singular engadgments from what hath been the way of the Lords dealing with them; so it is sad when these are more buried almost and forgot, then searchd out under present and new trouble. Some would judge a su∣teable accesse, to give in their mite, to this treasure, a special enlargement; and to own a peculiar debt, to so great a duty, for putting their seal, to the truth, and faithful∣ness of God this day, and to bear a honourable witness to his way, amidst all the changes, and remarkably searching tryals, have occurred, in the course of their pilgrimage. He is the rock his work is perfect, and all his wayes are judgment, a God of truth, just, and true, is he. Deut. 23. 3. O that men would praise him, and that one generation, would declare his works, to another, and transmit the memory of his goodness; yea that such a blest conformity to the doctrin of Christ in humility, love, meekness, bowels of com∣passion and overcoming evill with good, might this day more appear; as the world thus, might be both judged, and condemned in their own conscience thereby: 3. This also might be a suteable and edifiing study for Christians in such a time, for getting a clear sight, of the way of the Lord, amidst all these strange and amazing things, which are before us, both for their own strengthening, and to justifie his holy and unspotted righteousnesse, and thus to consider, that what ever, we now see yet it is so clear. 1. That the glory of the Church militant, and greatest triumph, which the Gospel hath had since its first dawning in the world, was yet never by any outward clam, or prosperous state here, but under tribulation, and distresse, in ignominy, and contempt, els I must confesse, I have mistaken the Scripture; and that thus the most Lucide intervals, and sunshine hath been most usually short, and not only a dark cloud but a seen necessity thereof, hath still followed. 2. And how sweet, and confirming might such a clear prospect be, now to a shaken Christian, of the singu¦lar congruity, of such a providence, both to the revealed truth, and infinit wisdom of God,
in his dealing with his people; that so straite, and wearysome away, should be here to an eternity of glory, in that life; which is to come; and no getting there but tho∣row some degrees, of sore breaking, and anguish, and going through a state of tryall, befor that of enjoyment; when they consider, how unconceiveably great and excellent, that state which is above, is; and their being trained in so sharp a a school of tribulation here, shall at length tend to an unexpressible joy, and comfort, that ever they had such an occasion to prove their love and adherence to Jesus Christ and of crediting his truth against all visible grounds, and in having with patience and hope got through such a throng of temptations, when they thus see, the most bitter grieving, and difficult part of their warfare, was but to make the victory more full, and triumphant. 3. Thus we might have a more clear, and confirming look of the holy judgment of the Lord, in the product of these sad breakings, in our Church that when so strange a spirit, hath been aloft, and a strong affection in some, without a humble and deliberat judgment, it should at last resolve in a fervor of error and delusion, yea to come that length of breaking down what they supposed to be bulding up, and to adventure with greatest confidence for engadging the Holy God, to a concurrance in these wayes which his word doth expressly testify against, whilst so impatient to be touched herein, as they have been ready to turne again and tear such, who hath with tenderness, sought their recovery. But tho such sad things should deeply affect us yet, there is no cause for stumbling to any; pure religion and undefiled is the same this day that ever it was; and the redeemed of the Lord, are a broken, and diseased com∣pany, whielst here by the way full of sores and Distempers, but all under cure, which will ere long be perfyted, and I hope through grace, there is a generation of tender, solid, and humble Christians yet in our land (who shall be owned and accepted at the appearance of Jesus Christ) as this day I know on the earth; and many much hid there; but what is too visible the temper and complexion of this age, may cause much fear, upon these peculiar hazards, professors now seem to be exposed to; beyond former times, when a forme of knowledge, and the theory of practical religion hath so farr outgone tenderness and practice, and become so much a matter of art, and Inven∣tion, whilst Christians formerly with a smaller measure of light and in a plainer dresse, walked in the love and simplicity of the truth; a bold and professing age, where a too easy and suddain growth to a forward appearance amongst many, hath so visibly out run a solid rooting in the truth, and that fear and serious exercise on their own soul, about their spiritual state and the soundness of conversion as hath sometimes been; an age where it may be feared that not at a common rate many are like to adventure on the furthest hazard of perishing amidst these strange distempers in our Church, but with highest pretences seem to out darre all means of conviction; even while with grea∣test tenderness and love to their souls followed, yea an age when that dreadful engine of Sathan is now so discernibly on foot and in such different formes and shape, by the spirit of error and delusion, to turne men off all setled persuasion of the truth and give the credit and interest of the Gospel a sorer wound, then the open violence and rage of others, hath yet ever done; and is not here one sad influencing cause of so deplorable a State of the Church this day, that many professing godlinesse in this age are not more taken up with the great and weighty things thereof, and in these retired exercises which hath the clossest communication with the vitals of Christianity; and so indispensibly necessar to a honourable appearance for the Lord, in any publict duty and service of the time.
4. What a choise study in so extreme an exigence now of the Church should this be to know, and bring near, by some more deep reflection thereon, how great these things are, which a humble and serious Christian hath to converse with, and to oppose all his griefs and fears this day, even when they seem to presse above measure; which this might not only confirme but overcome the heart with unexpressible joy, when he but thus alone reasons with himself. 1. What ever shaking winds now blow, almost from evry airth, yet hath he firme and surest, principles of trust for a safe founding the rest and peace of his soul, and his security here is full though not his enjoyment, yea what ever want now be of the certainty of adherence in resting on the truth with such full re∣pose and quiet of minde he is called to: yet he knowes thereis no want, of furthest certainty of evidence. 2. That not in a dream, but in the most serious composure of spirit, he can retire into the Gospel of Christ: and there see how unexpressiblie blessed poor lost man is made by a redeemer: on whom he hath choiced to have the exceed∣ing riches of his grace shewed forth to all eternity, yea this in so marvelous a way when no possible help could be found in us, that the Holy God, would take satisfaction to himself by himself, not only to save his people but to preserve the rights of justice in∣violable: yea hath thus brought us under a Law to come and be blessed in his Son, to whom he bears record that in him is life, and an eternall salvation made sure. 3. That the clear intent of this astonishing mistery is not only to save his people from wrath, but to make them meet by the spirit of holyness, for that state, which is above: since it is not pardon alone, or a heaven without us, can make any blessed untill the soul once be framed for it, and this first begun and wrought there, and now, what hath a Christian this day to converse when amidst the multitude of his saddest thoughts, he can with such assurance retire into the Gospel, and thence look up to an eternity of glory as that which ere long he shall know and enjoy. 4. That this is so sure, for his con∣firming, that such a signature and Impress of the Gospel, in the truth and reality of holi∣ness is to be seen this day in the earth, I hope yet in innumereable instances even in these declining times with so visible an assimilation and likness to a higher state herein, that if men but exerce reason, they might see, it is Sure a marvelous transforming power, could ever make such a change, and that miracles (if rightly considered) does not this day cease in the Church, whilst so great a witness to the power and truth of god∣liness is continued. 5. He thus sees that tho no resemblance of our blessed head hath been left to the Church, of his human appearance whilst he was in the earth; yet is his undoubted Image and portraiture drawne to the life, to be seen here, in the truth and reality of holyness; and how much should this commend and indear truth, in the inward parts, and tender walking with God unto christians, that thus not only the reflection of his image on such may be convincing to the world in whom as so many mir∣rours he hath choised to shine forth, and appear; but that in this state of dis∣tance, whilst they see him not whom their soul loves, they may yet still wear his blessed portrature within on their heart, and thus discerinbly see him there, until they be ta∣ken up to himself for ever. 6. Thus he can intertaine his soul in so dismall an hower, that he knowes assuredly, there are comforts here, which have no rise or affinity with the flesh, unexpressibly above all the griefs of time, and seeks no credit from any on report but to be found upon surest tryall, such as no grief, paine or pressure was yet ever at that hight in the lot of any of the saints, which the spirit of the Lord cannot make sweet and easy to endure, yea hath oft looked them out of paine with a present sensible outgate on their soul before any outward deliverance broke up. 7. He kno∣wes
also that the greatest comforts within time are assuredly in the life and exercise of godliness; when thus a sincere resignation, is reached, and a feeling of themselfs to offer freely yea with joy their Isaac, and most indeared indeared interests to the Lord; in having credit his truth against visible grounds of hope, and their being helped to crosse some present desireable interest of sense, on the alone incouragement of faith and when some remarkable sharp triall hath been thus got well through; upon this sweat re∣flection also of having gained a season, and opportunity for the Lord, that may be for some fruit to his praise, and of a streight and serious aime to please him, when the visible displeasure of men, hath come in competition therewith, O what plea∣sure and an abundant entry to a christians peace will be then felt. 8. He hath this to be confirming, what unexpressible delight and pleasure is found on displeasing the flesh, even in its most impetuous, and violent motions, in tryall of their obedience, and love to Christ (what ever paine may be for a little in that conflict) as lets him see, resistance to sin is the most gainefull, and rationall act of his life; whilst with any sinfull delight, which in a moment is gone, an imbittering sting and inward shame upon the guilt thereof, does then only abide, yea is so tried that the way of sin, can never cease to be a way of paine, and torment if the strenght and malignity of the disease did not take of all sense thereof, which as a bone out of joint, hath no ease, nor does suffer the whol body to be at rest; whilst on the other hand in closse following the rule, and resisting a present temptation, what sweet peace, humble confidence, and comfortable accesse to God, with inward rejoycing is most sensibly then found, and how here only is the way of his relief; and a great seal thus to the truth, when he sees so firme and indissoluble a tie betwixt peace, and holiness, as the worst of times can never break of. 9. He knowes that if no searching tryal, there could be no triumph and in so farre should be shut out from the overcomers joy, to which the forest wrestling of a christian when sanctifiingly exercising must still make way. 10. And what thoughts might these be on a more deep reflection, upon the truth, and reali∣ty of prayer, that here is no conjecturall thing but such a passage, is sure, knowne, and tryed, betwixt heaven, and a Christians soul; which hath had so wonderfull effects, and certain returns, in the greatess exigence and strait; and is not only an in∣stituted dutie, but mean of their reliefe, yea not only the sweetest way of converse with God here on the earth; but is the most effectual to prevaile and obtaine. I shall but add, a few words more, now in the close, and deteane the reader no further; that it would have been judged, the appearance of the time, in this ex∣tream exigence, with what may be seen of the deplorable state of the Church of Christ, not only in Brittain, but almost universally, might ere now have allayed these high distempers, hath been of late, when popery is on so present and dreadfull an approach as threatens to swallow up all, and when that mine, which hath been so long in the dark, and digging under the ground, seems so near to spring, yea hath got too vi∣sible advantage, to enter at such a breach (as hath been of late) and gain ground this way. It is true, it may seem not easy to comprehend and is surely one of the greatest dephts of the judgment of God this day, how in one and the same age where the truth hath so brightly shined, both in purity, and power, there can be a subjecting of so many with their own consent, to so visible and notour an Impostur, as popery is, and after all we have seen, this Surprising darknesse, should now-come to such a hight, as men are turned thus cruel against themselves, and the Posterity, to deli∣ver up all that should be dearest to them, to such a party: yea engadge in a way
that so clearly enervats the whole intent of the Gospel, and where there is no con∣ceiveable access for seduction, by any arguments to mens reason, and judgment; or on other termes then to shut their eyes first on the Bible. But what ever length this tryal, may now come, and tho it should yet once pro∣vaile against all visible profession of the truth in the Church of Brittain and Ireland, we should adore the spotless righteousness of God herein in delivering mens reason and judgment up to so strong delusion, since as the greatest of blessings which ever came to the world is the pure light of the Gospel; it needs not be strange that the grea∣test of judgments follow on a peoples contempt, and rejecting thereof, so as nothing is so absurd and irrationally grosse which these will not drink in who have once rejected the truth. But since the prospect and impression of this time, is like to be more fainting, then to confirme, or awake to duty, I would but touch this a little, though there can be no possible stumbling, for want of light, when the truth and doctrine of the reformed religion is so fully cleared; and tho this might seem incongruous with the forgoeing subject, yet I am sure not unsuteable to the time when such hazard is now of much stumbling, and men do unsensibly weare at a distance from under these former impressions of the truth, and the way of the Lord, which they once had; yea that a few dayes may come the Churches way more remarkable for tryal, then all hath yet ever been in this age; I shall but offer some special reflexions now sutable to such a day, and of so known publick, and unquestionable evidence, to the Church that when brought near to our thoughts, may let us see how farre the advantage, and measure of these confirmations of the truth, given in to this generation, does ex∣ceed that of former times; and I should hop such an exercise, might be of use and blessed through the Lords gracious concurrence for Christians furthest confirming, thus but to reason with themself, and have more deep reflectings thereon. 1. What ever hight this present assault from popery, may come to yet we know how solemne a triumph, the Gospel hes had, and that surly it is the same truth, and cause of the reformed Church; for which so great things, hath the Lord wrought, when that blest revolution once came, after Antichristian darkness had overspread the face of the World for many ages; so as the full stroak, and down fall of that King∣dome, seems not more marvelous, and above all humane appearances, when now at a distance; then what we have already seen. 2. That it is clear, how extraordi∣nare a power did attend this blest work of the Churches rising and that astonishing swift progress thereof, as nations seemed to be borne at once, and the earth to bring forth in one day; Churches was then both planted, and confirmed betwixt the Year 1521. and 70. like a new Christian World, thus brought forth and setled, yea how farre this was a∣bove visible means and how little interest instruments had therein as it may be still said, let none fear or stager at the promise of God, though difficulties in an ordinare way, seem insuperable; after we have now seen what the Lord hath don these last ages. 3. That it is so evident, how with the first shining forth of the truth, and doctrine of Christ, in the purity thereof, the life and power of Christianity came al∣so therewith to the world, and how this blest light, did lead in, to greatest tender∣ness in the walk, and practise of Christians, which we might see yet as still present before us, how extraordinare an effusion of the spirit of God, this was, which caused then so marvelous a change, and lustre on the Church. 4. Have we not seen to confirme us of the truth, these prodigies of cruelty hath been acted, by the popish party such as some immediat power and incitement of the Divell, can only answer and hath so
farre outgone the ordinare rate of humane cruelty, as if Infernall spirits, had then come and assumed human shape, to act this way; yea is evident that no such measures can be found under the heathenish persecution against the Christian Church and in that strange way and manner followed as the French, and Irish massacre, hath been. 5. That such horrid practises also, hath been consequentiall to their doctrine, and principles, so as this hath not only been dispensed with  by that Church, but ac∣counted as highly meritorious, that it may be now easy to judge where that spirit, and way tends and what might be expected where this long  fury should but once get a vent. 6. Have we not seen also no possible m security, from such whose greatest strength hath thus been to move still in the dark; and by surprise, to make their greatest assault, yea whose very religion, does so evidently subvert all truth, and mutuall confidence amongst men. 7. But have we not also seen, amore excellent spirit, and invicible power, hath been, to bear up against all this cruelty, and rage, and how great a seal, thus hath been to the Protestant se, and doctrine in these late times, by innumerable witnesses, who even in their extreamest suffer∣ings, did so convincingly evidence, a joy unspeakable, and undoubted sealing of the comforts, of the Holy Ghost, on their soul. 8. That these likewise were rare examples, of the truth, and reality, of holyness in their day; and of humility, and subduedness to the flesh, yea of tenderness, and bowels of compassion to their persecutors whom the Lord did thus call and prepare for such a sacrifice. 9. That no precipitancy, or stubbornness, in the least was in their way, but as with great assurance of minde; so with a tender, humble and deliberat acting, their study then was by rationall con∣viction to deall with the conscience of adversaries, in a willing rendering, the rea∣son of their faith, and suffering, with all meekness, from the scripture, with a refe∣rence thereto before the world, to be tryed and searched out in what any could ob∣ject. 10. Have we not seen the power, and wisdom of God, most brightly shine forth, in that day, in the weakness of means, and that no speciall peice of service, was then called for, but a most surprising and discernible call, and excitement of in∣struments thereto, who in the same spirit, by which others were helped to suffer, was remarkably then carried out to act in defence of the Gospel much above them∣selves and their ordinare reach. 11. Have we not seen also, that no great thing was by the Lord, then brought forth for his Church, but some remarkable hight of trouble, went before, and how every step of her rise, and prevailling over Anti∣christ hath been still ushered in with some sore conflict, and down casting lyke the Pangs, and throwes, of the birth before a delivery. 12. Have we not clearly seen, that no humane power since the breaking forth of this blest light of the gospel, could yet ever reach its end, against the reformed Church; though no possible way, and chainge of weapons, have been left untried, but how most visibly the work of their own hands, hath ensnared them herein, and tended more to the furtherance of the gospel. 13. And might it not be confirming what hath been so clear to see, the re∣formed Church of France, get so sweet a clam, yea fixt in a setled state, with out∣ward peace, and legal security, by the Catholick league there, andby such a formidable conjunction as was therein of persons and interests for her utter ruine. 14. To see four Kings of France, successively taken away in 30 Years, all upon the same designe; and in a vigorous pursuite to destroy the Protestant interest there, and in them that race of the house of Valois wholy extinct of whom two, were by a violent death Henry the second, and third, and this last so remarkably from that very airt with whom he
had most concurred and joyned in counsell, as particularly with the Duke of Guise, for the massacre but both falling and destroyed by other in a short time. 15. To see the Netherlands fixt both in a setled state, and Church by that bloody engine of the Spanish inquisition, set up there and severe cruelty of Philip the II., as the very mean made most subservient thereto. 16. To see the Protestant doctrine, more effectu∣ally promot and rooted in England, by the bloody dayes of Queen Mary, then the peace full calme of King Eduard who had gone before. 17. To see the violence and fals∣hood of Queen Douager, and inbringing, of the French to Scotland, to bear down and destroy the Protestant interest there, such an effectual mean and advantage for its rise and further establishment. 18. To see the blood, and cruelty by Ferdinand the II. in Bohemia, in so very short a time most visibly returned on himself, to a making Germany almost desolate, and for many years, to sume in its own blood, by the Swedes, and their confederats. 19. To see that horrid late Irish massacre, in a few years after resolved in an utter rooting out almost of that cruel party, who had moved therein with such a discernible sunshine of the liberty of the Gospel, as did follow after in that land. 20. I must here add which may be clear and confirming this day how so strange a falling in with popery hath been now these 20. Years past in Brittaine, and what ground that interest hath gained there, hath so visibly had its strength from that airt of atheisme, ignorance, and the getting up of a prophane Spirit, which as a prodigie, and deluge hath thus broke forth in these lands, once blest both with the purity, and power, of the Gospel beyond most of the Churches; and how such hath indeed found it easy to quite the truth, who yet never knew it, besides the influence, and suting of such a baite, as this way is to the temper of so licentious a time, and for some private interest, when that hath been under so favourable an aspect. FINIS.
