F235 12037356 52907
THE Lord Fairfax's MEMORIALS.
SHORT MEMORIALS OF THOMAS Lord Fairfax. Written by Himself. LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and are to be Sold at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1699.
TO THE Right Honourable THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX. MY LORD, IT is with Your Lordship's leave, that this short Manuscript of my Lord Fairfax, Your Noble Predecessor, is now Print∣ed from the Original, written in
his own Hand, and left in Your Study at Denton in Yorkshire; for it was never intended by him, to be Published, but to remain for the Satisfaction of his own Relations. But of late something has hapned, which in the judgment of Your Lordship, and many o∣ther Persons of Condition, makes it necessary that these Papers should be sent to the Press; which is now done, without any Material Alterations from the Original, but only by placing them in the natural order of Time.
Tho' no Copy was ever taken by Your Lordship's Consent, yet I know not how, some imperfect Ones are got into other Hands. And this being an Age, wherein every Man presumes to Print what he pleases, of his own, or other Mens, we are plainly told, That my Lord Fairfax's Memo∣rials are ready to be Published; and by the very same Person, who has lately set forth some Memoirs, wherein his Lordship is scarce ever nam'd but with Re∣proach; not to be excused by what the Editor himself confesses,
That the Author was much out of humour when he writ the Book. My Lord Fairfax's True Cha∣racter is better known to many Wise and Good Men, than to be blemished by such envious Detra∣ctions. Nor can his Reputation thereby suffer with any who were acquainted with his Person, and the true Intentions of his Actions, and knew him in the latter part of his Life. His great Misfortune, and so he accounted it, was to be enga∣ged in the Unhappy Wars, where∣of he desired no other Memorial
than the Act of Oblivion; which few that ever needed, better de∣served. It cannot be denied, but as a Soldier, his Life would furnish as Noble a Memoir as the Age has produced, from the time that he began with a Troop of Horse, and a few undisciplined Forces in the North, to his being General of a Victorious Army in the South; which he Governed, not as a Cypher, but with great Pru∣dence and Conduct, in Councils of War, as well as animated by his Personal Courage in the Field, as long as they had any Enemy to op∣pose them.
But after that, they broke into Factions, and were over-run with Enthusiasm, and became Vngo∣vernable by their General, when they chose their own Agitators, and were managed by Men of the deepest Dissimulation and Hypo∣crisie: by whose fair but treache∣rous Promises, some Greater than Himself, were deceived to their own Ruin. That most Tragical and Deplora∣ble part of the Civil War, the Death of the King, he utterly from his Soul abhorred, and lamented to his dying day; and never mentioned it but with Tears in his Eyes.
The retired part of his Life gave him greater Satisfaction than all his former Victories, when he li∣ved quietly at his own House at Nun-Appleton in Yorkshire; always earnestly wishing and praying for the Restitution of the Royal Family, and fully resolved to lay hold on the first good Opportunity to contribute his part towards it; which made him always lookt upon with a jea∣lous eye by the Usurpers of that time. As soon as he was invited by Ge∣neral Monk to assist him against Lambert's Army, he cheerfully embraced the Occasion, and appear∣ed
at the Head of a brave Body of Gentlemen of Yorkshire; and up∣on the Reputation and Authority of his Name, the Irish Brigade of Twelve Thousand Horse forsook Lambert's Army, and joyned with him; the Consequence was the im∣mediate breaking of all Lam∣bert's Forces, which gave General Monk an easy March into Eng∣land. This was always acknowledged, not only by General Monk, but by the King himself, as a signal Testimony of his Zeal to make a∣mends for what was past, and of the very considerable Assistance he
gave towards the restoring the Roy∣al Family. After he had waited on his Ma∣jesty in Holland, as one of the Commissioners sent to invite him home, and had seen the King esta∣blish'd on his Throne, he retired a∣gain into his own Country, where he died in Peace, in the 60th Year of his Age, Anno 1671. leaving be∣hind him his only Daughter, the Lady Mary Dutchess of Buck∣ingham. I shall now say no more of him, but, That so long as Unfeigned Piety towards God, Invincible Cou∣rage, joyned with wonderful Mo∣desty,
and exceeding Good Na∣ture: Justice and Charity to all men in his private Life; and an Ingenuous Acknowledgment of his Publick Error, with hearty Endeavours to make Reparation, as soon as he was convinced of it, shall be esteemed in the World: So long shall the Name of my Lord Fairfax be honoured by good Men, and be had in perpetual Remem∣brance. Your Lordship had the good for∣tune to be born after the Storms and Tempests of that Age: But you have had the Honour to appear eminently in defence of our Reli∣gion,
and Civil Rights, in this last happy Revolution, as your Noble Predecessor did at the Restora∣tion. My LORD, Apr. 22. 1699. I am Your most affectionate Uncle, and humble Servant, Brian Fairfax.
A short MEMORIAL of the Northern Actions in which I was engag'd, du∣ring the War there, from the Year 1642, to the Year 1644. IN Gratitude to God for his ma∣ny Mercies and Deliverances, and not to deprive my self of the Comfort of their Remembrance, I shall set down, as they come into my Mind, those things wherein I have found the won∣derful
Assistance of God to me in the Time of the War in the North; though not in that me∣thodical and polish'd Manner as might have been done, being intended only for my own Sa∣tisfaction, and help of my Me∣mory. My Father was call'd forth by the Importunity of his Coun∣try to join with them in their own Defence, which was con∣firm'd by a Commission from the Parliament. The first Action we had was at Bradford.Bradford. We were about three hundred Men, the Ene∣my seven or eight hundred, and two Pieces of Ordnance. They assaulted us; We drew
out close to the Town to re∣ceive them; They had the Ad∣vantage of the Ground, the Town being encompassed with Hills, which exposed us more to their Cannon, from which we receiv'd some Hurt; but our Men defended those Passa∣ges by which they were to de∣scend, so well, that they got no ground of us; and now the day being spent, they drew off, and retired to Leeds. A few days after, Captain Hotham with three Troops of Horse, and some Dragoons, came to us: Then We march'd to Leeds; but the Enemy having Notice of it, quitted the Town, and in haste fled to York.
We advanc'd to Tadcaster,Tadcaster. eight Miles from York, that we might have more room, and be less burthensome to Our Friends; and being increased to one thousand Men, it was thought fit that we should keep the Pass at Wetherby, for the securing of the West-Riding, or the greatest part of it, from whence our chief Sup∣plies came. I was sent to Wetherby with three hundred Foot,Wetherby. and for∣ty Horse; The Enemy's next design from York, was to fall upon my Quarters there, being a Place very open, and easy for them to assault, there being so many back-ways, and
Friends enough to direct them, and give them intelligence. About six a clock one morn∣ing they fell upon us with eight hundred Horse and Foot, the Woods thereabout favouring them so much, that Our Scouts had no notice of them, and no Allarm was given till they were ready to enter the Town: Which they might easily do, the Guards being all asleep in Houses; for in the beginning of the War, Men were as im∣patient of Duty, as they were ignorant of it. I my self was only on Horse∣back, and going out of the other End of the Town to Tadcaster, where my Father lay, when one came running after
me, and told me the Enemy was entring the Town; I pre∣sently galloped to the Court of Guard, where I found not above four Men at their Arms, as I rememberOne of them had a Pension for his Life till 1670., two Ser∣jeants, and two Pikemen, who stood with me when Sir Tho∣mas Glenham, with about six or seven Commanders more, charged us; and after a short, but sharp Encounter, they re∣tired, in which one Major Carr was slain; and by this time more of the Guards were got to their Arms. I must confess I knew no Strength but the powerful Hand of God that gave them this Repulse.
After this they made ano∣ther Attempt, in which Cap∣tain Atkinson (on our part) was slain: And here again there fell out another remark∣able Providence, during this Conflict, our Magazine was blown up. This struck such a Terror into the Enemy, be∣lieving we had Cannon, which they were before inform'd we had not, that they instantly retreated; And though I had but a few Horse, we pursued the Enemy some Miles, and took many Prisoners: We lost about eight or ten Men, whereof seven were blown up with Powder; the Enemy lost many more.
At this time the Earl of Cumberland Commanded the Forces in York-shire for the King; He being of a peace∣able Nature, and affable Dis∣position, had but few Ene∣mies; or rather, because he was an Enemy to few, he did not suit with their present Con∣dition. Their Apprehensions and Fears caused them to send to the Earl of Newcastle, who had an Army of six thousand Men, to desire his Assistance, whereof he assured them by a speedy March to York. Being now encouraged by this increase of Force,Tadcaster. they re∣solv'd to fall upon Tadcaster. My Father drew all his Men thither;
but, in a Council of War the Town was judged untenable, and that we should draw out to an advantagious piece of Ground, by the Town; But before we could all march out, the Enemy advanced so fast, that we were necessitated to leave some Foot in a slight Work above the Bridge, to secure our Retreat, but the Enemy pressing on us, forced us to draw back, to main∣tain that Ground. We had about nine hundred Men, the Enemy above four thousand, who in Brigades drew up close to the Works, and storm'd us. Our Men re∣serv'd their shot, till they came near, which they did then dis∣pose of to so good purpose,
that the Enemy was forced to retire, and shelter themselves behind the Hedges. And here did the first Fight continue from Eleven a Clock at Noon, till Five at Night, with Can∣non and Musquet, without in∣termission. They had once possessed a House by the Bridge, which would have cut us from our Reserves that were in the Town, but Major General Gifford with a Commanded Party, beat them out again, where many of the Enemy were slain, and taken Prisoners. They at∣tempted an another Place, but were repulsed by Captain Li∣ster, who was there slain, a great Loss, being a Discreet Gentleman.
By this time it grew dark, and the Enemy drew off into the Fields hard by, with inten∣tion to assault us again the next day. They left that Night above two hundred dead and wound∣ed upon the Place. But our Ammunition being all spent in this day's Fight, we drew off that Night, and marched to Selby, and the Enemy en∣tred the next Morning into the Town. Thus by the Mercy of God were a few delivered from an Army, who in their thoughts had swallowed us up. The Earl of Newcastle now lay betwixt us and our Friends in the West-Riding; but to as∣sist
and encourage them I was sent with about three hundred Foot, and three Troops of Horse, and some Arms to Brad∣ford: I was to go by Ferry-bridge, Our Intelligence being that the Enemy was advanced no further than Sherburne, but when I was within a mile of the Town, we took some Pri∣soners who told us, my Lord of Newcastle lay at Pontefract, eight hundred Men in Ferry-bridge, and the rest of the Ar∣my in all the Towns there∣about: So that our Advance or Retreat seem'd alike diffi∣cult. Little time being allow∣ed us to consider, we resolv'd to retreat to Selby: three or four hundred Horse of the Ene∣my
shewed themselves in the Rear, without making any attempt upon us, so that, by the Goodness of God, we got safe to Selby. Three days after this, upon better Intelligence how the Ene∣my lay, with the same Num∣ber as before, I marched in the Night by several Towns where they lay, and came the next Day to Bradford, a Town very untenable, but for their good affection to us, deser∣ving all we could hazard for them. Our first Work then was to Fortifie Our selves, for we could not but expect an Assault. There lay at Leeds fifteen hun∣dred of the Enemy, and
twelve hundred at Wakefield, nei∣ther place above six or seven Miles distant from us. They visited us every Day with their Horse, Ours not going far from the Town, being very unequal in Number: yet the Enemy seldom return'd with∣out Loss, till at last our few Men grew so bold, and theirs so disheartned, that they durst not stir a Mile from their Ga∣risons. Whilst these daily Skirmishes were among the Horse, I thought it necessary to strength∣en our selves with more Foot; I summon'd the Country, who had by this time more liberty to come to us. I presently Armed them with those Arms
we brought along with us; So that in all we were about eight hundred Foot. Being too many to lye idle, and too few to be upon con∣stant Duty, we resolv'd through the assistance of God, to at∣tempt them in their Gari∣sons. We summon'd the Country again, and made a Body of twelve or thirteen hundred Men, with which we marched to Leeds,Leeds. and drew them up within half Cannon-shot of their Works, in Battalia, and then sent a Trumpet with a Summons to deliver up the Town to me, for the use of King and Parliament. They pre∣sently
returned this Answer, That it was not civilly done to come so near before I sent the Summons, and that they would defend the Town the best they could with their Lives. I presently order'd the man∣ner of the Storm, and we all fell on at the same time: The business was hotly disputed for almost two Hours; but the Enemy being beaten from their Works, and the Barricado's in∣to the Streets forced open, the Horse and Foot resolutely en∣tred, and the Soldiers cast down their Arms, and rendred them∣selves Prisoners. The Gover∣nor and some Chief Officers swam the River and escaped,
only Major Beaumont was drown∣ed, about forty or fifty slain, good store of Ammunition ta∣ken, of which we had great want. The Consequence of this Action was yet of more im∣portance; for those who fled from Leeds to Wakefield, and quitting that Garison also, gave my Lord of Newcastle such an Allarm at Pontefract, that he drew all his Army again to York, leaving once more a free intercourse, which he had so long time cut off, betwixt my Father and us. After a short time the Earl of Newcastle return'd again to the same Quarters, and we to our stricter Duties. But we
quickly found our Men must have more room, or more A∣ction. Captain Hotham and I took a resolution early one Morning (from Selby) to beat up a Quar∣ter of the Enemies that lay at Fenton; they being gone, we marched to Sherburne,Sherburn. intend∣ing there only to give them an Alarm; but they might see us a Mile or more, over a plain Common, which lay by the Town, and they sent twenty or thirty Horse, to Guard a Pass near the Town; I had the Van; for at this time we com∣manded our Troops distinct one from another, both ma∣king five Troops of Horse,
and two of Dragoons. I told Captain Hotham, that if he would second me, I would Charge those Horse, and if they fled, I would pursue them so close as to get into the Town with them: He promi∣sed to second me; I went to the Head of my Troops, and presently Charged them, they fled, and we pursued close to the Barricado, but they got in, and shut it upon us: Here my Horse was shot in at the Breast: We so fill'd the Lane, being strait, that we could not Retreat without confusion, and danger of their falling in our Reer, so we stood to it, and Stormed the Works with Pistol and Sword: At the end of the
Barricado, there was a narrow passage for a single Horse to go in, I entred there, others fol∣lowing me, one by one; and close at one side of the Entrance stood a Troop of Horse of the Enemy: So soon as eight or ten of us were got in, We Charged them, and they fled; by this time the rest of our Men had beat them from their Barricado, and entred the Town: We soon cleared the Streets, and pursued those that fled: And now my Horse which was shot in the Lane, fell down dead under me, but I was presently mounted a∣gain.
The Enemy in the Towns about having taken the Alarm, it made us think of securing our Retreat, with the Prisoners we had got, some of them be∣ing considerable, among whom was Major General Windham;Col. Pri∣deaux escap'd. We scarce got into order be∣fore General Goring came with a good Body of Horse up to us, and as we marched off, he followed us close in the Reer, without doing us any hurt, only my Trumpet had his Horse shot close by me, and thus we returned to Selby. Though this did not free us wholly from a Potent Enemy, yet we lay more quietly by them a good while after.
In this recess of Action, we had several Treaties about Pri∣soners; and this I mention the rather, for that Captain Hotham here first began to discover his intentions of leaving the Parliament's Service, in ma∣king Conditions for himself, with the Earl of Newcastle, though it was not discovered till a good while after, which had almost ruin'd my Father, and the Forces with him; for being now denied help and succour from Hull, and the East-Riding, he was forced to forsake Selby, and retire to Leeds, and those Western Parts where I then lay. To make good this Retreat, I was sent to, to bring what
Men I could to joyn with him at Sherburne, for my Lord of Newcastle's Army lay so as he might easily intercept us in our way to Leeds, which he had determin'd to do, and to that end lay with his Army on Clifford-Moore, having present In∣telligence of our March. Whilst my Father, with fif∣teen hundred Men, Ordnance, and Ammunition, continued his way from Selby to Leeds; I with those I brought to Sher∣burne, marched a little aside, betwixt my Lord of Newcastle's Army and Ours. And to a∣muse them the more, made an Attempt upon Tadcaster, where they had three or four hundred Men, who presently
quit the Town, and fled to York. Here we stayed three or four hours slighting the Works, which put my Lord Newcastle's Army to a stand, being on their March to meet us, think∣ing he was deceived in his In∣telligence, and that we had some other design upon York; He presently sends back the Lord Goring with twenty Troops of Horse and Dragoons to re∣lieve Tadcaster. We were newly drawn off when he came; my Lord Go∣ring past over the River to follow us, but seeing we were far unequal in Horse to him, (for I had not above three Troops, and were to go over
Bramham-Moore Plain) I gave direction to the Foot to march away, whilst I stay'd with the Horse to interrupt the Enemy's passage in those narrow Lanes that lead up to the Moore. Here was much Firing at one another; but in regard of their great Numbers, as they ad∣vanced, we were forced to give way; yet had gained by it suffi∣cient time for the Foot to have been out of danger. When we came up to the Moore again, I found them where I left them, which troubled me much, the Enemy being close upon us, and a great Plain yet to go over. So we march∣ing the Foot in two Divisi∣ons,
and the Horse in the Rear, the Enemy followed about two Musket-shot from us, in three good Bodies, but made no Attempt upon us: And thus we got well over this open Campagn, to some Inclosures, beyond which was another Seacroft Moore. Moore, less than the other. Here Our Men thinking them∣selves secure, were more care∣less in keeping Order; and whilst their Officers were get∣ting them out of Houses where they sought for Drink, it be∣ing an extream hot Day, the Enemy got another Way as soon as we into the Moore; and when we had almost pass'd this Plain also, they seeing Us in some Disorder, charged Us
both in Flank and Rear: The Countrymen presently cast down their Arms and fled; the Foot soon after, which for want of Pikes was not able to with∣stand their Horse: Some were Slain, many were taken Priso∣ners; Few of Our Horse stood the Charge. Some Officers with me, made Our Retreat with much Difficulty; in which Sir Henry Fowlis had a slight Hurt; my Cornet was taken Prisoner. We got well to Leeds, about an Hour after my Fa∣ther and the Men with him got safe thither. This was one of the greatest Losses we ever receiv'd. Yet was it a Providence it was a part, and not the whole For∣ces
which receiv'd this Loss; it being the Enemy's Intention to have fought us that Day with their whole Army, which was at least Ten Thousand Men, had not Our Attempt upon Tadcaster put a Stand to them; and so concluded that Day with this Storm, which fell on me only. We being at Leeds, it was thought fit to possess some o∣ther Place; wherefore I was sent to Bradford with seven or eight hundred Foot, and three Troops of Horse. These two Towns were all the Garisons we had;VVake∣field. and at Wakefield, six Miles off, lay three thousand of the Enemy; but they did
not much disturb us: And we were busied about releasing Pri∣soners that were taken at Sea∣croft, most of them being Countrymen, whose Wives and Children were still importu∣nate for their Release, which was as earnestly endeavoured by us, but no Conditions would be accepted; so as their con∣tinual Cries, and Tears, and Importunities, compelled us to think of some way to redeem these Men; and we thought of attempting Wakefield. Our Intelligence was, that the Enemy had not above eight or nine hundred Men in the Town; I acquainted my Father with Our design, who approved of it, and sent some
Men from Leeds, so that we were able to draw out eleven hundred Horse and Foot. Upon Whitsunday, early in the Morning, we came before the Town, but they had notice of Our coming, and had manned all their Works, and set about five hundred Musketeers to line the Hedges without the Town, which made us now doubt our Intelligence, but it was too late. After a little Consultation we advanced, and soon beat them back into the Town, which we storm'd at three Places; and after an Hour's dispute, the Foot forced open a Barricado, where I entred with my own Troop,
Colonel Alured and Captain Bright followed with theirs: The Street where we entred was full of their Foot; We charged them through, and routed them, leaving them to the Foot that followed close behind us: And presently we were charged again with Horse led on by General Goring; where, after a hot Encounter, some were Slain, and himself taken Prisoner by Colonel Alured. I cannot but here acknow∣ledge God's Goodness to me this day; for being advanced a good way single before my Men, having a Colonel, and Lieutenant-Colonel, who had engaged themselves to be my
Prisoners, only with me, and ma∣ny of the Enemy now betwixt me and my Men, I lighted up∣on a Regiment of Foot stand∣ing in the Market-place; be∣ing thus encompassed, and thinking what to do, I spied a Lane which I thought would lead me back to my Men again: At the end of this Lane there was a Corps-de-guard of the Enemy's, with fifteen or sixteen Soldiers, who were just then quitting of it, with a Serjeant leading them off; whom we met, and seeing their Officers, they came up to us, taking no notice of me, and asked them what they would have them do, for they could keep the work no longer, the Round-heads
(as they call'd them) came so fast upon them. The Gentlemen who had pass'd their Words to me to be my true Prisoners, said nothing; and looking one upon another, I thought it not fit now to own them as Prisoners, much less to bid the rest to render themselves to me; but being well mounted, and seeing a place in the Works where Men used to go over, I rushed from them, and made my Horse leap over the Work, and by a good Providence got to my Men again, who before I came had, by Direction of Major-General Gifford, brought up a Piece of Ordnance, and placed
it in the Church-yard, against that Body that stood in the Market-place, which presently rendred themselves. All our Men being got in∣to the Town, the Streets were cleared, and many Prisoners taken; but the Horse got off, almost entire. This appeared the greater Mercy, when we saw Our mi∣stake; for we found Three thou∣sand Men in the Town, and expected but half the number. We brought away fourteen hun∣dred Prisoners, Eighty Officers, Twenty eight Colours, and great store of Ammunition.
But seeing this was more a Miracle, than a Victory; more the Effect of God's Providence, than humane Force, or Pru∣dence, let the Honour and Praise of all be His only. After this, we exchanged our Men that were Prisoners, and we were freed a good while from any trouble or attempt of the Enemy. Hitherto, through God's Mer∣cy, we had held up near two Years against a potent Army; but they finding us now almost tired with continual Service, treacherously used by Friends, and wanting many things ne∣cessary for support and defence,
the Earl of Newcastle marched with an Army of Ten or Twelve thousand Men to besiege Us, and resolv'd to sit down be∣fore Bradford, which was a ve∣ry untenable Place. Hither my Father drew all the Forces he could spare out of the Garisons; but seeing it impossible to defend the Town otherwise than by Strength of Men, and that we had not a∣bove ten or twelve days Pro∣vision for so many as were ne∣cessary to keep it;Adder∣ton-Moor. We resolv'd the next Morning, very early, with a Body of three Thousand Men, to attempt his whole Ar∣my, as they lay in their Quar∣ters three Miles off. Hoping
by it to put him to some di∣straction, which could not be done any other way, by reason of the unequal Numbers. To this End my Father ap∣pointed Four o'th' Clock next morning to begin Our March; but Major-General Gifford, who had the Ordering of the Busi∣ness, so delay'd the execution of it, that it was seven or eight before we began to move, and not without much suspicion of Treachery; for when we came near the Place we intended, the Enemy's whole Army was drawn up in Battalia. We were to go up a Hill to them; That Our Forlorn Hope gained by beating theirs into
their main Body, which was drawn up half a Mile further upon a Plain called Adderton-Moore. We being all got up the Hill, drew into Battalia al∣so. I Commanded the Right Wing, which was about One thousand Foot, and Five Troops of Horse. Major-General Gif∣ford Commanded the left Wing, which was about the same num∣ber. My Father Commanded in Chief. We advanced through the inclosed Grounds, till we came to the Moore, beating the Foot, that lay in them, to their main Body. Ten or twelve Troops of Horse charged us in the Right Wing; We kept the Inclosures,
placing Our Musketeers in the Hedges next the Moore; which was a good Advantage to us who had so few Horse. There was a Gate, or open Place, to the Moore, where five or six might enter a-breast. Here they strive to enter, we to de∣fend it; but after some dispute, those that entred the Pass, found sharp Entertainment; and those who were not yet entred, as hot Welcome from the Muske∣teers that flanked them in the Hedges. They were all, in the end, forced to retreat, with the Loss of Collonel Howard, who Commanded them. Our Left Wing at the same time was engaged with the Ene∣my's Foot, and gained Ground
of them. The Horse came down again, and charged us, they being about Thirteen or Fourteen Troops. We defend∣ed Our selves as before, but with much more difficulty; many having got in among us, but were beaten off again with some Loss. Collonel Herne, who Commanded that Party, was slain. We pursued them to their Cannon. Here I cannot omit a remarkable Instance of Divine Justice. Whilst we were engag'd in the Fight with those Horse that entred the Gate, four Soldiers had stript Colonel Herne naked as he lay on the ground, Men still Fighting round about him; and so dextrous were these Villains, that they had
done it, and mounted them∣selves again, before we had beaten the Enemy off: But af∣ter we had beaten them to their Ordnance, as I said, and now returning to our Ground again, the Enemy discharged a Piece of Cannon in our Rear, the Bullet fell into Captain Copley's Troop, in which were these four Men; two of them were killed, and some Hurt or Mark remain'd on the other, though dispers'd into several Ranks of the Troop, which made it more remarkable. We had not yet Martial Law among us; this gave me a good Occasion to declare to the Soldiers how God would punish, when Men want∣ed Power to do it.
This Charge, and the Re∣solution our Men shewed in the Left Wing, made the Ene∣my think of Retreating. Or∣ders were given for it, and some marched off the Field. Whilst they were in this wavering condition, one Collo∣nel Skirton desired his Gene∣ral to let him Charge once with a Stand of Pikes, with which he broke in upon our Men, and not being relieved by our Reserves, which were Commanded by some ill-af∣fected Officers, chiefly Major General Gifford, who did not his part as he ought to do, Our Men lost Ground, which the Enemy seeing, pursued this
advantage, by bringing on fresh Troops; Ours being here∣with discouraged, began to fly, and were soon routed. The Horse also Charged us again, We not knowing what was done in the Left Wing: Our Men maintained their Ground, till a Command came for us to Retreat, having scarce any way now to do it, the Enemy being almost round about us, and Our way to Bradford cut off. But there was a Lane in the Field we were in, which led to Hallifax, which as a hap∣py Providence, brought us off, without any great Loss, save of Captain Talbot, and twelve more that were slain in this last Encounter. Of those who
fled, there were about sixty kill'd, and three hundred taken Prisoners. After this ill Success, we had small hopes of better, wanting all things necessary in Bradford for defence of the Town, and no expectation of help from any Place. The Earl of New∣castle presently Besieg'd the Town; but before he had sur∣rounded it, I got in with those Men I brought from Hallifax. I found my Father much trou∣bled, having neither a place of Strength to defend our selves in, nor a Garison in Yorkshire to Retreat to; for the Gover∣nour of Hull had declar'd if we were forced to Retreat thi∣ther,
he would shut the Gates on us. Whilst he was musing on these sad thoughts, a Messenger was sent unto him from Hull, to let him know the Towns∣men had secured the Governour; that they were sensible of the danger he was in, and if he had any occasion to make use of that Place, he should be very readily and gladly receiv'd there. Which News was joyfully re∣ceiv'd, and acknowledged as a great Mercy of God, yet it was not made use of till a further necessity compell'd. My Father having Order'd me to stay here with eight hun∣dred Foot,Bradford. and sixty Horse, re∣tired that Night to Leeds to se∣cure it.
The Earl of Newcastle spent three or four days in laying his Quarters about the Town of Bradford, and brought down his Cannon, but needed not to raise Batteries, for the Hills within half Musket-shot com∣manded all the Town. Being planted in two places, they shot furiously upon us, and made their Approaches, which made us spend very much of our lit∣tle Store, being not above twen∣ty five or twenty six Barrels of Powder, at the beginning of the Siege. Yet the Earl of Newcastle sent a Trumpet to offer us Conditions, which I accepted, so they were Honourable for us to take, and safe for the In∣habitants.
We sent two Captains to treat with him, and agreed to a Cessation during that time; but he continued working still; whereupon I sent forth the Com∣missioners again, suspecting a design of attempting something upon us. They returned not till Eleven a Clock at Night, and then with a slight Answer. Whilst they were delivering it to us, we heard great shoot∣ing of Cannon and Muskets; all run presently to the Works, which the Enemy was storm∣ing. Here for three quarters of an hour was very hot Service, but at length they retreated. They made a Second attempt, but were also beaten off; after this, we had not above one Bar∣rel
of Powder left, and no Match: I called the Officers to∣gether, where it was advised and resolv'd to draw off pre∣sently, before it was day, and to retreat to Leeds, by forcing a Way, which we must do, for they had surrounded the Town. Orders were dispatch'd, and speedily put in execution. The Foot Commanded by Colonel Rogers was sent out, through some narrow Lanes, and they were to beat up the Dragoons Quarters, and so go on to Leeds. I my self with some other Officers went with the Horse, which were not above fifty, in a more open Way.
I must not here forget my Wife, who ran the same hazard with us in this Retreat, and with as little expression of Fear; not from any Zeal, or delight in the War, but through a willing and patient Suffering of this undesira∣ble Condition. I sent two or three Horsemen before, to discover what they could of the Enemy; who pre∣sently return'd and told us there was a Guard of Horse close by us. Before I had gone forty Paces, the Day beginning to break, I saw them upon the Hill above us, being about 300 Horse. I, with some 12 more, charged them, Sir Hen. Fowles, Major Ge∣neral Gefford, my Self and 3 more brake through; Cap. Mudd was
slain, and the rest of our Horse being close by, the Enemy fell upon them, and soon routed them, taking most of them Pri∣soners, among whom was my Wife, the Officer Will. Hill, behind whom she rid, being taken. I saw this Disaster, but could give no relief; for after I was got through, I was in the Enemies Reer alone, those who had char∣ged through with me, went on to Leeds, thinking I had done so too: But I was unwilling to leave my Company, and stay'd till I saw there was no more in my Power to do, but to be taken Prisoner with them. I then reti∣red to Leeds. The like Disaster fell among the Foot, that went the other
way, by a mistake, for after they had marched a little way, the Van fell into the Dragoons Quarters, clearing their way; but through a cowardly fear, he that com∣manded these Men, being in the Reer, made them face about, and march again into the Town, where the next Day they were all taken Prisoners, only 80 or thereabout of the Front that got through, came all to Leeds, mounted on Horses which they had taken from the Enemy, where I found them when I came thither, which was some joy to them all, concluding I was ei∣ther slain, or taken Prisoner. At Leeds I found all in great Distraction, the Council of War newly risen, where it was re∣solv'd
to quit the Town, and retreat to Hull, which was six∣ty Miles off, many of the E∣nemies Garrisons being in the way. This, in two Hours af∣ter, was accordingly done, least the Enemy should presently send Horse to prevent us; for they had fifty or sixty Troops with∣in three Miles: But we got well to Selby, where there was a Fer∣ry, and hard by a Garrison at Cawood. My Father being a Mile be∣fore, Selby. with a few Men, getting over the Ferry, word came to us that he was in danger to be taken. I hasted to him with about forty Horse, the rest fol∣lowing in some disorder. He was newly got into the Boat,
when the Enemy with three Cor∣nets of Horse entred the Town. I was drawn up in the Mar∣ket place, directly before the Street they came down; when they were almost half come into the Market-place, they turn'd on the Right Hand; with part of my Troop I charged them in the Flank, and divided them; we had the Chase of them down the long Street that goes to Bray∣ton. It hapned at the same time that those Men I left behind were coming up that Street, but being in disorder, and discourag'd with the Misfortunes of many Days before, they turn'd about, and gave way, not knowing we
were pursuing the Enemy in their Reer. At the end of this Street was a narrow Lane, which led to Ca∣wood. The Enemy strove to pass that way, but it being narrow, there was a sudden stop, where we were mingled one among another. Here I receiv'd a Shot in the Wrist of my Arm, which made the Bridle fall out of my hand, and being among the Nerves and Veins, suddenly let out such a quantity of Blood, that I was ready to fall from my Horse: But taking the Reins in the other Hand in which I had my Sword, the Enemy minding nothing so much as how to get away, I drew my self out of the Crowd,
and came to our Men, who turned about, and seeing me ready to fall from my Horse, they lay'd me on the Ground; now when I was almost senseless, my Surgeon came seasonably, and bound up the Wound, and stopt the bleeding. After a quarter of an Hours rest, I got a Horse-back again; the other part of our Horse had beaten the Enemy back to Cawood, the same way they came first to us. Thus by the goodnesse of God, our passage was made clear; some went over the Ferry after my Father, I my self with others went through the Levels to Hull, but it proved a very troublesome and dangerous passage, being
often interrupted by the Enemy, sometimes in our Front, some∣times in our Reer. I had been twenty Hours on Horseback, after I was shot, without any rest or refreshment, and as many Hours before. And as a further Affliction, my Duck. of Buck. Daughter, not above five Years old, being carried before her Maid, endured all this Retreat a Horseback; but Nature not being able to hold out any long∣er, she fell into frequent Swoon∣ings, and in appearance was rea∣dy to expire her last. Having now past the Trent, and seeing a House not far off, I sent her with her Maid only thither, with little hopes of see∣ing her any more alive, though
I intended the next Day to send a Ship from Hull for her. I went on to Barton, having sent before to have a Ship rea∣dy against my coming thither. Here I lay down to take a lit∣tle rest, if it were possible to find any in a Body so full of pain, and a Mind yet fuller of anxiety and trouble. Though I must acknowledge it as the in∣finite goodness of God, that my Spirit was nothing at all discou∣raged from doing still that which I thought to be my Duty. I had not rested a quarter of an Hour, before the Enemy came close to the Town. I had now not above a hundred Horse with me, we went to the Ship, where under the Security of her
Ordinance we got all our Men and Horse aboard; and crossing Humber, we arriv'd at Hull, our Men faint and tired. I my self had lost all, even to my Shirt, for my Cloaths were made un∣fit to wear with Rents and Blood. Presently after my coming to Hull, I sent a Ship for my Daugh∣ter, who was brought the next Day to the Town, pretty well recovered of her long and tedi∣ous Journey. Not many Days after the Earl of Newcastle sent my Wife back again in his Coach, with some Horse to guard her; which ge∣nerous act of his gain'd him more Reputation, than he could have got by detaining a Lady Priso∣ner, upon such Terms.
Many of our Men, who were dispersed in this long Retreat, came hither again to us. Our first Business was to raise new Forces, and in a short time we had about 1500 Foot, and 700 Horse. The Town being little, I was sent to Beverly, with the Horse, and 600 Foot, but my Lord of Newcastle now looking upon us as inconsiderable, was marched into Lincolnshire, with his whole Army, leaving some few Garri∣sons. He took in Gainsbrough, and Lincoln, and intended Boston, which was the Key of the Asso∣ciated Counties; for his Orders, which I have seen, were to go into Essex, and block up London on that side.
Having laid a great while still, and being now strong enough for those Forces which remain'd in the Country, we sent out a good Party to make an Attempt upon Stanford-Bridge, near York, but the Enemy upon the allarm fled thither, which put them al∣so in such a fear, that they sent earnestly to my Lord of New∣castle to desire him to return, or the Country would again be lost. Upon this he returned again in∣to York-shire, and not long after came to besiege Hull. I lay at Beverly in the way of his March, and finding we were not able to defend such an open place against an Army, I desired Orders from my Father to retire back to Hull: But the
Committee there had more mind of raising Money, than to take care of the Soldiers; and yet these Men had the greatest share in Command at this time, and would not let any Orders be gi∣ven for our Retreat; nor was it fit for us to return without Or∣der. The Enemy marched with his whole Army towards us: Retreat we must not; keep the Town we could not. So, to make our Retreat more honou∣rable and useful, I drew out all the Horse and Dragoons towards the Enemy; and stood drawn up by a Wood side all that Night. Next Morning by Day, our Scouts and theirs fired on one
another. They marched on with their whole Body, which was about 4000 Horse, and 12000 Foot. We stood till they were come very near to us. I then drew off; having given direction before for the Foot to March away towards Hull, and thinking to make good the Re∣treat with the Horse. The Enemy with a good Par∣ty came up in our Reer; the Lanes being narrow we made good shift with them, till we got into Beverley, and shut the Gate, which we had scarce time to do, they being so close to us. In this business we lost Ma∣jor Layton, and not above two more.
The Enemy not knowing what Forces we had in the Town, stay'd till the rest of the Army came up, which was a∣bout a Mile behind. This gave our Foot some advantage in their Retreat, it being five Miles to Hull, and the way on narrow Banks. I sent the Horse by Cottingham, a more open Road, who got well thither; they overtook the Foot, and made good their Retreat, till we got to a little Bridge two Miles from Hull, where we made a stand: The Enemy followed close: Our Men gave them a good Volley of Shot, which made them draw back, and they advanced no further. So leaving a small Guard at the Bridge, we got safe to Hull.
Thus not only for want of Military Skill in the Gentlemen of the Committee, but to say no more, for want of good Nature, we were expos'd to this trouble and danger. My Lord of Newcastle now laid Siege to Hull, but at a great distance, for the Sluces were let open and drowned the Land for two Miles about the Town. Yet upon a Bank, which was the Highway, he approached so near as to shoot Cannon Shot at random into the Town, and for the most part hot Bullets, but by the Diligence and Care of the Governour, who caused eve∣ry Inhabitant to watch his own House, the Danger was prevent∣ed.
Our Horse was now useless, and many dyed every Day, ha∣ving nothing but salt Water a∣bout the Town. I was therefore sent over with the Horse into Lincoln-shire to join with the Earl of Manchester's Forces, which were then Commanded by Ma∣jor General Cromwel, who recei∣ved us at our Landing with his Troops. Sir John Henderson lay within three or four Miles of this Place, with 5000 Men, to prevent our Conjunction, but durst not at∣tempt it. He marched three or four Days near unto us, but for want of good Intelligence, we did not know so much. For I altogether trusted to the Care of
our new Friends, being a Stran∣ger in those Parts. At Horncastle one Morning he fell upon our out Guards,Winsby, or Horncastle. who being but newly raised in that Country, fled towards Lin∣coln, without giving any Allarm to our Quarters, that lay disper∣sed and secure. Sir John Henderson marching slowly with his Army, gave the Allarm to some of our out Quar∣ters, which was soon taken in all the rest. Yet we were in some disorder before we could get in∣to any considerable Body. My Lord Willoughby with his Horse, and my Dragoons, Command∣ed by Collonel Morgan, brought
up the Reer, and after some Skirmishes, we lodg'd that Night in the Field. The next Day the Earl of Manchester came to us with his Foot, the Day following we ad∣vanced toward the Enemy, and chusing a convenient Ground to fight on, we drew up the Army there. The Enemy did so on the side of another Hill close by, having a little Plain betwixt us. Lieutenant General Cromwel had the Van, I the reserve of Horse, my Lord Manchester all the Foot. After we had faced one ano∣ther a good while, the Forlorn Hopes began the Fight, present∣ly the Bodies met on the Plain,
where the Fight was hot for half an Hour, but then they were forced to a Rout, 200 kill'd, and many taken Prisoners. This was the issue of Hornca∣stle Fight, or as some call it, Winsby Fight. At the same instant we heard great shooting of Ordinance to∣wards Hull, which was a Sally my Father made out of the Town upon my Lord of Newcastle's Trenches, who drew out most part of his Army to relieve them: But our Men charged so resolute∣ly, that they possess'd themselves of the Canon, and pursuing their Advantage, put the Enemy to a total Rout, upon which he raised the Siege, and returned a∣gain to York.
These two Defeats together, the one falling heavy upon the Horse, the other upon the Foot, kept the Enemy all that Winter from attempting any thing; and we, after the taking of Lincoln, setled our selves in Winter Quar∣ters. In the coldest Season of the Year I was commanded by the Parliament to go and raise the Siege at Nantwich, which the Lord Byron, with the Irish Army, had reduced to great Extremity. I was the most unfit of all their Forces, being ever the worst Paid, my Men sickly and almost na∣ked; I desir'd the Parliament that they would be pleas'd to supply these Wants, not excu∣sing
my self, as some did, who had no will to stir, though well enough accommodated. The Parliament's answer was a positive direction to March, for it would admit of no delay. But foreseeing I should have such a return to my Desires, and con∣sidering the necessity of the Busi∣ness, I had upon my own Credit got so much Cloath as Cloathed 1500 Men, and all were rea∣dy to March when these Orders came to me. The twenty ninth of December we set forward from Falkingham in Lincolnshire with 1800 Horse, and 500 Dragoons, and power to call the Regiments of Foot in Lancashire and Cheshire, to make
up the Body of the Army, which I found was not a little trouble when I came to Manchester, for some were thirty, some forty Miles distant, besides the dissatis∣faction of some of their Collonels, who went as their particular Safe∣ty or Interest sway'd them. But finding more readiness in the inferior Officers, and com∣mon Soldiers, I got up in a few Days near 3000 Foot. With this Army we marched to Nantwich, which was at the point of Surrendring. When we came within a Days March, I had Intelligence the Lord By∣ron had drawn off his Siege, and intended to meet us in the Field. I put my Men into the Order in
which I intended to Fight, and continued my March till we came within three Miles of the Town. There was a Pass kept with about 250 Men: I sent Collo∣nel Morgan with his Dragoons, who beat them off, in which his Brother was slain. The Major, who commanded the other Par∣ty, with some others, was ta∣ken Prisoner. We marched on till we came within Cannon shot of their Works, where half of their Ar∣my was drawn up. And we were inform'd, that the River which runs through the Town, being raised with the melting of the Snow, hinder'd those that lay
on the other side of the Town from joining with them. We call'd a Council of War, wherein it was debated, whe∣ther we should attempt those in their Works, being divided from the rest of the Army, or march into the Town and relieve them, and by the increase of our Force be better able the next day to encounter them. This last was resolv'd on, and making way with Pioneers through the Hedges, we mar∣ched to the Town; but after we had gone a little way, word came that the Enemy was in the Reer. We faced about with two Regiments, and my own Regi∣ment of Horse, commanded
by Major Rokeby, and reliev'd those that were engaged, and so the Fight began on all sides. These that fell on our Reer, were that part of their Army that lay on the other side of the Town, who had past the Ri∣ver. Those who were drawn up under their Works, fell up∣on our Van, which was mar∣ching to the Town. Thus was the Battel divided, there being a quarter of a Mile betwixt us, in the Division that first engag'd. Our Foot at the beginning gave a little Ground, but our Horse recover'd this, by beating the Enemies Horse out of the Lanes that flanked our Foot, which did so encourage our Men, that they
regain'd their Ground on the E∣nemy, and made them retreat from Hedge to Hedge, 'till at length they were forced to fly to their Works. Their Horse retreated in bet∣ter Order, towards Chester, with∣out much Loss. Our other Wing being assisted from the Town, who sally'd out with se∣ven or eight hundred Musketeers, beat the Enemy back into the same Works. We presently sur∣rounded them, and being in great Disorder and Confusion, they soon yielded themselves Prisoners, with all their chief Of∣ficers, Arms, Colours and Am∣munition.
Thus, by the Mercy of God, was this Victory obtain'd, being the more signal, in that we were not to deal with young Soldiers, but with Men of great Experi∣ence, and an Army which had ever been victorious. After this we took in several Garrisons in Cheshire; Latham on∣ly in Lancashire held out, which was besieg'd by the Forces of that County, but afterward the Siege was rais'd by Prince Ru∣pert. Having spent three or four Months in this Expedition, my Father commanded me back in∣to York-shire, that by the Con∣junction of our Forces, he might be abler to take the Field. We
met about Ferry-bridge, he being come out of Hull thither, with intent to fall upon the Enemies Garrison at Selby. I receiv'd at this time ano∣ther Command from the Parli∣ament to march immediately with my Horse and Dragoons in∣to Northumberland, to join with the Scots Army. The Earl of New∣castle, who was then at Durham being much stronger in Horse than they, for want of which they could not advance: But it being resolv'd within a Day or two to storm Selby, I stay'd 'till that bu∣siness was over, which proved as effectual for the relief of the Scots Army.
The Governour of York, Coll. Bellasis, lay in Selby with 2000 Men. We drew our Horse and Foot close to the Town, Sir John Meldrum led on the Foot, which had their several Posts appointed them, where they should storm. I with the Horse ready to second them. The Enemy within de∣fended themselves stoutly a good while. Our Men at length beat them from the Line, but could not advance further because of the Horse within. I got a Barrica∣do open, which let us in betwixt the Houses and the River; here we had an encounter with their Horse: After one Charge, they fled over a Bridge of Boats to York; their Horse came up, and
charged us again, where my Horse was overthrown, I being single a little before my Men, who presently reliev'd me, and forced the Enemy back. They retreated also to York. In this Charge we took Coll. Bellasis Governour of York. By this time the Foot had entred the Town, and had taken many Prisoners. This good Success of ours put them into great Di∣straction and Fear at York; so that they speedily sent to the Earl of Newcastle to haste back thither, believing we would pre∣sently attempt them. This News suddenly call'd him back, leaving the Scots, who with Cold, and often Allarms,
were reduced to great Extremi∣ty, but now they advance after him. The Earl of Newcastle gets in∣to York; the Scots join with my Father at Wetherby, altogether made 16000 Foot, and 4000 Horse. They march on to York. For the Siege of York it was thought necessary to have more Men, the Town being large in compass, and strongly mann'd. The Earl of Craford, Lindsey, and my Self were sent to the Earl of Manchester, to desire him to join with us in the Siege, to which he willingly consented, bringing an addition of 6000 Foot, and 3000 Horse.
Now the Army had three Generals, Lesly, Manchester, and Fairfax, who lay apart in three several Quarters before the Town, but the North side still remain'd open. Some time was spent here without any considerable Acti∣on, till in my Lord of Manche∣ster's Quarters, Approaches were made to St. Marry's Tower, and they soon came to mine it. Coll. Crayford, a Scotchman, who commanded that Quarter, sprung the Mine, being ambitious to have the Honour alone of it, without acquainting the other two Generals, for their Advice, and Concurrence, which prov'd very prejudicial, for having en∣gaged his Party against the whole
Strength of the Town, without more Forces to second him, he was repulsed with the loss of three hundred Men; for which he had surely been call'd to an Account, but escaped the better by reason of this Triumviral Go∣vernment. Soon after Prince Rupert came to relieve the Town. We rais'd the Siege. Hessey Moore was ap∣pointed the Randezvous. The whole Army drew thither. A∣bout a Mile from thence lay the Prince, the River Ouse being be∣twixt us, which he that night past over at Popleton. The next day he drew his Army into the same Moore, which being now joined with my Lord of New∣castles Army, made about 23
or 24000 Men, We something more. We were divided in our Opi∣nions what to do. The English were for Fighting; the Scots for Retreating, to gain (as they al∣ledg'd) both Time, and Place of more Advantage. This being resolv'd on, we marched away to Tadcaster, which made the Enemy advance the faster. Lieutenant General Cromwell, Lesley, and my Self were appoin∣ted to bring up the Reer. We sent word to the Generals of the necessity of making a stand, or else the Enemy, having this Ad∣vantage, might put us in some disorder. But by the advantage of the Ground we were on, we
hoped to make it good till they came back to us, which they did. The Place was Marston Fields, which afterwards gave the name to this Battel. Here we drew up our Army. The Enemy was drawn up in Battalia on the Moore a little be∣low us. The day being most part spent in Preparations, We now began to descend towards them. Lieutenant General Cromwell com∣manded the left Wing of the Horse, and seconded by Major General Lesley; I had the right Wing, with some Scots Horse, and Lances for my Reserves. The three Generals were with the Foot.
Our left Wing first charged the Enemies right Wing, which was perform'd for a while with much Resolution on both sides, but the Enemy at length was put to the worst. Our right Wing had not all so good success, by reason of the Furzes and Ditches we were to pass over before we could get to the Enemy, which put us in∣to great disorder. Notwithstanding I drew up a Body of 400 Horse. But be∣cause their Intervals of Horse in this Wing only, were lined with Musketteers, who did us much hurt with their Shot, I was ne∣cessitated to charge them. We were a long time engag'd one within another; but at last we rou∣ted
that part of their Wing which we charged, and pursued them a good way towards York. My self only return'd presently, to get to the Men I left behind me. But that part of the Enemy which stood, perceiving the dis∣order they were in, had charged and routed them before I could get to them: So that the good Success we had at the first was eclipsed by this bad Conclusi∣on. Our other Wing and most of the Foot went on prospe∣rously, 'till they had cleared the Field. I must ever remember with Thankfulness the Goodness of God to me this day; for having charged through the E∣nemy,
and my Men going after the Pursuit, and returning back to go to my other Troops, I was got in among the Enemy, who stood up and down the Field in several Bodies of Horse, so taking the Signal out of my Hat, I past through them for one of their own Commanders, and got to my Lord of Man∣chester's Horse, in the other Wing; only with a Cut in my Cheek, which was given me in the first Charge, and a shot which my Horse receiv'd. In this Charge many of my Officers and Soldiers were hurt and slain: The Captain of my own Troop was shot in the Arm, my Cornet had both his Hands cut, so as render'd him
ever after unserviceable. Cap∣tain Micklethwait, an honest stout Gentlemen, was slain: And scarce any Officer who was in this Charge but receiv'd a Hurt. Coll. Lambert, who should have seconded me, but could not get up to me, Charged in another place. Major Fairfax, who was Major to his Regiment, had at least thirty Wounds, of which he dyed at York, after he had been abroad again, and in good hopes of recovery. But that which nearest of all concern'd me, was the loss of myCharles Fairfax. Brother, who being desert∣ed of his Men, was sore wound∣ed, of which in three or four Days after he dyed. Buried at Marston. Aetat. 23.
In this Charge as many were hurt and kill'd as in the whole Army besides. On the Enemy's part there were above 4000 slain, and ma∣ny taken Prisoners. Prince Rupert returned into the South, the Earl of Newcastle went beyond Sea, with many of his Officers. York was presently surrendered, and the North now was wholly reduced by the Par∣liament's Forces, except some Gar∣risons. Soon after this I went to Helme∣sley, to take in the Castle there, where I received a dangerous Shot in my Shoulder, and was brought back to York, all being doubtful of my Recovery for some time.
At the same time the Parlia∣ment voted me to Command the Army in the South. But my Intentions being only to keep in mind what I had been present in during this Northern War, I shall put an end to this Discourse, where it pleas'd God to determine my Service there. Yet thus with some smart from his Rod, to let me see I was not mindful enough of re∣turning my humble Thanks and Acknowledgments for the Deli∣verances and Mercies I received; and for which▪ (alas) I am not yet capable enough to Praise him as I ought, that may say by Ex∣perience, Who is a God like unto Our God.
Therefore, not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give we the Praise. But as for my self, and what I have done, I may say with So∣lomon, I looked on all the Works that my Hands had wrought, and on the Labour that I had laboured to do, and behold all was Vanity and vexa∣tion of Spirit. For there is no remembrance of the Wise more than the Fool for ever, seeing that which now is, in the Days to come shall be forgotten. T. Fairfax.
SHORT MEMORIALS OF Some things to be cleared during my Command in the Army. BY the Grace and Assistance of God, I shall truly set down the Grounds of my Acti∣ons during this unhappy War, and especially of those Actions which seem'd to the World most que∣stionable.
My first engaging in the sad Calamities of the War, was a∣bout the Year 1641, when the general Distemper of the three Kingdoms, I mean the Difference betwixt the King and Parliament had kindled such a Flame even in the Heart of the State, that before a Remedy could be found, the whole Body was almost con∣sumed to Ashes. I must needs say, my Judg∣ment was for the Parliament, as the King and Kingdoms great and safest Council: As others were averse to Parliaments, be∣cause they did not go high e∣nough for Prerogative. Upon this Division, different Powers were set up: The Com∣mission of Array for the King, and
the Militia for the Parliament. But those of the Array exceeded their Commission in oppressing many honest People, whom, by way of Reproach, they called Roundheads, who for their Reli∣gion, Estates, and Interest, were a very considerable part of the Country; which occasion'd them to take up Arms in their own defence, and it was afterward confirm'd by Authority of Par∣liament. My Father, being yet at his House at Denton, where I then waited on him, had notice from his Friends, that it was intended he should be sent for as a Priso∣ner to York: He resolved not to stir from his own House, not be∣ing
conscious to himself of any thing to deserve Imprisonment. The Country suffering daily more and more, many came and intreated him to join with them in defence of themselves and Country, which was extremely oppressed by those of the Array (who after had the Name of Ca∣valiers) and he being also much importun'd by those about him, seeing his Neighbours in this Distress, resolv'd to run the same Hazard with them. Then did the Parliament grant a Commission to him to be Ge∣neral of the Forces in the North; my self also having a Commissi∣on under him to be General of the Horse.
It is not my intention in this place to relate the services done in this Cause of the Parlia∣ment. For I am rather desirous to clear my Actions, than de∣clare them; and therefore I shall say no more of this three years War in the North▪ there being nothing (I thank God) in all that time to be objected against me in particular: But I shall say something how I came to be engaged in the South. Some years had been spent in those Parts, in a lingring War betwixt the King and Parliament, and several Battels so equally fought, that it could scarce be known on which side the business in dispute would be determin'd: Though it must be confest that
the Parliaments Army was under the Command of a very noble and gallant Person, the Earl of Essex, yet they found that time and delay gain'd more advantage against them, and their Affairs, than Force had done. They therefore resolv'd to make a change in the Constitution of their Armies, hoping by it to find a change also in their busi∣ness, which was then something in a declining condition. In this distemper of things, the Army was new-modell'd, and a new General propos'd to Command it: And by Votes of the two Houses of Parliament I was no∣minated, though most unfit, and so far from desiring it, that had not so great an Authority (which
was then unseperated from the Royal Interest) Commanded my Obedience, and had I not been urged by the Perswasion of my nearest Friends, I should have refus'd so great a Charge: But whether it was from a na∣tural facility in me, that betrai'd my Modesty, or the powerful hand of God, which all things must obey, I was induced to re∣ceive the Command. Then was I immediately vo∣ted by the Parliament to come to London, and take my Charge, though not fully recovered of a dangerous Wound which I had received a little before at Hel∣mesley, and which I believe, with∣out the miraculous hand of God, had prov'd mortal.
But here (alas) when I bring to mind the sad consequences that crafty and designing Men have brought to pass since those first innocent Undertakings, I am ready to let go that confidence I once had with God, when I could say with Job, Till I die I will not remove my integrity from me, nor shall my Heart reproach me so long as I live: But I am now more fit to take up his complaint, and say, Why did I not die? why did I not give up the Ghost when my Life was on the confines of the Grave? God having been pleas'd thus to give me my Life for a Prey, I took my Journey Southward, hoping it might be some ways serviceable to the Publick: But
when I came thither, had it not been in the simplicity of my Heart, I could not have support∣ed my self under the frowns and displeasures of those who were disgusted with these alterations, in which many of them were much concern'd: And therefore they sought by all means to obstruct my proceedings in this new Charge; though they could not prevent what the necessity of Affairs prest most to do, which was to march speedily out with the Army; yet were we by them made so inconsidera∣ble, for want of fit and neces∣sary accommodations, as it ra∣ther seem'd that we were sent to be destroy'd, than to do any service to the Kingdom.
Surely then if we had had no other end but Self-interest, this might have discouraged us: But it wrought no such Effect on me, but rather gave me the more hopes of future success, as hapned to the Parliament's great advan∣tage. But if any ill Use hath been made of such Mercies, let the Mercies be acknowledged from God, but the abusers of them receive their due reward of shame and punishment. Being thus led on by good Success, and clear intention of publick Good, some of us could not discern the Serpent which was hid under the leaves of so good Fortune, nor believe the fruits of our hopes would prove as Cockatrice Eggs, from whence so
mischievous a Brood should af∣terwards spring. But how ill deserving soever we were, it pleas'd God still to give the Army such success in the Years of 1645 and 1646, that there remain'd in England neither Army not Fortress to oppose the Parliament in setling the Peace of the Kingdom. This Mercy was soon clouded with abominable Hypocrisy and Deceit, even in those Men who had been instrumental in bring∣ing this War to a conclusion. Here was the vertical Point on which the Army's Honour and Reputation turn'd into Reproach and Scandal. Here the Power of the Army I once had, was usurped by the Agitators, the fore∣runners
of Confusion and Anar∣chy. My Commission as General oblig'd me to act with Councel; but the arbitrary and unlimited Power of this Councel would act without a General: And all I could do was ineffectual to op∣pose them; especially when the Parliament it self became divi∣ded. At this time the Pay was with∣held from the Army, which in∣creased their Distempers; then followed Free Quarter, and that wrought a general Discontent through the whole Nation, which gave these factious Agitators occa∣sion to carry on their Design of raising their own Fortunes upon the Publick ruine.
I was much troubled to see things in this Condition, and ra∣ther desired to be a Sufferer than a Commander: But before I laid down my Commission, I thought fit to consult some Friends, ra∣ther than gratify my private Reason and Desires, especially having receiv'd it from a Pub∣lick Authority, which might justly expect to have notice be∣fore I laid it down. This was the Cause of my continuing in the Army longer than I would have done, which did indeed preserve the Parlia∣ment for some time from those Violences that it afterwards suf∣fer'd from these Disturbers. I shall now descend to some particulars of their Agitations.
The first time I took notice of them, was at Nottingham, by the Soldiers meeting to frame a Petition to the Parliament about their Arrears: The thing seem∣ed just; but not liking the way, I spake with some Officers, who were principally engaged in it, and got it suppress'd for that time. But this was only as the cutting off a Hydra's Head; for they began again, not so near the Head-Quarters, but in more remote Corners of the Army; so that before I could prevent it, they presented it to the Par∣liament; At which they were highly displeas'd. They now fell into Differences, the consequence of which did not only prove fatal to the King,
but destructive to themselves: The one striving to uphold their Authority; the other, who had a Spirit of Unsettlement, to pre∣serve themselves from the Ruine they fear'd. This, with a natural Inclina∣tion to change, I believe created thoughts of new Government, which in time attain'd the Name of a Commonwealth, but never ar∣riv'd to the Perfection of it, be∣ing sometimes Democratical, then Oligarchical; lastly, Anarchical: And indeed all the ways of at∣taining to it, seem'd nothing but Confusion. For now the Officers of the Army were plac'd and displac'd at the will of the new Agitators; and Violence so prevail'd, that it was above my
Power to restrain it. This made me have recourse to my Friends, to get me a Discharge of my Command; and several Mem∣bers of Parliament met and con∣sulted about it, but none would undertake to move it to the House, as Affairs then stood, believing such a Motion would be unpleasing to them. This was the Answer I re∣ceiv'd from them, and that I should satisfy my self, for it would be the Parliament's care to compose all things for the Good and Settlement of the Kingdom. These hopes did a little sup∣port my Spirit, but could not Ballance the Grief and Trouble I had, that I could not get my Discharge: So that if you find
me carried on with this Stream, I can truly say, it was by the Violence of it, rather than my own Consent. The Army got this Power and Strength by Correspondence with some in Parliament, who found it afterwards to their own Trou∣ble. The Army marcht nearer London; and at Windsor, after two days debate in a Council of War, it was resolv'd to remove all out of the House, whom they conceiv'd did obstruct (as they call'd it) the Publick Settle∣ment. I was prest to use all Expe∣dition in this March; but here I resolv'd to use a restrictive Power, where I had not a Persuasive: And when the Lieutenant-Ge∣neral,
and others, did urge me to sign Orders for marching, I still delay'd it, as ever dreading the Consequences of breaking Parliaments, and at a time when the Kingdom was falling into a new War, which was so near, that my delaying three or four days giving out Orders, divert∣ed this Humour of the Army, from being Statesmen, to their more proper Duty as Soldiers. Then did Collonel Poyer de∣clare in Wales; great Forces did rise with my Lord Goring in Kent; and Duke Hamilton came into England, almost at the same time with a Powerful Army of Scots; all which set out work enough that Summer.
This I write to shew how by Providence a few days of delay secur'd the Parliament above a Year from the Violence which soon after was offered them. I might here mention those great and difficult Actions the Army perform'd that Year,In Rent, &c. which were design'd for the Good of the Kingdom; but that Factious Party growing more Insolent, as Success made them more power∣ful, I shall forbear to relate them, which otherwise would have deserv'd a better remem∣brance than in Modesty were fit for me to give. I shall rather punish my self with the continuance of this Sto∣ry of the Irregularities of the Army. But I must not forget
one thing of very great Con∣cernment in the after Changes, which should have been insert∣ed before the mentioning of this Second War; The King's remo∣val from Holmby, the sad Con∣sequences whereof fill my Heart with Grief in the remembrance of them, as they did then with Care how to prevent them. Being at Saffron-Walden in Es∣sex, I had notice that Cornet Joyce, an Arch-Agitator, who Quarter'd about Oxford, had seized on the King's Person, removed his Guards, and given such a Check to the Commissioners of Parlia∣ment, who were ordered there to attend His Majesty, that they refused to act any further on their Commission, being so unwar∣rantably interrupted.
So soon as I heard of it, I immediately sent away two Re∣giments of Horse, Commanded by Colonel Whaley to remove this Force, and to set all things again in their due Course and Order. But before he came to Holmby, the King was advanced two or three Miles on his way to Cambridge, attended by Joyce, where Colonel Whaley acquaint∣ed the King, he was sent by the General to let him know how much he was troubled at those great Insolencies that had been committed so near his Person; and as he had not the least knowledge of them before they were done, so he had omitted no time in seeking to remove that Force, which he had Or∣ders
from me to see done: And therefore he desired His Majesty that he would be pleased to re∣turn again to Holmby, where all things should be settled again in as much Order and Quietness as they were before. And also he desired the Commissioners to re∣assume their Charge, as the Par∣liament had directed them, which he was also to desire them to do from the General. But the King refused to return, and the Commissioners to Act; where∣upon Colonel Whaley urged them to it, saying, He had an express Command to see all things well settled again about His Maje∣sty, which could not be done, but by His returning again to Holmby.
The King said positively, he would not do it; so the Colonel prest him no more to it, having indeed a special Direction from me to use all Tenderness and Respect, as was due to His Ma∣jesty. The King came that Night, or the next, to Sir John Cutts's House, near Cambridge; and the next day I waited on His Maje∣sty, it being also my business to persuade his Return to Holmby, but he was otherwise resolv'd. I prest the Commissioners al∣so to Act according to the Power given them by the Parliament, which they also refus'd to do: So having spent the whole day about this business, I return'd to my Quarters; and as I took
leave of the King, he said to me, Sir, I have as good Interest in the Army as you; by which I plainly saw the broken Reed he lean'd on. The Agitators could change into that Colour which served next to their ends; and had brought the King into an Opi∣nion that the Army was for him. That it might appear what a real trouble this Act was to me, though the Army was al∣most wholly infected with this Humour of Agitation, I call'd for a Council of War, to proceed against Joyce for this high Of∣fence, and breach of the Articles of War, but the Officers, whe∣ther for fear of the distemper'd
Soldiers, or rather (as I suspect∣ed) a secret allowance of what was done, made all my endea∣vours in this ineffectual. And now no Punishment being able to reach them; all Affairs were steer'd after this Compass▪ the King and his Party, in Hopes; those of the Parliament, and o∣thers, who kept to their Covenant Interest, in Fears; so as for ma∣ny Months all Publick Councils were turn'd into private Junto's, which begot greater Emulations and Jealousies among them. So that the Army would not trust the King any longer with the Liberty he had, nor the Parlia∣ment suffer the Army to under∣take that which was more proper∣ly their own Work, to Settle the
Kingdom in its just Rights and Liberties; and the Army was as Jealous that the Parliament would not have care enough of their Security. All things growing worse and worse, made the King endeavour to escape, which he did; but out of a larger Confinement at Hampton-Court, to a straiter one in the Isle of Wight. Here the Parliament treated upon Propositions of Peace with the King; but, alas, the envious one sowed Tares that could not be rooted out, but by plucking up the Corn also. The King was the Golden Ball cast before the two Parties, the Parliament and the Army; and the Contest grew so great,
that it must again have involv'd the Kingdom in Blood; but the Army having the greater Power▪ got the King again into their Hands, notwithstanding all en∣devours to hinder it. The Treaty was scarce ended before the King was seized on by the Hands of the same Persons that took him from Holmby; soon after followed his Trial. To prepare a way to this Work, this Agitating Council did first intend to remove all out of the Parliament who were like to oppose them, and carried it on with such Secrecy, as I had not the least Intimation of it till it was done, as some of the Members of the House can wit∣ness, with whom I was at that
very time upon special Business, when that Attempt was made by Colonel Pride upon the Parlia∣ment, which I protest I never had any knowledg of till it was done. The Reason why it was so se∣cretly carried, that I should have no notice of it, was, because I always prevented those De∣signs when I knew them. By this purging of the House, (as they call'd it) the Parliament was brought into such a con∣sumptive and languishing Con∣dition, that it could never again recover that healthful Constitu∣tion, which always kept the Kingdom in its Strength, Life, and Vigour.
This Way being made by the Sword, the Trial of the King was easier for them to accomplish. My afflicted and troubled Mind for it, and my earnest Endeavours to prevent it, will, I hope, sufficiently testify my dis∣like and abhorrence of the Fact: And what will they not do to the Shrubs, having cut down the Cedar? After this, Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, the Lord Capel, and others, were condemn'd to Death. It is fit for me in this Place to say something for my own Vin∣dication about my Lord Capel, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle, who were Prisoners at Mer∣cy upon the rendring of Colchester,
seeing some have questioned the just Performance of those Arti∣cles. I laid Siege to the Town, and made several Assaults: But find∣ing their Forces within much more numerous than those I had without, I was forced to take ano∣ther course in blocking them up, and, by cutting off all supplies, to bring them to a Surrender; which after four Months close Siege they were compelled to, and that upon Mercy, being in Number three or four thousand Men; and delivering upon Mer∣cy, is to be understood that some are to Suffer, the rest to go Free. Immediately after our en∣trance into the Town, a Council of War was called, and those fore∣named
Persons were Sentenced to Die, the rest to be Acquitted. This being so resolved, I thought fit notwithstanding to transmit the Lord Capel, the Lord Norwich, &c. over to the Par∣liament, being the Civil Judica∣ture of the Kingdom, consisting then both of Lords and Com∣mons, and so most proper Judges in their Case; who were consi∣derable for Estates and Fami∣lies: But Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, being mere Sol∣diers of Fortune, and falling in∣to our hands by chance of War, were Executed; and in this I did nothing but according to my Commission, and the Trust repo∣sed in me.
But it may be objected I went into the Court during the Trial; to which I answer, it was at the earnest request of my Lord Capel's Friends, who desired me to ex∣plain there what was meant by surrendring to Mercy: Otherwise I had not gone, being always un∣satisfied with those Courts. For this I need say no more, seeing I may as well be question'd for the Articles of Bristol, Oxford, Exeter, or any other Action in the War, as this. I have now related the most remarkable Things that might be alledged against me, during the prosecution of the War. One thing more requires I should say something to be∣fore I conclude; that is, con∣cerning
Papers and Declarations of the Army that came out in my Name, and the Council of Of∣ficers. I say from the time they de∣clared their usurped Authority at Triplow Heath, I never gave my free Consent to any thing they did: But being yet undischarged of my Place, they set my Name in way of course to all their Pa∣pers, whether I consented or not: And to such failings are all Au∣thorities subject. Under Parli∣ament Authority many injuries have been done; so here hath a General's Power been broken and crumbled into a Levelling Faction. Yet even this I hope all im∣partial Judges will interpret as
Force and Ravishment of a good Name, rather than a voluntary Consent, which might make me equally Criminal with that Fa∣ction. And if in a multitude of Words, much more in a multitude of Actions, there must be some Transgressions; yet I can truly say, they were never designedly, or willfully com∣mitted by me. All the Power being got into the Army, they cut up the root of Kingly Government; af∣ter this were Engagements made to abolish that Title. Then was War declared against Scotland for assisting the King, and several Leagues made with Foreign Princes, to Confederate with their new Government, which
was now a Commonwealth, against the Kingly Power. All this I saw with grief and sorrow, and though I had as much the Love of the Army as ever, and was with great importunity solicited by that remaining Par∣liament and Soldiers, to conti∣nue my Command; and though I might, so long as I acted their Designs, have attained to what height of Power, and other Ad∣vantages I pleas'd; yet by the mercies and goodness of God, I did, so long as I continued in the Army, oppose all those Ways in their Councils, and when I could do no more, I then de∣clined their Actions: Though I did not resign my Commis∣sion which I had from the Par∣liament,
till the remaining part of it took it from me. Thus have I given you the Sum of the most considerable Things, for which the World may Censure me, during this unhappy War; and I hope in all my Weakness and Failings, there shall not be found Crimes of that Magnitude to make me be num∣bred with those who have done these Things through Ambition and Dissimulation. FINIS.
THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX HIS EPITAPH Made by the Duke of BUCKINGHAM. UNDER this Stone doth lie One born for Victory, Fairfax the Valiant, and the only He Who e're for that alone, a Conqueror would be. Both Sexes Vertues were in him combin'd, He had the fierceness of the Manliest mind, And all the meekness too of Womankind. He never knew what Envy was, nor Hate; His Soul was fill'd with worth, and Honesty, And with another thing besides quite out of date, Call'd Modesty.
He ne're seem'd Impudent but in the Field, a place Where Impudence it self dares seldom shew its face. Had any stranger spy'd him in a room With some of those whom he had overcome, And had not heard their talk, but only seen Their Gesture, and their Mien, They would have sworn he had the Vanquisht been: For as they bragg'd, and dreadful would appear, Whilst they their own ill luck repeated, His Modesty still made him blush to hear How often he had them defeated. Through his whole life the part he bore Was wonderful and great, And yet it so appear'd in nothing more Than in his private last Retreat; For 'tis a stranger thing to find One Man of such a glorious mind As can despise the Power he has got, Than millions of the Poll's and Braves, Those despicable Fools and Knaves, Who such a pudder make, Through dulness and mistake, In seeking after Power, and get it not.
When all the Nation he had won, And with expence of blood had bought Store great enough, he thought, Of Fame, and of Renown, He then his Arms laid down With full as little Pride As if h' ad been oth' Conquer'd side, Or one of them could do that were undone. He neither Wealth nor Places sought; For others, not himself, he fought. He was content to know, For he had found it so, That when he pleas'd to Conquer, he was able, And left the Spoil and Plunder to the Rabble. He might have been a King, But that he understood, How much it is a meaner thing To be unjustly Great, than honourably Good. This from the World did admiration draw, And from his Friends both love and awe, Remembring what he did in Fight before. Nay has Foes lov'd him too, As they were bound to do, Because he was resolv'd to Fight no more.
So blest of all he di'd, but far more blest were we, If we were sure to live till we could see, A Man as Great in War, as Just in Peace as He.
There is lately Publish'd, PROPOSALS for the Subscriptions to a Book now Ready for the Press, Entituled, The Fourth and Last Part of Mr. RUSH∣WORTH's Historical Collections. Containing the Principal Matters which happen'd from the Beginning of the Year 1645. (where the Third Part ended) to the Death of King Charles the First, 1648. Impartially Related: Setting forth only Matter of Fact▪ in Order of Time, without Observation or Reflection. Fitted for the Press in his Life-time. To which will be added, Exact Alphabetical Tables. WHEREAS many Gentlemen are already provided with all the Parts of Mr. Rush∣worth's Collections which are yet Printed, viz. The FIRST PART in One Volume, which Began with the 16th Year of King James the First, Anno 1618. and Ended the Fifth Year of King Charles the First, Anno 1629. The SECOND PART in Two Volumes, Beginning Anno 1629. and Ending Anno 1640. The THIRD PART in Two Volumes, Be∣ginning at the Meeting of the Parliament, November 3. 1640. and Ending 1644. And being Desirous of Compleating their Sets of that Laborious and Exact Collection▪
The UNDERTAKERS of this Fourth and Last Part (having Purchased the Copy at a very Considerable Rate) do Propose to Print it by Subscriptions, upon the Terms following: I. It shall be Printed in Two Volumes, after the same Manner with those already Published, and will Contain about Five Hundred Sheets. Which at the usual Rate in Common Sale, could not be al∣low'd for less than Forty Shillings Unbound of the Small Paper; and Four Pounds of the Large Paper. Five and Twenty only will be Printed on Large Paper, for Accommodation of such Gentlemen as have the Former Volumes of the same Paper. II. That every Gentleman upon Subscribing, shall Pay down in Part Twenty Shillings for One Book of the Small Paper, and Thirty Shillings for One of the Large Paper; and at Delivery of a Perfect Book in Quires Fifteen Shillings more for the Small, and Thirty Shillings more for the Large Paper. III. That whoever Subscribes for Six Books of the Small Paper, shall have a Seventh Gratis: (Which reduceth the Price to Thirty Shillings.) Note, No advantage can be allow'd on the Large Paper Books. IV. That no more Books will be Printed, than what shall be Subscribed for. And if any Books shall happen to be left on our hands by any Subscri∣bers, they shall not be sold for less than Forty Shil∣lings, Unbound. V. Subscriptions will be taken till the 29th of June next, being the Last Day of Midsummer-Term, and the Book shall be finished in Mi∣chaelmas-Term following. And whereas there were Printed of the FIRST PART above Three Thousand; of the
SECOND PART Two Thousand, which are all Sold of; and of the THIRD PART near Fifteen Hundred, of which some are yet un∣sold (Divers Gentlemen suspending to buy the THIRD PART till the WHOLE should be finished); so that there are abroad several Sets Imperfect: Now for the Encouragement of SUBSCRI∣BERS to this Fourth Part, and the Accom∣modation of such Gentlemen, who are not yet furnished with the Third; The Undertakers do Propose to all SUCH, and no others, The Third Part at Thirty Shillings in Quires, of the Small Paper; and Three Pounds of the Large Paper. These Papers of Proposals are to be had of the UNDERTAKERS, Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard: AND Thomas Cockerill, in Amen-Corner, at the End of Pater-Noster-Row. And of most Booksellers in London and the Country.
BOOKS Printed for Ric. Chiswell. WHarton's Anglia Sacra. In 2 Volumes. Folio. Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primive Fathers. In 2 Vol. Folio. Dr. John Lightfoot's Works. In 2 Vol. Folio. Dr. Pet. Allix's Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of Piedmont and Albigences. In 2 Parts. Quarto. Bishop Burnet's Collection of Tracts, relating both to Church and State, from 1678 to 1694. In 3 Vol. Quarto. Dr. Wake's Eleven Treatises against Popery. In 2 Vol. Quarto. Dr. Tennison (now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury) his Account of the Conference with Pulton the Jesuit. Quarto. —His Nine Sermons upon Several Occasions. Quarto. A Discourse of the Unreasonableness of Separation on account of the Oaths. By Bishop Stilling fleet. Quarto. A Vindication of the said Discourse. By Dr. Wil∣liams. Quarto. A Vindication of His Majesty's Authority to fill the Sees of the Deprived Bishops. By Bishop Stilling fleet. Quarto. Dr. William's Discourse of the Lawfulness of Wor∣shipping God by the Common-Prayer. Quarto. —His Representation of the absurd and mis∣chievous Principles of the Muggletonians. Quarto. The Secret Consults, Negotiations, and Intriegues of the Romish Party in Ireland, from 1660 to 1689. Quarto. An Impartial History of the Wars in Ireland. In Two Parts. With Copper Sculpturs. By Mr. Story, (now Dean of Down and Connor) present in the same. The New Cambridge Dictionary. In Five Alpha∣bets. Quarto.
England's Wants: Or, some Proposals to the Par∣liament, probably beneficial to England. Quarto. Dr. Allix's Reflections on the Holy Scripture. Octavo. Cole's English and Latin Dictionary. Octavo. The Jesuits Memorial for the intended Reforma∣tion of England, under a Popish Prince. Octavo. [Found in King James's Closet.] The History of the Troubles and Trial of Arch∣bishop Laud; wrote by himself: Published by Henry Wharton. Folio. Remarks on Mr. Hill's Vindication of the Primi∣tive Fathers, against Bishop Burnet. Animadversions on Mr. Hill's Vindication of the Primitive Fathers, against Bishop Burnet. Dr. William's Vindication of Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons against the Socinians; and of the Bi∣shop of Worcester's Sermon of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion. To which is annexed, a Letter from the Bishop of Salisbury to the Au∣thor, in Vindication of his Discourse of the Divinity of our Saviour. Quarto. Books written by Symon Patrick, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Ely. —The Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a Friend. The Sixth Edition. Quarto. 1681. —Mensa Mystica: Or, a Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: In which the Ends of the Institution are so manifest, our Addresses to it so directed; our Behaviour there and afterward, so composed, that we may not lose the Profits which are to be received by it. With Prayers and Thanksgivings inserted. To which is annexed, —Aqua Genitalis: A Discourse concerning Baptism: In which is inserted a Discourse to persuade to a Confirmation of the Baptismal Vow. Octavo.
—Jeshish Hypocrisy: A Caveat to the present Generation. Wherein is shewn both the false and true way to a Nations, or Persons, compleat Happiness, from the Sickness and Recovery of the Jewish State. To which is added, A Dis∣course upon Micah 6. 8. belonging to the same matter. Octavo. —Divine Arithmetick: A Sermon at the Fu∣neral of Mr. Samuel Jacomb, Minister of St. Mary Woollnoth Church in Lombard-street, London. With an Account of his Life. Octavo. —A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Grigg, Rector of St. Andrew Undershaft, London, Quarto. —An Exposition of the Ten Commandments. Octavo. —Hearts Ease: Or, a Remedy against all Troubles. With a Consolatory Discourse, par∣ticularly directed to those who have lost their Friends and Relations. To which is added, Two Papers, Printed in the time of the late Plague. The Seventh Edition corrected. 12 mo. 1699. —The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Trea∣tise shewing that the Roman Church falsly claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St. Paul, in 1 Tim. 3. 15. Quarto. —An Examination of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church, viz. ANTIQUITY. Quarto. —An Examination of the Texts which Papists cite out of the Bible to prove the Supremacy of St. Peter, and of the Pope, over the whole Church. In Two Parts. Quarto. —A private Prayer to be used in difficult Times. —A Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance. —A Prayer for Charity, Peace and Unity; chiefly to be used in Lent.
—A Sermon preach'd upon St. Peter's Day; printed with Enlargements. Quarto. —A Sermon preach'd in St. James's Chappel, before the Prince of Orange, Jan. 20. 1681. on Isaiah 11. 6. —A Second Part of the Sermon before the Prince of Orange, on the same Text. Preached in Covent-Garden. —A Sermon preached before the Queen in March, 1688. on Colos. 3. 15. —A Sermon against Murmuring, preached at Covent-Garden in Lent, 1688. on 1 Cor. 10. 10. —A Sermon against Censuring, preached at Covent-Garden in Advent, 1688. on 1 Cor. 4. 10. —A Fast-Sermon before the King and Queen, April 16. 1690. on Prov. 14. 34. —A Thanksgiving-Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 26. 1691. for the reducing of Ireland, and the King's safe Return, on Deut. 4. 9. —A Fast-Sermon before the Queen, April 8. 1692. on Numb. 10. 9. —Easter-Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1696. on 2 Tim. 2. 8. —A Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 5. 1696. on Dan. 4. 35. —A Commentary on Genesis. Quarto. 1695. —A Commentary on Exodus. Quarto. 1697. —A Commentary on Leviticus. Quarto. 1698. —A Commentary on Numbers. Quarto. 1699. Of Sincerity and Constancy in the Faith and Pro∣fession of the True Religion, in several Ser∣mons, by Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. Being the First Volume, Published from the Originals, by Ralph Bar∣ker, D. D. Chaplain to his Grace. The Second Edition. Octavo.
—Sixteen Sermons preached on several Occasi∣ons: By the Same Author. Being the Second Volume. Published by Dr. Barker. Octavo. —Sixteen Sermons preached on several Sub∣jects; being the Third Volume, by the Same Author. Published by Dr. Barker. Octavo. —Several Discourses, viz. Of the great Du∣ties of Natural Religion. Instituted Religion not intended to undermine Natural. Christia∣nity not Destructive, but Perfective of the Law of Moses. The Nature and Necessity of Rege∣neration. The Danger of all known Sin. Know∣ledge and Practice necessary in Religion. The Sins of Men not chargeable on God. Being the Fourth Volume, by the Same Author, Publish∣ed by Dr. Barker. Octavo. Reflections upon a Pamphlet, Entituled, [Some Discourses upon Dr. Burnet, and Dr. Tillotson, occasioned by the late Funeral Sermon of the former upon the latter.] By Dr. Gilbert Burnet Lord Bishop of Sarum. Octavo. —His Sermon preached before the King at Whitehal, on Christmas-day, 1696. Quarto. On Galat. 4. 4. —His Sermon preached before the King at Whitehal, on the third Sunday in Lent, being the Seventh of March, 1696. 1 Ephes. 5. 2. —His Essay on the Memory of the late Queen. The second Edition. Octavo. Dr. Williams (now Lord Bishop of Chichester) his eight Sermons at Esq  Boyle's Lecture for the Year 1695. Quarto. [Any of them may be had single, to perfect Sets. —His first, second, third, fourth Sermons at the same Lecture for the year 1696. Quarto. —His Sermon preached at St. Lawrence Jury before the Lord Mayor, &c. on Saturday the 28th of September, 1695. at the Election of the
Lord Mayor for the Year ensuing. On Joshua 22. 31. Quarto —His Sermon preached before the Honoura∣ble House of Commons, on Wednesday, Decem∣ber, 11. 1695. Being a solemn Day of Fa∣sting and Humiliation, appointed by his Ma∣jesty for imploring the Blessing of Almighty God upon the Consultations of this present Parliament. Quarto. On 1 Sam. 11. 30. —His Sermon upon the Resurrection, preach∣ed before Sir Edward Clark Lord Mayor, &c. on Easter Monday, April 5. 1697. on Acts 10. 40, 41, 42. Reflections upon a Libel lately Printed, Entituled, [The Charge of Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson, Considered, 4to.] The Church History of Ethiopia; wherein, among other things, the two great splendid Roman Missions into that Empire are placed in their true Light; to which are added an Epitome of the Dominican History of that Church. And an Account of the Practices and Conviction of Maria of the Annunciation, the famous Nun of Lisbon. Composed by Michael Geddes, D. D. Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of Sarum. Octavo. Fourteen Sermons preached in Lambeth Chappel, before Dr. William Sancroft, late Lord Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. In the Years 1688, and 1689, by the Learned Henry Wharton, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace; withan Account of the Author's Life. Octavo. Dr. William Owtram's twenty Sermons. On se∣veral Occasions. The 2d Edition. Octavo. Sermons preached on several Occasions. By John Conant D. D. The first and second Volumes. Published by Dr. Williams, now Lord Bishop of Chichester. Octavo. The 2d Edition Corrected. 1699.
The Fathers vindicated: Or Animadversions on a late Socinian Book, Entituled, [The Judgment of the Fathers touching the Trinity, against Dr. Bull's Defence of the Nicene Faith.] By a Presbyter of the Church of England. Octavo. A Fifth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Discour∣ses, published by his Chaplain Dr. Barker, on these following Subjects, viz. Proving Jesus to be the Messias. The Prejudices against Jesus and his Religion consider'd. Jesus the Son of God, proved by his Resurrection. The Danger of Apostacy from Christianity. Christ the Au∣thor, and Obedience the Condition of Salva∣tion. The Possibility and Necessity of Gospel Obedience, and its consistence with Free Grace. The Authority of Jesus Christ, with the Com∣mission and Promise which he gave to his Apo∣stles. The Difficulties of a Christian Life con∣sidered. The Parable of a Rich Man and Laza∣rus. Children of this World wiser than the Children of Light. Octavo. 1698. A second Volume of Sermons preached in Lambeth Chappel before Archbishop Sancroft, 1690. By the Learned Mr. Henry Wharton, his Graces, Cha∣plain. Which with the first Volume lately pub∣lished, are all that he preached. A New Account of India and Persia; being Nine Years Travel, began 1672. and finished 1681. Containing Observations made of those Coun∣tries: Namely, Of their Government, Religi∣on, Laws, Customs: Of their Soil, Climates, Seasons, Health, Diseases. Of their Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, Jewels. Of their Hou∣sing, Cloathing, Manufactures, Trades, Com∣modities. And of the Coins, Weights and Measures used in the Principal Places of Trade in those Parts. By John Fryer M. D. Canta∣brig. and Fellow of the Royal Society. Folio. 1698.
SCRIPTORUM ECCLESIASTIORUM Historia Literaria facili & perspicua methodo digesta. Pars Altera. Qua plusquam DC. Scriptores novi, tam Editi quam Manuscripti recensentur; Prioribus plu∣rima adduntur; breviter aut obscure dicta illustra∣tur; recte asserta vindicantur. Accedit ad finem cujusvis Saeculi CONCILORUM omnium tum Generalium tum Particularium Hictorica No∣titia. Ad Calcem vero Operis Dissertationes tres, (1) De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis incertae aetatis. (2) De Libris & Officiis Ecclesiasticis Graecorum. (3) De Eusebii Caesariensis Arianismo adversus Jo∣annem Clericum. Adjecti sunt Indices utilissimi Scriptorum Alphabetico-Chronologici. Studio & labore Gulielmi Cave, S. T. P. Canon. Winde∣soriensis. Folio. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity. The fifth Edi∣tion. 1698. Bishop Wilkins of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion. The third Edition. A Sixth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Discour∣ses. Published by Dr. Barker. Being upon the Divine Attributes and Perfections. 1699. Mr. Evelyns Gardner's Almanack: Directing what he is to do Monthly through the Year, and what Fruits and Flowers are in Prime. The ninth Edition. Octavo. 1699. Pharmacopaeiae Collegii Regalis Londini Remedia om∣nia succincte descripta: Una cum Catalogo simplici∣um Ordine Alphabetico digestorum: Quibus annex∣um est Manuale ad Forum nec non Divax Porogra∣phicus. Editio Tertia, Prioribus emendatior & au∣ctior. Huic insuper adjioiuntur, Phramaca nonnulla in usu hodierno apud Medicos Londinenses. Acessit in calce Prosodia Medica observatu non indigna. Cura Ja. Shipton. 1699. Twelves. Coles Latin and English Dictionary. Octavo. A Discourse of the Government of the Thoughts, by George Tully Sub-Dean of York. The third Edition in Twelves.
A Sixth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Dis∣courses. Published by his Chaplain, Dr. Barker. Being upon the Attributes of God, viz. Con∣cerning the Perfection of God. Concerning our Imitation of the Divine Perfections. The Happiness of God. The Unchangeableness of God. The Knowledge of God. The Wisdom, Glory, and Sovereignty of God. The Wisdom of God in the Creation of the World. The Wisdom of God in his Providence. The Wis∣dom of God in the Redemption of Mankind. The Justice of God, in the Distribution of Re∣wards and Punishments. The Truth of God. The Holiness of God. To which is annexed a Spital Sermon. Of doing Good. The Life of Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canter∣bury. In which there is a Particular Relation of many Remarkable Passages in the Reigns of Henry the V. and VI. Kings of England. Writ∣ten in Latin by Arthur. Duck, LLD. Chancellor of the Diocess of London: And Advocate of the Court of Honour. Now made English. And a Table of Contents annexed. The Judgment of the Ancient Jewish Church, against the Unitarians, in the Controversy up∣on the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity of our Blessed Saviour. With a Table of Matters, and a Table of Texts of Scripture occasionally Explain'd. By a Divine of the Church of England. In the Press. Dr. Wake of Preparation for Death, being a Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman in France, in a dangerous Distemper of which she died. The Fourth Edition. Twelves. Archbishop Tillotson's Seventh Volume. Published by Dr. Barker, being the remaining Discourses upon the Divine Attributes. Octavo. The Bishop of Ely's Commentary on Deuteronomy. Quarto.
