G265 R6689 12581549 63787
THE BOOK OF OATHS. AND THE Several FORMS thereof, BOTH ANCIENT and MODERN Faithfully Collected out of sundry Authentick Books of Records, not heretofore extant. Very useful for all persons whatsoever, especially those that undertake any Office of Magistracy or publique Imployment. Whereunto is added a perfect Table. LONDON, Printed for H. Twyford, T. Basset, B. Griffin, C. Harper, T. Sawbridge, S. Keble, G. Col∣lins, J. Place, M. Wotton, and are to be Sold in Fleetstreet and Holborn. 1689.
coat of arms and emblem
A TABLE A ABjure the Land for Stealing the Kings Venison. 196 Alderman of London. 254 Administrators Oath. 249 Allegiance. 36 Allegiance of the Duke of York, and other Lords in Parliament. 145 Aletaster within a Leet his Oath 250 Allegiance of the Duke of York in Parlia∣ment to Henry the 6. 146 Allegiance of the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral, at Coventry. 148 Alneger. 134 Appraisers within London. 246 Approver Banished. 116 Arch-Bishops Oath 66 Articles Matrimonial between Prince Charles, and the Infanta of Spain. 154 Assistants of the Company of Worsted Weavers. 235
Assent and Consent, the Declaration to be Sub∣scribed. 233 Attorney at Law 17 Attorney of the Sheriffs Court. 244 Attorney of the Augmentation Court 47 Attorney of the Mayors Court. 247 Attorney of the Court of Wards 179 Attorney of the first fruits. 184 Attorney of the Court of the Survey. 198 Auditor of the Augmentation. 49 Auditor of the Court of Wards. 181 Auditor of the first fruits. 185 Auditors of the Court of Survey. 199 Auditor of the Exchequer. 213 B Baron of the Exchequer. 119, 216 Barwick Souldiers 32 Bayliffe to attend a Jury. 111 Bayliffe of Shewers. 10, 203 Bail upon suspition of Felony, or Murder. 115 Beadle of a Ward in London. 44 Bishops Oath, 74 Bishops Renuntiations of the Popes Bull 137 Bishops Fidelity. 137 Bishops Popish. 156 Broker London. 40
Bull of the Pope Renounced. 137 C Captains in Zealand. 109 Captains of a Band 31 Chancellor of England. 118 Chancellor of the Augmentation. 44 Chancellor of the Exchequer. 133, 215 Chamberlain of the Exchequer. 291 Chancellor of the first fruits. 183 Church Wardens. 222, 223 Clerk of the Augmentation. 49 Clerk of the Chancery. 6 Clerks six of the Chancery. 140 Clerk of the Checque in Berwick. 30 Clerk of the Council to the Prince. 54 Clerk of the first fruits. 186 Clerk of the Liveries. 195 Clerk of the Parliament. 35 Clerk of the Petty Bage. 142 Clerk of the Pleas. 218 Clerk of the Signet. 81 Clerk of the Statutes. 132 Clerk of the Court of Survey, 200 Clerk of the Court of Wards. 182 Cloaths to be valued. 194 Commissioners for executing the Commissions in the Diocesse of York, for Mustering and
putting the Kings Subjects in readiness for War. 10 Common Serjeant of London. 259 Commissioners for draining Bedford Fens. 237 Commissioners for Sewers. 203 Common Council of London. 243 Comptroller of the Kings Household. 158 Comptroller of the Pipe. 219 Comptroller of Calice. 100 Comptroller of the Customs. 128 Constable of London. 11, 42, 245 Constable in the Country. 207 Controversie to be Compounded in Parliament between the Duke of Glocester, and the Bishop of Winchester. 72, 143 Corporation Oath. 232 Council of Calice, 107 Council Clerk. 5 Council to Princess Mary. 55 Council Privy. 3 Council Privy. 75 Council of War. 57 Council of Wales. 67 Customer. 130 D Decay of Castles, and Forts to be surveyed and reported. 189
Declaration to be Subscribed by all Officers of Corporations. 233 Declaration of Assent and Consent. 233 Declaration to be Subscribed by all in Holy Orders, and Schoolmasters. 234 Declaration against Transubstantation. 271 Declaration of Fidelity to King William and Queen Mary, and Subscription of the Chri∣stian Belief to be Subscribed by Dissenters. 263, 264 Doctor of Divinity according to the Ʋniver∣sity of Basill. 205 Deputy of Calice. 81 Deputy Chamberlain of the Exchequer, 222 E Earl in Scotland. 208 Escheator. 127, 220 Esquires for the body. 71 Estates of the Subjects to be discovered. 189, 190 Estates of the Subjects to be Examined. 191, 192, 193 Estates of the Subjects to be discovered 191 Evidence between party and party. 113 Evidence against a prisoner. 112 Evidence upon Bills of Indictment. 114
Examiner in the Chancery. 143 Excise Officers Oath. 234 Executors Oath. 249 F Fealty. 133 Fealty of the King of Scots. 201 Fealty of John King of England to the Pope. 204 Fidelity of a Bishop. 74 Fidelity of the Priour of St. Johns. 154 Forrester of the Forrest. 200 Foraign Opposers to the Exchequer. 218 Franck Pledg in London. 39 Freemen of London. 13 Freemen of Merchants Adventures. 18 French Kings Oath. 51 G Garnet the Jesuit. 206 Garnishee on a Attachment in London. 247 Garter King of Arms. 58 Governour of Berwick. 25 Great Seal. 78
H Heralds of Arms. 61 Homage of an Arch-Bishop. 66 Homage of the King of Scots. 109 Homage of a Temporal Lord. 138 I Ingrosser of the great Roll. 213 Inhabitants of Forrests. 201 Inquest grand. 113 Judge. 6 Judge endorso claus de Anno. 120 Jury to try a Nisi prius. 113 Jury to try a Travers. 252 Jury to try a prisoner at the Bar. 111 Jury of Women 250 Justice to hear and determine. 130 Justice of Peace. 206 Justice for works, weights, and measures. 122 Justice of Eyre. 131 K Kidderminster Weavers Company. 238 Keeper of the Kings Papers of State. 177 Keeper of the great Seal. 78 King Charles the first his Oath. 154 King Charles the Second his Coronation Oath 230 King of Arms. 59
Kings Council and Judges of the Court of Requests. 205 King Edward the Second his Oath. 195 King of France to observe the Statutes of the Garter. 51 King James his Servants. 55 Kings Oath before H. 8. 1 Kings Oath corrected by H. 8. 2 King of Polonia to the Turk. 65 King James the Second his Oath. 260 King Williams, and Qmeen Maries Corona∣tion Oath. 262 King of Scots to King Henry 6. 109 Knight of the Garter. 52 Knights of the Round Table. 64 Knights for the Body. 71 Knights of the Bath. 108, 200 Knight of Scotland. 209 L League and Covenant. 226 Leather Sealer or Searcher his Oath. 251 Lieutenant of Calice. 92 Lieutenant of Guisness. 86 Lieutenant of Hannues. 100 Lieutenant of Hewhaven. 104 Lieutenant of Ruisbank. 97 Lieutenant of the Tower. 150 Lollardism renounced. 151
Lord of the Parliament in Scotland. 209 M Mary Queen her Council. 55 Marshal of Barwick. 26 Marshal of Calice. 89 Marshal Deputy of Calice. 105 Master of the Ordinance for Berwick. 29 Master of Requests. Master of the Rolls. 140 Master of the Court of Wards. 178 Master and Warden of the Company of Kidder∣minster Weavers. 238 Master of the Woods of the Court of Augmenta∣tion 47. Master of the Woods of the Court of Survey. 199 Master and Wardens of the Manufacture of Broad woollen Cloath. 236 Master of the Staple. 135 Mayor of London. 211, 253 Members of the House of Lords their Test 240 Members in Parliament and others in Offices of Trust in place of the Oath of Allegiance. 261 Messenger of the Augmentation. 51 Messengers of the Court of Survey, 201 Merchants for the true Shipping Cloath to
the Mart Town. 19 Midwives Oaths. 161 Militia Officers. 232 N Nun entring into the Cloyster; 194 Non Conformity living within 5 miles of a Corporation 238 P Parliament Member Test. 240 Philip Duke of Burgoyne took to Henry 5. as right inheritor of France 116 Poor Prisoners not worth 10. l. 239 Portage of the Chancery. 136 Porter of Barwick. 26 Porter of Calice. 103 President of the Council. 67 President of Wales. 33 President Warden, and Assistants of Kider∣minster Weavers 230 Prior of St. John of Jerusalem. 154 Privy Seal. 76 Presenters of the Peace against any delinquent. 252 Protestation. 224 Pursevant at Armes. 63 R Ranger of the Forrest. 196 Receiver of the Augmentations. 50
Receiver of the Court of Survey. 200 Receiver general of the Court of Wards 180 Receiver in particular of the Court of Wards 181 Recorder of London, 241 Regarder of the Forrest 200 Register of the Kings papers of State. 177 Remembrancer to the King. 217 Request Master. 9 S Scavenger of London. 12 Scavengers of the Wards in London. 39 Searcher in the Customs. 139 Searchers of the manufacture of of Broad woollen Cloath. 236 Secretaries of State 76 Seminary Preists. 200 Serjeant at Law. 139 Serjeant at Law to the King 138 Serjeant to attend a Jury 111 Serjeants to the Sheriffe of London 42 Servants to the King 8, 69, 71 Servants of the Kings Chamber. 53 Servants for the true serving of their Lords. 19 Sheep to be numbred and valued. 193 Sheriffe of the Counties. 14, 123 Sheriffe of a County newly altered. 206 Sheriffe of London. 255
Sheriffe of Oxon and Berks, &c. 126 Steward of Gascoygne. 134 Solicitor of the Augmentation. 47 Souldiers Sworn for their true Service. 24 Sub-Treasurer of the Exchequer. 212 Succession of the Crown. 141 Succession of H. 8. and Queen Ann, 186 Succession of H. 8. and Queen Jane, 38, 201 Supremacy. 28, 201 Surveyer of the Augmentation. 45 Surveyer of the Court of Survey. 196 Surveyer of the Moors. 251 Surveyer of the Lands in the Court of Aug∣mentation. 50 Surveyers of Bedford Levell. 237 Surveyer of the Liveries. 194 Surveyer of the Woods in the Augmentation. 48 T Tales de Circumstantibus. 252 Tennants Attorning to their Lords. 110 Test for Members of Parliament. 240 Tennants to the King in a Court Baron, 110 Test to be taken by all Officers of Trust. 239 Town Clerk of London. 257 Treasurer of the Augmentation 46 Transubstantiation the Declaration concerning the same. 239 Treasurer of Berwick. 27
Treasurer Clerk. 20 Treasurer of Calice. 95 Treasurer of England, Treasurer of the first Fruits, 184 Treasurer of the Exchequer, 118 Treasurer of the Kings Houshold, 156 Treasurer of the Court of Survey 197 Treasurer of the War. 56 Tronater of London. 129 V Verderer of a Forrest, 197 Ʋnder Sheriff, Bayliff of Franchies, Deputies, and Clerk of every Sheriff. 204 Vow and Covenant 225 Ʋsher of the Exchequer. 23 W Warden and Assistance of Worstedweavers. 235 Warmote Inquest in London. 45 Writer of the Pell, 23 Writer of the Tables, Tallies, and Counter Ta∣lies 22
THE BOOK OF OATHS, BOTH ANCIENT and MODERN. The Ancient Oath used and taken by the Kings of England at their Coronation. THat he shall keep and maintain the li∣berties of the Holy Church, of old time granted by the righteous Chri∣stian Kings of England; and that he shall keep all the Lands, Honours, and Dignities, righteous and free of the Crown of England, in all man∣ner holy, without any manner of minishments;
and the rights of the Crown hurt, decay, or loss to his power shall call again into the ancient estate: And that he shall keep the peace of the holy Church and of the Clergy, and of the Peo∣ple with good accord; And that he shall do in his Judgement Equity and right Justice, with discretion and mercy; And that he shall grant to hold the Laws and Customes of the Realm, and to his power keep them, and affirm them which the Flock and People have chosen; And the evil Laws and Customes wholly to put out, and stedfast and stable peace to the People of his Realm keep, and cause to be kept to his power. The new Oath used and taken by the Kings of England at their Coronation. THe King shall then swear, that he shall keep and maintain the lawful Right, and the Liberties of old time granted by the Righte∣ous Christian Kings of England, King H. 8. corrected the old Oath with his wn hand to the effect of this: The Ori∣ginal is in the hands of Sir Rob. Cotton, Kt. Bar. 1625. to the holy Church of England, not prejudicial to his Jurisdi∣ction and Dignity Royal, and that he shall keep all the Lands, Honours, and Dignities, Rights and Freedomes, of the Crown of England, in all manner whole, without any manner of minish∣ment, and the Right of the Crown hurt, de∣cay, or lost, to his power shall call again into
the ancient estate; and that he shall endeavour himself to keep unity in his Clergy and Tem∣poral Subjects; and that he shall according to his Conscience in all his Judgments minister E∣quity, Right, and Justice, shewing where is to be shewed mercy; and that he shall grant to hold the Laws and approved Customes of the Realm, and lawful, and not prejudicial to his Crown, or imperial Jurisdiction, to his power keep them, and affirm them which the Nobles and People have made and chosen with his con∣sent, and the evil Laws and Customes wholly to put out, and stedfast and stable peace to the People of his Realm keep, and cause to be kept to his power in those which honour and Equity do require. The Oath of a Privy Counseller. YOu shall swear, To the uttermost part of your cunning, wit, will, and power: you shall be true and faithful to the Queens Maje∣sty our most dear and Soveraign Lady, and to her Highness Heirs and Successors, Kings and Queens of England, according to the limita∣tion of the Statute made in the year of her Reign for the establishment of the Succession of the Crown Imperial of this Realm; You shall not know nor hear any thing, that may in any wayes be prejudicial to her Majesty, or to her Heirs and Successors in form aforesaid, or to
the Commonwealths peace, and quiet of this her Majesties Realm; but you shall with all diligence reveal and disclose the same to her Majesty, or to such person or persons of her Highness Privy Counsel as you shall think may and will honestly convey and bring it to her Ma∣jesties knowledge; you shall serve her Majesty truly and faithfully in the room and place of her Highnesse Privy Council; you shall keep close and secret all such matters as shall be treated, dis∣puted, debated, and resolved of in Counsel, with∣out disclosing the same, or any part thereof to any, but to such only as be of the Privy Coun∣cil; and yet if any matter so propounded, treat∣ed, disputed, and debated in any such Council, shall touch any particular person sworn of the same, upon any such matter as shall in anywise concern his fidelity, and truth to the Queens Majesty, you shall in no wise open the same to him, but keep it secret, as you would do from any other person, till the Queens Majesties plea∣sure be known in that behalf; you shall in all things to be moved, treated, disputed, and de∣bated in any such Council, faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion, according to your heart and conscience, in no wise forbear∣ing so to do for any manner of respect, of favour, love, n, dread, displeasure, or corruption. Finally, you shall be vigilant, diligent and cir∣cumspect in all your doings and proceedings, touching the Queens Majesty and her Affairs; all which points before expressed you shall faith∣fully observe, fulfil, and keep, to the uttermost
of your power, wit, and cunning. So God you help, and by the holy Contents of this Book. The Oath of the Clerk of the Council. YOu shall swear, To be a true and faithful Servant unto the Queens Majesty, as one of the Clerks of her Highness Privy Council; You shall not know or understand of any manner of thing to be attempted, done, or spoken, against her Majesties Person, Honour, Crown and Dignity Royal, but you shall let and withstand the same, to the uttermost of your power, and either do, or cause it to be revealed either to her Majesty her self, or to her Privy Council; You shall keep secret all matters committed and re∣vealed unto you, or that shall be treated of se∣cretly in Council; And if any of the same Trea∣ties or Counsels shall touch any of the Counsel∣lors, you shall not reveal it unto him, but shall keep the same until such time, as by the consent of her Majesty, or of the Council, Publication shall be made thereof; You shall to your utter∣most bear Faith and true Allegiance to her Ma∣jesty, her Heirs and Successors, and shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Preeminencies, and Authorities, granted to her Majesty and annex∣ed to her Crown, against all Forraign Princes, Persons, Prelates, or Potentates, &c. by Act of Parliament or otherwise; And generally in all other things you shall do as a faithful and true Servant and Subject ought to do to her Majesty. So help you God, and by, &c.
The Oath of a Judge. THe Kings Justices shall be sworn, That they well and truly shall serve the King and his People; and that they shall not assent to things that may turn to his damage or dis-inheri∣tance: nor that they shall take no Fee nor Livery of none but of the King, nor that they shall take gift or reward of none that hath a do before them, except it be meat or drink of a small value, as long as the Plea is hanging before them, nor after for that cause: Nor that they shall give Council to none in a matter that may touch the King, upon pain to be at the Kings will, body and goods; And that they shall do right to every person, notwithstanding the Kings Lees, &c. And in like manner the Barons of the Exchequer shall be sworn, and also Justices of Oyer and Ter∣miner, and of Assizes and Goal Delivery, and Justices of Peace, before whom they have their Commissions, in a certain form, as shall seem good to the Chancellor. Anno 2. Edw. 3. The Oath of the Clerks of the Chancery. YE shall swear, That ye well and tru∣ly shall serve our Soveraign Lord the King and his People, in the Office of the Chancery, whereto ye are Titled; nor shall ye assent, or procure the dis-herizon or perpetual hurt of the
King, to your power: Nor you shall do no fraud nor procure none to be done, to the hurt of any of the people, nor in any thing that toucheth the keeping of the Seal; And truly shall ye counsel the things that touch the King, when you shall be thereto required, and the counsel that you know touching him shall ye conceal, and if ye know the Kings dis-heritance, or his perpetual hurt, or fraud to be done in things touching the keeping of the said Seal, you shall put your lawful power to redresse it; and if ye cannot do it, ye shall shew it the Chancellor or other that may amend it after your intent. And it shall be added for the Clerk of course; And ye shall not bring, nor suffer to be brought to your knowledge, Writs, which ye shall make of the Court not sealed, thereof to make execu∣tion; nor ye shall record none Attorney, nei∣ther by Writ nor without Writs, without speci∣al License, if ye have not Lawfully examined the party, and the Attorney in proper person: or at least he that shall make the Attorney in pro∣per person: nor no Writ which is of Command∣ment ye shall not deliver to the Examiners, nor to the Seal, before the same Writ be command∣ed to you, by a Commander that hath power, if it be not to the Chancellor, or to one of the Masters, which shall command you to make the Writs; and that all the Writs which ye shall make ye shall deliver them to the Examiner by your own hands, or by a fellow that is sworn to the King, if your self be out of the Court because of sickness, or cannot do it for some other ne∣cessary
cause; And that ye shall deliver to the Examiner no Writs written of another hand un∣der your name as yours, nor you shall put no name upon your Writs. So help you God, and his Saints. Anno xviii. Edw. 3. The Oath of the Kings Servants, Yeomen, by the Vice Chamberlain. YE shall swear, That ye shall be true to your Soveraign Lord King Hen. 8. and to his Heirs Kings of England; and if ye have known any thing in times past, or may know in time coming, that might be prejudicial to his Royal Person, or to this his Realm, ye shall with diligence do it to be known, either to his Person or to such of his Council as it may soon∣est come to his knowledge; Ye shall from hence∣forth use your self in the Room, as one of the Squires for his Body; ye shall be diligent in giv∣ing your attendance for the same; Ye shall be obedient to the Lord Chamberlain, to the Vice-Chamberlain, to all Gentlemen Ushers, and to all Yeomen Ushers, in all things that shall ap∣pertain to your Room, Ye shall not depart this the Kings Court without the Kings especial License, the Lord Chamberlains, or the Vice-Chamberlaines in his absence; You shall not from hence forward bear your service, nor be retained to no manner of person, but onely to the Kings Highness; Ye shall not from hence forward retain no man, otherwise than accord∣ing to the Kings Laws, except it be only for
the Kings service. These Articles, with all other, ye shall truly observe and keep; As help you God, and holy David, and all Saints, and by this Book, &c. The Oath of a Master of Requests, as it is en∣tered in the Council Book, Anno Eliz. YOu shall swear, To be true Counsellor to the Queens Majesty, as one of her Ma∣sters of Requests; You shall not know or under∣stand of any manner of thing to be attempted, done, or spoken against her Majesties Honour, Crown, and Dignity Royal, but you shall let and withstand the same to the uttermost of your power, and either do, or cause it forthwith to be revealed, either to her Majesties self or to the rest of the Privy Council; And you shall to the uttermost bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Queens Majesty, her Heirs, and Lawful Successors; and shall assist and defend all Juris∣dictions, Preeminencies, and Authorities granted to her Majesty, and annexed to the Crown, a∣gainst all Forreign Princes, Persons, Prelates, and Potentates, &c. by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, and generally in all things ye shall do as true Counsellors ought to do to her Majesty. So God you help, &c.
The Tenor of the Oath directed by King Hen. 8. and his Council, in the fourth year of his Reign, to his Commissioners for executing the Kings Commissions and Instructions within the Diocesse of York, for Mustering and putting the Kings Subjects in a readiness for the Wars, and to understand the substance of every man throughout England YE shall truly and plainly declare and shew, as near as ye can, or may possibly call to mind or remembrance, putting apart all colour, fraud, or deceit, of what value and sub∣stance ye be, as well in Money, Plate, Jewels, Utinsels, Stuffe, and Ornaments of Houshold∣stuffe, Merchandizes, of all manner, sorts, and qualities, debts upon specialties, Obligations, Pledges, Promises, or any otherwise, not only on this side the Seas, but also in any outward parts; not forbearing thus expresly to shew and declare, for any lucre, singular profit, or ad∣vantage, prejudices, hinderances, losles, and damages that may ensue unto you by the same. So God you help, and the holy Evangelists. The Oath of the Bayliffe for the Sewers YOu shall swear, That you shall diligent∣ly, truly, and circumspectly peruse, view, and search from time to time, all and singular
such damages, perils, defaults, and reparations, that shall at any time happen or chance to be within any of the Banks, Walls, Sewers, Troughs, or Slewces, within the Precinct of the Level, as far as the limits of your Office shall extend, and the same with all diligence, to the uttermost of your power, procure to be pre∣sented unto her Majesties Commissioners or Sewers, and the Jury that are or shall be im∣pannelled for such causes, that the same with all expedition may be amended and repaired; and to do and execute all and every other thing and things whatsoever that shall appertain unto your said Office, as nigh as God shall give you grace. So help you God, &c. The Oath of the Constables within the City of London. YE shall swear, That ye shall keep the Peace of our Soveraign Lord the King well, and lawfully after your power, and ye shall Arrest all them that make Contempt, Ryot, Debate, or Afray by breaking of the said Peace, and lead them to the Home or Counter, and if ye be withstood by strength of mis-doers, ye shall rear on them an Entry, and pursue them from Street to Street, and from Ward to Ward till they be Arrested; and ye shall search at all times when ye be the Scavengers, or Beadles, the common noysomness of your Ward, and the Beadle and Raker ye shall help to rear, and
gather their Sallary, and Quarterage, if ye be thereunto by them required, and if any thing be done within your Ward against the Ordi∣nance of this City, such defaults as ye shall find there done ye shall then present unto the Mayor, and Ministers of the City, and if ye be letted by any person, or persons, that ye may not duly do your daily Office, ye shall certifie the Mayor and Council of the City of the name or names of him or them that so let you, You shall also Swear, that during the time that ye shall stand in the Office, and occupy the room of a Constable; ye shall once at the least every Month certifie and shew to one of the Clerks of the Mayors Court, as well the names as the fir-names of all Free-men which ye shall know to be deceased within the Month in the Parish wherein ye shall be inhabited, as also the names, and sir-names of all the Chil∣dren of the said Freemen so deceased, being Orphans of the said City; and thus you shall not fail to do, as God you help, &c. The Oath of the Scavenger. YE shall swear, That ye shall diligently over∣see that Pavements within your Ward be well and sufficiently repaired and not made too high in noysance of your Neighbours; and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes be cleansed of Dung, and all manner of Filth for the honesty of this City; and that all the Chimnies, Furnaces,
Reredoes be of Stone, sufficiently and defensi∣ble made against peril of Fire, and if ye find any of the contrary, ye shall shew it to the Al∣derman of the Ward, so that the Alderman may ordain for the amendment thereof; And thus ye shall do, as God ye help, &c. The Oath of every Free-man of the City of London. YE shall swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Soveraign Lord King Charles and to the Heirs of our said Soveraign Lord the King; obeysant and obedient shall ye be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, the Franchises and Customes thereof ye shall main∣tain, and this City keep harmless in that which in you is; ye shall be contributary to all man∣ner of Charges within this City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Taxes, Tallages, Lot and Scot, and to all other Charges bearing your part as a Free-man ought to do; Ye shall colour no Foreign Goods under or in your name, whereby the King or this City might or may lose their Customes or Advantages; ye shall know no Forei∣gner to buy or sell any Merchandise with any o∣ther Foreigner within this City or Franchise there∣of, but ye shall warn the Chamberlain thereof or some Minister of the Chamberlains; ye shall im∣plead or sue no Free-man out of this City; whiles ye may have Right and Law within the same Ci∣ty; ye shall take none Apprentice, but if he be free
born (that is to say) no Bondmans Son, nor the Son of any Alien, and for no less term than for se∣ven years, without fraud or deceit, and within the first year, ye shall cause him to be Enrolled, or else pay such Fine, as shall be reasonably im∣posed upon you for omitting the same; and af∣ter his term end, within convenient time being required, ye shall make him Free of this City, if he have well and truly served you; ye shall also keep the Kings Peace in your own Person; ye shall know Gatherings, Conventicles, or Con∣spiracies made against the Kings Peace, but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to your power; all these Points and Articles ye shall well and truly keep according to the Laws and Customes of this City to your power, So help you God, &c. The Oath of a Sheriff of a County. YE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well, and truly in the Office of the Sheriff of A. and do the Kings profit in all that be∣longeth to you to do by way of your Office, as far forth as you can or may; ye shall truly keep the Kings Rights, and all that belongeth to the Crown; ye shall not assent to decrease, to lessenings, or concealment of the Kings Right, or of his Franchises, and whensoever ye shall have knowledge that the Kings Rights, or the Rights of his Crown be concealed, or with∣drawn, be it in Land, Rent, Franchise, or Suits,
or any other things; ye shall do your true pow∣er to make them be restored to the King again, and if ye may not do it ye shall certifie the King, or some of his Council thereof, such as ye hold for certain will say it to the King; ye shall not respite the Kings Debts, for any gifts or favour, where you may raise them without great grievance of the Debtors; ye shall truly and righteously treat the People of your Sheriff∣wrick, and do right as well to Poor as to Rich in all that belongeth to your Office: Ye shall do no wrong to any man for any gift or other behest, or promise of Goods, for favour, nor hate; ye shall disturb no mans right; ye shall truly acquit at the Exchequer all those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the Kings Debts; ye shall nothing take whereby the King may lose, or whereby that Right may be disturbed, letted, or the Kings Debts delayed; ye shall truly return and truly serve all the Kings Writs, as far forth as shall be within your cunning; ye shall not have to be your under Sheriff, or any of the Sheriffs Clerks of the last year past; ye shall take no Bayliffes into your service, but such as ye shall answer for; ye shall make each of your Bayliffes to make such Oath as ye make your self in that that belongeth to their occupa∣tion; ye shall receive no Writ by you or any of yours unsealed, or any sealed, under any Seal of any Justice save of Justice in Eyre, or Justice As∣signed in the same Shire where ye be Sheriff in, or other Justice having power or authority to make any Writs unto you by the Law of the Land,
or any Justice of Newgate; ye shall make your Bayliffes of the true and sufficientest men in the Country, Nota, These words All manner of Heresies com∣monly called Lollards were objected against by the Lord Chief Justice Cook, and ordered to be left out of the Oath, Cro. Car. 1. quod vide. also, ye shall do all your power and dili∣gence to destroy, and make to cease all manner of He∣resies, and Errors, com∣monly called Lollards, with∣in your Bayliffwick, from time to time to all your power, and assist and be helping to all Ordina∣ries, and Commissaries of holy Church, and favour and maintain them as oft times as we shall be required by the said Ordinaries, and Commissaries; ye shall be dwelling in your pro∣per person within your Bayliffewick for the time ye shall be in the same Office, except ye be o∣therwise licensed of the King; ye shall not let your Sheriffwick, nor any Bayliffwick there∣of to Farm to any man; ye shall truly set, and return reasonable and due issues of them that be within your Bayliffwick after their estate and their honour; and make your Pannels your self of such persons as be most next, most suf∣ficient, and not suspect, or procured, as it is ordained by the Statutes, and over this in Es∣chewing and restrainder of the Mans slaughters, Robberies, and other manifold grievous offences that have been done daily, namely of such as name themselves Souldiers, and by other Vaga∣rants, the which continually increase in num∣ber, and multiply, so that the Kings true Sub∣jects may not be safe, yea ride, nor go to do
such things as they have to do, to their intole∣erable hurt and hinderance; ye shall truly and effectually with all diligence possible to your power execute the Statute, as the Statutes of Winchester, and of Vagabonds; these things all ye shall truly keep, as God you help, and his Saints. The Oath of an Attorney at Law. YOu shall do no falshood, nor consent to any to be done in the Court, and if you know of any to be done you shall give know∣ledge thereof unto my Lord Chief Justice, or other his Brethren, that it may be reformed; you shall delay no man for lucre or malice; You shall increase no Fees, but shall be contented with the old Fees accustomed; you shall plead no Foraign Plea, nor suffer no Foraign Suits unlawfully to hurt any man, but such as shall stand with order of the law, and your consci∣ence; you shall seal all such Processe as you shall sue out of the Court with the Seal there∣of, and see the Kings Majesty, and my Lord Chief Justice discharged for the same; ye shall not wittingly nor willingly sue, nor procure to be sued any false Suit, nor give aid, nor con∣sent to the same, in pain to be expulsed from the Court for ever; And furthermore, you shall use your self in the Office of an Attorny, with∣in the Court according to your Learning and discretion; so help you God, &c.
The Oath of a Merchant Adventurer. First, ye shall swear, To be true to our Soveraign Lady the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, and if any thing may come to your knowledge intended against her Majesties Per∣son, or Dominions, to discover the same to the Governour of this Fellowship, or his Deputy, or some other in place convenient. Secondly, You shall swear to be obedient and assistant to the Governour, and his Deputy, and Fellowship of Merchant-Adventures; and to keep all Acts and Ordinances by them made, or to be made, without doing or procuring any thing in prejudice thereof, or else offending, duly to pay the penalties. Thirdly, Ye swear, To conceal the secrets of the Fellowship, and to make known unto the Governour, or his Deputy, from time to time, any thing which you shall understand to be pretended against the Fellowship, or the Privi∣ledges thereof. Lastly, You swear, That in no case you shall colour or free any mans Goods whomsoever, being either Stranger, or one free of this Fol∣lowship.
The Oath of a Merchant Adventurer taken before the Poqueter, for the true Shipping of his Clothes. YOu shall swear, That all and every such Clothes, and other Commodities, where∣of you, or any of you have made entry, are al∣ready bought, and within the Walls of London, being over and above all former Entries, and are not yet Shipped, and they are also belong∣ing to those men in whose names they be en∣tered, and their Partners, being free Brothers of this Company of Merchant Adventurers; and that they are entred to be Shipped either for Stoade, or Middleborough. So God you help. The Oath which the Honourable George Lord Nevel, Baron of Abergaveny used to swear his Servants by, at their first com∣ing into his Houshold. YE shall bear your faith therewith, and true service next unto our Soveraign Lord King Henry 8. unto my Lord and Lady of this place, whom ye intend now to serve; also if ye know any hurt, harm, or hinderance to be done to my said Lord and Lady to their Bodies, or to their Goods, or to his Children, by any person or persons, ye shall give him knowledge, or some of his Council as soon
as God will give you grace; Also ye shall not consume nor waste none of his Goods, nor suf∣fer them to be wasted negligently by any other person, if ye be in power to let it, or else give knowledge to his Officers that have the Rule and Charge of his House; And also at all times ye shall be obedient, requisite, and necessary, unto my Lords Officers that have the Rule and Charge of my said Lords Houshold aforesaid, ye shall well and truly of your behalf keep and perform, to the best of your power. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of Treasurer Clerk in the Exche∣quer. YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve the King your Lord, in your Office, and Room of Clerkship, to the Lord Treasurer of England, within this Court of the Kings Receipt and Treasury; And you shall uprightly behave your self towards all his Sub∣jects and Accomptants, for their speedy ex∣pedition, without any unjust hindrance or de∣lay, for affection, meed, or dread,; And you shall make uo untrue Entry into any of the Kings Rolls, or other Books of Receipt and exitus, commonly called the Pelles of Receipt and Exitus, whereby the King our Lord, or any his Subjects, may be hurt or damaged. But if you shall know of any errour in them escap∣ed; speedily to be amended; And you shall from
time to time make, or cause to be made to the Lord Treasurer of England, true and per∣fect Declarations of all manner of Sums of Mony coming in, and going out of the Kings Trea∣sury, so often as the same Lord Treasurer shall demand; And you shall safely preserve and keep the Kings Records, Leagues, and other Writings lying in his Treasury, not suffering any of them to be harmed, lost, or altered by your default, nor yet to be removed abroad to any place out of the said Treasury, but only by Warrant or License from the Lord Treasurer of England; And when any such License or com∣mand shall be given, yet you shall not rudely adventure the carrying thereof by water, if you may have convenient passage by Land; And you shall to the best of your power conserve all the ancient and laudable Customes of this Court, without permitting any new errour to arise (if you be able to resist it,) and where you are not able, you shall speedily disclose it to the Lord Treasurer of England for reforma∣tion. Finally, you shall in all things concern∣ing this your Office be obedient, faithful, and true, to the Lord Treasurer for the time be∣ing, and shall not bewray the secrets of this Court; nor yet any waste make of the Kings goods for any cause. So help you God, and all Saints, and by the Contents of that Book.
The Oath of the Writer of the Tallyes, and Counter Tallyes. YOu shall swear, That you shall truly and faithfully writ all the Tallyes and Coun∣ter-Tallyes, otherwise called the Joyles of the said Tallyes, of all manner of payments in the Court of Receipt to be made, and to give good attendance to the same, helping to dispatch all manner of Accomptants accord∣ing to the antient customes of this Court; and to make Declarations for the declaring of all manner of Receipts and Payments, there received and paid from time to time, to the Lord Treasurer of England, or to the under-Treasurer for the time being; and especial∣ly to regard, and so from time to time, unto the Entries safe keeping, taking out, shew∣ing, delivery, and laying up all manner of Leagues, and other Writings of any other parties, which remain within the King our Soveraign Lord his Treasury; to whom you shall be true, secret, and faithful, dur∣ing the time of your being in the said Office. So help you God, and all Saints.
The new Oath of the Writer of the Pell, made in the sixth year of King Edward the sixth. YOu shall swear, That you shall truly and faithfully keep the Kings Majesties Book within this his Court, called the Pell, for the speedy expedition of his Accomptants, for their surety; And you shall delay none of the Kings Accomptants; for favour meed, affection, or dread; and see all ways that no untrue entry be made in the said Pell: And if you know of any er∣ror done within the said Court, you shall shew it to the Lord Treasurer or to the under Treasu∣rer, without any delay thereof to be made: And the secrets of this Court you shall not bewray. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Ʋsher of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the Treasurer and Chamberlains of the Exchecquer in your room of Ushership to the Lord Treasurer of England, within this Court of the Kings Receipts, and shall diligently lock and keep the doors of the Kings Treasury in due time for safety of his goods; And the same doors ye shall be ready to open again at all times, when the same Lord Trea∣surer and Chamberlain, or other their Clerks,
and Deputies, shall have occasion to enter, and there shall give your attendance till their de∣parture. And ye shall demand no unjust allow∣ance for any necessaries or other kind of thing by you bought for service of the King within this Court: And ye shall, to your power, help and further all such the Kings Accomptants as shall have to do in this Court. So help you God, and Holidome, and by the Contents of that Book. The Oath ministred unto the Souldiers ser∣ving under the Earl of Leicester in the Low Countries. WEE do swear and promise, To do all loyal, true, and faithful service unto the Queen of England, her most Excellent Ma∣jesty, and unto the Provinces and Cities united in these Countries, and their Associates, under the charge and obedience of the Right Excel∣lent the Earl of Leicester Governour general of the said Provinces and Cities, and their Associates, and of her Majesties Army and For∣ces within the same, and all lawful and due obedience unto the said Governour, and to any other Superiour that shall have charge un∣der him for Government in this Army. And further we do promise to endeavour our selves to keep and fulfil all such lawful Ordinances as his Excellency hath, or shall set forth and esta∣blish for the better ordering of this Army, as
much as concerns us, so long as we shall serve under him. So help us God, by Jesus Christ. The Oath of the Governour of Berwick. YOV shall swear, To bee faithful and true to our Soveraign Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. and to keep and defend, to the use of her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, This Town of Berwick, and the Marches of the same, to the uttermost of your power, and according to your Offices, you shall not be absent at any time from your Office, without her Majesties special License, containing in the same the names of such to whom your char∣ge shall becommitted in your absence, except it be upon reasonable causes, to go into the Wardency of the East Marches for the service thereof, or to some other part of Northumberland, upon any your needful causes; at which time neverthe∣lesse you shall depute the Marshal, or in his absence, the next principal Officer, to take your charge of this Town: You shall cause all the Officers of this Town to do their duties, or else see them punished without favour or delay; you shall use the advice of all those which be Counsellors of this Town for any mat∣ter concerning the Government thereof, ex∣cept the matter shall touch any of themselves in which the same parties shall be excluded for the time; you shall see that this Town,
and the Garrison be provided of a convenient force of Victual of all sorts from time to time; And that the Mayor and his Brethren shall do their duties for the Common weal of the same Town according to their Jurisdiction. You shall administer Justice truly, and indifferently to all manner of persons having any Cause de∣pending before you: You shall not admit, nor suffer to be admitted any manner of person to be of this Garrison that shall be born out of the Realm of England or Ireland; nor above the number of forty that shall be born within the Realm of Ireland; You shall at sundry times visit the Gates and Posterns of this Town, the Locks and Shuttings thereof, the Town Walls, Bulworks, Ditches, Ordinances, Artillery, and Munition, and the Houses of the Stoage of the same, and cause to be redressed to the best of your power any thing therein amisse; Finally, you shall quarterly peruse the Statu∣tes and Ordinances heretofore made, and now remaining in force for the Government of this Town, and them cause to be duly kept and observed. The Oath of the Marshal of Berwick. YOu shall swear, That you shall be faith∣ful and true to our Soveraign Lady Queen Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. You shall be obedient to the Gover∣nour
of this Town, for the good governance and defence of the same, and shall give good coun∣sel and assistance unto him, and all other Officers of the Town to the uttermost of your power; You shall set the Watch of the Town, and visit it from time to time, as to your Office belongeth; You shall not imprison, or present any person without reasonable cause, and thereof you shall certifie the Governour of their names, and their causes: You shall suffer no person born out of the Queens Maje∣sties Allegiance without the Governours spe∣cial License, (and that not without good cause) to lodge in this Town above two nights, or to continue above twenty four hours at any one time, nor shall suffer any stran∣ger to be lodged, but in convenient place to keep the same person from the knowledg of the secrets of this Town. Finally, you shall keep, and cause to be kept, all manner of Sta∣tutes, Laws and Ordinances, heretofore made, and now remaining in force, for the good governance of this Town, to the uttermost of your power. The Oath of the Treasurer of Berwick. YOu shall swear, That you shall be faith∣ful and true to our Soveraign Lady Eliza∣beth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. You shall be obedient to the Governour of this
Town for the good governance and defence of the same, and shall give counsel and assi∣stance to him, and all other Officers of the Town to the uttermost of your power; you shall make no payment to Officers or Souldiers until Muster be had, viewed, and taken by the Governour and Marshal of the Town, and the Comptroller, and of the Checque hereof. Finally, Ye shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and kept, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, heretofore made, and now remaining in force; for the government of this Town. The Oath of the Porter of Berwick. YOu shall swear, That you shall be faith∣ful and true to our Soveraign Lady Eliza∣beth by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, &c. You shall be obedient and attendant to the Gover∣nour for the time being in all things appertaining to the good governance and defence of the same Town, and to him, and to the Queens Coun∣cel and Officers of the same Town; You shall give faithful and diligent counsel, and them ayd and assist to the uttermost of your power: You shall safely, surely, and diligently keep the keyes of the Gates of this Town of Berwick, while they shall be in your hands, and shall see the same Gates guarded and shut up at the times accustomed, and as the Governour of this Town shall command, for the surety of
this Town; And at all times, as soon as the Gates shall be shut, you shall bring the said Keys to the Governour of the Town, and in his absence, to his Deputy; you shall whensoe∣ver any tidings or intelligence shall come to you by Land, or by Water, that is meet to be known to the Governour of the Town, or to the Council in his absence, forthwith let them know the same; You shall rear no new Customes or Taxes, to the vexation of any comers or goers, &c. The Oath of the Master of the Ordinance for the Town of Berwick. YOu shall swear, That you shall be true and faithful to our Soveraign Lady Eliza∣beth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. You shall be obedient to the Governour of this Town, for the good governance and defence of the same; And shall give good counsel and assistance to him, and all other Officers of the Town to the uttermost of your power; You shall see that the Ordinance, Artillery, and Munition be safely and well kept from all dan∣ger of the Enemies, of Fire, or other misad∣ventures to the best of your power, and that the Ordinance and Artillery placed for the defence of this Town he always kept in good repair, and be in readiness for the use where the same is or shall be planted; You shall
issue no part thereof at any time but for the service of this Town, nor shall expend any portion of your Office but by Warrant; Fi∣nally, You shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and kept all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances of this Town hereto∣fore made, and now remaining in force for the good governance of the same Town. The Oath of the Clerk of the Checque in Berwick. YOu shall swear, That you shall be true and faithful to our Soveraign Lady Eliza∣beth by the Grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. You shall swear to keep truly the Books of Musters of all the persons in the Town, and you shall keep true Record, and Re∣port of the time of all manner of persons depar∣ting from the Town, being either Licensed for more then two dayes, or being Cashier'd or discharged of Service, and of all such as shall depart without License, and shall duly in∣form the Governour of the defaults that you shall find, and the same you shall Checque in your Book, and the same Book you shall duly keep, and at the pay see the party thereof Taxed and defaulted, and surther punished as the cause shall require.
The Oath of Captains of Bands in the Town of Berwick. YOu shall swear, To be true and good to our Soveraign Lady the Queen, and to the Governour of the Town, and shall keep your whole number being, in your charge without diminishing, or admitting of the same until you have certified the Governour of the Town thereof, and that the Clerk of the Checque by the Governours appointment have enrolled the same in his Book, and if any of your Band shall escape away, or die, you shall forthwith notifie the same to the Governour of the Town, and the said Clerk of the Checque; You shall not refuse to come to common Musters at any time, upon the call of the Governour of the Town, either being alone, or else having with him the Treasurer and Clerk of the Checque; neither shall you bring to Muster any person but such as have served in your Band, during the time for which he shall have pay; neither shall you to your knowledg suffer any one to be in your Band that receiveth any mans pay of our Treasurer in any other room or place within this Town, except it be for the Tax work in our Fortifications, whereof you shall make privy the Treasurer, and Clerk of the Checque; You shall see, and cause every your Souldiers to be frequently Trained and taught the use
of their Weapons, and other Feats of War convenient for them; and at the last you shall cause the same to be done every fourteen days in Summer once, and every twenty days in Winter: You shall not permit any of your Band to take any more Victuals, or other Wares within that Town then his Wages will discharge; You shall with your Band, Watch and Ward for the defence of this Town as you shall be appointed by the Marshal and Governour thereof; You shall not depart out of the Town and Marches further then the Orders of the Town do permit without leave of the Governour of the Town, or in his absence by his Deputy, under their Wri∣tings and Seal, mentioning the time of your leave to be absent, and before your departure (if it shall be longer then for three days) you shall present your self to the Treasurer, or his Deputy, giving notice unto them for the time licensed you for absence, and at your return you shall also give notice to the said Treasurer and Clerk of the Checque; You shall also be obedient to the Governour, and to the other Counsellors of this Town, and shall obey all Statutes and Ordinances of the same. The Oath of every private Souldier in Berwick. YOu shall swear, To be good and true to our Soveraign Lady the Queen, and to the
Governour of this Town for Her Majesties service, and truly (do as much as in you shall lie, to) keep this Town always true English, and in good obedience to the Governour, Mar∣shal, and other Officers thereof; and you shall be governed by your Captain within any De∣bate or Rebellion, and if you shall know any thing hurtful to the state of this Town, or to any part thereof, you shall forthwith disclose the same either to your Captain, or to the Governour, or to one of the Council of the Town; You shall keep such Armour and Weapon as you are by your Captain limited to have without willful spoil, or selling there∣of, except it be to provide better; You shall keep all other Ordinances of this Town that may any ways pertain to you to keep. The Oath of the Lord President of the Councel in the Marches of Wales. YOu shall swear, To the uttermost of your power, will, and cunning, that you shall be true and faithful to the Queens Highness, our Soveraign Lady, and to her Heirs and Succes∣sors, and that you do utterly testifie and de∣clare in your conscience, that the Queens Highness is the only supream Governour of this Realm, and of all other her Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spi∣ritual and Ecclesiastical things or Causes as Temporal; and that no Foraign Prince, Person,
Prelate, State, or Potentate hath, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power Superiority, Pre∣eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or Spi∣ritual within this Realm; And that you do utterly renounce and forsake all Foraign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Autho∣rities; and do promise that from henceforth you shall bear faith, and true Allegiance to the Queens Highness; her Heirs and Succes∣sors, and to your power shall assist, and de∣fend all Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Preemi∣nencies, and Authorities granted or belong∣ing to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Im∣perial Crown of this Realm. 2. You shall not know nor hear any thing that may in any wise be prejudicial to her Highness or her Common-wealth, peace and quiet of her Highness Realm, but you shall with all diligence reveal and discover the same to her Highness, or to such other person or persons of her Graces Privy Council, as you shall think meet, and will soonest convey and bring it to her Highness. 3. You shall serve her Highness truly and faithfully in the room and place of one of her Graces Council. 4. You shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated, in any Council, faith∣fully and truly declare your mind and opinion according to your heart and conscience, no wise forbearing so to do, for any manner, re∣spect of favor, meed, displeasure, or corruption.
5. You shall faithfully and uprightly, to the best of your power, cause Justice to be duly and indifferently Ministred to the Queens Majesties Subjects, that shall have cause to sue for the same, according to equity and to the Order of the Law. Finally, You shall be vigilant and circum∣spect in all your doings and proceedings touch∣ing the Queens Majesty, and her Highness Affairs. All which points and Articles before expres∣sed, with all other Articles, Signed with the Queens Majeslies Hand, and delivered to me the Lord President of her Highness Councel, established in those parts; you shall saithfully keep and fullfil, to the uttermost of your pow∣er, wit, will, and cunning. So God you help, and the contents of this Book. The Oath of the Clerk of the Parliament. YOu shall be true, faithful, and truth you shall bear to our Soveraign Lord the King, and to his Heirs and Successors; You shall nothing know that shall be prejudicial to his Highness, his Crown, State, and Dignity Royal, but that you shall resist, to your power, and with all speed ye shall advertise his Grace thereof, at the least some of his Councel, in such wise as the same may come to his know∣ledge; Ye shall also well and and truly serve his Highness in the Office of Clerk of his Parliament,
making true entry and Records of the things done and past in the same; Ye shall keep se∣cret all such matters as shall be treated in his said Parliament, and not disclose the same be∣fore it shall be published, but to such as they ought to be disclosed unto: And generally ye shall well and truly do and execute all things belonging unto you to be done, appertaining to the Office of Clerk of the Parliament; as God you help, &c. The Oath of Allegiance. I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, professe, testifie, and declare, in my con∣science before God and the world, That our Soveraign Lord King James is lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesties Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other, hath any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Majesties Kingdoms or Domi∣nions, or to authorize any Foraign Prince to invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegi∣ance and obedience to His Majesty; or to give License or leave to any of them, to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesties Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any of His Majesties Sub∣jects
within His Majesties Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or Sentence of Excommuni∣cation or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his See. against the said King his Heirs or Successors, or any ab∣solution of the said Subjects from their Obedi∣ance, I will bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and Contempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons, their Crown and. Dignity, by reason or colour of any such Sentence or De∣claration, or otherwise; and will do my best indeavour to disclose and make known unto his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and treacherous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or them. And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as im∣pious and heretical, his damnable Doctrine and Position, that Princes which be Excom∣municated or deprived by the Pope, may be de∣posed or murthered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever; And I do beleive, and in con∣science am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any person whatsoever hath power to ab∣solve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully administred unto me; and do re∣nounce
all Pardons, and Dispensations to the contrary, and all those things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledg, and swear according to these expresse words by me spoken, and ac∣cording to the plain and common sence and underitanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret re∣servation whatsoever; And I do make this Recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God, &c. The Oath of Supremacy. I A. B. Do utterly testifie and declare in my conscience, that the Kings Highness is the only Supream Governour of this Realm, and of all other his Highness Dominions, and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and Eccle∣siastical things or causes as Temporal; And that no Foraign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate hath, or ought to have any Ju∣risdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this Realm; And therefore I do utterly re∣nounce and forsake all Foraign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings High∣ness, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist, and defend all Ju∣risdictions, Priviledges, Preeminencies, and Authorities granted, or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs, and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. The Oath of Franck Pledge within the City of London. YE shall swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Soveraign Lord, the King of England, and to his Heirs, Kings, and the Kings Peace ye shall keep, and see that it be kept; And to all the Ministers of the City ye shall be obedient, and at all times ye shall be ready to help the Officers of the City in do∣ing of their Offices for arresting of Mis-doers, in keeping of the Kings Peace, and for to fol∣low them from Street to Street, and Ward to Ward, unto the time they be Arrested, and brought to one of the Counters; and if ye know any Congregation, or Conventicles of any mis-doers within the Ward, ye shall do the Alderman to weet thereof; and all other points within the Wardmoot ye shall well and truly keep. So help ye God, and by this Book. The Oath of the Scavengers of the Ward. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and diligently over-see that the Pavements in
every Ward be well and rightfully repaired, and not hausted to the noyance of the Neigh∣bours, and that the Wayes, Streets, and Lanes be kept clean from Dung and other Filth for the honesty of this City, and that all the Chimnies, Redosses, and Furnaces be made of Stone for defence of Fire; and if ye know any such ye shall shew it to the Alderman, that he may make due redresse thereof; and this ye shall not leave. So help you Gods &c. The Oath for Brokers in London. YE shall swear, That ye shall neither buy nor sell, nor any other for you, any manner of Merchandize by fraud or collusion to your own proper use within the Franchises of this City, nor without; And that ye neither make, nor do to be made any manner Bar∣gain between Forraigner and Forraigner, or Forraigner and Stranger within the Franchises of this City, nor without, upon pain of forfeiture of one hundred pounds to the Chamber of London, and losing of your Office for ever; Also that ye buy no manner of Mer∣chandize of any person within the Franchises of this City nor without to no persons use; That ye bring the Seller and the Buyer together, mak∣ing a rightful Bargain between them if you be required; and that ye shall neither suffer, nor
counsel any other person to use Brokeage within the said City, or the Franchises of the same, but if he be admitted and sworn and hath found sufficient Surety to do well and truly, and keep and observe all these Articles and Ordinances: and if ye know any person so doing ye shall open it to the Mayor and Aldermen, and else ye shall be deprived of your Office for ever. Also ye shall be in no Livery with any Per∣son nor Host, any manner of Stranger, or Alien, upon pain of losing of your Office for ever; Also ye shall do all your Bargaines that ye shall make between any manner of persons to be writ∣ten in a Book, and that ye shall have the same Book ready before the Mayor, and Aldermen for the time being, at all times when he by them shall be required to testifie the Bargains aforesaid; Also that ye shall not be dwelling, harboured, nor lodged with any Merchant Stranger within the City of London, or Liberty thereof. Also ye shall make no manner Bargain of Usury, nor exchange of Usury, nor any other false Chevisance nor untrue Bargain, nor Con∣tract, nor meddle, nor consent to the same in any wise no such Bargain, favour, nor coun∣sel, or hide, but them disclose to the Mayor and Aldermen of the same City for the time being, and this you shall not leave. So God you help.
The Oath of the Sheriff of Londons Serjeant. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the Sheriff of London in your Office of Serjeantship, and the Franchises of London; Ye shall swear and maintain to your power, and all manner persons that ye shall Arrest by Plaint, Writ, or by Fray, or by any other lawful cause, ye shall bring them unto the Counter if ye be of power; Also ye shall warn no person to agree with the Cre∣ditors of their Debts, but that a Plaint of such Debts be lawfully made; Also ye shall warn no person on Whom a Plaint or a Writ is on in the Counter, and ye shall well and truly enter such Plaints as ye shall have of your Clients or any other person; Also all manner of Mercements and Fines that ye shall receive, ye shall well and truly bring them to the Coun∣ter, and there to deliver them to the Sheriff, or to his Deputy; Also ye shall not tarry, or delay none occasion, nor make none untrue Process; That ye shall by vertue of your Of∣fice, fraud, or hate, or promise for your sin∣gular availe: Also ye shall be no Lone day maker, nor maintainer of none occasion; Also in all manner of Plaints that ye shall return good and honest persons, and true, and not suspitious, not procured by you, nor by your assent; Also you shall counsel nothing whereby
the Sheriffes, or any of their Courts or Officers may be hurt in their availes; Also the com∣mons of the City peaceably and gently ye shall intreat, and also to all other persons that have his Patents of exemptions of any Office, or other Charges within the City of the Kings grant ye shall do, summon them like as ye do other Free-men of Inquests; Also ye shall take no Yeoman into your Go∣vernance whilest he be Officer with the said Sheriff, unto the time that ye shew the said Yeoman unto the said Sheriff, and by him so to be accepted; and also ye shall not do away the said Yeoman in that being without a lawful cause, certifying, and knowing to the Sheriff; And if that Yeoman be from you so voided, ye shall take away the Livery of the Sheriff, except, and in all other things your Office you shall well and truly keep and bear you. So help you God, and by this Book. The Oath of a Constable in London. Ye shall swear, That ye shall keep the peace of our Soveraign Lord the King well, and lawfully after your power; Also ye shall Arrest all them that make any Riot, Debate, or Affray in breaking of the said Peace, and ye shall bring them to one of the Sheriffes Houses, or to the Counters of the said Sheriffe, and if ye be withstood by strength of any such mis∣doers,
ye shall ever rear up Hue and Cry, and ye shall follow them from Street to Street, and from Ward to Ward till ye may Arrest them. Also ye shall search at all times when ye shall be required by Scavengers, or Beadle, for the common noyance of the Ward. Also if there be any thing done within the Ward contrary to the Ordinance to the City. Also such faults as ye find ye shall present them to the Mayor, and to the Ministers of the City; and if you be withstood with person or persons, that ye may not do your Office ye shall present them to the Mayor, and to the Common-Council of the City, with the names of them that so trouble you. And this ye shall not leave. So help you God, and holidome, and by this Book. The Oath of a Beadle of the Wards in London. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and honestly keep the Ward that ye be Beadle in: And ye shall suffer no manner Ribbawdes, nor none of evil living, nor hunters of Ale, nor women holding Brothels, nor none other Noy∣ons, other women slandred of evil name, and of evil life, dwelling within the Ward, but you shall certifie the names of them unto the Alderman, to that intent that he shall have them out within fifteen days; and if the Al∣derman do it not, ye shall anon after the fifteen
days ended, do the Mayor to weete; and if any man make any fray, or draw any wea∣pon against the Kings Peace, ye shall do the Sheriff to weet, that they may make lea∣vy by the Serjeants of such misdoers also; Ye shall return good and lawful men in the Hustings asor the Sheriffes, and the Kings Crowner to the Quest, and not men suspi∣tions, and maintainers of persons of evil name; And the Return that ye make, ye shall shew them three or four dayes before the Hustings, that ye may see the Return, whether it be sufficient or no; Also ye shall see, that no Poul∣ter, nor no other Victualler, make no sale of Poultery, Corn, or Meal, or any other Victu∣al, in no privy place, against the Ordinance of the Mayor, but ye shall warn the Mayor, and the Sheriffes thereof; Ye shall be none Of∣ricer in Court expedient during your Beadle∣ship; Also ye shall brew none Ale, nor none for you, to be no Regrater ye shall keep no Bake-house: Also ye shall be no Regrater of Victual, nor none hunter of Ale, nor part∣ner with none of them: And other things to your Office belonging ye shall well and law∣fully keep. So help you God, and Holidom, and by this Book. The Oath of the Wardmoot Inquest with∣in London. YE shall swear, That ye shall be true to our Soveraign Lord the King that now
is, and to his Heirs and Successors Kings of England; and readily ye shall come when ye be summoned, to the Common Council of this City; but if ye be reasonably excused; and good and true Councel ye shall give in all things touching the Common-wealth of this City, after your wit and cunning; And that for favour of any person ye shall maintain no singular profit against the common profit of this City; And after that ye be come to the Common Councel, you shall not from thence depart until the Common Councel be ended, without reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Mayors License: And also any secret things that be spoken or said in the Common Councel, without to be secret, in no wise ye shall disclose; As God you help and his Saints. The Oath of the Chancellor of the Court of Augmentation. YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the Office of the Chancellorship of the Court of the Augmen∣tations and Revenues of the Kings Crown; And shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best of your cunning and power; And that ye shall diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the Kings ad∣vantage and profit, and to the Augmentation of the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown,
and truly use the Kings Seal, appointed to the Office; And also endeavour your self to see the King truly answered of such Rents, Re∣venues, Issues, and Profits, which shall or may arise or grow in your Office, and from time to time deliver with speed, such as shall have to do for you; And that you shall not take nor re∣ceive of any person any gift or reward in any Cause or matter depending before you, where∣in the Kings Highness shall be party, where∣by any prejudice, hinderance losse, or dis-herizon shall grow or be to the Kings Highness. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the general Surveyor of the Court of Augmentation. YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the Office of the general Surveyor of the Court of the Aug∣mentations and Revenues of the Kings Crown; And shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best of your power; And that ye shall diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the Kings advan∣tage and profit, and to the Augmentation of the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown; And also endeavour your self to the utter∣most of your power, to see the King truly an∣swered of all such Rents and Revenues, Issues or Profits, which shall or may arise or grow in your Office, and from time to time deliver
with speed, such as shall have to do before you; And that you shall not take or receive of any person any gift or reward in any cause or matter depending before you, wherein the Kings Highness shall be party, whereby any prejudice, hinderance losse, or dis-herizon, shall grow, or be to the Kings Highness. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Treasurer of the Court of Augmentations. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord and his People in the Office of Treasurer of the Court of the Augmentations according to the Orders hereafter ensuing; and ye shall rea∣sonably and honestly procure the Kings pro∣fit, and do right to all manner of people poor and rich, in those things which touch your Office, and the Kings Treasure; ye shall truly keep and dispend, and true De∣claration and Accompt make from time to time without any concealment, according to the Ordinance made for the establish∣ment of this Court; and further shall do every thing that of right appertaineth to your Office. So help you God, and all Saints.
The Oath of the Master of the Woods of the Court of Augmentations. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, in the Office of the Master of the Woods of this Court of Augmentations, in all things touching your Office, according to the Au∣thority given unto you by these Letters Pa∣tents, for the Kings most advantage; And ye shall do all and every thing and things which you ought to do by reason of your Office according to the form and effect of these Let∣ters Patents. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Attorney, and Solicitor of the Court of Augmentations. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King, as his Attorney or Solicitor in all Courts, for and concerning any matter or cause that shall concern or touch the Possessions and Hereditaments limited to the Survey and Governance of this Court of the Augmentations, and procure the Kings pro∣fit thereof; and that ye shall truly counsel the Kings Chancellor, and general Surveyor of this Court, all things concerning the same, to the best of your Cunning, Wit, and Power,
and with all speed and diligence from time to time at the calling of the said Chancellor and general Surveyor, or any of them, be diligent∣ly attendant to assist the said Chancellor and Sur∣veyor, or any of them, with good advise and counsel, in the hearing and determination of such matters and causes as shall depend before the said Chancellor and general Surveyor of this Court; And that he shall not take any gift or reward in any matter or cause depend∣ing in the same Court or elsewhere, wherein the King shall be party, whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hindered, hurted, or disheri∣ted; And further do all and every thing that shall appertain to your Office. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Surveyor of the Woods of the Court of Augmentations. YE shall swear, That ye shall serve truly the King in your Office of Surveyor of the Woods within the Survey of this Court of the Augmentation; and to your cunning and power shall truly do and execute all and every thing and things which ye ought to do, by rea∣son of your Office, according to the forms and effect of the Ordinance and Establish∣ment of this Court. So help you God, and all Saints.
The Oath of the Clerk of the Augmen∣tations. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of Clerk of this Court of the Augmentations, and truly do and execute all and every thing and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, according to the form and effect of the Ordinance made upon the Erection of this Court. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of the Augmentations. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of Au∣dicorship; and true Allegiance make to every person which shall be Accomptant before you; Ye shall not take nor receive of poor or rich any Gift or Reward in any Matter or Cause depending, or to be discussed in Court, but such that shall be your ordinary Fees; and ye shall do all and every thing and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Of∣fice, according to the form and effect of the Ordinance made and established upon the E∣recting of this Court of the Augmentations. So help you God and all Saints.
The Oath of the Receiver of the Court of Augmentations. YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and nothing conceal, but true Accompt make of all such Revenues, Rents, Sums of Mony, and other profits wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged, by reason of your Office; ye shall make no Petition nor ask any allowance, but such as shall be good, just, true, and reasonable; And ye shall do all and every thing and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Of∣fice, according to the form and effect of the Ordinance made and established upon the E∣rection of this Court of Augmentation. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of Surveyor of the Lands of the Court of Augmentations. YE shall truly serve the King in your Of∣fice of Surveyor of Lands within the Sur∣vey of this Court of the Augmentations, and to your cunning, wit, and power, shall truly do and execute all and every thing and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Of∣fice, according to the form and effect of the Ordinance, and establishment of this Court. So help you God, and all Saints.
The Oath of the Messenger of the Court of the Augmentations. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of Messenger of this Court of the Augmentations, as well in speedy serving all and singular Pro∣cess to you to be delivered, without fraud, covin, guile, or deceit, as also making true and speedy Certificate to this Court of the same; and that you well and truly do and ex∣ecute all and every other thing and things which ye ought to do, by Reason of your Of∣fice. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of Henry the third, French King, for observing of the Statutes of the Order of the Garter. WE Henry by the Grace of God King of France and Pologne do Swear, Vow, and Protest solemnly upon our Honour, and in the Word of a King, That we shall ob∣serve, keep, and maintain, the Statutes and Orders of the right Noble Order of St. George, called the Garter, so far forth as they shall not be found contrary to our Reli∣gion Catholique, Greatness, and Majesty Roy∣al, nor to the Statutes and Ordinances of Our
two Orders of the blessed Holy Ghost, and of St. Michael. In witness whereof we have Signed this present with our own Hand, and caused the same to be sealed with our Privy Seal at Paris the last day of February, Anno 1585. Henry Prilart. The Oath of a Knight of the Garter, at his first admission, as it was used in the time of King, P. and Queen Mary. YOu being chosen to be one of the Ho∣nourable Companions of the most Honou∣rable Order of the Garter, shall promise, and by those holy Evangelists by you manifestly touched, swear truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the Statutes of the said Order, and every Article in the same contained, for so much as to you pertains and belongs. And further, That you shall help to defend and maintain, so much as in you lieth the Rights and Liberties of the Colledge of our Blessed Lady, and Saint George the Martyr, wherein the Honourable Order of the Garter shall be founded.
The Oath Ministred to them of the Kings Chamber by the Lord Chamberlain, in the time of King H. 8. J A. B. swear by the holy Evangelists, That I faith and truth shall bear unto our Soveraign Lord Henry 8. King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland, and unto the Queen our Soveraign Lady his Wife, and to their Issue; and in and upon the Office of C. D. I shall duly and truly await and attend un∣to which at this time I am admitted and recei∣ved; I shall not know any Treason or thing pre∣judicial compassed, attempted, or imagined, a∣gainst our Soveraign Lord or Soveraign Lady, or their Issue, or any of them, but I shall incon∣tinent upon the said knowledg discover it unto our Lord Chamberlain, or unto his Deputy, if he have any, or in their absence to one of their Ushers in the said Chamber; I shall not discover any secrets or things that may happen to come to mine Ears, that shall touch the Kings Council, or the honour of his Chamber; And I shall be obedient unto my said Lord Cham∣berlain, and unto his said Deputy, if he have any, and unto the said Ushers, and their Com∣mandments diligently and faithfully observe and keep to my power; I shall eschew all man∣ner of Riots, making of Bandies, Quarrels or Debates either within the said Chamber, or without, but I shall forbid and let all such in∣conveniences
as far forth as I may; And also let the said Officers, or one of them, have knowledg thereof; Also I shall not depart out of the Kings Court, without License appoint∣ed and had of my said Lord Chamberlain, or of his Deputy, if he have any: Which Premisses, and every of them, with all other Command∣ments to be given on the behalf or our said Soveraign Lord, by my said Lord Chamber∣lain or his said Deputy if he have any, or any of the said Ushers, I shall faithfully ob∣serve, obey, and keep to the uttermost of my power. So help me God, and his Saints. The Oath Ministred to the Clerk of the Council to Prince Henry Son to King James YOu shall swear, That well and truly you shall serve the High and Mighty Prince Henry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, in the Office and Clerk of his Council, and matters committed to you, or treated of by his Council, to be kept secret, you shall faithfully keep; And you shall not know nor understand, nor suffer any thing tending to the hurt or disheriting of his High∣ness, be decreased by any means, so far forth as ye may let it; and if ye may not let it, ye shall make it clearly and expresly known to his Highness; and that ye shall do, and procure
and purchase his Highness profit in all that ye reasonably may as God you help. Perused and Examined by Mr. Stevens the Prince's Atror∣ney. The Oath to be ministred to any of King James his Servants in ordinary or extra∣ordinary. YOu shall swear, Faithfully and truly to serve our Soveraign Lord the King, James of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, his Heirs and Successors; You shall serve him in the room and place of N. N. in ordinary: You shall know nothing that shall be prejudicial to his Person, his State, his Crown, or Digni∣ty, but you shall with all diligence make it known to the Lord Chamberlain, Vice-Chamberlain, or some other of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council; You shall be obedient to the Lord Chamberlain, Vice-Chamberlain, and Gentlemen-Ushers, in all matters tending to his Majesties Service. So help you God, and Jesus Christ. The Oath ordained to be ministred to the Princess Maries Council, when her houshold was established in the 17. year of King H. 8. YOu shall be true and faithful unto the King our Soveraign Lord King Henry 8. and
unto his Heirs and Successors Kings of En∣gland; And ye shall be faithful and true unto my Lady Princess Grace; And ye shall, ac∣cording to your Wit, Discretion, Knowledg, and Experience, give unto her true and faithful Counsel in all things, as shall be demanded of you by way of good advice and counsel: Ye shall also keep secret and conserve her said coun∣sel, without disclosing of the same to any per∣son, except he be of the same Council; And if the matter touch any of the said Council, ye shall not disclose the same unto him; ye shall not also promote nor further any matter in her said Council for any Meed, Reward, Favour, Affection, or Displeasure; And in case you shall perceive any thing to be done or at∣tempted contrary to her Honour, Estate, De∣gree, or Surety, ye shall to the uttermost of your power, withstand and let the same. And generally, You shall do all manner of things that unto a good, true, and faithful Counsel∣lor shall appertain. So help you God, and the holy Contents of this Book. The Oath ministred to the Treasurers of War, for the Receipt and Issues of the three Subsidies, and three Fifteens, granted by Act of Parliament in the 21. year of King James. YOu shall swear, That you being appointed one of the Treasurers for the receiving of
the three Subsidies, and three Fifteens and Tenths, granted by the Temporality, shall not issue any part of those Monies which shall be paid unto your hands, or unto the hands of any other by your appointment or consent, with∣out the special Warrants of those Persons which are by his Majesty appointed to be of his Council for the Wares, and in this Act nominated, or of five of them at the least, whereof two of them to be such as are of His Majesties Privy Council, under their Hands. The Oath ministred to the Council of War, for the true imploying of the three Subsi∣dies, and three Fifteens, granted by Act of Parliament in the 21. year of King James. YOu shall swear, That you being one of the Council of War chosen by His Ma∣jesty, and nominated in this Act, shall make no Warrant for any Monies to be issued, which are given by this present Act, but for some of those ends which are expressed in this Act; And that all such Warrants as shall be made by you, shall mention in them that those Monies are to be imployed according to the true mean∣ing of this Act; and to the best of your means you shall imploy the same accordingly.
The Oath ministred to Garter King of Armes at his Creation. FIrst, ye shall swear, To honour and obey the Kings Highness, as first and So∣veraign of this most noble Order, and after him other Knights of the same Order, name∣ly in such things as shall belong to your Office, which shall be found reasonable. And because you be taken as here to be made privy of Coun∣cel, you shall swear Alwayes to be a man of silence, true and faithful in all things here to be done, and shall in no wise disclose any part thereof. Ye shall swear also, That ye shall be faith∣ful and diligent to fullfil, perform, and exe∣cute all things that shall be committed to your charge and credit; and diligently to enquire of all the Noble Acts of all and every the said Noble Knights of the said Order, and shall cer∣tifie the Register thereof, that he may put the same in perpetual Memory. Moreover when any Knight of the said Or∣der shall die, ye shall strait, upon knowledge thereof, first make the Soveraigne privy there∣of, and after him the other Knights of the said Order, to be made privy thereunto. And finally, ye shall swear, That ye shall truly and faithfully use and exercise this same Office. So God you help, and these blessed E∣vangelists.
The Oath of a King of Armes at the time of his Coronation. YE shall swear by the Oath ye received when ye were made Herauld, and by the faith ye own to our Soveraign Lord the King, whose Armes you bear, That you shall truly keep such things as be comprized in these Ar∣ticles following: First, when the King shall command you to do any Message either to Emperour or King, Prince, or any other Estate of what condition or degree soever he be of, either with∣in the Realm or without, you shall do it as honourable and truly as your wit, reason, and discretion shall serve you; and as greatly to the advantage of your said Soveraign and his Realm, and true report bring again to your foresaid Soveraign, of your Message that ye shall do, as neer to the charge to you com∣mitted, in word and substance as your said rea∣son shall attain, alwayes keeping your self se∣cret for any manner of motion, except it be to such persons as you are commanded to ut∣ter your Charge unto. Secondly, you shall do your true endeavour, every day to be more cunning than other in the Office of Armes, so that ye may be the bet∣ter furnished to teach others under you, and execute with more wisdom and eloquence, such charges as your Soveraign or any Noble
man of this Realm shall deliver, or give unto you by vertue of the Office which his High∣nesse will erect unto you at any time, not discovering in no wise such as ye are com∣manded to keep close, unless it be prejudi∣cial unto the King his Soveraign Lord, and to this Realm. Thirdly, you shall do your best endeavour to enquire of all the Noblemen and Gentlemen within your Province or Marches, which should bear Coats in the Field, in the Service of our Soveraign Lord, or Commissioners, and them with their Issues truly to Register, together with their Armes as they may truly bear, with their difference due in Armes to be given, and whether they hold any service of Knights Fee, whereby they should do the King Service for the defence of his Realm. Fourthly, ye shall not be strange to teach Heraulds and Pursevants of such doubts as they shall move unto you, howbeit you shall ask the Pursevants whether he have moved it, and desired any of the Heraulds to instruct him therein; and if he say nay, ye shall limit him to one of them, or else ease him your selfe; and if you cannot, then you shall shew it to the Constable or Marshal: Also you shall keep from month to month in your Marches your Chapters to the increase of cunning in the Of∣fice of Armes, and the doubts which cannot there be resolved and answered, you shall move to the Constable and Marshal. Fifthly, ye shall observe and keep, to your
cunning and power, all such Oaths as ye make when ye were created Herauld, to the ho∣nour and worship of Nobles, and great increase of learning and good living, and namely in eschewing of slanders, and dishonest places and persons reproached; and to be always readier to excuse then to blame any Noble Person un∣less ye be charged to speak truth by the Kings Highness. Constable, or Marshal, or any Peer Judicial; Also you shall promise, to Register all Acts of Honour in manner and form as they are done, as far forth as your power and cunning can extent. As God shall you help, and by the holy Contents of this Book. The Oath of a Herauld at Armes, at the time of his Creation. FIrst, ye shall swear, to be true to the most High and Mighty Prince our Sove∣raign Lord the King that here is; And if ye have knowledge or any imagination of Trea∣son, in Language or word, that moves to the derogative or hurt of his Estate or Highness, who God defend, you shall in that case, as honestly and as soon as shall be possible dis∣cover and shew to his Highness, or to his Noble and discreet Counsel, and it in no wise conceal. Secondly, ye shall promise and swear, That ye shall be conversant and serviceable to all
Gentlemen; to do their commandments, to the worship of Knighthood; and to excuse their Worship by your good Councel that God hath sent you, ever ready to offer your self unto them. Thirdly, ye shall swear and promise, To be secret, and to keep the secret of Knights, Es∣quires, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, as a Con∣fessor of Armes; and not to discover them in no wise, except it be Treason, as aforesaid. Fourthly, ye shall promise and swear, That if it fortune you in any Land or Country to go or ride, and find any Gentleman of Name and Armes that hath lost his good in Worship of Knighthood in the Kings Service, or in any other place of Worship, and is fallen into Poverty, ye shall aid, support, and succour him in that you may, if that he ask of you goods to his sustenance, ye shall give him part of that which God hath sent you, to your power, and as ye may bear. Fifthly, ye shall swear and promise, if ye be in any place where ye hear of any debate or evil Language, between party and party, that is not worshipful, profitable, nor virtuous, that ye report it not forth, but to their wor∣ship, and to the best. Sixthly, if ye be in any place where you here debate or language dishonest between Gen∣tleman and Gentleman, whereunto you are called as a Witness, or required by Princes, Judges, or any other, unless the Law do so compel you, ye shall not open without License
of both Parties; and having License, ye shall for any love, dread, or favour of any party, report the truth. Seventhly, ye shall promise and swear, To be true and secret to all Gentlewomen, Wid∣dows, or Maids; and in case be that any man would do them wrong, or inforce them, or disherit them of livelihoods, and they hav∣ing not goods to pursue their Rights, if they require you of supportation, you shall help them with your goods, wisdom, and counsel, and shew their griefs to the Prince and Judges. Eightly, ye shall swear and pronounce, That ye shall forsake all places dishonest of hazardy, and dayly going to common Ta∣verns and places of debate, and all manner of vice, and take you to vertues to your power. These Articles, and all other Articles above∣said, you shall truly keep. So God you help, and by the Cross of this Sword, that belong∣eth to Knighthood. The Oath of a Pursevant of Armes, at his Creation. FIrst, ye shall swear, That ye shall be true to the most High, Mighty, and most ex∣cellent Princess, the Queens most excellent Highness that now is; and if ye have any knowledge, or hear any imagination of Trea∣son, of Language, or word, that should sound to the derogation or hurt of her Estate and High∣ness,
which God forbid, ye shall in that case as hastily and as soon as is to you possible, discover and shew it unto her Highness, or to the Honourable and discreet Council. Secondly, ye shall also dispose you to be lowly, humble, and serviceable to all those States Universal, that be Christians, not lying in wait to blame, nor hurt none of the said Estates in any thing that may touch their Honours. Thirdly, ye may dispose to be secret and sober in your Por, and not to abuse in Lan∣guage, ready to commend, and loath to blame, and diligent in your service, eschewing vice, and taking you to virtue, and true in your re∣ports; And so to exercise whiles you be in the Office of Pursevant, that your merits may cause your more preferment in the Office of Arms in the time to come; All such Articles and things as belong to a Pursevant of Arms to keep, you shall well and truly keep and observe. So God you help, and Holidome, and by the Contents of this Book. The Oath of the Knights of the Round Ta∣ble, in the time of King Arthur. NOt to put off your Armour from your Body, but for requisite rest in the night. To search for marvellous adventures, where∣by to win renown. To defend the poor and simple people in∣their right.
Not to refuse aid unto them that shall ask it in any just quarrel. Not to hurt, offend, or play any lewd part the one with the other. To fight for the protection, defence and welfare of his friends. Not to purchase any goods or particular pro∣fit, but Honour and the Title of honesty. Not to break faith promised or sworn, for any cause or occasion whatsoever. To put forth and spend his life for the ho∣nour of God and his Country, and to chuse ra∣ther to die honestly then to live shamefully. The Oath which the new King of Polonia made to the Turk, in Anno 1573. I Promise and swear by the mighty God merciful, and being the maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all things that are therein, by these holy Evanglists, by holy Baptisme, and by Christian faith. That all those that I know shall be manifested to high and mighty Solo∣mon, Emperour of the Turks, whose Empire God certifie, I will be friend to his friends, and enemy to his enemies: I will be a redeemer of his Captives out of the hands of his Ene∣mies, there shall be no fraud or deceipt on my part. If I shall neglect thus to do, I will be an Apostata, a forsaker of the holy Com∣mandments, of the Gospel of the Christians; I will say that the Gospel is false and untrue; I will
cross both Altar and Priest; I will slay Swine upon the Fount, I will deny the holy Trinity, and will worship them; I will commit whore∣dom upon the Altar; and will receive the curse of the Saints even as God shall behold me from Heaven. The Oath of Homage done and performed by an Arch-Bishop. IF your Homage, by reason of my Tenure in the Manour of A. in the County of B. become Leigeman of life and limb, and of earthly worship, and faith, and troth, I shall bear unto you, to I've and die against all manner of men; as God me help, and all Saints. I shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth shall bear to you my Soveraign Lord King H. and to your Heirs Kings of England, of life and limb, and earthly worship, for to live and die against all people; and diligently I shall intend unto your needs and business, after my wit and power; and your Counsel I shall keep and lein, and truly I shall knowledg; And the ser∣vicedue of the Temporalities of my Arch-Bishop∣pwrick B.C. the which I claim to hold of you, and the which ye gave and yeild to me; And to you and your Commandments, in that to me appertaineth and belongeth, I shall be obey∣sant. As God me help, and all Saints.
The Oath Appointed by Queen Elizabeth in June 1579. to be ministred by the Lord President of Wales unto the Council established in those parts, &c. YOu shall swear, That to the uttermost of your power, wit, and cunning, you shall be true and faithful to the Queens Highness our Soveraign Lady, and to her Heirs and Successors; And that you do utterly testifie and declare in your conscience, that the Queens Highness is the only Supreme Governour of this Realm of England, and of all other her High∣ness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal; And that no Prince, Person, Pre∣late, State, or Potentate, hath, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, power, Supremacy, Pre∣eminence, or Authority: And do promise, That from henceforth you shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Queens Highness her lawful Heirs and Successors, and to your pow∣er shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Preeminencies, and Authorities, granted or belonging to the Queens High∣ness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this King∣dom and Realm. You shall not know, nor have any thing that may any way be prejudicial to her Highness or to her Common-wealth, peace and quiet of
this her Highness Realm, but you shall with all diligence reveal and disclose the same to her Highness, or to such other person or persons of her Graces Privy Counsel as you shall think meet, and will soonest convey it, and bring it to her Highness knowledge. You shall serve her Majesty truly and faith∣fully in the room and place of her Highness Counsel; You shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated in any Counsel, faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion, ac∣cording to your heart and conscience; in no wise forbearing so to do, for any manner re∣spect of favour, meed, dread, displeasure, or corruption. You shall faithfully and uprightly, to the best of your power cause Justice to be duly and indifferently ministred to the Queens Maje∣sties Subjects, that shall have cause to sue for the same, according to the equity and the Or∣der of the Law. Finally, You shall be vigilant, diligent, and circumspect in all your doings and proceedings, touching the Queens Majesty and all her Affaires. All which points and Articles before ex∣pressed, with all other Articles signed with the Queens Majesties own hand, and delivered to me the Lord President of her Highness Counsel established in those parts, you shall faith∣fully observe, keep, and fulfil, to the uttermost of your power, wit, will, and cunning, So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.
The Oath that a Gentleman Ʋsher doth give to any that is sworn the Kings Ser∣vant in the time of H. 8. First, you shall swear upon the Holy E∣vangelists, That you faith and truth shall bear unto our most gracious and most dread So∣veraign Lord, and unto his Issue Kings of England. Ye shall be here sworn in and unto the room of a Gentleman Usher, or &c. whereun∣to at this present time by the Kings Highness Commandment you are admitted and received, you shall from henceforth truly and diligently attend and wait. Ye shall not know or conceal any thing prejudicial compassed, attempted, or imagined, against our said most gracious and most dread Soveraign Lord the King or his Issue, or any of them; but you shall incontinently upon the said knowledg discover the same unto my Lord great Chamberlain, or else to Master Vice-Chamberlain, and in their absence, to one of the Ushers of the Kings Chamber. Ye shall not discover any secrets or other things that may touch the Kings most Ho∣nourable Council, or to the Honour of his Chamber. Ye shall be obedient unto the Lord Great Chamberlain, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, and un∣to
the Ushers of the said Chamber, and to their Commandments fully, and keep to the uttermost of your power. Ye shall eschew all manner of Riots, Routs, unlawful Assemblies, and making of Bands, Quarrels, Debates, Strifes, Controversies, ei∣ther within the Kings Chamber, or without; and ye shall forbid and let the same, to the ut∣termost of your power; and ye shall let the said Officers or one of them have knowledge thereof without any further delay. Ye shall not wear neither Livery, Cogni∣zance, nor Badge of no mans, be retained of no man, but only to the Kings Majesty; nor ye shall not retain contrary to the Sta∣tute. Ye shall not depart out of the Kings Court, without License had and obtained of my Lord Great Chamberlain, or else of Master Vice-Chamberlain, or his Deputy in his absence. All the which Premisses, and every of them with all and singular other Commandements whatsoever they are, or shall happen to be given you in charge, on the behalf of our most Gracious and most Excellent Majesty by my Lord Great Chamberlain, Master Vice-Chamberlain, or any of the said Ushers; Ye shall on your behalf observe, perform, fullfil and keep, to the uttermost of your power. So help you God, and all his Saints, and by the Holy Contents of this Book.
The Oath ministred to the Kings Servants, as well Knights and Esquires for the Body as others, in the time of Henry 8. YE shall be from henceforth during your life natural, faithful and true, and faith shall bear, and faithfully and truly ye shall serve the King our Soveraign Lord H. 8. by the Grace of God King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supream Head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs of his Body begotten, against all Men that may live or die, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition soever they be. Ye shall nothing do or attempt that in any manner of wise may be hurtful or prejudicial to our said Soveraign Lord, or to his Heirs; And if it shall happen at any time hereafter, any thing to come to your knowledge, that in any manner of ways be hurtful or prejudi∣cial to our said Soveraign Lord, or to his Heirs, or that may touch the surety or honour of their persons, ye shall not only let it to the best of your power, but also in all haste possible shall shew it to our Soveraign Lord, or to some of his Council attending upon his person, so that the same may come to the knowledg of his Grace. Also ye shall not be, nor stand confederate, nor Banded, nor Band your self, or yet be re∣tained
in any cause or matter, to, or with, or towards any manner of person, of what e∣state, condition, or degree soever he be of, pri∣vily or openly; neither by Promise, Sign, In∣denture, Fee, nor by any other manner of wise whatsoever it be, otherwise then the Law will suffer or permit you. You shall also diligently serve the Kings Grace in the room of N. N. and not depart from the Court where his Grace for the time shall be, unless ye be licensed so to do by his Grace, or by his Lord Chamberlain, or in his absence by his Vice Chamberlain, and to be obedient in that they shall command you to do within the Kings House, or elsewhere touching the Kings service in that appertain∣eth to the room of N. N. well and truly keep, and observe on your behalf. So help you God and all his Saints, and by this Book. The Oath ministred in Parliament to the Duke of Bedford, and other Lords Spiri∣tual and Temporal, for the according of all Controversies between the Duke of Glocest∣er, and the Bistop of Winchester Chan∣cellor of England,in the fourth year of H. 6. THat my Lord of Bedford, and my said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and each of them shall as far forth as their cunning and dis∣cretion sufficiently, truly, justly, and indiffer∣ently
counsel, and advise the King, and also proceed and acquit himself in all the said mat∣ters and quarrels withouten, that they or any of them shall privily, or apart make, or shew himself, or be party, or parcel therein nought, being, or eschewing so to do for affection, love, meed, doubt, or dread of any person or per∣sons, and that they shall in all wayes keep secret all that shall. be conveyed by way of counsel in the matters and quarrels abovesaid in the foresaid Parliament, withouten that they or any of them shall by word, writing, or in any wise open it, or discover it to any of the said parties, or to any other person that is not of the said Counsel; but if he have especial Commandement thereto of the King, or of my said Lord of Bedford, and that each of them shall with all his might and power by by him, and by his strength, and assist by way of Counsel, or else unto the King to my said Lord of Bedford, and to the remnant of my said Lords, to put the said parties to reason, and naught suffer, that any of the said parties by them, or theirs, proceed or attempt by way of feat against the Kings Peace; nor help, a∣ssist, or comfort any of them hereto, but let him with all their might and power, and with∣stand him, and assist unto the King, and my said Lord of Bedford in keeping of the Kings Peace, and redressing of all such manner of proceedings by way of feat and force.
The Oath of a Bishop. I A. B. Doctor in Divinity, late Bishop of D. and now elected Bishop of L. do verily testifie and declare in my conscience, that your Majesty is the only supream Governour of this Realm of England, and of all other your Ma∣jesties Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, Causes, as Tem∣poral, and that no Forreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate hath, or ought to have any Jurisdictory power, superiority, pree∣minence, or authority Ecclesiastical or Tem∣poral within this Realm; and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all forreign Juris∣dictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall and will bear true faith and allegiance to your Majesty, your lawful Heirs, and Successors, and to my power shall assist, and defend all Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Preeminences, and Au∣thorities granted and belonging to your High∣ness, your Heirs, and lawful Successors, or united or annexed to the Imperial Crown of this your Majesties Realms; and further I acknowledge and confeses to have the said Bi∣shop of L. and the Possessions there of your Highness; and after the same I do my homage presently unto your Majesty, to whom and to your lawful Heirs and Successors, I shall be faithful and true. So help me God, and the contents of this Book.
The Oath of a Privy Counsellor, framed now in the time of King James. YOu shall swear, To be a true and faith∣ful Servant unto the Kings Majesty, and one of his Privy Counsel; you shall not know, or understand of any manner of thing to be at∣tempted, done or spoken against his Majesties Person, Honour, Crown, or dignity Royal, but you shall let and withstand the same to the uttermost of your power, and either cause it to be revealed unto his Majesty himself, or to such of his Privy Counsel as shall advertise his Highness of the same; you shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated in Counsel, faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion according to your heart and con∣science, and shall keep secret all matters commit∣ted and revealed unto you, or that shall be treated of secretly in Counsel, and if any of the same Treaties or Counsels shall touch any of the Counsellors. you shall not reveal it un∣to him, but shall keep the same until such time as by the consent of his Majesty, or of the Counsel, publication shall be made thereof; You shall to your utmost bear faith and allegiance unto the Kings Majesty, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and shall assist, and defend all Jurisdictions, Preeminences, and Authorities granted to his Majesty, and annexed to his Crown against all forreign Princes, Persons, Pre∣lates,
or Potentates, &c. by Act of Parliament or otherwise; and generally in all things you shall do as a faithful and true Servant and Sub∣ject ought to do to his Majesty. So help you God, and by the holy contents of this Book. The Oath of the Lord Privy Seal. YE shall as far forth as your cunning and discretion sufficeth, truly, justly, and even∣ly execute, and exercise the Office of Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal to you by his High∣ness committed, not leaving or eschewing so to do for affection, love, meed, doubt, or dread of any person or persons, and ye shall take special regard that the said Privy Seal in all places where you shall direct unto, may be in such substantial wise used and safely, that no other person without the Kings special com∣mandment, or your assent or knowledge, shall more seal, or imprint any thing with the same, and generally ye shall observe, fullfil, and do all and every thing which to the Office of the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal duely belong∣eth and appertaineth. So help you God, and by the contents of this Book. The Oath of a Secretary of State. YOu shall swear, To be a true and faith∣ful Servant unto the Kings Majesty, as
one of the Secretaries of his Majesties High∣ness Privy Counsel; you shall not know or understand of any matter or thing to be at∣tempted, done, or spoken against his Maje∣sties Person, Honour, Crown, or Dignity Roy∣al, but you shall let and withstand the same to the uttermost of your power, and either do or cause it to be revealed, either to his Ma∣jesty himself, or to his Privy Counsel; You shall keep secret all matters revealed and com∣mitted unto you, or that shall be secretly treat∣ed of in Counsel, and if any of the said Trea∣ties or Counsels shall touch any of the said Counsellors; you shall not reveal the same un∣to him, but shall keep the same until such time as by the consent of his Majesty, or of the Counsel publication shall be made thereof; you shall to your uttermost bear faith and allegiance unto the Kings Majesty, his Heirs, and lawful Successors and shall assist, and de∣fend all Jurisdictions, Preemininencies, and Au∣thorities granted to his Majesty, and annexed to his Crown against all forreign Princes, Per∣sons, Prelates, Potentates, &c. by Act of Par∣liament or otherwise; And generally in all things you shall do as a faithful and true Servant, and Subject (ought to do) to his Ma∣jesty. So help you God, and by the holy con∣tents of this Book. This clause above noted thus, C. C. is the same which is set down more largly in the Oath of Supremacy, in the first Act of Parliament, in the first year of Queen
Elizabeth, which Oath must be taken at the same time with this, and there∣fore is not needful to be here recited. The Oath of the Lords Keeper of the Great Seal of England. YE shall swear, That well and truly you shall serve out Soveraign Lord the King, and his people in the Office of the Lord Keep∣er of the Great Seal of England, and ye shall do right to all manner of People, poor and rich, after the Laws and Usages of this Realm, and truly ye shall counsel the King, and his Council you shall leave and keep, and you shall not know, nor suffer the hurt or disherit∣ing of the King, or that the rights of the Crown be decreased by any mean, as far forth as you may let it, and if you may not let it you shall make it clearly and expresly to be known unto the King, with your true advice and counsel, and that you shall do, and purchase the Kings profit in all that you reasonably may, as God you help, and by the contents of this Book.
The Oath of the Clerk of the Signet. YOu shall be true to our Soveraign Lord the King, and his heirs and Successors, Kings and Queens of England; and also you shall keep secret his Counsel in all things you shall be privy unto concerning the Office of the Signet, without uttering or disclosing the same to any person; and if you shall hear, or know any thing either in word or deed which shall be in any wise to the derogation or hurt of his Majesties Person and Royal Estate, you shall it let to your power as in you lieth; and as honestly as is possible, shall discover, and shew the same to his Highness, or to some of his discreet Councel. So help you God, and by the holy contents of this Book, The Oath of the Deputy of the Town of Ca∣lice, ordered by Parliament in Anno XXVII. Hen. 8. YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful true unto our Soyeraign Lord King Hen∣ry 8. by the Grace of God King of England and of France, defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supream head, of the Church of England; And if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or to his Town of
Calice, or Marches of the same; ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or to such of his Councel as ye think will shew it unto him, and ye shall safely keep to the use of our said So∣veraign Lord, and of his Heirs, and defend to the uttermost of your power this his Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, as much as to you by reason of your Office belong∣eth; and in all things to be done that touch∣eth the safeguard, defence, and good Govern∣ance of the said Town, and Marches; Ye shall give as it shall need from time to time your true, faithful, and diligent Counsel to the other the Kings Officers of the same Town and Marches, and ye shall at no time be absent from your said Office without the Kings special license obtained in that behalf. Ye shall well and truly oversee the Marshal, and all other Officers, his, and their Ministers and Servants, and their Charge, and every one of them in his degree intreat in his Office as appertaineth, not suffering any of them to do in his said Office, or by colour thereof, any excess, extortion, bribery, or exaction; and if any of them be found, or approved in that case culpable, that without favour or delay ye proceed to the punishment of them, and eve∣ry of them to the example of other; Ye shall do your devoyer at your power to the keep∣ing of the Peace among all estates, and other persons of what degree or condition soever they
be within the said Town dwelling, or there∣unto from time to time repairing, not suffer∣ing any Congregations, Assemblies, Com∣motions, or Conventicles to be made within the said Town, against the said Peace, or against the good, restful, and Politique Go∣vernance of the said Town; And if any per∣son of what degree or condition soever he, or they be within the said Town, that pro∣voketh privily, or appartly any such Congre∣gation, Assembly, Commotion, Sedition or Conventicle, as be found faulty thereof, either else that taketh upon him any unlawful main∣tenance, to the perturbance or violation of the said Peace, or against right to oppress by might any person; Ye shall resist and let, with the advice and aid of the residue of the Kings Councel of the said Town, and do such punishment thereunto as with reason may serve, without any exception of person, not sparing so to do for favour, love, dread, or meed of any person; And that as much as in you shall lie, to your power you shall foresee that the said Town be sufficiently Vi∣ctualled from time to time, as unto the same ne∣cessarily shall appertain or belong; And ye shall oversee the Rule and Governance of the Mayor, and Aldermen of the said Town touch∣ing all manner of Victual and other things appertaining to their charge for the Common-Weal, profit, and policy of the said Town, and if any default ye find therein, ye shall minister and shew it unto them, charging
them to amend and redress it, and if they be therein negligent or froward, ye shall then by the said advice purvey such remedy by your wisdome and discretion as can be thought most expedient with reason; And if you, and the said Council cannot provide remedy in that behalf; that then ye shall disclose the same to the Kings Highness, or to such of the Kings Council as ye think verily will inform the Kings Highness thereof with speed; And ye shall administer truly, rightfully, and indif∣ferently Justice to all manner of person and per∣sons, that shall have any cause moved or de∣pending before you in the said Town and Marches, without having any manner of re∣spect to any person for love, meed, dread, or favour; And ye shall in time conveniable, af∣ter your said discretion, visit, and oversee the Locks and shutting of the Gates and Posterns of the said Town, and also the governance of the Watch, Tower, Wall, and Ditches of the same, and generally all other things necessary for the surety, safeguard, and defence there∣of; And ye shall not appoint, nor admit any person or persons into any room within the retinue of the said Town belonging to your Admission; but if the same person or persons be born within the Realm for England, Wales, Ireland, the said Town of Calice, and the Mar∣ches of the same; and that the said person or persons be not Artificers, except he or they be a Bowyer, or Amorour, Fletcher, Cross∣bow maker, or Smith, and the same Person
so by you named not to be admitted to any such room, nor to enjoy nor exercise the same room to the time he be viewed, examined, and enabled thereunto as well by the Trea∣surer and Comptroller, as by the residue of the Kings Council there then being present; And you shall not admit, nor suffer any Alien born out of the Kings obeysance, to take and inhabit any dwelling House within the Town of Calice and Marches of the same, as much as to you appertaineth, except the said person be licensed by the Kings Letters Patents so to do under his Great Seal, any Grant, or Grants heretofore made to the contrary notwithstand∣ing: And ye shall see surely to be kept, and safely and straightly cause to be observed as much as in you lieth all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or to be made by the King our Soveraign Lord Henry VIII. or by his Council Authorised for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defence, and good orders of his Town of Calice, and the Mar∣ches of the same, doing due execution upon the Transgressors of any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to the persons so transgressing for affection, meed, dread, or any other cause whatsoever; As God you help, and the holy Evangelists.
The Oath of the Lieutenant of Guysnes, ordered by Parliament, Anno 27. H. 8. YE shall swear, That ye shall be faith∣ful and true to our Soveraign Lord King Hen. 8. by the Grace of God King of England, and of France, Defend of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supream head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs, and if you shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or to such of his Councel as ye think will shew it unto him; And ye shall safely keep to the use, and behoof of our said Soveraign Lord, and of his Heirs and defend to the uttermost of your power the Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes, by his Highness ap∣pointed and assigned to your safe keeping, and in all things to be done that toucheth the de∣fence, and good Governance of the Town of Calice, and Marches of the same; ye shall give from time to time your true, faithful, and dili∣gent counsel and assistance to the Kings Depu∣ty for the time being, and other of the Coun∣cil and Officers of the same Town and Mar∣ches, and ye shall be personally remaining, and be resident upon your room and Office
there, and at no time to be absent from the same without the Kings special license obtained; And you shall well and truly oversee, that all the said Officers and Ministers of the said Castle and Town, and County of Guysnes, that shall serve the Kings Highness there under you, shall diligently do, cause, and suffer to be done, all and every thing and things that unto them shall appertain and belong concerning the sure and safe keeping of the said Castle, Town, and County, and if any of them be found, and ap∣proved to be remiss or negligent in doing his, or their duty, that then ye without any favour or delay, proceed to the correction and puni∣shing of him or them so offending; and that ye do your duty to your power to the keeping of the Peace among all and every person and persons, of what degree or condition he or they be dwelling within the said Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes, or thereunto from time to time repairing, not suffering any unlawful Congregations, Conventions, or Conventicles to be made within the said Castle, Town, or County of Guysnes, against good, restful, and Politick Governance of the same, and du∣ly to correct all and every person or persons so offending; and that as much as in you shall lie, ye shall foresee that the said Castle be fur∣nished with Victuals, as with all other things appertaining to the sale custody of the same that to you belongeth of the duty of your said Office; And that you truly, rightfully, and indifferently administer Justice unto all and
every Person and Persons that hereafter shall have any cause or matter moved or depending before you in the said Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes, without having any man∣ner of respect to any Person or Persons, for love, dread, meed, malice, or affection; And that you from time to time as much as in you is foresee, that the Kings Highness be not de∣ceived, or defrauded in any of his Possessi∣ons, Rents, Revenues, and Profits which to his Highness should appertain within the said Castle, Town, and County; And ye shall not appoint, nor admit any Person or Persons within the retinue of the said Castle; but if the said Person or Persons be born within the Realm of England, Wales, Ireland, the said Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; and that the said Person be sworn to be true Leigeman unto the King our Soveraign Lord, and to his Heirs; And finally, ye shall ob∣serve and keep, or cause to be observed and kept as much as in you shall be, during the time that you shall be Captain there, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or to be made by our said Soveraign Lord, his Heirs, or Successors, or by his or their Councel autho∣rised for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defence, and good orders of the Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes, doing due execution upon the Transgressors offending any of the same Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to the person so offending, for love, favour, meed, dread, or any other cause whatsoe∣ver.
So help you God, Holydome, and all Saints, and by this Book. The Oath of the High Marshal of Calice, ordained by Parliament in Anno 27. Hen. 8. YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Soveraign Lord King H. 8. By the Grace of God King of England and France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supream head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs; And if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudici∣al or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power; And in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think will shew it unto him; Ye shall be di∣ligent obedient and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town, and Marches for the time be∣ing, in those things that to the service of the Kings sure, good, politick Government, and defence of the said Town and Marches apper∣taineth, and in all things to be done that toucheth the defence, safeguard, and good Go∣vernment of the said Town of Calice, and Mar∣ches of the same, shall give as it shall need from time to time your true faithful, and diligent counsel to the Deputy for the time being, and
to the Kings Council, and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid and assist to the uttermost of your power; and ye shall set, or do to be set the Kings Watch, and that visit from time to time as unto your Office appertaineth, as it is ordained to be used, searched; And if ye can any better order or devise, ye shall shew it unto the Deputy, and Kings Council of the said Town and Marches, to the intent it may be set in the surest and strictest way for the safeguard of the said Town and Marches; and that ye present not, or do to be presented, nor imprisoned, nor cause to be imprisoned, any manner of person, Watch∣man, or other without reasonable or just cause, and if any be imprisoned may be delivered with∣out Fees, or Costs paying. And that ye shall duly and truly Arrest; and do to be Arrested, all and every person and persons, according to the Laws used and accustomed within the said Town, and also all and every other person or persons that ye shall know to be sugitive, taking the Fees thereunto limited and accustomed without excess; and also that you take Surety, or do to be taken of each Prisoner, as well of the Plaintiff as of the Defendant, to pursue, and answer as the Law will ordain, so that every person that commeth into the Kings Court may have full right; and if any person by chance meddle, drawing Weapon or smiting, that ye lead, or cause to be led to Prison, there to remain according to the Laws, Cust∣omes and Ordinances of the Town. And
that ye Present every fault Presentable, and that ought by you to be Presented by vertue of your Office, and if ye see any default, or that ye be required of any person to take any distress for doing or cleansing of the said Town, that ye do it duly, and truly, and cause it to be done by the Officers under you, so that no man have cause to complain thereof; And ye shall make good and true Records of all manner of things that ought to be Recor∣ded, taking no other Fees for the same then of right and reason have been used of old time; And ye shall not hold with no Party against the other, none sustain, but ye shall be true Reverentary, and Reporter of all that which belongeth unto your Office of Marshal, and if ye hear, or weet of any Menaces or Debate between any parties that ye take, or cause to be taken of both the said Parties Sureties, to the in∣tent that the Peace may be kept and holden for the said Town and Marches, and ye shall see surely to be kept, and straitly cause to be ob∣served as much as in you lieth, all manner of Statutes, Laws, Ordinances made, or to be made by our Soveraign Lord King Henry VIII. or his Heirs, or by his Council autho∣rised for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defence, and good order of this Town of Calice and of the Marches of the same, doing due ex∣ecution upon the Transgressors of any of the same Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to the Person so Transgressing for affecti∣on, meed, dread, or any other cause whatsoever.
The Oath of the Lieutenant of the Castle of Calice, ordained by Parliament in An∣no 27. H. 8. YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Soveraign Lord King Hen. 8. by the Grace of God, King of Eng∣land, and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Surpeam head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs, and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudi∣cial or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; Ye shall reside the same to the uttermost of our power, and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his High∣ness or unto such of his Council as ye shall think will shew it unto him; Ye shall give as it shall need from time to time your true faith∣ful, and diligent counsel to the Kings Depu∣ty of his Town, and Marches of Calice for the time being, and to the Kings Council, and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them shall aid and assist to the uttermost of your power, in all things to be done concern∣ing safeguard, defence, and good governance of the said Town and Marches; Ye shall safe∣ly keep true English to the use and behoof of our Soveraign Lord, and of his Heirs to the ut∣termost of your power, his Castle and Fortress of Calice, by his Highness appointed and assign∣ed
to your safe keeping; Ye shall personally remain, and be resident upon your said room, and Office there, and at no time to be absent from the same without the Kings special license for the same obtained; And you shall well and truly oversee that all Officers, Souldi∣diers, and Ministers of the said Castle and For∣tress, that shall serve the Kings Highness there under you, shall diligently do, cause, and suffer to be done, all and every thing and things that unto them shall appertain and belong, concern∣ing the sure and safe keeping of the said Castle and Fortress; and if any of them be found and proved to be remiss, or negligent in do∣ing his or their duty, or duties, that then ye without favour or delay proceed to the cor∣rection and punition of him or them so of∣fending; And that you do your duty to your power to the keeping of the Peace among all and every person or persons, of what condition he or they be, dwelling within the said Castle or Fortress or thereunto from time to time repairing, not suffering any unlawful Congre∣gations, Conventions, or Conventicles to be made within the said Castle or Fortress, a∣gainst good, restful, and Politick. Govern∣ment of the same, and duly to correct all and every person and persons offending; And that as much as in you shall lie, you shall see that the Castle and Fortress be furnished as well with Victuals and with all other things appertaining to the safe custody of the same that to you belongeth by duty of your Office,
and that you truly, rightfully, and indiffe∣rently administer Justice to all and every per∣son and persons that hereafter shall have any Cause or matter moved, or depending before you in the said Castle or Fortress, without having any manner of respect to any person or persons, for dread, meed, malice, or affection; And ye shall not appoint, nor admit any per∣son or persons within the retinue of the said Castle or Fortress, but if the said person or per∣sons be born within the Realm of England, Wales, and Ireland, or being English born with∣in the said Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; and that the said person to be true Leigeman unto the King our Soveraign Lord, and to his Heirs. And finally, ye shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and kept as much as in you shall be during the time ye shall be Lieutenant there, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, and to be made by our said Soveraign Lord, his Heirs, or his Successors, or by their Council Authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defence, and good Orders of the said Castle and For∣tress, doing due Execution upon the Trans∣gressors so offending any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to any person so offending for affection, meed, dread, or any other cause whatsoever. So God, &c.
The Oath of the Treasurer of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament in the 27th. Year of Hen. 8. YOu shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Soveraign Lord Hen. 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth, Supream head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs, and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial and hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; Ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in case ye cannot, ye shall with∣out delay declare the same unto his Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think will shew it unto him; Ye shall be diligent, obe∣dient, and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town, and Marches for the time being, in those things that to the service of the King, sure and Politick Governnance, and defence of the said Town and Marches appertaineth, and in all things to be done that toucheth the safe∣guard and defence, and good governance of the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the same; Ye shall give, as it shall be need from time to time, your true, saithful, and diligent counsel to the Deputy for the time being, and to the Council, and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid and assist to the utter∣most
of your power, and that to your know∣ledge, wit, and power, for as much as in you is during the time you shall be in your Office, you shall endeavour your self to see his Highness answered, and truly satisfied of all Rents, Reve∣nues, Issues, Profits, and Commodities, as well casual as certain, whatsoever they be or shall be which his Highness of right ought for to have, or hereafter shall have, or be, or shall be to him belonging by any manner of mean with∣in the said Town, County, and Marches; and that he be in no wise defrauded, or deceived thereof by your negligence or default; and that ye make no payment of none Wages to none Offi∣cer nor other Souldier, unto such time as due Muster be had, viewed, and taken, and the same comptrolled by the Comptrollers Book for the time being; And ye shall from time to time, during the time ye shall be in your Of∣fice, see all Artificers which be, or shall be in Wages under your Governance and Rule, dili∣gently, duly, and truly exercise and occupy their Occupations, and Mysteries in the Kings Works, and that you shall not appoint, or ad∣mit any person or persons into the Office or room of a Spear, or other Souldier within your retinue, but if the said person or persons be born within the Realm of England, Wales, Ireland, the said Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; And that the said person be sworn to be true Leige-man unto the King our Soveraign Lord, and his Heirs, and be an able person to serve the King, for the Defence of the said Town
and Marches; And finally you shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and kept as much as in you shall be, during the time that you shall be in your Office, all manner of Sta∣tutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or to be made by our Soveraign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, or by his or their Council autho∣rized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defence, and good Orders of the said Town and Marches. So help you God, &c. The Oath of the Lieutenant of Ruisbank, as it was ordained by Parliament in Anno 27. of Hen. 8. YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Soveraign Lord King Henry the eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Su∣pream head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs; And if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay de∣clare the same unto his Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think will shew it unto him; Ye shall give from time to time as it shall need your true, faithful, and diligent counsel to the Kings Deputy of his Town and Marches, and them shall aid and assist to
the uttermost of your power in things to be done concerning the safeguard, defence, and good Governance of the said Town and Mar∣ches; Ye shall safely keep true English to the use and behoof of our said Soveraign Lord, and of his Heirs, and defend to the uttermost of your power his Castle and Fortress of Ru∣isbank, by his Highness appointed and assigned to your said keeping; Ye shall be personally re∣maining and resident upon your said Office and Room there, and at no time to be absent from the same without the Kings special License for the same obtained; And you shall well and truly oversee that all Officers, Souldiers, and Mi∣nisters of the said Castle and Fortress, that shall serve the Kings Highness there under you, shall diligently do, cause, and suffer to be done, all and every thing and things that unto them shall appertain and belong, concerning the sure and safe keeping of the said Castle and Fortress, and if any of them be found, and proved to be remiss, or negligent in doing his or their duty; That then ye without Favour, or delay, proceed to the correction and pu∣nition of him, or them so offending, and that you do your duty to your power to the keeping of the Peace among all and every per∣son and persons, of what degree or condition ye or they be, dwelling within the said Castle or Fortress, or thereunto from time to time repairing, not suffering any unlawful Congre∣gations, Conventions, or Conventicles to be made within the said Castle or Fortress against
good, restful, and Politique Governance of the same; and duly to correct all and every person and persons offending; and that as much as in you shall lie you shall see that the said Castle and Fortress be furnished as well with Victual as with all other things appertain∣ing to the safe custody of the same that to you belongeth by duty of your said Office; and that you truly, rightfully, and indifferently ad∣minister Justice to all, and every person and persons that hereafter shall have any cause or matter, moved or depending before you in the said Castle or Fortress, without having any manner of respect to any person or persons for love, dread, meed, malice, or affection; And ye shall not admit, nor appoint any person or persons within the said Castle and Fortress, but if the said person or persons be born within the said Realms of England, Wales, Ire∣land, or being English born within the said Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; and that the said person, be sworn to be true Leige∣man unto the King our Soveraign Lord, and unto his Heirs; and finally, you shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and kept as much as in you shall be, during the time you shall be Lieutenant there, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, and to be made by your said Soveraign Lord, his Heirs, or his Successors, or by his or their Counsel authori∣sed for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defence, and good Orders of the said Castle and Fortress, doing due execution upon the
transgressors offending any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to the person so offending, for love, favour, meed, dread, or other cause whatsoever. So help you God, &c. The Oath of the Lieutenent of Hannues, as it was ordained by Parliament, in Anno 27. Hen. 8. THe said Lieutenant shall take the like Oath as is Ordained before for the Lieutenant of Ruisbank. The Oath of the Comptroller of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament in Anno 27. Hen. 8. YOu shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Soveraign Lord Hen. 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth, Supream head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs, and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; Ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in case ye cannot, ye shall with∣out delay declare the same unto his Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think will
shew it unto him; Ye shall be diligent, obe∣dient, and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town, and Marches for the time being, in those things that to the service of the King, sure good Politique Governnance, and defence of the said Town and Marches appertaineth; And that you shall not be absent from your said Of∣fice without the Kings special License obtain∣ed in that behalf, and in all things to be done that toucheth the safeguard, defence, and good governance of the said Town of Calice and Marches of the same, shall give as it shall need from time to time, your true, faithful, and diligent counsel for the time being, and to the Kings Council and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them ayd, and assist to the uttermost of your power; And you shall so much as in you is, that due Musters shall beta∣ken at all the whole retinue, at two several times in the year before the paying of their Wages and oftner if need shall be thought by the De∣puty and the Kings Council of the said Town to be needful; and in as much as in you is, and shall be from time to time, ye shall see that the Deputy, Souldiers, and all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever, be resident, attendant, and furnished as to them in every degree apper∣taineth; and such as ye shall find defective, or faulty from time to time; ye shall reform, and do therein as to your Office belongeth; ye shall also diligently and particularly oversee the Pro∣visions made, and to be made of all and every thing and things necessary and expedient for
the Kings Works, Buildings, and Reparations within the said Town and Marches, and dili∣gently see that all Artificers, and Work-men, that from time to time shall be retained in the Kings Wages, shall do their duties in all such things for the which they are so retained; And that you from time to time, as much as in you is, foresee that the Kings Highness be not deceiv∣ed, nor defrauded of any of his Possessions, Rents, Revenues, Woods, Waters, Customs, For∣feitures, and other Profits, as well certain as casual, whatsoever they be, which to his High∣ness shall of right appertain; And that ye shall not appoint, nor admit any person or persons into the room of a Souldier within your retinue, but if the said person or persons be born within the said Realm of England, Wales, and Ireland, and the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, and the said person to be sworn to be true Leige-man unto the King our Sove∣raign Lord, and to his Heirs; and to be an able person to serve the King for defence of the said Town and Marches. And finally, ye shall observe and keep, or cause to be ob∣served and kept, as much as in you shall be, dur∣ing the time that you shall be in your Office, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made and to be made, ut supra.
The Oath of the Master Porter, as it was ordained by Parliament, in Anno. 27. H. 8. YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Soveraign Lord King Hen∣ry 8. by the grace of God King of England, and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in each Supream Head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs; and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or hurt∣ful unto his Highness or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power; And in case ye cannot, ye shall with∣out delay declare the same unto his Highness, or unto such of his Council, as ye think will shew it unto him; Ye shall be diligent, obedi∣ent, and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town and Marches, for the time being, in those things that to the service of the Kings Sewer, good politique Governance and defence of the said Town and Marches appertaineth, and in all things to be done as toucheth the safeguard, defence, and good governance of the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, shall give, as it shall need, from time to time, your true, faithful, and diligent counsel to the Deputy, for the time being; And to the Kings Coun∣cil and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid and assist to the uttermost of your
power; Ye shall safely keep, duly and truly, the Keyes of the Gates of this Town of Calice at all times, as to your Office appertaineth; and if that you may hear or espy coming by Water or by Land any tidings, you shall do it to be known to the Kings Deputy of the said Town and Marches with diligence; And ye shall not raise, nor suffer to be done or raised a∣ny new customs which might turn to prejudice or hinderance of any person. And finally, ye shall not raise, nor suffer to be done or raised a∣ny new customs which might turn to prejudice or hinderance of any persons. And finally, ye shall see surely to be kept, and straightly cause to be observed, as much as in you lieth, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made or to be made by our said Soveraign Lord or his Heirs and Successors, or by his Coun∣cil authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defence, and good Orders of this Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, do∣ing due Execution upon the Transgressors of any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinan∣ces, having no regard to the person so transgres∣sing, for affection, meed, dread, or any other cause whatsoever, So God, &c. The Oath of the Lieutenant of Newenham Bridge, as it was ordained by Parliament, in Anno 27. Hen. 8. THe said Lieutenant shall take like Oath as is Ordained before for the Lieutenant of Ruisbank.
The Oath of the under Marshal of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament, in An∣no 27. Hen. 8 YE shall swear, That ye shall be Faithful and true to our Soveraign Lord King Henry VIII. By the Grace of God King of England, and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supream head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs; and if you shall know any thing that shall be pre∣judicial or hurtful to his Highness or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power; and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same to his Highness, or to such of his Counsel as ye think will shew it unto him; Ye shall be obedient to the Kings Deputy for the time being, in all things to be done, that toucheth the safeguard, defence, and good Governance of the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the same; ye shall give, as it shall need, from time to time, your true, faithful, and diligent counsel to the Kings Deputy for the time being, and to the Kings Council, and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid and assist to the uttermost of your power; Ye shall truly set, and cause to be set the stand-Watch, night∣ly on the Walls of the said Town at the Castle hill, and shall suffer no person or persons to
keep and furnish the said stand-Watch, but such person or persons as shall be by you appointed, and sworn according to the Oath for the same devised; and also take sureties for his or their A∣bearing in the Watch; And that ye neither present, nor do to be presented, nor impri∣soned, nor cause to be imprisoned, any manner of person or Watch-man, nor other whatsoever, without reasonable and true cause; And if you find any persons in Chance-medly, drawing any weapon, or smiting, that ye do lead, or cause to be lead, him or them to Prison with∣out any let; And that ye present, or do to be presented, every fault that belongeth to your Office to be presented duely and truly; and that ye take not, or cause to be taken, any o∣ther fees of any person or persons then of right and of reason have been used, and of old time accustomed, belonging to your Of∣fice; And also you shall not hold with no par∣ty against other nor none sustain; but ye shall be true Referender of all that belongeth to your Office of under Marshal, and ye shall nightly be in the Market-place to take the Re∣port of the Typped-staves of the furnishing of the Watches in the East and West Houses, on the Walls, and shall certifie the same Report unto the Kings Deputy immediately. And all other things do that appertain to your said Office of under-Marshal, during the time you shall con∣tinue in your said Office. So help you God, &c.
The Oath of them that be or shall be made of the Kings Counsel of the Town and Mar∣ches of Calice, as it was ordained by Par∣liament in Anno 27. Hen. 8. YE shall swear, That ye shall be good, true, and faithful unto our Soveraign Lord King Henry the 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth su∣pream head of the Church of England, and to his Heirs, and ye shall be ready with good at∣tendance to come to the place of Council hol∣den for the King, where it shall be assigned and appointed by the Deputy of his Town, and Marches of Calice for the time being, and not absent you there from without reasonable cause of excusation, and that in all matters, causes, and questions that by the said Counsel be, or shall be opened moved, stirred, or asked, you shall say and utter your good advice, and opinion, clearly after your discretion and understanding, shewing, and giving in conclusion your true and faithful counsel, not letting for favour, affection, love, affinity, hatred, wrath had, or born to any party, or for corruptions of any goods, or other things whatsoever it be; And that all manner Languages, Reasons, Conclu∣sions had, moved, or uttered in the said Coun∣cil ye shall effectually keep them secretly, and not discover them in no wise in other
form or manner then by the same Counsel shall be ordained, devised, and accorded; and whereas you can devise, think, or purpose any thing, form, or rule that might be evident to turn to the honour, weal, and commodity of the King our Soveraign Lord, or to the good governance of this Town and Marches, ye shall at all times shew, and move it to the Counsel, to the intent that it may be ordained and executed. These things abovesaid, and every of them with all their circumstances and de∣pendances ye shall duly exercise, use, keep, and do from time to time, during your abiding in the said Counsel, with all the spirits of your good mind. So help you God, and the Holy∣dome, and by this Book. The Oath given to a Knight of the Bath at the time of his Creation. GReat Worship be this noble Order unto you, and Almighty God give you Grace well to keep it; you shall be strong in the Faith of Holy Church, you shall releive as right requireth, Widows, Maids, and Orphans; you shall love and dread God above all things, you shall love the King your Soveraign Lord, and him and his right defend to your power; you shall suffer no Extortion as far forth as you may, nor sit in any place where wrongful Judgement shall be given to your knowledge; and as great honour be this noble Order un∣to
you, as it was to any of your Kin or Pro∣genitors before you, or any others, The Oath of the Captains and Souldiers serving the Estates of Zealand. WE swear and promise, To be faithful to the Queens Majesty of England, our Soveraign, and to the General united Provinces of the Low Countries, especially to the Estates of this Province of Zealand, to the end to keep this Town of Flushing, with the Forts belonging to the same for the assurance of her Majesty, the profit of the said Estates, and the maintenance of the true Christian Religion, as it is at this present exercised as well in England as in the Town and Country of Zealand, and to yeild all due obedience to our Governour chief, and Captains. So God us help. The Oath and Homage made by James the King of Scots, unto King Henry 6. in the second year of his Reign over England. J Iames Steward King of Scots, shall be true and faithful unto you Lord Henry, by the grace of God King of England and France, the noble and Superiour Lord of the King of Scotland, which I hold and claim to hold of you; and I shall bear you my faith and fidelity of life
and limb, and worldly honour, against all men; and faithfully I shall knowledge, and shall do to you service due to the Kingdom of Scotland So God help me, and these holy Evangelists. The Oath of a Tenant that doth Atturn to the Lord of a Mannour. YOu shall become true and lawful Tenant, and true faith bear to the Lord of this Mannor, for such Lands as you hold of the same Lordship, and do such Customs and Services, as of right ye ought to do, saving the faith that you bear to any other Lands. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book. The Oath used in a Court Baron, to swear any to the Queens Highness. YOu shall be true Liegeman, and true faith bear to our Soveraign Lady Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and to her Heirs and Successors; You shall be no Thief, nor Thiefs Feir, but if you know of any, you shall do the Queens Majesties Ju∣stices to weet of them, as soon as you can; and you shall live by such good and true occupa∣tion as God lent you, uprightly and truly, so far as God will give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.
The Oath that is to be given to any Jury, before Evidence given in against a prisoner at the Bar. YOu shall true Deliverance make between our Soveraign Lord the King, and the Prisoner at the Bar as you shall have in charge, according to your Evidence, as neer as God shall give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book. Or, more moderne, thus YOu shall well and truly try, and true de∣liverance make between our Soveraign Lord the King and the Prisoners at the Bar, whom you shall have in charge according to your Evidence. So help you God. The Oath given to a Bayliffe, or Serjeant that attendeth on any Jury or Inquest at an Assize. YOu shall well and truly keep this Inquest from meat and drink, fire and candle; you shall not suffer any man to speak with them, neither shall you your self speak with them, more than to ask them, If they be agreed, until such time as they be agreed. So help
you God, and by the Contents of this Book. Or, thus YOu shall well and truly keep every person sworn of this Inquest, together in some private and Convenient Room, without meat, drink, candle, or lodging, and you shall not suffer any person whatsoever, to speak to them, or any of them, neither shall you your self speak to them, until such time as they have delivered up their Verdict, unless it be to ask them whether they be agreed of their Verdict. So help you God. The Oath for Evidence upon the Arraign∣ment of the Prisoner at the Bar. THe Evidence that youshall give to this Inquest against the Prisoner at the Bar, shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and noth∣ing but the truth as neer as God shall give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book. Or, thus THe Evidence that you and every of you shall give to this Inquest against I. S. pri∣soner at Bar, shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. So help you God.
The Oath to be given to any Jury, by whom a Nisi prius is to be tried. YOu shall truly try this Suit of Nisi prius be∣tween party and party, according to the Evidence as shall be given you in Court, as neer as God shall give you grace. So help you God and by the Contents of this Book. The Oath to be given to such as are to give Evidence between party and party, at an Nisi prius. THe Evidence that you shall give to this In∣quest concerning the matter in variance, shall be the truth and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so near as God shall give you grace. So help you God, and by the Con∣tents of this Book. The same Oath that your Foreman hath sworn you of your part shall well and truly keep. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book. The Oath of the great Inquest, YE shall truly enquire, and due presentment make of all such things as you are charged withall on the Queens behalf, the Queens
Council, your own, and your fellows, you shall well and truly keep; And in all other things the truth present. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book. Or more modern, thus YOu as Fore man of this Inquest for the body of this County of L. shall diligently enquire and true presentment make of all such matters and things as shall be given you in Charge the Kings Majesties Counsel, your fellows and your own, you shall keep Secret, you shall present no man for Envy, Hatred, or Malice, neither shall ye leave any man unpresented for love fear, favour or affection, or hope of reward, but you shall present things truly as they come to your knowledge according to the best of your understanding. So help you God. The Oath of those that give Evidence upon Bills of Jndictment. THe Evidence that you shall give to the Inquest, upon this Bill shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, And you shall not let so to do for malice, ha∣tred, or evil will, nor for meed, dread, favour or affection. So help you God, and the holy Contents of this Book.
Aliter thus THe Evidence which you shall give to the grand Inquest against I. S. upon this Bill, shall be the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth. So help you God. The Oath of such as are to be bailed upon suspition for Felony or Murther. J A. B. shall from henceforth during all my life, be true Leigeman, and true faith bear unto our Soveraign Lady Elizabeth, and to her Heirs and Successors Kings and Queens of this Realm; and shall commit no Murther, Treason, or Misprision of Treason, nor con∣sent or agree to any such Offence, nor shall know any peril or damage to his Grace, or to the Realm, or other Dominions aforesaid, but shall reveal and disclose it with all speed unto such as have the Laws in Government; nor shall commit any Felony or Murder, or be ac∣cessary to any such Offence or Offences; but shall live a good and an obedient Subject dur∣ing my life. So help me God, and the Con∣tents of this Book.
The Oath of the Approver banished. HOc Audis tu Coronator quod Ego, A A. sum Latronius equi vel Alterius Rei, vel Homicidia unius per homines vel Plurimorum & fel. Dom. Re∣gis H. & quia multa Mala, & Latricinia, Per∣petram in hac Terra Abjura Regnum H. Regis Anglia, & debeo me festinare versus portum de &c. quem dedisse mihi, & quod non debeo devertere ab altu via, & si faciam volo quod sivi capius sicut la∣tro & fel. Dom. Regis, ut quod apud &c. queram diligentur Transitum meum, & non expectabo ibi, visi fluxum, & refluxum maris unum si transitus ha∣beri poterit, & visi Tanto Spatio abire potero, ibo quolibet die in mare us{que}e ad genua tentane transire, & visi hoc potero infra, 40. dies continues, mittum me itcrum in ecclesium sicut latero & fel. Dom. Re∣gis, sic me Deus adjuvet, secundum judicium. The Oath which Philip Duke of Burgo∣ny took, accknowledging, and promising to obey King H. 5. as the right Inheritor of the Kingdom of France, after Charles the first Kings Death. I Philip, Duke of Burgoyn, For me and my Heirs, swear and make Oath upon these holy Evangelists, to Henry of England, and Heir Apparant and Regent of France, by the Sove∣raign Lord King Charles, that meekly and
faithfully I shall obey the same King Henry, in all things that appertain to the King of France, as to the Common-weal of the same Realm; and immediately after the death of the said King Charles, our Soveraign Lord, we shall be true and faithful Leigs, to the said King Hen∣ry, his Heirs and Successors; and furthermore, we shall not be of Council, nor give our con∣sent to no things that may be to the prejudice of the same King H. his Heirs, and Successors wherein they may suffer any derogation or de∣triment of their bodies, of their Members, Pos∣sessions, or Honours; And if we know of any conspiracy against him, his Heirs, or Suc∣cessors in all the haste to us possible, either by our Letters, or else by our Trusty Messengers to declare, that they may the better provide to eschew the perils thereof. When the Dukes Oath was thus finished, as ma∣ny as were present there, both of the Kings Council, and also of the Parliaments, Bishops, Lords, Knights, and Commons, made the same Oath to the King, and 23. and 24. days of the same month of May the Chancellor of France, and many other Lords, Bishops, Prelates and Noblemen of the Realm gave the like Oath to King H.
The Oath of the Chancellor of England. YE shall swear, That well, and truly, ye shall serve our Soveraign Lord the King and his People, in the Office of Chancellor, and ye shall do Right to all manner of People, Poor and Rich, after the Laws and Usages of this Realm, and truly ye shall counsel the King, and his counsel ye shall lain and keep, and ye shall not know nor suffer the hurt nor dis∣heriting of the King, nor that the Rights of the Crown, be distressed; by any means, as far forth as you may let; And if ye may not let it, ye shall make it clearly and eypresly known to the King, with your true advice and coun∣sel; And that ye shall do, and purchase the Kings profit, in all that ye may, as God help you and the holy Evangelists. The Oath of the Treasurer of the Exchequer YE shall swear, That well, and truly, ye shall serve the King our Soveraign Lord, and his People in the Office of Treasurer, And ye shall do Right to all manner of People, Poor, and Rieh, of such things as toucheth your Office; And that Kings Treasure truly ye shal kep and dispend; And truly ye shall counsail the King, and his counsel ye shall layn, and keep; and that ye shall neither know nor suffer
the Kings hurt, nor his dis-heriting nor that the Rights of his Crown be distressed by any means, as far forth as ye may let; And if ye may not let it, ye shall make knowledge there of clearly and expresly, to the King, with your true advice, and counsel: And ye shall do, and ptrchase the Kings profit in all that ye may reasonably do, as God you help, and the holy Evangelists. The Oath of the Barons of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King, in the Office of Bar∣on of his Exchequer; And that truly ye shall charge, and discharge all people that have Accompt before you; and that ye shall do Right to all manner of People, as well to Poor as to Rich. And that for Highness, nor for Riches, nor for harted, nor for the estate of amar∣ner of person, nor any good deed, gift, nor pro∣mise of any person, the which is made to you or may be made to you, nor by crafts nor by Engines, the Kings Right, nor none other persons ye shall disturbe, let, nor respite a∣gainst the Laws of the Land, nor the Kings Debts, ye shall put in respite where that they may goodly be leavied; And that the Kings needs ye shall speed before all other, And that neither for gift, wages, nor good deed, ye shall lain, disturb, nor let the Profit, and the ad∣vantage of the King, in advantage of any other
person, nor of your self; And that no thing ye shall take of any person, for to do wrong, or Right to delay of, for to deliver, or delay the peo∣ple, the which that have to do before you; But as hastily as ye may them goodly to deliver without hurt to the King; And having no reward to any profit that might thereof to you he made, then ye shall make to the deli∣vered. And that whereas ye may know any wrong or prejudice to be done to the King, ye shall put and do all your power and dili∣gence, that to redress, and if ye may not do it ye, shall tell it to the King, or to them of his Council, the which may make relation to the King, if ye may not come to him; And the Kings Counsel ye shall keep, and layn in all things; As God you help, and all his Saints. The Oath of a Judge, endorso claus de An∣no 20. Edw. 3. Par. prima. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve our Soveraign Lord, the King and his People in the Office of Justice; And that ye shall counsel, our Soveraign Lord the King in his needs; And that ye shall not give any counsel, or assent to any thing, the which might turn to hurt or dis-heriting of the King by any way or colour, and that ye shall not know any hurt or dis-heriting of the King, but that ye shall make it to him known by you or by some other person, and that ye shall
do equal Law and Execution of Right, to all the Kings Subjects Rich and Poor, without ha∣ving regard to any person: And that ye shall not take by you, or by any other privily, ne apart any gift, or reward of Gold, or of Sil∣ver, nor of any other thing, the which might turn you to profit. But if it be meat or drink, and that of little value, of any man, that shall have any Plea or Process hanging before you, as long as before your self two Pleas and Process shall be hanging, nor after for that cause; And that ye shall take no Fees, as long as ye be Justice, nor Robe of any Person, Great or Small in any case, but of the King himself; And that ye shall not give any Coun∣sel, or advice to any person great or small in any case, where the King is party; and in case that any persons in what estate that they be of, come before you in Sessions with force and Arms, or otherwise, against the Peace, or a∣gainst the form of the Statute hereof made for, to disturb the Execution of the Common Law, or for to Menace the people, that may not do the Law; That ye shall do, Arrest their Bodies, and put them in prison; and in case they be such as ye may not Arrest, that ye shall certifie the King of their Names, and of their misdoing hastily, to that End that ye may thereof Ordain remedy; And that ye shall not maintain by your self, nor by none other privily nor openly, any Plea or Quarrel, hang∣ing in the Kings Courts, or elsewhere in the Country; And that ye shall not delay any
person of Common Right, for the Letters of the King, or of any other person, nor for any o∣ther cause; And in case that any Letters come to you contrary to the Law, that ye shall no∣thing do for such Letters, but ye thereof shall certifie the King; And ye shall proceed to do the Law, the same Letters notwithstanding, and that ye shall do, and procure the Profit of the King and his Crown, in all things where ye them reasonable may do: And in case that ye be found in default hereafter, in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall be at the Kings will of Bo∣dies, Lands and of Honour, to do thereof that that shall please the King. The Oath of a Justice for Works, Weights, and Measure. YE shall swear, That in your Office of Justice, of Labors, and of Weights, and Measures, ye shall do equal Right to the Poor as to the Rich, after your cunning, Wit and Power, and after the form of Statutes thereof made, and the Issues, Fines, and Amercia∣ments, the which shall be made and to be made before you ye shall do truly, enter without any concealment or embezling, and truly send into the Exchequer; And that ye shall not leave for gift, nor for other cause, but that well and truly ye shall do your Office of Ju∣stice in that behalf; And also ye shall Swear, that in your Office of Justice of Peace, and La∣bours,
and of all other Articles contained in the Kings Commission to you directed; Ye shall do equal Right to the Poor, and to the Rich, after your cunning and power, and after the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and the Statutes thereof made, and the Issues, Fines, and Amerciaments, the which shall be made, or happen to be made, and all forfeitures the which shall fall afore you, ye shall make truly to be entred, without any concealment, imbezling; and truly them to send into the Exchequer: And ye shall not let for gift, nor for other cause, but that well and truly, ye shall do your Office of Justice on your behalf; And that ye take nothing for your Office of Justice of Peace to do, but of the King, and Fees ac∣customed; And that ye shall not make, or de∣liver any Warrants to the Parties, but ye shall them deliver to the Bayliffs of the County, or to other of the Kings Officers or Ministers of the same to do Execution. As God you help, and his Saints. The Oath of a Sheriff. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve, the King in the Office of the Sheriff of Bedford and Berks, and do the Kings profit in all things that belongeth to you to do by way of our Office, as far forth as ye can or may; ye shall truly keep the Kings Rights, and all that belongeth to the Crown; ye shall
not assent to Decrees, or Passing, or to Con∣cealment of the Kings Rights, or of his Fran∣chises; And wherever ye shall have knowledge that the Kings Rights, or the Rights of the Crown been concealed or withdrawn, be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, or any o∣ther things, ye shall do your true power to make them be restored to the King again; And if ye may not do it, ye shall certifie the King or some of his Council thereof, such as ye hold for certain will say it to the King; ye shall not respite the Kings Debts for any gift or favour, where ye may raise them without great grie∣vance of the Debtors; Ye shall truly and righ∣teously treat the People of your Sheriffwick, and do right as well to the Poor as Rich in all that belongeth to your Office; ye shall do no wrong to any man, for any gift or good behest, or promise of good, nor favour, nor hate; ye shall disturb no mans right; ye shall truly ac∣quit at the Exchequer all those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the Kings Debts; ye shall nothing take whereby the King may leese, or whereby that Right may be disturbed, letted, or the Kings Debts delayed; Ye shall truly return and truly serve all the Kings Writs, as far forth as it shall be in your cunning; Ye shall none have to be your under Sheriff, or any your Sheriffs Clerks, of the last year passed; Ye shall take no Bayliffe into your Service, but such as ye will answer for; Ye shall make each of your Bayliffs to make such Oath as ye make your self, in that that belong∣eth
to their Occupation; Ye shall receive no Writ by you or any of yours unsealed, or any sealed, under the Seal of any Justice, save of Justice of Eyre, or Justice Assigned in the same Shire where ye be Sheriff in, or other Justices having power and Authority to make any Writ unto you by the Law of the Land, or of the Justice of Newgate; you shall make your Bay∣liffs of the true and suffici∣ent men in the Country: Le residue del serve∣ment que hic sequitur fuit insert depuisne temps come appeirt per le Regist. f. 301. Also ye shall do all your pain and diligence to de∣stroy and make to cease all manner of Heresie and Er∣rors, commonly called Lollardries, within your Baylywick, from time to time, to all your power, and assist and be helping to all the Ordinaries and Commissaries of Holy Church, and favour and maintain them as oft times as ye shall be required by the said Ordina∣ries and Commissaries; ye shall be dwelling in your proper person within your Baylywick, for the time ye shall be in the same Office; ye shall not let your Sheriffwick, or any Bay∣wick thereof, to farm to any man; Ye shall truly set and return reasonable and due Issues of them that be within your Bayliffwick after their Estates and Honour, and make your Pan∣nels your self; And over this, in eschewing and restraint of the Manslaughters, Robberies, and other manifold grievous Offences that hath been done daily, namely by such as name themselves Souldiers, and by other Vagarants, the which
continually increase in number, and multiply, so that the Kings true Subjects may neither ride nor go to do such things as they have to do, to their intollerable hurt and hindering; ye shall truely and effectually with all diligence possible to you, execute the Statutes, the which ye shall have knowledge of. These things all ye shall truly keep, as God you help, you and his Saints. The Oath of the Sheriff of Oxon and Berks, Cambridge and Huntington. YOu shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of She∣riff of Oxon and Berks, and the Kings profit, &c. ut supra us{que} ibi. So God help you and his Saints, Et tunc sic; And also ye shall swear, That the Masters and the Schollers of the Uni∣versity of Oxon, and their servants, from inju∣ries and violences, ye shall keep and defend by all your strength and prower; and the Peace in the said University, as much as is in you is, ye shall do keep; And that ye shall give your counsel, and help to the Chancellor, and Schollers of the same University, for to punish the Disturbers and Breakers of the Peace there, after the Priviledges and Statutes of the said University at all times when it shall be need∣full; And also ye shall put your help with all
your strength to defend the priviledges, liber∣ties, and customs of the said University: And that ye shall receive all such Oaths of your Under-Sheriffs, and other your said Ministers of your said County of Oxon, as soon and anon as ye shall be at the Castle, or at the Town of Oxon, in presence of any that shall be thereto deputed by the said University; to the which things, the King will that your said Ministers, be by you Arted, and compelled, As God you help and all his Saints: Consimile sacrum fac. Vio. Cant. & Hunt. The Oath of an Escheator. YEE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of Es∣cheator, in the Counties of Bed. and Bucks, and do the Kings profit, in all things that belong∣geth to you to do, by way of your Office, after your wit and power, his Rights and all that be∣longeth to the Crown ye shall truly keep; Ye shall not assent to Decrees, ne to concealment of the Kings Rights, ne of the Franchizes; And wheresoever ye have knowledg of the Kings Rights, or his Crown, be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, be in any wise con∣cealed, or withdrawn, ye shall do your pain and diligence to withstand it, and to make it be re∣stored, and repaired; and if ye may not, ye shall say it unto the King, or such of his Coun∣cil,
the which ye shall know for certain will say it unto the King; Ye shall truly, and righ∣teously Treat the people of your Bailiffwick, and do Right to every man, as well to Poor as to Rich, in that that belongeth to you to do; Ye shall do no wrong to any man, neither for pro∣mise, love, nor hate, nor no mans Right di∣sturb; Ye shall nothing do, whereby the King may lose, or whereby that Right may be distur∣bed, letted, or delayed; Ye shall truly and right wisely return, and serve the Kings Writs; Ye shall in your proper person make, or do to be made the extents of Lands and other Revenues, after their very value, and duly charge the Quests that be returned before you and receive the Verdicts, and return them as often as they been taken by you, and that within a month; Ye shall take no Bailiff into your service, but such as ye will answer for; Ye shall make your Bailiff to make such Oath as it belongeth to you to give him; Ye shall truly, and right wisely yield Accompts at the Kings Exchequer, of all the Issues of your said Bailiffwick; Ye shall take your Inquests in open places, and not privy, and that by Indenture, after the effect of the Statute made thereof, As God help you, and his Saints. The Oath of the Comptroller of the Customs. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
troller of the Kings Customs and Subsidies, in the place of Customer, and truly ye shall enter all the Goods and things Customable the which shall come to the said Port, or shall pass from the same; And that ye shall no gift take for to do your Office, nor for any thing that may fall in disadvantage of the King, nor any Merchan∣dize, nor any other thing Customable, ye shall not suffer to pass out of the said Port, without custom due be paid; And ye shall do the Of∣fice your self, and dwell thereupon in your proper person, without making any Substitute, or Deputy under you; And ye shall write the Rolls with your own hands, and the Kings profit ye shall await, and do, in as much as ye may after your knowledg and power. As God you help, and his Saints. The Oath of a Tronator. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of Tro∣nator, in the City of London, and truly ye shall weigh and poyse the Wool that shall come thi∣ther, and ye shall not suffer any Wool to pass but by certain weight and poyse, ordained so that neither more nor less be put in the weight, and poyse, but all only the certainty: And that all the Wool the which shall come, ye shall do to be weighed, and poysed out, that for gift nor favour of any person, ye shall not suffer any Wool to pass before that be entirely weighed
and poysed, and ye shall dwell and abide, upon your Office in your proper person, without making of any Substitute or Deputy under you, And ye shall wait and do the Kings profit, and Advantage all that ye may. As God you help and his Saints. The Oath of Custom. YE shall swear, That ye shall make con∣tinual abiding in the Port of London, and shall oversee the charge of Wool, Leather, and Woolfell, and all other Merchandizes, and things Customable, and the number of Sacks in the said Port, and in as much as in you is, ye shall not suffer that the King have hurt or loss there; and that true accompt thereof ye shall yield; and of the Issues of the said Customs, truly ye shall swear, without Fauxim or Fraud, to be done in any point, As God you help, and his Saints. The Oath of a Justice to hear and de∣termine. YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King as Justice, to hear and determine the wrongs and grievances done to the King and his People, after the form of the Commission to you and to other your fellows thereof made; And shall keep and lean the
Kings Council and Right to your power; Ye shall do to all People, as well to the poor as to the rich: And that ye shall take no gift of any person to do wrong, nor right to de∣lay, and that for Highness, nor for Ri∣ches, nor for hatred, nor for the Estate of any person, nor for any good deed, gift or pro∣mise, the which is made to you of any person, or may be made to you, nor by craft or ma∣ligning Right ye shall not disturb, nor respite against Reason, and against the Laws of the Land; but without regard of any Estate or Per∣son truly ye shall do right to all People, after the Laws aforesaid. So God ye help, and his Saints. The Oath of a Justice in Eyre. YE Iustice in Eyre shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of Justice, and shall do Right to your power, to all People, as well to poor as to rich; and that for Highness, nor for Riches, nor for hatred, nor for the Estate of any per∣son, nor for good deed, gift, nor promise of any person that is made to you, or may be made to you, neither by craft, nor by maligny, the right of any person ye shall not disturb nor respite, against reason, nor against the Laws of the Land; but without having of regard of any Estate or Person, truly ye shall do Right to every person after the Laws and Customs of the
Land; and that ye shall nothing take of any person for to do wrong, or right to delay. So God ye help, and his Saints. The Oath of the Clerk of the Statutes. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of Clerk of the Statutes, in the Town of B. and that ye shall be dwelling and abiding upon the same Office in proper person, without making any Substitute or Deputy: And truly ye shall enter the Recognizances the which shall be made a∣fore you, and them that keep the greater party of the Seal, ordained for such Recognizances to be taken in the said Town: And that ye shall not receive, nor take any Recognizance with∣out the presence aforesaid, that for to do, be deputed and ordained, and that no manner of Recognizances, the which be not taken by you, and them, together as it is aforesaid; And ye shall not enter them, nor make them to be en∣tered, and that all manner of Recognizances so before you, and them made, ye shall write and enroll with your own Hand, As God help you, and his Saints.
The Oath of the Chancellor of the Ex∣chequer. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King, in the Office of Chancel∣lor of the Exchequer, and well and truly ye shall do all that pertaineth and belongeth to the same Office; and the Kings Business and needs ye shall speed afore all others; and that no Writ of Judgment of any other Place, but of the Exche∣quer it self, ye shall not enseal with the Seal of the Exchequer, as long as the Chancery shall be twenty miles where the Exchequer doth a∣bide. The Oath of Fealty. YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth bear unto the King our Soveraign Lord, and to his Heirs, Kings of England, and truly ye shall do, and truly knowledg the services due of the Lands, the which ye claim to hold of him, as in the Right of your Wife, and in the which the King to you doth yield. As God help you, and all his Saints.
The Oath of the Steward of Gascoygne. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall with all your Wit, and withal your power, ye shall keep the Office of the Steward∣ship, of the Dutchy of Guyan; And ye shall do right to all People, in that that to you ap∣pertaineth and belongeth; And the Towns Castles, Fortlots, and the Lands, and Tene∣ments, of the King our Soveraign Lord in that Dutchy ye shall keep to the use of him and his Heirs; And ye shall not deliver them to any person, but to him or to his Heirs, or to the which shall bring you his Letters Patents, and his Honour, his Estate, his Rights, and his Seignory ye shall keep, and maintain to all your power; and if any thing of his Rights, in what things soever it be, be withdrawn or concealed, ye shall put to your true pain and deavour, that to repeal and retain in due and right estate; and if ye may not that do; ye shall do it to be known to the King. So God ye help, and his Saints. The Oath of the Alneger. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People, in the Office of Substitute Lannyour of the King; And that for favour nor for hatred, ye shall not
let; But that ye shall meet the Clothes, the which attain and belong to your Office to meet truly, and them enseal with the Seal of your Office; and that truly ye shall answer to the King of the forfeitures of the Clothes, after the form contained in the Statute thereof late made; And that ye shall not tarry nor delay the people, in that that appertaineth and be∣longeth to your Office; And that ye shall use your said Office without Fraud, Extortion, or Outrage, to be done to the people. As God you help, and his Saints. The Oath of the Major of the Staple, and Constable of the same Staple. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his people in the Office of Major, of the Staple of Westminster, to the which ye be chosen, and truly ye shall Treat the Merchants of the same Staple, and e∣qual Right ye shall do to all people, as well to Strangers as others after the Ordinances there∣of made, and the Law Merchant. As God you help, and his Saints. Like Oath shall make the Constable of the same Staple, of that that apper∣taineth to their Office.
The Oath of the Portage of the Chancery. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of Por∣tage of the Chancery, and that ye shall be con∣tinually abiding upon the said Office, and no time ye shall absent you, without especial leave of the Chancellor, or of the Keeper of the Rolls, and that for good and just cause, and that ye shall not carry nor bear, nor suffer the Rolls to be carried or born to any place, but unto the place, to the same Ordained and Deputed; and that ye shall not shew them to any Person, but by the Commandment of the said Keeper of the Rolls, privily or openly, and that ye shall not assent that any fraud or deceit, the which may be done to the said Rolls, as by taking of Coppie, or by the sight, to have of the said Rolls privily, nor in none other manner; and of Fraud, or untruth, that ye may know to be done in the said Rolls, or any thing that appertaineth to your keeping of the said Rolls, ye shall tell to the said Keeper of the Rolls, without any concealment to do so. So God ye help, and all Saints.
The Oath of a Bishops Renuntiations of a Popes Bull. I Renounce all the words comprized in the Popes Bull, made unto me of the Bishop-prick of B. the which be contrary and prejudi∣cial to the King our Soveraign Lord, and to his Crown; and of that I put my humblement in his Grace, praying to have restitution of my Temporalities of my Church of B. The Oath of a Bishops Fidelity. ALso I shall be faithful, and true, and faith and truth shall bear the King our Sove∣veraign Lord, and to his Heirs Kings of Eng∣land, of Life and Limb, and of Earthly wor∣ship for to Live and Dye against all the people; And diligently, I shall be intendant unto the Kings Needs and Business after my wit and Power, and the Kings Counsel I shall keep and lain, and truly I shall knowledg and do the services due of the Temporalities of my Bi∣shopprick of B. The which I claim to hold of my said Soveraign Lord the King; And the which he giveth and yieldeth me, and to him and to his Commandments, in that that to me attaineth and belongeth for my Temporali∣ties, I shall be obeysant. As God me help, and his Saints.
The Oath of the Kings Serjeant at Law. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King and his people, as one of his Serjeants of the Law, and truly coun∣sel the King in his matters, when he shall be called, and duly and truly Administer the Kings matters, after the course of the Law, after your cunning; ye shall take no wages, nor Fee of any man, for any matter where the King is party; against the King, ye shall as duly and hastily speed such matters, as any man shall have to do against the King in the Law, as ye may law∣fully do, without delay or tarrying the party of his lawful Process, in that that to you be∣longeth; ye shall be attendant to the Kings matters when ye shall be called thereunto. As God help you, and his Saints. The Homage of a Temporal Lord. J Become your Leigman of Life and Limb, and of Earthly Worship, and saith and troth, I shall bear unto you, for to live and dye, a∣gainst all manner of Folk. So God me help, and his Saints.
The Oath of a Searcher in the Custome House. YE shall swear, That ye shall serve the the King well and truly in the Office of the Searcher-ship in the Port of N. and do the Kings profits in all things that longeth to you, to do by way of your Office, and well and truly ye shall make due search of all the Ships and Vessels, coming in or passing out of the said Port, and truly answer the King of all that shall belong unto him, in your said Of∣fice without Fraud or Malign, after your wit and power. As God help you, and his Saints. The Oath of a Serjeant at Law. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the Kings People, as one of his Serjeants at Law, And ye shall truly coun∣sel them, that ye shall be retained with after your cunning, and ye shall not defer, tract, nor delay their causes willingly for covetousness of mony, or other thing that may turn you to profit, and ye shall give due attendance accor∣ding. As God you help, and his Saints.
The Oath of the Master of the Rolls. YE shall swear, That well and lawfully ye shall serve the King our Soveraign Lord and his People, in the Office of Clerk or Master of the Rolls, to the which ye be called; Ye shall not assent, ne procure the dis-inheritance, ne perpetual damage of the King, to your power; ne fraud ye shall do, nor cause to be made wrongfully, to any of his People, ne in any thing that toucheth the Seal; and lawfully ye conceal the things that touch∣eth the King, when ye shall be thereto requi∣red; And the Council that ye shall give touch∣ing him, ye shall not disclose; And if ye know any thing of the dis-inheritance, or damage of the King, or fraud to be made upon any thing that toucheth the keeping of the Seal, ye shall put your lawful power that to redress and amend; And if that ye cannot, ye shall advise the Chan∣cellor or other, which may that amend, to your power. As God you help, and his Saints. The Oath of the six Clerks in the Chancery. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People in the Office of one of the six Clerks of Chancery whereunto ye be admitted, and well and justly order your self in the same, according to your
learning, and truly counsel them that ye shall be retained with; And ye shall be diligent to further the Kings business from time to time, as need shall require; And ye shall not assent to any fraud or deceit to be had or done by you, or any by your consent, in any of the Kings Re∣cords, whereunto ye shall have recourse; but well and truly ye shall entreat the same; And ye shall not absent your self willingly, where∣by the Kings business or any other shall be undone or hindered, without special License of the Master of the Rolls, or his Deputy for the time being. As God you help, and his Saints. The Oath to maintain the Succession of the Crown of England. YE shall swear, To bear faith, truth, and obedience all only to the Kings Majesty, and to his Heirs of his body of his most dear and entirely beloved lawful Wife Queen Ann, begotten; And farther to the Heirs of our said Soveraign Lord, according to the limitation in the Statute made for surety of his Succession in the Crown of this Realm, mentioned and con∣tained, and not to any other within this Realm, nor Forraign Authority or Potentate. And in case any Oath be made or hath been made by you to any person or persons, that then you to repute the same as vain, and annihilated; And that your cunning wit, and uttermost of
your power, without guile, fraud, or other undue mean; ye shall observe, keep main∣tain, and defend the said Act of Succession; and all the whole effects and Contents threof, and all other Acts and Statutes made in confirma∣tion, or for due execution of the same, or of any thing therein contained; And this ye shall do against all manner of persons of what E∣state, Dignity, Degree, or Condition soever they be; And in no wise do or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or things pri∣vily or apartly, to be let, hinderance, damage or derogation thereof, or of any part of the same, by any manner of means, or for any manner of pretence. So help you God, all Saints, and the holy Evangelists. The Oath of a Clerk of the Petty Bag. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People, as one of his Ministers and Clerks in the Office of the Petty-bag, whereunto ye be admitted; and well and truly order your self in the same, accord∣ing to your learning; And ye shall be dili∣gent to further the Kings business from time to time, as need shall require; And ye shall not assent to any fraud or deceipt to be had or done by you, or any by your consent, in any of the Kings Records whereunto ye shall have re∣course; but well and truly ye shall entreat the same. As God you help, and his Saints.
The Oath of the Examiner in the Court of Chancery. YE shall swear, Well and truly, after your cunning and learning, to excuse and oc∣cupy the Office of one of the Examiners in the Kings Court of Chancery, whereunto you are admitted; And duly, Justly, and equally, ye shall examine their Causes that shall be com∣mitted unto you, without any favour or cor∣ruption of any person or persons to be had, otherwise than shall of right appertain con∣cerning the same; And ye shall be attendant as well to further the Kings business as the same Causes from time to time, as need shall require; And ye shall not publish, or shew the same Depositions to any person afore pub∣lication in the Court, without the Warrant of the same Court. As God you help and his Saints. The Oath which the Duke of Bedford and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal took in Parliament in Anno 4. H. 6. Nov. 10. for their sincere arbitrating of the variance be∣tween the Duke of Glocester and the Bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor of England. THat my said Lord of Bedford and my said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
each of them, shall, as far forth as his cunning, and discretion, sufficient, truly, justly, and in∣differently, counsel and advise the King, and also proceed and acquit himself in all the said matters and Quarrels, withouten that they or any of them shall privily, or apart, make or shew himself, or be party or parcel therein, nought be leaving or schewing so to do, for affe∣ction, love, meed, or dread of any person or persons; And that ye shall in all wise keep secret all that shall be communed by way of Counsel in the Matters and Quarrels above∣said in the foresaid Parliament, withouten that they or any of them shall by word, writing, or in any wise open it, or discover it to any of the said parties, or to any other person that is nought of the said Counsel, but if he have es∣pecial Commandment thereto of the King, or of my said Lord of Bedford; And that each of them shall with all might and power, by him and by his strength, aid and assist by way of Counsel, and tell unto the King, or to my Lord of Bedford, and to the remnant of my said Lords, to put the said parties, to reason; and nought suffer that any of the said parties by them or theirs, proceed or attempt by way of Feet, against the Kings Peace; nor help, assist, or comfort any of them thereto; but let them with all her might and power, and with∣stand them, and assist unto the King and my said Lord of Bedford, in keeping of the Kings Peace, and redressing of all such matter of proceeding by way of Feet and Force.
The Oath which the Duke of York, and Buckingham, the two Archbishops. 11. Bishops. 6. Earls. Two Viscounts. 18. Ab∣bots. 2. Priors. 17. Barons, took in Par∣liament, unto Hen. 6. in Anno 33. Nov. 25. for their Allegiance unto the said King. I Promise unto your Highness, by the Faith and truth that I owe to God and you, that I shall true and faithfully keep the Leigeman that I owe unto you most Soveraign Lord, and to put me in my devoir to do all that may be to the welfare, honour, and safeguard of your most noble Person and Royal Estate, Preemi∣nence and Prerogative, and I shall at no time, will, or consent to that, that might in any wise sound to the hurt, or prejudice of your said most noble person, Dignity, Crown or Estate: And over that I shall with all my power resist and withstand all them, that will in any wise pre∣sume to attempt the contrary. So God me help, and his Saints.
The Oath which the Duke of York took for his Allegiance to King Hen. the 6. At the High Altar in St. Pauls-Church London, in presence of the said King, which is enter∣ed in the Parliament Roll, Anno 38. Hen. 6. Nov. 9. I Richard Duke of York, confess and know, That I am, and ought to be humble Subject and Liegeman, unto you my Soveraign Lord the King, Hen. 6. And ought therefore to bear you faith and truth, as to my Soveraign and Leige Lord; and so shall do all the days unto my lives end; and shall not at any time will, nor at any thing be attempted or done against your most Royal Person: But whensoever, I shall have knowledg of any such things imagin∣ed, or purposed, I shall with all the speed and diligence possible to me, to make that your Highness shall have knowledg thereof, and ever do all that shall be possible to come to the withstanding thereof, to the uttermost of my lise: I shall not in no wise any thing take up∣on me against your Royal obeysance, that is due thereto, nor suffer any other man to do, as far forth as it shall lye in my power to let it: And also I shall come at your Commandment, whensoever I shall be called by the same, in all humble and obedient wise: But if I be letted by sickness, or impotency of my person, or by such other causes as shall be thought reasonable
to you my Soveraign Lord, I shall never hereafter take upon me to gather any Routs, or make any Assembly of your people, with∣out your Commandment or License, or my lawful defence; In the interpretation of which my lawful defence and declaration thereof; I shall report me at all time unto your High∣ness, and if the case require, unto my Peers, nor any thing attempt by way of faith against any of your Subjects, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition they be; but whensoever I shall be, or when I shall feel my self wronged or grieved, I shall sue humbly for remedy unto your Highness, as an humble and true Sub∣ject ought to have him to his Soveraign Lord; All these things abovesaid I permit truly to ob∣serve, and keep by the holy Evangelists con∣tained in this Book that I lay my hand upon, and by the holy Cross that I here touch, and by the blessed Sacrament of our Lords body that I shall now with his mercy receive, and over this I agree me, and will, that if I at any time hereafter, as with the grace of our Lord I never shall any thing attempt by way of fact or otherwise against your Royal Estate, or obeysance that ought thereto, or any thing I take upon me otherwise then is above expressed, I from that time forth be unable to all manner of worship, Estate or dignity, be it such as I now occupy, or any other that might grow un∣to me in any wise; And this that I have pro∣mitted and sworn, proceedeth of my own de∣sire and free volunt, and by no constraint or co∣hertion;
In witness of all the which things a∣bove written, I Richard Duke of York above written, Subscribe me with my own Hand, and Seal, this with my own Seal &c. The Oath which was taken in the Parlia∣ment at Coventry unto King Henry 6. Anno 38. Nov. 26. by the two Arch Bi∣shops, sixteen Bishops, five Earles, two Viscounts, three Dukes, (in the absence of the Duke of York) fourteen Abbots, two Pryors, and seven Barons. J A. B. knowledge you most High and Mighty, and most Christian Prince, King Henry 6. to be my most redoubted Soveraign Lord, and right-wise by Succession born to Reign upon me, and all your Liege People; Whereupon I voluntarily, without cohertion, pro∣mit and oblige me, by the faith and truth that I owe unto God, and by the faith, truth, and Liegeance, that I owe unto you my most re∣doubted Soveraign Lord, That I shall be with∣out any variance, true, faithful, humble, and obey∣sant Subject and Liegeman unto you my most re∣doubted Soveraign Lord; and that I shall be un∣to my lives end, at all times and places, ready and attending at your calling in my most hear∣ty wise and manner, as any true Liegeman ow∣eth to be unto his Soveraign Lord, putting me in my true undelayed endeavour, to do all that
may be unto the weal and furety of your most Royal Person, of your most Noble Estate, and the very conservation, and assurance, and con∣tinuance of Your most High Authority, Pree∣minence, and Prerogative, To the weal, surety and preserving of the Person of the most No∣ble and Benign Princess Margaret the Queen, my Soveraign Lady, and of her most High and Noble Estate, she being your Wife; And also to the weal, surety, and Honour of the Per∣son of the right High and Mighty Prince Ed∣ward, my right redoubted Lord the Prince, your first begotten Son, and of the Right High and Noble Estate of the same, and faithfully, truly, and obeysantly, in my most humble wise and manner, honour, serve, obey, and bear mine Allegiance unto you my most redoubted Sove∣raign Lord during your life, which God the Fa∣ther of mercy, for my most singular recomfort, preserve long in prosperity to endure; and if God of his infinite Power take you from this Transi∣tory life, me bearing life in this world, That then I shall take and accept my said redoubted Lord the Prince, Edward, your said first born Son, for my Soveraign Lord, and bear my true Faith and Liegeance unto him as my natu∣al born Soveraign Lord, and after him, unto his Succession of his body lawfully begotten; and in default of his Succession, which God defend unto any other Succession of your Body law∣fully coming; And that I shall never at any time, for any manner of occasion, colour, af∣finity, or cause, consent, give aid, assistance, or
favour, or agree to any thing, that I may un∣derstand, or know by any means, that may be prejudicial or contrary to the premises, or any of them: But that I shall, as soon as I may have knowledge, put me in my undelayed de∣voyre, in most hearty and effectuous wise and manner, without colour or faintness, with my body, goods, might, power, counsel, and ad∣vertisements, to resist, withstand, and subdue all them that would in any wise presume to do contary to the premises, or any of them. So God me help, and those holy Evangelists. In witness whereof, I set to these Presonts my Seal, and my Sign Manuel. The Oath of the Lieutenant of the Tower of London. YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve the Kings Majesty in the Lieu∣tenancy of the Tower of London, and the same Tower ye shall faithfully and safely keep to the behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs and law∣ful Successors; And the profit of the Kings Majesty ye shall do and advance in all things that you, as Lieutenant of the Tower be∣longeth; And the Rights and Priviledges of the Tower, that to the same lawfully appertain, you shall keep and preserve; You shall hear nothing that may be hurtful to the Tower or prejudicial to his Majesty, but that with all convenient speed you shall disclose it to
some of his Majesties Privy Council: In these and all other things that to a Lieutenant of the Tower belongeth to do, well and faithful∣ly you shall, according to your best power and knowledge, perform, fullfil, and keep. So help you God, &c. The Oath ministred to certain persons for the renouncing of their profession of Lol∣lardism, in Rich. 2. his time, vide Claus, Anno. Rich. 2. Nov. 18. Dorso. MEmorandum quod primo die Decembris, Anno Regni Regis Rich. 2. Post. Conquestum 19 Willus Divet, Nichus Taylor, Nichus Poncher, & Will. Staynor, de Nottingham, in Canc. prim. Regis Personaliter Constit. Sacram. divisim presti∣terint, sub eo qui sequitur Tenor. J William Deynet, before you worshipful Fader Lord Arch-Bishop of York, and your Clergy, with my free will, and full advised swear to God, and all his Saints, upon the holy Gospel, That for this day forthward I shall wor∣ship Images with praying and offering unto them, in the worship of Saints, that they be made offer; And also I shall never despise Pilgri∣mage, ne States of holy Church in no degree, And also I shall be Buxim to the Laws of holy Church, and to yhorn as my Arch-Bishop, and to my other Ordinaries and Curates, and
keep your Laws upon my power, and main∣tain them; And also I shall never more main∣tain, ne teachen, ne defend an Errour, Con∣clusions ne teachings of the Lollards, ne swich Conclusions and Teachings that men clepity Lollards Doctrine, ne shall her Books, ne swich Books, ne hem, or any suspect or defamed of Lollardy, receive or company withal wittingly, or defend in your matters; And if I know any swich, and also I shall excite and stir all tho to good Doctrine that I have hindered with my Doctrine, up my power; And also I shall stand to your Declaration which is Heresie or Errour, and do thereafter; and also with Pennance, yhe wook for, that I have done for maintaining of this false Doctrine inmyns me, I shall fulfill it, and I submit me thereto up my power; And also I shall make no other gloss of this mine Oath but as the words stand; And if it be so, that I come again, or do again this or any part thereof, I yield me here compt∣able as an Heretick, and to be punished by the Law as an Heretick, and to forfeit all my Goods to the Kings will, withouten any other pro∣cess of Law; And thereto I require the Notary to make of all this, the which is my will, and instrument against me.
The Oath of Fidelity, by the Priour of St. Johns of Jerusalem, in Dorso Claus, Anno 14. Edw. 4. Nov. 5. J shall be faithful and true, and Faith, and Truth shall bear to the King our Soveraign, and to his Heirs Kings of England, of Life and Limb, and of Earthly Worship for to live and die against all People, and diligently I shall be attendant unto the Kings needs and busines∣se; after my wit and power, and to him, and to his Commandments, in that that to me attaineth and belongeth I shall be obeysant. As God me help, and his Saints. A Copy of an Oath of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the Kings Coun∣cil sworn for performance of the Articles Matrimonial, treated, and had between the High and Mighty Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, and the Highness of the Infanta of Spain and their Commissaries on both Parties, the 20th. July, 1625. I George Archbishop of Canterbury, do swear that I will Justifie and Faithfully observe, so much as in me lyeth, all and each of the Articles which are contained in the Treaty of Matrimony between the most Excellent Prince
Charles, Prince of Wales, and the most Excel∣lent Lady, the Lady Mary Infanta of Spain; And I do also swear, That I will neither Exe∣cute, nor cause to be Executed any Law made against any Roman Catholick, or exact any pain imposed thereby, neither by my self, nor any inferior Ministers serving under me; but in all things appertaining unto me, I will faith∣fully observe the orders of the Kings Majesty in this behalf made and provided. The Oath which King Charles took at the time of His Coronation. After the Sermon was done the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury came to the KING, and with a low voice inquire of his Majesty, saying: SIR, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the People of England, the Laws and Customes to them granted by the Kings of England, Your Lawful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, The Laws Cu∣stomes, and Franchizes granted to the Clergy, and to the People, (by the) glorious King Saint Edward your Predecessor, According, and con∣formable to the Laws of God, and Profession of the Gospel Established in this Kingdom, and agreeing to the Prerogatives of the Kings thereof, and to the Antient Customs of this Realm. Respons, I grant, and Promise to keep them.
Sir, Will you keep Peace, and Agreement entirely according to your Power, both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and to the Peo∣ple? Respons, I will keep it. Sir, Will you to your Power, cause Law, Justice, and Mercy, in discretion, and Truth to be Executed in all your Judgments? Respons, I will. Sir, Will you grant to hold and keep, the Laws and Rightful Customs, which the Com∣monalty of the Kingdom have; And to defend and uphold them, to the honour of God, so so much as in you lieth? Respons, I grant, and promise so to do. Legatur, Admonitio sequens, ab uno Episcopo, Coram Omnibus, Clara voce sic dicendo. Domine, Rex, a vobis Pardonari Petimns uni∣cui{que} de nobis & Ecclesiis, nobis commissis Cannoni∣cum Privilegium, & debitam Legem, at{que} Justi∣tiam, conservetis, & defensiomen exhibiatis, sicut Rex in suo Regno debet unicui{que} Episcopo, & Ecclesiis, sibi commissis. Responder Rex. Animo Libenti & devoto promitto vobis, & Pardno, Quia unicuique de vobis & Ecclesiis vobis-Commissis Canonicum Privilegium, & debitam Le∣gem, at{que} justitiam servabo, & defensionem (quan∣tum potuero adjuvante Domino) exhibeo sicut Rex in suo Regno unicui{que} Episcopo, Ecolesiis sibi Commissis, per rectum defendere debet.
This being done the King cometh to the Altar, and laying his right hand on the Bible, saith these words: These things which I have before promised, I shall observe and keep: So God me help, and by the contents of this Book. The Oath which all Popish Bishops swear un∣to the Pope, under Decretalls; Lib. 1. Tit. 14. Cap. 4. J H. Bishop, will be faithful, from this day forward, unto St. Peter, and to the holy Church of Rome, and to my Lord Boniface the Pope, and to his Successors elected Canonically; and I will be an help to keep and defend a∣gainst all people, the Popedome, or Papal Sove∣raignty, and the rules of the holy Fathers. So God me help, and the holy Gospel. The Oath of the Treasurer of the Kings Houshold, in the time of H. 8. as it is entered in the Black Book of the Houshold YE will swear, By that Book to be after your power, and cunning, and good worshipful and true Officer to the King our Soveraign Lord, whose high estate is here pre∣sent, and diligent service to do him, as Trea∣surer of his honorable Houshold, and be know∣ing and consenting to any thing that might be
against him in his Body Natural, or of his goods Temporal, but that you let it after your power, or else to give hasty knowledg thereof to himself, or to such about him that will do him Wit, or to let it or amend it; And also such good as ye shall receive of the King, by the Treasurer of England, or other Officers for the Estate, and conservation of his Royal Hou∣shold, and for the expences of it, you shall truly charge your self therewith, and true Ac∣compt yield into the Exchecquer, full and whole by every two years end at the furthest, and no concealment make; also to behave you truly and honesty, in making of all your payments with favorable demeaning, cherishing love be∣tween the King and people, and that such pay∣ments be made and used continually as the green Cloth in the Counting-House of Hou∣shold; also that ye take oftentimes views and such over sight of all manner of Victual, and stuff, comprised within your charge and par∣cel, in every Office, so that the utterance of it be guided to the Kings most worship and pro∣fit; and that in all your Sessions and Judgments in the Counting-house, upon any mattter, cause or any thing to say, and give your doom truly, after good Conscience, right, reason, and all the Rules of this Court will require between the King and party, or any other party or parties, cherishing the good Officers, and punishing the evil doer, not by affection or love only, nor in anger or evil will but return truth to every par∣ty as nigh as you can.
Item, ye shall neither ask nor consent to any allowance but as shall be rightful and due to be done, and that you demean you in charg∣ing or discharging of the expences of Houshold, always to the Kings Houshold Worship and Profit, and in your own person, to be example to other in the Court; All such parcel of pur∣veyance as shall be brought into the Counting-House of your time, truly purveyed and par∣celled by Indentures, betwixt such Officers, and if you by good examinations and searches in the Countries, as truly ye can charge all the Purveyors, and that it be duly opposed in the Counting-House monthly for the King; And also that he search, the good old rule wor∣shipful, and profitable of this Court, used before time; and them to keep, uphold, and better if you can. As God help you, and by that Book. The Oath of the Comptroller of the Kings Houshold, as it is recorded the Black Book of the Houshold. YE shall swear, By that Book, to do un∣to the King our Soveraign Lord, good and true service, and diligent after your power and cunning, as Comptroller of his Honour∣able Houshold, and not to know or consent to any thing, that may be hurting to his High∣ness Estate, or to his body, or goods, but that ye shall that after your power, or else warn
them in hasty time that may let it, also to comptrol the receipts and all issues, of the Trea∣surers Office of Houshold, and that to record in plain Accompt into the Kings Exchequer, of the old form of the Compting house; Also truly and justly, to help to make the prizes of all manner of Stuff, Victual, and other purvey∣ance for this Houshold, and that you see and know it to be good and wholesome Victuals in every thing for the King, and his Houshold, and for the Kings Worship; Also that it be like worth to the Silver, that the King must pay therefore, or better by your wisdome and dis∣cretion; and also such Victuals of meat and drink be dampned and annulled, so that it be not expended within the Houshold, and to shew comin such matters as the green Cloth, before the Steward and Treasurer, that it may be understood, not done for malice, and then to counsel upon whom to cast the losses of such mispurveying; Also ye to be consciently assenting in, and to all due allowance to be made, or giving in the Counting house, be∣twixt the King and his people, to apply your businesses, upon the good guiding and over∣sight of all such manner of charges, and expen∣ces within this Court, and without also belong∣ing to this Houshold, also in our parties to make due search and enquiry, of and upon the conditions of purveyance, and of their pur∣veyance inward and outward, and of all the demeaning of the Officers of the Court, that there rise no slander by their deeds, unto this
famous Court, and that you see that the O∣fficers under you for the King, put them in their diligence to take often the views of the Offices, that the allowance of the Expences, pass not their charges of receipts; ye also to make Ac∣compt of all the Treasurer of Houshold charge and discharge for all receipts, purveyances and expences, and no concealments make thereof but truly to ingross it, and to put into the Kings Exchequer; and in your Office to attend, and preserve the Kings Worship and profit, as nigh as you can devise; and ye to search, keep, and uphold the good said Worshipful and pro∣fitable Rules and Statutes used before time in this Court, and them to. increase, and that this demeaning be example to all other, un∣der you in this Court of good governance; And also that ye or your under Clerk, or both, be at the Cowperage of Flesh, and at the de∣parting of Fish, at the service of the Kings Chamber and Hall, and to know the very duties of Liveries dailyin Houshold, and to see with the Almner that the Messes thereof be smitten in a sufficient and according manner, after the old Customs, and so to see it to the Kings Ta∣ble, and to other Officers due; Also ye and your Clerk truly, as oft as it is requisite, shall take the Remanents and viewes in Offices, and sure∣ly make the Book of Wine, and all present in∣to the counting House, as oft as you be desir∣ed by the Steward, Cofferer, and Clerk of the Green Cloth, which must needs ingross the great Accompt of the Houshold by your
Record. To all which things ye will conform after your power and understanding, So help you God, and by this Book. The Oath that is to be administred to a Mid∣wife by the Bishop or his Chancellor of the Diocess, when she is licensed to exercise that Office of a Mid-wife. YOu shall swear, First, That you shall be diligent and faithful, and ready to help every Woman labouring of Child, as well the Poor as the Rich; and that in time of necessity, you shall not forsake, or leave the Poor woman, to go to the Rich. 2. Item, Ye shall neither cause nor suffer any woman to name, or put any other Father to the Child, but only him which is the very true Father thereof indeed. 3. Item, You shall not suffer any Woman to pretend, feign, or surmize her self to be deli∣vered of a Child, who is not indeed; neither to claim any other Womans Child for her own. 4. Item, You shall not suffer any Womans Child to be murthered, maymed, or otherwise hurt, as much as you may; and so often as you shall perceive any peril or jeopardy, ei∣ther in the Woman, or in the Child, in any such wise, as you shall be in doubt what shall chance thereof you shall thenceforth in due time send for other Midwiss, and expert Wo∣men
in that faculty, and use their advice and counsel in that behalf. 5. Item, That you shall not in any wise use or exercise any manner of Witchcraft, Charm, or Sorcery, Invocation, or other Pray∣ers then may stand with Gods Laws and the Kings. 6. Item, You shall not give any counsel, or minister any Herb, Medicine, or Potion, or any other thing, to any Woman being with Child whereby she should destroy or cast out that she goeth withal before her time. 7. Item, You shall not enforce any Wo∣man being with Child by any pain, or by any ungodly wayes or means, to give you any more for your pains or labour in bringing her a bed then they would otherwise do. 8. Item, You shall not consent, agree, give, or keep counsel, that any Woman be delive∣red secretly of that which she goeth with, but in the presence of two or three Lights ready. 9. Item, You shall be secret, and not open any matter appertaining to your Office in the presence of any man, unless necessity or great urgent cause do constrain you so to do. 10. Item, If any Child be dead born, you your self shall see it buried in such secret place as neither Hog, nor Dog, nor any other Beast may come unto it, and in such sort done, as it be not found nor perceived, as much as you may; And that you shall not suffer any such Child to be cast into the Jaques, or any other in∣convenient place.
11. Item, if you shall know any Midwife using or doing any thing contrary to any of the premises, or in any other wise then shall be seemly or convenient, you shall forthwith detect, open, to shew the same to me or my Chancellor for the time being. 12. Item, You shall use your self in honest behaviour unto the woman being lawfully ad∣mitted to the room and Office of a Midwife in all things accordingly. 13. Item, That you shall truly present to my self, or my Chancellor, all such women as you shall know from time to time to occupy and exercise the room of a Midwife within my foresaid Diocess and Jurisdiction of A. with∣out my License and admission. 14. Item, You shall not make or assign any Deputy or Deputies to exercise or occupy un∣der you in your absence the Office, or room of a Midwife, but such as you shall perfectly know to be of right honest and discreet beha∣viour, as also apt, able, and having sufficient knowledge and experience to exercise the said room and Office. 15. Item, You shall not be Privy, or con∣sent, that any Priest, or other party, shall in your absence, or in your company, or of your knowledge or sufferance, Baptise any Child, by any Mass, Latin-Service, or Prayers, then such as are appointed by the Laws of the Church of England; neither shall you consent that any Child, born by any woman, who shall be delivered by you, shall be carried
away without being Baptised in the Parish by the ordinary Minister, where the said Child is born, unless it be in case of necessity, Baptis∣ed privately, according to the Book of Com∣mon Prayer: But you shall forthwith upon un∣derstanding thereof, either give knowledge to me the said Bishop, or my Chancellour for the time being. All which Articles and Charge you shall faithfully observe and keep. So help you God and by the Contents of this Book, The Oath of a Nun, taking upon her a Monastical life. TV igitur Primo Jurabis quod in castitate cor∣poris te conservabis: Item tu Jurabis, quod eis Obediens Abati Sci. Augustini comtuari, qui nunc est, & Successoribus suis, qui & Temporo fuerint, in Omnibus, que Pertinent, ad jurisdictionem quam eadem Abbas Habet, super te, vel habefurum sunt Successores ejus. Item, Tu Jurabis, quod eris Obediens & in∣tendens Magistro, & Priorisse, hujus Loci, qui pro Tempore fuerint in his, quam tibi ex parte dicti Abbatis Injungent, saluberitur vel imponent haec omnia permittis Observaturam, quam diu in hac domo, soror volueris commorari, & Beneficio hujus domus gaudere, sic Deus te Adjuvet, & haec san∣cta Dei Evangelia.
The Oath taken by Edw. 2. King of Eng∣land, at his Coronation, Anno 1. vide Claus Nov. 10. SIre volez vous grauntere garder, & par vostre sorment, confermer an People d'Engleterre les leyes, & les custumes, a eux grauntees pur les Auncien Rois d'Engleterre voz Predecessours, duotenus & deotz a dieu & noment les leys custumes, & les Franchi∣sez guntez, an Clerge, & an People, Par le gloriens Roy Seint Edw. vostre Predecessour. Respons, Jeo lees grantee, & permitte. Sir, garderez vous a dieu, & Seint Eglise, & an Clerge, & an People Paes & acore, en dieu en∣tiremt. solunt, vere Poer. Respons, Jeo les garderai. Sir, freez vous feare en touz vos Ingementz, mele, & droit Justice, & discretion, en Misericorde, & verite a vere Poer. Respons, Jeo lefrai. Sir, graunt vous, a tenir, & garder, les leyes, & les custumes, droit les quieles, la comunante, de vere Royalme, Aura est in, & les defendres, & afforcerez ad honor, de dieu a vostre Poer. Respons, Jeo les graunte, & promitte.
The Oath taken by such as are convicted for stealing the Kings Venison, and therefore ordered to abjure the Land. MAster Coroner hear you this, That I have offended our Soveraign Lord the King in his Venison, for wich cause I abjure the Realm of England, and hereafter I shall ne∣ver return into it again, without the leave of our Soveraign Lord the King. So God me help, and those holy Saints. The Oath of a Ranger of the Forest. YOu shall truly execute the Office of a Ranger in the Panralles of W. upon the Borders of the Kings Forest of Waltham, you shall rechuse, and with your hand drive back again the wild Beasts of the Forest, as often as they shall range out of the said Forest into your Panralles; you shall truly present all unlaw∣ful Hunting, and Hunters of wild Beasts of Ve∣nire and Chase, as well within the Pancallees as within the Forest. And those and all other Offences you shall present at the Kings next Court of Attachments or Swanmoth, which shall first happen. So God you help
The Oath of a Verderor of the Forest. YOu shall truly serve our Soveraign Lord the King in the Office of a Verderor in the Forest of W. you shall, to the uttermost of your power and knowledg, do for the profit of the King, so far as it doth appertain unto you to do; You shall preserve and maintain the antient Right and Franchizes of the Crown; you shall not conceal from his Majesty any Right of Priviledges, nor any Offence, either in Vert or Venison, nor any other thing; You shall not withdraw nor abridg any de∣faults, but shall endeavour your self, you shall give knowledge thereof unto the King, or unto his Justice of the Forest; Ye shall deal indifferently with all the Kings Liege Peo∣ple; You shall execute the Laws of the Fo∣rest, and do equal Right and Justice, as well unto the poor as unto the rich, that apper∣taineth unto your Office; You shall not op∣press any Person by colour thereof, for any Reward, Favour, or Malice. All these things you shall to the uttermost of your power ob∣serve and keep. So help you God.
The Oath of the Regarder of the Forest. YOu shall truly serve our Soveraign Lord the King, in the Office of a Regarder of the Forest of Waltham; you shall make the Re∣gard of the same Forest, in such manner as the same hath been accustomed to be made; You shall range throughout the whole Forest, and through every Bayliwich of the same, as the Foresters there shall lead you to view the same Forest; and if the Foresters will not, or do not know how to lead you to make the regard, or range of the Forest, or that they will conceal from you any thing that is forefeited to the King, you your selves shall not let for any thing; but you shall see the same forfeiture and cause the same to be enrolled in your Roll; You shall enquire of all wastes, purprestures and asserts of the Forest, and also of conceal∣ment of my offence or trespass in the Fo∣rest, either in Vert or Venison, by any Of∣ficers of the same Forest. And all these things you shall to the uttermost of your power do. So help you God. The Oath of a Forester of the Forest. YOu shall truly execute the Office of a Forester or Keeper of the Kings wild Beasts, in the Walk called P. within this Fo∣rest
of W. You shall be of good behaviour your self towards his Majesties wild Beasts, and the Vert of the same Forest; You shall not con∣ceal the offence of any other person, either in Vert or Venison that shall be done within your Charge; but as well the same offence, as also all Attachments, and Swanmothe, other you shall present at the Kings next Court of Attachments or Swanmothe, which shall first happen to be holden for the same Fo∣rest; And you shall, to the uttermost of your power, maintain and keep the Assizes of the Forest, and in all things the Kings Right de∣fend, concerning the same, so long as you shall be Keeper there. So help you God, &c. The Oath of the Inhabitants of the Forest, being of the age of twelve yeares, as the same hath been accustomed and used in antient time. YOu shall true Leigeman be unto the Kings Majesty; You shall no hurt do unto his Beasts of his Forest, nor unto any thing that doth belong thereto, the offences of other you shall not conceal; but to the uttermost of your power, you shall them reveal unto the Officers of the Forest, or to them that may see the same redrest. All these things you shall see done. So help you God, and Holidome.
The Oath of the English Seminaries of the Romish institution use to take. I Iohn Copley Collegial of the English Se∣minary, duly considering the great benefits which Almighty God hath bestowed upon me and that especially whereby he hath drawn me out of the Country infected with Heresie, and made me a member his true Catholick Church, and desiring not to shew my self altogether ingrate unto Gods so great mercy, I have freely decreed to consecrate, and offer up my self wholly unto his divine service, for attain∣ing as much as in me lyeth to the end of the said Colledge; And I do promise and confirm by this mine Oath unto Almighty God, that I am, and shall be ever most ready in mind, by the assistance of his holy grace, to receive in due time Holy Orders, and to return into England, there to gain Souls, whensoever the Superiour of this Colledge shall think good by vertue of his Office, to command me thereto. The Oath of a Knight of the Bath, as it was Ministred at the Coronation of King Charles, Anno, 1625. RIght dear Brother, great Worship be this Order unto you, And the Almighty God give you the praise of all Knight-hood;
You shall love God above all things, ye shall be stedfast in the faith of Christ, and the same maintain and defend to your power; You shall love your Soveraign above all earthly creatures, and for your Soveraign, and your Soveraigns Right and dignity, live, and dye; You shall defend Maidens, Widows, and Or∣phans, in their Rights; You shall suffer no Ex∣tortion so far forth as you may, nor sit in place to here any wrongful Judgments given to your knowledge, And as great Honour be this No∣ble Order unto you, as ever it was to your Progenitors. The Oath of Fealty taken by John Balioll King of Scots, to the King of England, THis hear you my Lord Edward King of England; Soveraign Lord of the Realm of Scotland, that I John de Balioll King of Scot∣land, which I hold and claim to hold of you, that I shall be faithful and loyal, and owe faith and loyalty to you, I shall bear of life and member, and of earthly honour against all people; And lawfully I shall acknowledge, and do the services which I owe to you, for the Realm of Scotland aforesaid; So God me help, and his Holy Evangelists.
The Oath and Fealty, made by King John to Pope Innocentius, Anno Dom. 1213. Anno R. John. 14. JOhn by the Grace of God, King of Eng∣land, France, and Ireland, from this hour for∣ward shall be faithful to God, and to Saint Peter, and to the Church of Rome, and to my L. Pope Innocentius, and to his Successors law∣fully entring; I shall not be in word nor deed, in consent, or counsel, that they should lose life, or member, or be apprehended in evil man∣ner: Their loss, if I may know it, I shall Im∣peach and stay, so far as I shall be able, or else so shortly as I can, I shall signifie unto them and declare to such persons the which I shall believe, will declare the same unto you; The counsel which they shall commit unto me, by themselves, their messengers, or their Letters, I shall keep secretly, and not utter to any man to their hurt, to my knowledge. The Patri∣mony of Saint Peter, and especially the King∣dom of England, and Ireland, I shall endeavour my self to defend, against all men to my pow∣er; So help me God, and these Holy Evange∣lists, Amen. This Fealty was done on the Eve of the As∣cention of our Lord, in the year Anno, 1213.
The Oath of a Doctor of Divinity, accord∣ing to the practice of the Ʋniversity of Ba∣sill. ORnatissime, Vir, Sacrarum Literarum, can∣ditate, D. Doctissime, Hodie coram Amplissimo hoc concessit promittis at{que} fidem das in conspectu Sacrosancti Adorandae Trinitatis, cui te Hactenus Totum Addixisti, Consecrati studiis, laboribus, Vigilliis tuis, quod velis doctrinam Puram, a Prophetis Aposte∣lis ac Patribus, Melioris Notae Acceptam in corrupte in Scolis Ecclesiis{que} docere; Dogmata Pugnantia cum dei verbo: (quantum vis  habeant) nulla vel Seminare, vel tueri per totam vitam eru∣ditioni, ac gradui sermone, & Actionibus morum gravitatem conjungere eam, que Theologie docet, & sit avera  comoda nostrae Reipublicae Symnasii; utilitatem, ac in Primis Ordinis Theologici salutem (quantum in te fuerit) Perpetuo promonere Indignes, Ambitioses, contentioses à dignitatis titula (quem docturatam Appellamus longe Abarcere, deni{que} cum universis Fratribus sinceram Religionem profitenti∣bus, ) insigne coujunctionis vinculum Colore, Alere, Aeternum, Amen.
The Oath of a Sheriff of a County, accor∣ding as it was reformed by direction of the Kings Council, the 4. of Decemb. Anno, 1625. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King, in the Office of the Sheriff of the County of B. and do the Kings Profits in all that belongeth to you to do by way of your Office, as far forth as you may or can; Ye shall truely keep the Kings and all that belongeth to the Crown; Ye shall, not assent to decease, to lessen, ne to conceal∣ment of any of the Kings Rights, or of his Franchizes; And whensoever ye shall have know∣ledge, that the Kings Rights, or the Rights of the Crown be concealed or withdrawn, be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, or any other thing; Ye shall do your true power to make them be restored to the King again: And if he may not do it, ye shall certifie the King, or some of his Council thereof, such as you know for certain will say it unto the King Ye shall not respite the Kings debts for any gift or savour, where ye may raise them with∣out great grievance of the debtor; Ye shall truly and righteously treat the people of your Sheriffwick, and do right as well to poor as to rich, in all that belongeth to your Office; Ye shall do no wrong to any man, for any gift or other behest, or promise of
goods, for favour nor hate; Ye shall disturb no mans right, ye shall acquit at the Exchequer all those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the Kings debts; Ye shall nothing take whereby the King may lose, or that right may be letten, or disturbed, or the Kings debt delayed; Ye shall truly return, and truly serve the Kings Writs, as far forth as it shall be in in your cunning; Ye shall not have to be your under Sheriff, any of the Sheriffes Clerks, of the last year passed; Ye shall take no Bayliffe into your service, but such as you will answer for; Ye shall make each of your Bayliffs make such Oath as you make your self, in that that belongeth to their Occupation; Ye shall receive no Writs, by you, nor any of yours unsealed, nor any Sealed under the Seal of any Justice, save of Justice in Eyre, or Justice assigned in the same Shire where you be Sheriff in, or other Justices having power or autho∣rity to make any Writs unto you, by the Law of the Land, or Justice of Newgate; You shall make your Bayliffe of the true and suffici∣ent men in the Country; Ye shall be dwel∣ling in your own proper person within your Bayliffewick, for the time you shall be in the same Office, except ye be otherwise Licen∣sed by the King: You shall not let your Sheriffewick, nor any Bayliffwick thereof, to Farm to any man; Ye shall truly set, and re∣turn reasonable and due Juries of them, that be within your Bayliff wick, after their E∣state and their Haviour, and make your Pan∣nell
your self of such persons as be most meet, most sufficient, and not suspect, nor procured, as it is ordained by the Statute; And over this in eschewing and restraining of the Robberies, Man-slaughters, and other manifold grievous offences that be done dayly, namely, by such as name themselves Souldiers, and by other Vagrants, the which increase in multitude and number; So that the Kings true Subjects may not safely ride, nor go to do such things as they have to do, to their intollerable hurt and hinderance; Ye shall truly and effectually, with all diligence possible to your power, execute the Statutes of Winchester, and of Vagabonds; All these things ye shall well and truly ob∣serve and keep, So help you God, &c. The Form of The Oath of Justices of the Peace. YE shall swear, That as Justices of the Peace in the County of C. in all Arti∣cles, in the Kings Commission to you di∣rected, you shall do equal right to the Poor, and to the Rich after your cunning, wit, and power, and after the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and Statutes thereof made. And ye shall not be of Counsel of any Quarrel hanging be∣fore you. And that ye hold your Sessions after the form of Statutes thereof made. And the Is∣sues, Fines, and Amerciaments that shall hap∣pen to be made, and all forfeitures which shall
fall before you ye shall cause to be Entred with∣out any concealment (or imbezilling) and truly send them to the King's Exchequer. Ye shall not let for gift or other causes, but well and tru∣ly you shall do your Office of Justice of the Peace in that behalf. And that you take nothing for your Office of Justice of the Peace to be done, but of the King, and Fees accustomed, and Costs limitted by the Statute. And ye shall not direct, nor cause to be directed any War∣rant (by you to be made) to the parties, but ye shall direct them to the Bayliffs of the said County, or other the Kings Officers (or Mini∣sters) or other indifferent persons to do Execu∣tion thereof. So help you God, &c. The Oath of the Register, and Keeper of the King's Papers and Records of State, in his Palace of Whitehal at Westminster. YOu shall swear, To bear faith and true Allegiance unto the Kings Majesty, and him from henceforth truly and faithfully to serve in the place of Clerk, Keeper, and Re∣gister of his Majesties Papers and Records for matters of State, established at his Majesties Palace of Whitehal; You shall do your utter∣most endeavour to keep and conserve the said Papers and Records, which either now or here∣after shall be committed o your charge, from all harm and damage; You shall not willingly suffer any of the same to be purloyned, embezi∣led,
or defaced; You shall carefully and faith∣fully keep secret and conceal, from the know∣ledg of others, either by writing or relation, all such things therein contained as shall be fit, ei∣ther for reason of State, or otherwise for his Majesties service, to be concealed and kept se∣cret, except it be to the Lords, and others of his Majesties Privy Council, or such as his Ma∣jesty shall be content to have them communica∣ted unto; if you shall know of private person, or persons, that have embezled, or do detain any such Papers or Records which belong unto his Majesty, you shall do the best to recover the same, and bring them to the said Office, and do all things else that belong to the duty of the Clerk, Keeper, and Register of the said Papers and Records: All these you shall well and truly perform and do. So help you God. The Oath to be ministred to the Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of the Master of the Kings Wards, and shall minister equal Justice unto rich and poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power: And that ye shall diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the Kings Advantage and Profit, and to the Augmentation of the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown, and truly use the Kings Seal appointed to your Of∣fice,
and also endeavour your self to the utter∣most of your power, to see the King justly and truly answered yearly of all such Rents, Reve∣nues, Issues, and Profits, which shall, or may arise, grow, or be due to the King in your Office, and from time to time, deliver with speed such as shall have to do before you: And that ye shall not take, nor receive of any person any Gift or Reward, in any case or matter de∣pending before you, or wherein the Kings Highness shall be Party, whereby any preju∣dice, loss, hindrance, or disherison shall grow, or be to the Kings Highness. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath to be ministred to the Atturney of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as it is in the Statute 32. Hen. 8. Cap 16. YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King as his Atturney in all Courts, for, or concerning any matter, or cause, that shall concern the Possessions and Heredita∣ments limited to the Survey and Governance of this Court, and procure the Kings Profit thereof: And that ye shall truly counsel the King, and the Master of this Court, in all things concerning the same to the best of your wit and cunning, and with all speed and dili∣gence from time to time, at the calling of the said Master ye shall endeavour your self, for the hearing and determination indifferently of such
matters and causes as shall depend before the said Master; and that ye shall not take any Gift or Reward in any matter or cause depen∣ding in the same Court, or elsewhere, wherein the King shall be party, whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hurted or hindred, or disheri∣ted: And further, ye shall do to your power, wit, and cunning, all and every thing that shall appertain to your Office. So help you God and all Saints. The Oath of the Receiver-General of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in Sta∣tute, Anno, 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 46. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, and his people, in the Office of the general Receiver of this Court: And ye shall reasona∣bly and honestly procure the Kings profit, and do right to all manner of people, poor, and and rich, in those things which touch your Of∣fice: And the Kings Receipt of his Money, you shall truly keep, dispend, pay, and deliver, and true Declaration and Accompt make there∣of from time to time without any concealment, according to the Act made for the establish∣ment of this Court: And further, shall do eve∣ry thing that of right appertaineth to your Of∣fice. So help you God, and all Saints.
The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in the Sta∣tute, Anno 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 46. YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and true Allow∣ance make to every person which shall be ac∣comptant before you: And you shall not take, or receive of poor or rich, any Gift or Reward, in any matter or cause depending, or to be dis∣cussed in the same Court, but such as shall be ordinary appertaining to your Office, whereby the King shall be hurted, hindred, or disheri∣ted: And ye shall do all and every thing, which shall be appertaining to your Office. So help you God, and all Saints. And all particular Auditors, that shall be∣long to, and be appointed to the said Court, shall take the same Oath aforesaid, before the Master of the said Court of Wards. The Oath of the particular Receivers of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in the Statute, Anno 32 Hen. 8 Cap. 46. YE shall swear, That ye truly shall serve the King in your Office, and nothing conceal, but true Accompt make of all such Revenues, Rents, Sums of Money, and other profits, wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged by reason of your Office: Ye shall
make no Petition, or ask Allowance, but such as shall be good, just, true, and reasonable; And also truly content to pay the King, all such sums of Mony as shall come to your hands, and ye shall do all, and every thing and things which ye ought to do, by Reason of your Office, according to the form and effect of this Act: So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Clerks of the Council of the Court of Wards, as in the Statute, 32. H. 8. Cap. 46. YE will swear, That ye shall well and and truly serve the King in your Offices of Clerks of the Council of this Court, and truly do, and Execute all, and every thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, according to the form and ef∣fect of this Act; So help you God, and all Saints. All Surveyors, and Feodaries, that shall be appointed by the said Master, Attourny, Re∣ceiver general, and Auditor of the said Court, or three, or two of them, whereof the Master to be one, shall take a corporal Oath before the said Master, according to the form above∣said.
The Oath of the Chancellour of the first Fruits and Tenths, as in the Statute, An∣no 32. H. 8. Cap. 46. YOu shall swear, That he well and truly serve the King in the Office of the Chan∣cellour-ship of the first Fruits, and Tenths, and shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power; And that ye shall diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the Kings best advantage and profit, and to the Aug∣mentations of the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown, and truely use the Kings Seal ap∣pointed to your Office, and also endeavour your self, to the uttermost of your power, to see the King justly and truly answered yearly, of all such Rents, Revenues, and Profits, which shall or may arise, grow, or be due to the King in your Office, and from time to time, deliver with speed, such as shall have to do a∣fore you; And that ye shall not take nor receive of any person any Gift or Reward in any case or matter depending before you, or wherein the Kings Highness shall be Party, whereby any pre∣judice, hindrance, loss, or dis-herison shall grow, or be to the Kings Highness: So help you God, and all Saints.
The Oath of the Treasurer of the Court of first Fruits and Tenths, as in the Statute, Anno 32 H. 8. Cap. 45. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and tru∣ly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, and his People in the Office of the Treasurer of this Court; And ye shall reasonably and ho∣nestly procure the Kings Profits, and do right to all manner of people, poor and rich, in those things which touch your Office, and the Kings Receipt of his Mony, ye shall truly keep, dis∣pend, pay, and deliver a true Declraation and Accompt thereof shall make, from time to time without any concealment, according to this Act made for the establishment of this Court; And further, shall do every thing that of right appertaineth to your Office: So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Attourney of the Court of First Fruits and Tenths, as in the Statute, Anno 32 H. 8. Cap. 45. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King as his Attourney in all Courts, for and concerning any matter or cause that shall concern or touch the Rents,
Revenues, Profits, or Hereditaments, limited to the Survey and Governance of this Court, and procure the King Profit thereof; And that ye shall truly counsel the King, and Chancellour of this Court, in all things, con∣cerning the same, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power, and with all speed and dili∣gence, from time to time, at the calling of the said Chancellour, you shall endeavour your self, for the hearing and determination indif∣ferently of such matters and causes as shall de∣pend before the said Chancellour; And that ye shall not receive any Gift, or Reward, in any matter or cause depending in the Court, or elswhere, wherein the King shall be Party, whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hurted, hindred, or dis-inherited; And further ye shall do to your power, wit and cunning, all and every thing that of Right appertaineth to your Office; So help you God and all Saints. The Oath of the Auditor of the Court of First Fruits and Tenths, as in the Statute, Anno 32 H. 8. Cap. 45. YE shall swear, That ye truly shall serve the King in your Office, and true Allow∣ance make to every person which shall be ac∣comptant before you; And you shall not take nor receive of Poor, nor Rich, any Gift or Reward in any matter or cause depending,
or to be discussed in the same Court, but such as shall be ordinary appertaining to your Office, whereby the King shall be hurted, hindred, disherited; And ye shall do every thing ap∣pertaining to your Office. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Clerk of the Court of first Fruits and Tenths, as in the Statute, An∣no 32. H. 8. Cap. 45. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of Clerk of the Council of this Court, and truly do, and execute all and every thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Of∣fice, according to the form and effect of this Act; So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath taken for the surety of the Suc∣cession of the Kings Highness, by Queen Anne, Anno 26. H. 8. Cap. 2. YE shall swear, To bear faith, truth, and obedience, all only to the Kings Majesty, and to his Heirs of his body of his most dear and entirely beloved lawful Wife Queen Ann, begotten and to be begotten; And farther to the Heirs of our said Soveraign Lord, accor∣ding to the limitation in the Statute made for
surety of his Succession in the Crown of this Realm, mentioned and contained, and not to any other within this Realm, nor for any Au∣thority or Potentate. And in case any Oath be made or hath been made by you to any person or persons, that then ye repute the same as vain, and Annihilated; And that to your cunning wit, and uttermost of your pow∣er, without guile, fraud, or other undue mean, ye shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the said Succession, and all the whole effects and contents thereof, and all other Acts and Statutes made in confirmation, or for execu∣tion of the same, or of any thing therein con∣tained; and this ye shall do against all manner of persons, of what Estate, Dignity, Degree, or Condition soever they be, and in no wise do, or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or things privately or appartly, to the let, hindrance, damage, or derogation thereof, or of any part of the same, by any manner of means, or for any manner of pre∣tence; So help you God, all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.
The Oath taken for the Establishment of the Succession of the Crown of this Realme, in the Kings Highness by Queen Jane, Anno 28 H. 8. Cap. 7. YE shall swear, To bear Faith, Truth, and Obedience, all only to the Kings Ma∣jesty, Supream Head in earth under God of Church of England during his Life, and to his Heirs of his Body, and of his most dear and entirely beloved lawful Wife Queen Iane, be∣gotten and to be begotten and Procreated; And further, to the Heirs of our said Sove∣raign Lord, according to the limitation in the Statute made for surety of his Succession in the Crown of this Realm, As the Parliament begun, and holden at Westminster the 8th. day of June, in the 28th. Year of the Kings most gracious Reign; And also for lack of such Heirs to such person or persons as the Kings High∣ness shall limit and appoint to succeed to the Crown, by vertue and Authority of the same Act, and not to any other within this Realm, nor for any Authority, Power, or Po∣tentate; And in case any other Oath be made, or hath been made by you to any person or persons, that then ye to repute the same as vain and Annihilate, and that to your cun∣ning, wit, and uttermost of your power, with∣out guile, fraud, to other undue manner; Ye shall observe, keep, defend and maintain the
said Act of Succession, made in the said Par∣liament begun and holden at Westminster, in the said 8th. day of June, in the said 28th. Year of the Kings most Royal Reign, and all the whole effects and contents thereof, and all things that shall be done by the Kings Highness by Authority of the same and all other Acts and Statutes, made in Confirmati∣on or Execution of the same, or any thing therein contained; And this ye shall do a∣gainst all manner of persons, of what Estate, Dignity, Degree, or Condition soever they be, and in no wise do or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done or attempted, direct∣ly or indirectly, any thing or things, privately or appartly, to the let, hindrance, damage, or derogation thereof, or any part of the same, or of any thing or things that shall be done by the Kings Highness, by vertue and Authority of the said Act, by any manner of means, or for any manner of pretence; So help you God, all Saints, and the Holy Evangelists. The Oath of the Commissioners appointed for inquiry of the decay of Castles, Forts, and other places near Scotland, and for Reparation of the same. Anno 2 & 3 P. & M. 4. Cap. 1. YE shall swear, That to your cunning wit and power, ye shall truly and indif∣ferently execute the Authority to you given by
this Commission without any favour, affection corruption, dread, or malice to be born, to any manner of person or persons; and as the case shall remain, you shall consent, and endeavour your self, for your part, to the best of your know∣ledg and power, to the making of such whol∣some, just, equal, and indifferent Laws and Ordinances, as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent number of your selves, being in Commission with you, for the making, errection and preservation of all and every such things as are contained and specified in the said Commission, and the same Laws and Ordinances to your cunning, wit, and power, cause to put in due Execution, without favour, meed, malice, or affection. As God you help, and all Saints. The Oath of such as were Sworn to de∣clare the true value of their Estates towards the payment of the 15. Dismes and Subsi∣dies, Anno 2. & 3. P. & M. Cap. 23. I Shall faithfully, truly, and plainly, accord∣ing to my knowledg, shew unto you the King and Queens Commissioners, and to others by you assigned, the best and greatest value of all my goods and chattels, and summs of mony to me owing, according to the grant of this Act of Subsidy, and truly answer to that I shall be examined of, touching the premises, with∣out coven or deceit; So help me God, and the holy contents of this Book.
The Oath of such as were to make Enquiry of the value of the Goods and Lands of such persons as were lyable to the payment of Fif∣teens. Dismes, and Subsidies, Anno 4. & 5. P. M. Cap. 6. & Anno 6. Edw. 6. Cap. 7. I Shall truly enquire, with my Fellowes that shall be charged with me of the Hundred, Wapentake, Ward, Town, and other places of the best and most value of the substance of eve∣ry person dwelling and abiding within the li∣mits of the places, that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other which shall have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with any sum of mony by this Act of the said Subsidy, and of all other Articles that I shall be charged with touching the said Act, and according to the intent of the same, and thereupon as near as it may be, or shall come to my knowledg, truly to present and certifie before you the names, sir-names, and the best and uttermost substance and va∣lues, of every of them, as well of Lands, Te∣naments, and other Hereditaments, Possessions, and Profits, as of Goods, Chattells, Debts, and other things chargeable by the said Act, with∣out any concealment, favour, love, affection, dread, fear, or malice, near as God will give me grace; So help me God, and the holy con∣tents of this Book.
The Oath of such as were to present names and best values of the substance of such per∣sons as were to pay relief to the King, An∣no 2 & 3 Edw. 6. Cap. 36. J Shall truly enquire, with my fellows that shall be charged with me, of the Hundred, Wapentake, Ward, Town, or other place of the best and most value of the substance of every person dwelling and abiding within the limits of the places, that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other which shall have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with any sum of mo∣ney by this Act, of this said relief, and of all other Articles that I shall be charged with touching the said Act, and according to the in∣tent of the same, and thereupon as near as it may, or shall come to my knowledg, not on∣ly truly to present and certifie before you, the names, sir-names, additions, and the best and uttermost substance and values of every of them, of their Goods, Chattels, Debts, and other things chargeable by the said Act, and how many Strangers, Denizons, or not Denizons, being above the age of seven years, be resiant and dwelling within the limits of my charge, of what value in Goods, and other things charge∣able to the payment of this relief they have been, and whether they be Housholders, or Servants or otherwise, under the rule and government
parents, without any concealment, favour, love, affection, dread, fear, or malice: So help me God, and the holy contents of this Book. The Oath taken by those that were to pay Relief to the King, Anno 2 & 3 Edw. 6. Cap. 36. I Shall faithfully, truly, and plainly, accord∣ing to my knowledg, shew unto you the Kings Commissioners, and to others by you as∣signed, the best and greatest value of all my goods and chattels, and sums of mony to me owing, according to the grant of this Act of Relief, and truly answer to that I shall be examined of, touching the premises, without coven or deceit; So help me God, and the holy contents of this Book. The Oath to be taken by Parsons, Vicars, or Curates, and others, to declare what num∣ber of Sheep were in their several Parishes, to the end, that the King might be paid his his Relief by the Pooll, Anno 3. & Edw. 6. Cap. 36. YE shall diligently enquire, and justly and truely present and certifie us, the Kings Commissioners, what number of Ewes, We∣thers, and other Shear-sheep there be within
the limits of your charge, whose they be, in what Town or Parish the Owner dwelleth, of what condition or degree he is, and whether for the most part of the year they be kept in several Pastures, or Marshes, or in Commons, or Grounds, commonly used to be Tilled, As ye trust to be saved by the merits of Christs Passion. The Oath of such as were to value Cloaths, to the end, that the King might receive payment of Relief for every Cloath, Anno 2 & 3 Edw. 6. Cap. 36. YE shall faithfully and truly esteem, set the just price and value of all such Cloaths as shall be brought to you to be viewed and praised, as ye shall in your conscience think the same worth in your conscience to be sold when they shall be wrought, and the same shall not suffer to be delivered out of your custody till you have made of the Colour, Kind, and Price thereof an entry, both in the Book of the Clo∣thier, and also of the Alnager, or his Deputy, and set your hands, or Marks, delaring who was the Owner of the Cloath, and the Kind and Price thereof. So help you God, and by this Book.
The Oath of the Surveyor of the Kings Li∣veries, Anno 33 H. 8. Cap. 22. YE shall swear, That ye well and truly serve the King our Soveraign in the Of∣fice of Surveyor of his Graces Liveries, and shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor to the best of your power, wit, and knowledg, and that you shall diligently proceed in all things which may honestly and justly be to the Kings advantage and profit, and to the Augmentati∣on of the right and prerogative of his Graces Crown, and from time to time deliver with speed such as shall have to do before you; And that you shall not take, nor receive of a∣ny person or persons any gift or reward, in any case or matter, depending or to depend in the said Court of the Kings Wards, wherein the Kings Highness shall be Party, by reason where∣of, any prejudice, loss, hindrance, or dis-heri∣son, shall or may grow to the Kings Highness his Heirs or Successors; So help you God and all Saints. The Oath of the Clerk of the Liveries, as in Anno 33 H. 8. Cap. 22. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord in your Office of Clerk of the Liveries, and
truly do and execute, without delay, fraud, or coven, all and every thing and things which you ought to do, by reason of your said Office, according to the form and effect of this present Act: So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the general Surveyor of the Kings Court, called the Court of general Surveyor of the Kings Lands, Anno 23 H. 8. Cap. 39. YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the said Office of the general Surveyor of the Revenues of this Court, called the Court of the general Surveyor of his Graces Lands, and shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power; And that ye shall diligently procure all things which may honest∣ly and justly be to the Kings advantage and pro∣fit, and to the Augmentation of the rights and prerogatives of his Crown, and truly use the Kings Seal appointed for your Office; And also endeavour your self, to the uttermost of your power, to see the King truly answered of all such Rents, Revenues, Issues, and Profits, which shall or may arise or grow in your Office, and from time to time deliver with speed, such as shall have to do before you; And that ye shall not take, or receive of any person, any Gift or Reward, in any cause or matter depending be∣fore you, or wherein the Kings Hghness shall
be Party, whereby any prejudice, hindrance loss, or dis-herison shall grow, or be to the Kings Highness; So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Treasurer of Office or Court of the Kings general Surveyor, Anno 33 H. 8. Cap. 39. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and tru∣ly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, and his people in the Office of Treasurer of his Highness Court of general Surveyor; And ye shall reasonably, and honestly procure the Kings Profit, and do right to all manner of people, poor and rich, in those things which touch your Office and the Kings Treasure; ye shall truly keep and dispend, and true Declaration and accompt thereof shall make from time to time, without any concealment, to and before such person and persons, as shall be named and ap∣pointed by the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors for the same; And further, shall do every thing that of Right appertaineth to your Office: So help you God, and all Saints.
The Oath of the Kings Attourney of the Court of general Surveyer. Anno. 33 H. 8. Cap. 39. YE shall swear. That ye well and truly shall serve the King in all places, for, or con∣cerning any matter or cause that shall concern or touch the possessions and Hereditaments, li∣mited to the survey and governance of this Court, and procure the Kings profit thereof; And ye shall truly counsel the King and the Sur∣veyor and Treasurer of this Court, in all things concerning the same, to the best of your cun∣ning, wit, and power, and with all speed and diligence from time to time at the calling of the said Surveyor and Treasurer, you shall endea∣vour your self, for the hearing and determina∣tion indifferently, of such matters and causes as shall depend before the said Surveyor and Treasurer; And that ye shall not take any gift or reward in any matter or cause depending in the same Court, or elsewhere, wherein the King shall be Party, whereby the Kings Ma∣jesty shall be hurted, hindred, or dis-inherited; And further, do all and every thing that shall appertain to your Office: So help you God, and all Saints.
The Oath of the Master of the Woods of the Court of General Surveyor, Anno, 33 Hen. 8. Cap. 39. YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King our Soveraign Lord, in the Office of Master of the Woods in this Court: And that ye shall make true sale and sales of all Woods, and Under-woods belong∣ing to your Office, according to the authority given unto you by this Act of General Survey∣or, or any other Act or Acts to be made con∣cerning the said General Surveyors for the Kings most advantage, and nothing conceal, but true accompt make of all such sums of mo∣ney received for the same, and other Profits wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged by rea∣son of your said Office: Ye shall make no Pe∣tition, nor ask any Allowance, but such as shall be good, just, true, and reasonable: And ye shall do all and every thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, ac∣cording to the form and effect of this Act. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of the General Surveyor, Anno 33 H. 8. Ca. 39. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office, and shall not take or receive of poor or rich, any gift or
reward, in any matter or cause depending, or to be discussed in the same Court, but such as shall be your ordinary Fees: And ye shall do all and every other thing which shall appertain to your Office. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Receiver of the Court of the General Surveyance, Anno 33. Hen. 8. Cap. 39. YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and nothing con∣ceal, but true accompt make of all such Revenues, Rents, Sums of Money, and other profits where∣with you shall be lawfully charged, by reason of your said Office: You shall make no Petition, nor ask Allowance, but such as shall be good, just, and true and reasonable, and ye shall do all, and every thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, according to the form and effect of this Act. So help you God, and by the contents of this Book. The Oath of the Clerk of the Court of the General Surveyor, Anno 33 Hen. 8. Cap. 39. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of Clerk of the said Court, and truly do and ex∣cute,
all, and every thing and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, accor∣ding to the form and effect of the Act: And ye shall also be attendant unto the said Gene∣ral Surveyor from time to time, as they shall require you. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Messenger of the Court of the General Surveyor, Anno 33 Hen. 8. Cap. 39. YOU will swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of Mes∣senger of this Court, as well in speedy serving all and singular Processes to you, to be delivered without fraud, coven, guile, or deceit: As also making true and speedy Certificate to this Court of the same: And that you well and truly do, and execute all, and every other thing and things which ye ought to do by reason of your said Office. So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of Supremacy, Anno 28 Hen. 8. Cap. 10. IT is Ordained and Enacted by Authority a∣foresaid, That all, and every Ecclesiastical Judge, Ordinary, Chancellor, Commissary, Of∣ficial, Vicar-General, Mayor, Bayliff, Sheriff, Under-Sheriff, Escheator, Alderman, Jurate, Constable, Headborough, Thirdborow, Bur∣sholder,
and every other Lay-Officer and Mi∣nister to be made, created, elected, or admit∣ted within this Realm, or any other the Kings Dominions, of what estate, order, degree, or condition soever he shall be, from, and after the said last day of July, shall before he take upon him such Office, make, take, and receive a Corporal Oath upon the Evangelists, before such person and persons as have, or shall have authority to admit him: That he from hence∣forth shall utterly renounce, refuse, relinquish and forsake the Bishop of Rome, and his autho∣rity, power, and jurisdiction: And that ye shall never consent or agree, that the Bishop of Rome shall practice, exercise, or have any manner of authority, jurisdiction or power within this Realm, or any other the Kings Dominions, but that he shall resist the same at all times to the uttermost of his power: And that from henceforth he shall accept, repute and take the Kings Majesty to be the only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England, and that to his cunning, wit, and uttermost of his pow∣er, without guile, fraud, or other undue mean: He shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the whole effect and contents of all and singu∣lar Acts and Statutes, made, and to be made within this Realm, in derogation, execution, and extinguishment of the Bishop of Rome, and his Authority, and all other Acts and Statutes, made, and to be made in Reformation and cor∣roboration of the Kings Power of Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England: And
this he shall do against all manner of persons, of what estate, dignity, degree, or condition they be, and in no wise do or attempt, nor to his power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or things privily or ap∣partly, to the let, hindrance, damage, or dero∣gation thereof, or of any part thereof, by any manner of means, or of any manner of pre∣tence: And in case any Oath be made, or hath been made to him, by any manner of person or persons, in maintenance, defence, or favour of the Bishop of Rome, or his Authority, Jurisdi∣ction, or power, ye repute the same as vain and adnihillate. So help him God and all Saints, and the Holy Evangelists. The Oath of a Commissioner for Sewers, as is in the Statute, Anno 23 Hen. 8. YE shall swear, That you to your cunning, wit, and power shall truly and indifferent∣ly execute the Authority given by this Commis∣sion of Sewers, without any favour, affection, corruption, dread, or malice, to be born to any manner of person or persons, and as the case shall require, ye shall consent and endeavour your self, for your part, to the best of your knowledg and power, to the making of such wholsome, just, equal, and different Laws, and Ordinances, as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent number of your fellows, being in Commission with you,
for the redress, reformation, and amendment, of all, and every such things as are contained and specified in the said Commission: And the same Laws and Ordinances, to your cunning, wit, and power, cause to be put in due execu∣tion without favour, meed, dread, malice, or affection. So God you help, and all Saints. The Oath of an Ʋnder Sheriff, Bayliff of Franchies, Deputies, and Clerk of every Sheriff, and Ʋnder-Sheriff, Statute, Anno 27 of Queen Eliz. Cap. 12. I. A. B. Shall not use or exercise the Office of Under-Sheriff corruptly, during the time that I shall remain there, neither shall, or will ac∣cept, rejoice, or take by any colour, means, or device whatsoever, or consent to the taking of any manner of fee or reward of any manner of person or persons for the impannelling or returning of any Inquest, Jury, or Tales, in any Court of Record for the Queen, or be∣tween party and party, above two Shillings, or the value thereof, or such Fees as are allowed and appointed for the same by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, but will, according to my power, truly and indifferently with conve∣nient speed, Impannel all Jurors, and return all such Writ or Writs touching the same, as shall appertain to be done by my duty or Office, during the time that I shall remain in the said Office. So help me God, and by the contents of this Book.
It is Ordained, That every Under-Sheriff, Bayliff of Franchizes, Deputy, and Clerk of every Sheriff, and Under-Sheriff, and every other person and persons, which shall have Au∣thority, or take upon him to Impannel or re∣turn any Inquest, Jury or Tales, or intermeddle with execution of Process in any Court of Re∣cord, until he or they have taken the Oath of Supremacy, as it is Ordained in the first year of Queen Elizabeth; together with the Oath abovsaid. The Oath given to the Kings Council and Judges of his Court of Requests, as it is entred in an old Book of Presidents remain∣ing among the Records of that Court, Anno 27 Hen. 6. Fol. 56. YOu shall be faithful and true Counsellor to our Soveraign Lord, Henry by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland, the 7th. and to his Coun∣cil be diligently attendant, and due, and dili∣gent attendance he shall give to the same, and and in every matter touching our said Sove∣raign Lord his Honourable suretie or profit that shall come to your knowledg, or that shall be communed or treated in his Council: Ye shall to the best of your wisdom, give plain and true Counsel, not letting so to do for meed, dread, favour, or affection of any person, of what degree or condition soever he be; the
Kings Council, as long as it is Ordained to be Council, ye shall conceal and keep secret, with∣out disclosing it to any person, though he be of the same Council, if it touch him, and that he may not be made privy there: And if there shall come any thing to your knowledg, that may be hurtful prejudicial, or dishonourable to our said Soveraign Lord: Ye shall let it to the best of your power, and as soon as ye goodly may, shew it to our said Soveraign Lord, or such of his Council as ye shall think will shew it to him; All which premises, and every of them, ye shall well and truly keep and observe. So help you God, and all Saints, and by his Holy Evangelists, by you bodily touched. The Oath which was given by Henry Gar∣net the Jesuit, to Catesby, Piercy, Chri∣stopher Wright, and Thomas Winter, and the rest of the Conspirators in the Pow∣der-Treason, Anno 1605. for secresie, as perseverance and constancy in the execution of their Plots, YOu shall swear, By the Blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose to receive, never to disclose directly nor indirectly, by word or circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep Secret, nor desist from execution thereof, until the rest shall give you leave.
The Oath concerning the Office of a Consta∣ble in the Country, Vide Dalton, Title Warrants. YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Soveraign Lord the King in the Office of a Constable; You shall see, and cause his Majesties Peace to be well and truly kept and preserved according to your pow∣er; You shall Arrest all such persons as in your sight or presence shall ride or go Armed offen∣sively, or shall commit, or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach of his Majesties Peace; You shall do your best endeavour (upon complaint to you made) to apprehend all Fellons, Baretors, and Rioters, or persons Riotous assembled; and if any such Offenders shall make resistance (with force) you shall leave hue and cry, and shall pur∣sue them until they be taken: You shall do your best endeavour, that the Watch in your Town be duly kept, and that hue and cries be duly pursued, according to the Statute of Winchester: And that the Statutes made for the Punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and Night-walkers, and such idle persons coming within your Bounds and Limits be duly put in Execu∣tion: You shall have a watchful eye to such persons as shall maintain or keep any common house or place where any unlawful
Games is, or shall be used; As also, to such as shall frequent or use such places; or shall use or exercise any unlawful Games there, or else∣where, contrary to the Statutes at your Assizes, Sessions, or Leet; You shall present all, and every the offences done, contrary to the Sta∣tutes made, 1. Jacob. 4. Jacob. & 21. Jacob. Regis, to restrain the inordinate hunting and tipling in Innes, Alchouses, and other Victu∣aling-houses, and for repressing of Drunkenness. You shall true representment make of all Blood∣shedding, Affraies, Out-cryes, Rescuous, and other Offences committed or done against the Kings Majesties Peace within your Limits; And you shall have a care for the maintenance of Archery, according to the Statute: You shall well and duly execute all Receipts and Warrants to you directed, from the Justices of this Coun∣ty; And ye shall well and duly, according to your knowledge, power, and ability, do, and execute all other things belonging to the Office of a Constable, so long as you shall con∣tinue in this Office; So help you God. The Oath of a Duke and Earl in Scot∣land, to their King. YOu shall fortifie and defend the true and Christian Religion, and Christs holy Evan∣gel presently preached in this Realm, and shall be loyal and true to our Soveraign Lord the Kings Majesty, and shall defend his Highness
Realm and Lieges from all Aliens and Stran∣gers, at the uttermost of your power; So help you God, and by the Oath that ye have else made. The Oath of a Lord of Parliament in Scotland. YE shall give due and faithful Counsel to our Soveraign Lord the Kings Majesties Weal publiquely in Parliament, as in all other places needful, and secretly accor∣ding to your knowledge, for the preservation of his Highness most noble Person, his Royal Estate, Lieges, and Realm, and Common-weal thereof; And shall never Heil nor conceil any point of Treason, or Crime, Leismajesty, that shall appear to be conspired against his said Royal Person but shall incontinent, with all possible diligence reveal the same; So help you God, and by the Oath that ye have else made. The Oath of a Knight of Scotland. 1. J Shall fortifie and defend the Christian Religion, and Christs holy Evangel pre∣sently preached in this Realm, to the uttermost of my power. 2. I shall be Loyal and true to my Sove∣raign Lord the Kings Majesty, to all Orders
of Chivalry, and to the Noble Office of Arms. 3. I shall fortifie and defend Justice at my power, and that with favour or feed. 4. I shall never flye from my Soveraign Lord the Kings Majesty, nor from his High∣ness Lieutenants, in time of Mellay and Battail. 5. I shall defend my Native Realm from all Alieners and Strangers. 6. I shall defend the just occasion and quar∣rel of all Ladies of Honour, of all true and friendless Widows, of Orphans, and of Maidens of good fame. 7. I shall do diligence wheresoever I hear there is any Murtherers, Traytors, or master∣ful Reavers, that Oppresseth the Kings Lieges, and poor people, to bring them to the Law at my power. 8. I shall maintain and uphold the Noble Estate of Chivalry, with Horse, Harness, and other Knightly Habilliments, and shall help and succour them of the same Order, if they have need. 9. I shall enquire, and seek to have the knowledge and understanding, of all the Arti∣cles and Points contained in the Book of Chi∣valry. All these premises to observe, keep and faithful, I oblige me; So help me God, by my own hand, so help me God, &c.
The Oath of the Mayor of London and Oxford, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall serve well and truly our Soveraign Lord the King, in the Office of Mayoralty in the City of Lon∣don, or (Oxenford,) and the same City, Ye shall surely, and safely, unto the use of our said Sovereign Lord the King of England, and of his Heirs, Kings of England, and the Profit of the King, ye shall do in all things that to you longeth, and the Right of the King, and that that belongeth to the Crown ye shall truely keep; Ye shall not assent unto decrees nor con∣cealment of the Rights, nor of the Franchizes of the King, or of the Crown, be it in Lands Rents, or in Franchizes, or in Suits concealed or withdrawn, you shall put your power to call it again; And if ye may not do it, ye shall tell unto the King, or to those of his Council, of whom ye shall understand for to be certain, that they shall inform the King there∣of; And ye shall truely and right wisely treat the people of your Bayly, and right ye shall do to every person, as well to Stranger as to privy, to poor as to rich, in that that belongeth to you for to do; And that for highness, nor for ri∣ches, for gift, promise, favour, nor hate, ye shall no wrong do to any person, nor to any man ye shall the right let; Ye shall not take
whereby the King may leese, or by which the right may be letted; And also that ye may set good keeping upon the Assize of Bread, Wine Fish, Flesh, Corn, and all other Victuals, and also of Weights and Measures in the said City, doing sad and due execution upon the defaults that there shall be found, according to all the Statutes thereof made not repealed, and that in all things to the Mayor of the said City long∣ing for to do, well and truly you shall have you, and do; So help you God, and holy∣dome, The Oath of the Sub Treasurer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall well and truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, in the room of Un∣der Treasurer of this his Exchequer, and in the Receipt of the same; and well and truly survey and order as well the Receipts of all sums of money, pay'd and to be pay'd to the Kings use in the said Receipt, as the issue of the same; And well and truly behave your self in the same room; So help you God, and all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.
The Oath of the Auditor of the Exchequer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Ex∣chequer. YE shall wear, That ye shall truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, in the Of∣fice of one of the Auditors of this Exchequer, during the time ye shall have the same; And well and truly ye shall intreat, and with all goodly speed ye shall rid such persons as shall be by this Court Assigned to Accompt before you; Ye shall not take of any Person, whereby the Kings Majesty may lose, nor consent to any untruth; And right ye shall do to every Accomptant that shall have to do before you, according to your wit and discretion, and safely and surely keep such Records, Writs, and other Mynuments of this Court as shall be com∣mitted for any time to your custody, without rai∣sing or embezlinng of the same. So God you help, &c. The Oath of the Ingrosser of the great Roll, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Ex∣chequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the Kings Majesty our Sove∣reign Lord, Clerk of the Pipe. in the Office of Ingrosser of the great Roll, otherwise called the Clerk of the Pipe of this Exche∣quer,
and the Office, with all the Rolls, Re∣cords, Accompts, and other Mynuments, be∣ing and remaining in the same, and that here∣after shall be committed to your custody, and pertaining to the same Office; Ye shall safely and surely keep, or do to be kept, to the use of our said Soveraign Lord the King; And ye shall draw, or cause to be drawn out of the Two Remembrancers Offices, with all conveni∣ent speed, all manner of Femes, or other Debts and Duties to be engrossed; And all the said Femes, Debts and Duties, ye shall set forth to be summoned at the next Liberate; And ye shall true entry make of all Awards made by the Court upon any Opposal of any Sheriff, or o∣ther Accomptants, for and concerning any Femes, Debts or other the Kings Duties; And the same Awards ye shall set out in the Scrowles of the Pipes; And also, ye shall well and truly make and discharge, or cause to be made and discharged, all Allowances and dis∣charges the same Term, or the next Vacation, before the first day of the next Term, with∣out any further delay; And ye shall not take of any person or persons, by promise, gift, re∣ward, or otherwise, whereby the King may lose, or be hindred, or his said Femes, Debts, or other duties may be prolonged or detained by any time; or else by the which, the right let to any manner of person and persons: And well and truly, and with all convenient speed, ye shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, all persons of all such things as the Court shall
award, belonging to your said Office; And all this ye shall do, during such time as ye shall be Officer in the said Office, without fraud or guile; So help you God, &c. The Oath of the Chancellor of the Exche∣quer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall serve well and truly the King our Soveraign Lord, in the Office of Chancellor of his Exchequer, and well and truly ye shall do all things, that appertaineth to that Office; And ye shall speed the Kings Business before all other; And ye shall not enseal any Writ of Judgment of any other Place then of the Exchequer, with the Seal of this Place, whiles the Chancery shall be twenty Miles about the place where this Ex∣chequer is abiding; And also, ye shall swear, That if it fortune, that if hereafter, by reason of your Office, to make any Clerks or Mini∣sters to execute any Office or Place within this Court, ye shall make such Clerks or Ministers, as ye will answer for at your peril, and such as shall be sufficient, true, and intendant unto that to them shall appertain, in speed, as well of the Kings Business, as of his People, after the form of the Statute in that behalf, made in the Parli∣ament holden at Westminster the second year of the Reign of King Henry the VI. So help you God, &c.
The Oath of a Baron of the Exchequer, as as it is entred in the Red Book of the Ex∣chequer. YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King our Soveraign Lord, in the Office of Baron of this Exchequer, and lawfully ye shall charge and discharge the peo∣ple that have to accompt before you, and right ye shall do to all people, as well to poor as to rich, and that for Highness for riches, neither for hate, nor for the Estate of any person, for benefit, gift, nor promise of any person that may be made to you, or shall be made to you, ne by Art, nor Engine, the Right of the King, nor none other you shall disturb, ne respite, contrary to the Laws of the Land, and the Kings Debts ye shall not put in respite there where they may goodly be Levyed, and the Kings Business ye shall speed before all other, and that for gift, wages, or benefit, ye shall not conceal the Kings Profit or advantage in advantage to other, nor for your self; And that ye shall not take Fee, neither neither Robe of any person, but of the King only; and ye shall have nothing of any person for to do wrong; or delay the right, or to delude, or delay the people that have to do afore you, but in all that ye may ye shall deli∣ver them; And there where ye may understand wrong, or prejudice, to be done to the King, ye shall put all your power and diligence to
redress it; And if ye may not ye shall tell it to the King, or to those of his Council which may shew it to the King, if ye may not come unto him; And the Kings Counsel ye shall keep in all things; So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Kings Remembrancer in the Exchequer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer, YE shall swear, That you well and truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, in the Office of Remembrancer of his Majesty of this his Exchequer; And the same Office, with all the Rolls, Records, and other Mynuments, now lying and remaining in the same, and that hereafter shall be committed to your custody, and appertaining to the same Office, ye shall safely and surely keep, or do to be kept, to the use of our said Soveraign Lord the Knig, and of his Heirs Kings of England; You shall true Entry make of all Awards, and other things to be entred in the said Office, and that with all convenient speed; You shall not take of any person or persons, by promise, gift, reward, or otherwise, whereby the Kings Majesty may leese or be hindred, or by which the right may be let, to any manner of person or persons, and all other things belonging to the Master of the said Office to do, ye shall well and truly do, without fraud or guile; So help you God, &c.
The Oath of the Clerk of the Pleas in the Exchequer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly intend, that which shall appertain un∣to your Office in speed, as well of the Kings Business, as of his people, and all such rewards as do, or shall concern your Office, you shall safely keep, or cause to be kept; And you shall true Entry make of all Orders, Awards, and other things to be entred into your said Office, and that with all convenient speed; And all other things belonging to the Master of the said Office to do, you shall well and truly do; So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Forreign Opposer of the Exchequer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, in the Office of For∣reign Opposer of this Exchequer, and the Kings Business in the same ye shall speed and dispatch before all other; And you shall faithfuly and truly charge and discharge all Accompts and people that have to do before you, and do all other things appertaining to the said Of∣fice,
and shall well and truly behave your self in the same Office, without undue practice, fraud or concealment, so long as you shall continue in the same Office; So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Comptroller of the Pipe in the Exchequer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly execute the place of the Comptroller of the Pipe in his Majesties Court of Exchequer and shall comptrol the great Roll of the Pipe and the Pipes thereunto belonging; And shall twice in the year (that is to say) in the Term of Saint Hiliary, and the Holy Trinity, year∣ly writ into the Summons of the Pipe, all Femes and Debts contained in the said great Roll, and well and truly behave your self in the said Office of Comptroller of the Pipe, as long as you shall continue in the same Office; So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of the Chamberlains of the Ex∣chequer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, in the Office of one of the Chamberlains of this Ex∣chequer,
and truly enter and ingross as well all manner of Receipts of Money received, and to be received to the Kings use, at the Re∣ceipt of this Exchequer, as the payment of the same; And also, you shall safely and truly keep, as well all Records, being in the Kings Treasury, as all other things, Leagues, Truces, Evidences, and Jewels, and all other things being to the Kings Treasury, and all that hereafter shall be committed to your keeping; And ye shall not assent unto the deliverance of any of the Kings Mony, nor any otherthing being in his Treasury, without sufficient Warrant in that behalf; And ye shall not depute, or put any Clerk or Minister to occupy any place or room under you in this Office, but such as shall be sufficient, true, and intendant unto that that to them shall appertain in speed, as well of the Kings Business, as of his people, after the form of the Statute in that behalf made, in the Par∣liament holden at Westminster, the second year of the Reign of King Henry the sixt; And in these, and all other things concerning your Office, ye shall well and truly have you, and do; So help you God, and all Saints. The Oath of an Escheator, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of the Escheator, in the Town of N. and do the Kings Profit in all that belongeth unto you to do,
by way of your Office, after your wit and your power, and his Rights, and all that belong∣eth to his Crown ye shall truly keep; Ye shall not assent to decrease, neither conceal the Kings Right, nor his Franchizes; And wheresoever that ye have knowledge of the Kings Rights, or of his Crown, be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, that be concealed or withdrawn ye shall do your true pain and diligence to with∣stand it; And if ye may not do it, you shall say it to the King, or some of his Council, such as you know for certain will say it to the King; Ye shall truly, and right wisely, treat the people of your Baylywick, and do right to every man, as well to poor as to rich, in that that belongeth to you to do, by way of your Office; Ye shall do no wrong to any man, nei∣ther for gift, promise, nor hate, neither no mans right ye shall disturb; ye shall take nothing, whereby that right may be disturbed, letted, or delayed; Ye shall truly and right-wisely return and serve all the Kings Writs; Ye shall in your proper person make the extent of Lands after their very value and enquests, to return them as oft as they be taken afore you, and that within a month after they be taken, ye shall take no Bayley into your service, but such as ye will answer for, and ye shall do your Bay∣liffs, to make such Oath as it belongeth to them. Ye shall truly and right wisely yeild accompt at the Kings Exchequer, of all Issues of your said Bayliffwick; Ye shall take your enquests in open places, and that by Indenture after
the effect of the Statute thereof made; As God help you, and his Saints. The Oath of the Deputy Chamberlain of the Exchequer, as it is entred in the Red Book of the Exchequer. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Soveraign Lord, as Deputy unto A.D. one of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer, in the Office of the said Cham∣berlain of this Court, and shall surely joyn all such Tables as any Accomptant or Debtor shall bring unto you to be joyned with the Foyles of the same, being in your charge and custody; And the same Tables so joyned, ye shall deliver over unto the Clerks of the Pipe, or the ingrosser of the great Roll in this Court, and do all other things appertaining to the said Office, so long as ye shall be Officer there; So God you help and his Saints. The Oath to be ministred to all Church∣wardens, and Sidemen, within the Diocess of Salisbury, to present according to Arti∣cles published in Anno. 1616. YOu shall swear, That all affection, fa∣vour, hatred, hope of reward and gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice set aside; You shall upon due consideration of the Articles gi∣ven
you in charge, Present all and every such person within your Parish, as hath committed any offence or fault, or made any default mention∣ed in these or any of those Articles, or which are vehemently suspected or defamed, of any such offence fault, or default, wherein you shall deal uprightly, and according to truth, neither of malice, presenting any contrary to truth, nor of corrupt affection, sparing to present any, and so conceal the truth, having in this action God before your eyes, with an earn∣est zeal to maintain the truth, and to suppress vice; So help you God, and the contents of this Book. The Oath to be ministred to all Church∣wardens within the Diocess of Bristol, in the Visitation to Present according to Arti∣cles published in Anno, 1595. YE shall swear, Calling Almighty God to witness, who seeth into your hearts, and knoweth your very thoughts, That you, and every of you, shall diligently and faithfully perform and execute the Office whereunto he is appointed, and setting apart all malice, ha∣tred, love, fear, or affection, to any person or persons, shall diligently enquire, and truly pre∣sent and discover, all, and every such person or persons within your Parish, either known, commonly reported, or vehemently suspected to have committed any Misdemeanour, Fault,
Default, Crime, Sin, or Offence, mentioned or specified within any the Articles in this Book comprised, or in the same omitted, which coming to your knowledge, are by Ecclesiasti∣cal Authority to be reformed; So help you God, in Christ Jesus. The Protestation. I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest to maintain and-defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate, the true Reformed Pro∣testant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, his Majesties Royal Person, Honour, and Estate; as also the Power and Priviledges of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject and every person that maketh this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavour to bring to condign punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Coun∣sels, Plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this pre∣sent Protestation contained. And further, That I shall in all just and honourable ways endeav∣our to preserve the Union and Peace between
the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and neither for hope, fear, nor other∣respect shall relinquish this Promise, Vow and Protestation. The Vow and Covenant appointed by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parlia∣ment, to be taking by every man, in the Cities of London, Westminister, the Sub∣urbs and Liberties thereof, and throughout the whole Kingdome. I A. B. In humility and reverence of the Divine Majesty, declare my hearty sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this Nation, which have deserved the calamities and judg∣ments that now lye upon it; And my true intention is, by Gods grace to endeavour the amendment of my own wayes; And that I do abhor and detest the said wicked and trea∣cherous Design lately discovered, and that I never gave, nor will give my assent to the execution thereof, but will according to my power and Vocation oppose and resist the same, and all other of the like nature. And in case any o∣ther like Design shall hereafter come to my knowledge, I will make such timely discove∣ry as I shall conceive may best conduce to the preventing thereof. And whereas I do in my conscience believe, That the Forces raised by the Two Houses of Parliament, are raised and con∣tinued for their just Defence, and for the De∣fence
of the true Protestant Religion and Liber∣ties of the Subject, against the Forces raised by the King: I do here in the presence of Al∣mighty God, Declare, Vow, and Covenant, That I will, according to my power and Vo∣cation, assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King without their consent; and will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath, in what they shall do in pursu∣ance thereof, and will not directly or indirect∣ly adhere unto, nor shall willingly assist the Forces raised by the King without the consent of both Houses of Parliament. And this Vow and Covenant I make in the presence of Al∣mighty God, the Searcher of all hearts with a true intention to perform the same, as I shall answer at the great Day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. The Solemn League and Covenant. 1. THat we shall sincerely, really and con∣stantly, through the grace of God, en∣deavour in our several places and callings the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrin, Worship, Dis∣ciplin and Government against our common Enemies; the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrin Worship, Disciplin and Government according the the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches; And shall endeavour to bring the Churches of God in the Three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church-government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing: That we and our Posterity after us may as Brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us. 2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavour the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is Church-Govern∣ment by Arch-Bishops, Bishops, their Chan∣cellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Arch-deacons, and all other Eccle∣siastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresie, Schism, Prophaness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrin, and the power of godliness; lest we pertake in other mens sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the Three Kingdoms. 3. We shall with the some sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our several Vocations en∣deavour with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Priviledges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings Maje∣sties Person and Authority, in the preservati∣on and defence of the true Religion and Li∣berties of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our loyal∣ty; And that we have no thoughts or inten∣tions to diminish his Majesties just power and great ness.
4. We shall also with all faithfulness endea∣vour the discovery of all such as have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instru∣ments, by hindring the Reformation of Reli∣gion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or Parties amongst the people contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to publick Tryal, and receive condign punishment as the degree of their Offences shall require or deserve, or the Supream Judicatories of both Kingdoms respectively, or others, hav∣ing power from them for that effect, shall udg convenient. 5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied in for∣mer times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted unto us, and hath been lately concluded and settled by both Par∣liaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavour that they may remain conjoyned in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the present Articles. 6. We shall also, according to our places and callings, in this Common Cause of Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist, and defend all those that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, per∣swasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn
from this blessed Union and Conjunction, whe∣ther to make defection to the Contrarypart, or give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this Cause; which so much concern∣eth the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and Honour of the King, but shall all the dayes of our lives zealously and constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever, and what we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed, all which we shall do as in the sight of God. And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof. We profess and declare before God and the world, our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these King∣doms, especially that we have not as we ought valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not laboured for the purity and power thereof, and that we have not endeavour∣ed to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and transgressions, so much abound∣ing amongst us. And our true and unfeigned purpose, desire, and indeavour for our selves and all others under our power and charge, both in publick and in private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to amend our lives and
each one to go before another in the example of a real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Govenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts, with all true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, most humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our de∣sires and proceedings with success, as may be de∣liverance and safety to his people, and encourage∣ment to other Christian Churches, groning un∣der, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to joyn in the same, or like Associati∣on and Covenant to the glory of God, the en∣largement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the Peace and Tranquility of Christian King∣doms and Common-wealths. The Coronation Oath of King Charles the Second. ARch-Bishop: Sir, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your Law∣ful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, the Laws, Customs, and Franchizes, granted to the Clergy by the Glorious King Saint Edward your Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the
true Profession of the Gospel Established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the Ancient Customs of the Realm? King, I grant and Promise to keep them. Arch-Bishop, Sir, will you keep Peace and Godly Agreement (according to your Power) both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy and the People? King, I will keep it. Arch-bishop, Sir will you to your power cause Law, Justice and discretion in mercy and truth to be Executed to your Judgement? King, I will. Arch-bishop, Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs which the Commonalty of this your Kingdome have, and will you defend and uphold them, to the ho∣nour of God, so much as in you lies? King, I grant and Promise so to do. The Form of The Oath to be taking by all Officers of the Excise Office-directed by the Stat. of 12 Car. 2. Cap. 23. & 24. YOu shall swear, to Execute the Office of truly and faithfully without favour or affection, and shall from time to time, true Account make and deliver to such person and persons as his Majesty shall appoint to receive the same; and shall take no Fee, or reward for the Execution of the said Office, from any o∣ther
person then from his Majesty, or those whom his Majesty shall appoint in that behalf. So help you God. By the Stat. of the 13 Car. 2d. Cap. 1. It is (inter alia) Enacted, that all persons, who upon the 24 of December, 1661. shall be Mayors, Aldermen, Recorders, Bayliffes, Town Clerks, Common-Council men, and other persons then bearing any Office or Offices of Magistracy, or places of Trust, or other Imployment relating to, or concerning the Government of the said respective Cities, Corporations, and Burroughs, and Cinque ports, and their members, and other Port Towns shall at any time before the 25. day of March, 1663. when they shall be there∣unto required by the said repective Commissi∣oners, or any three or more of them, take the Oaths of Allegiance vide before fol. 36. and Supremacy vide before fol. 38. and this Oath following. The Oath to be taken by all Officers in Corporations &c. by the Stat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 1. and by all Officers of the Militia, and Soldiers, by the Statute 13 and 14. Car. 2. cap. 3. I A. B. do declare and believe that it is not lawful upon any pretence whatsoever to take Arms against the King; And that I do abhor that Traiter ous position of taking Arms by his
Authority against his person, or against those that are Commissionated by him. So help me God. And also at the same time shall publickly Sub∣scribe before the said Commissioners or any three of them, this following Declaration. Declaration to be Subscribed by all Officers of Corporations by the Statute. 13. Car. 2d. Cap. 1. I A. B. do declare, that I hold that there lies no Obligation upon me or any other per∣son from the Oath Com∣monly called The Solemn League and Covenant vide before fol. 226. And that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and Imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws, and Liberties, of the Kingdome. Declaration of Assent and Consent to the Book of Common-Prayer, to be subscribed by all Parsons, Vicars, and Ministers, by the Statute of 13. and 14. Car. 2d. Cap. 4. I A. B. do hereby declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every thing Contained and prescribed in and by the Book, Intituled, The Book of Common-prayer and Administration of the Sacraments and other rights
and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, printed, as they are to be Sung, or said in Churches, and the form or manner of Making, Ordaining, and Con∣secrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Declaration or acknowledgment, to be subscribed by all persons in holy Orders, and all School∣masters, directed by the Statute of the 13 & 14 Car. 2. Cap. 4. and by all Vestry men by the Statute 14 Car. 2. Cap. 5. I A. B. do declare, that it is not Lawful upon any pretence whatsoever to take Arms against the King. And that I do Abhor that Traiterous position of taking Arms by his autho∣rity against his person, or against those that are Commissioned by him; and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now by Law Established: And I do declare that I do hold there lies no Obligation upon me, or any other person, from the Oath commonly cal∣led the Solemn League and Covenant, to endea∣vor any Change or Alteration of Government, either in Church, or State, and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed up∣on the Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdome.
Note, By the said Satute of 13 & 14 Car. 2. Cap. 4. it is provided, that from and af∣ter the 25th. day of March, 1682. There shall be omitted in the abovementioned Declaration or Acknowledgment so to be Subscribed, these following words, (viz.) And I do declare, That I do hold there lies no Obligation on me, or on any other Person from the Oath, commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavour any Change or Alteration of Government either in Church or State; And that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and Imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. The Oath to be taken by the Warden and Assistants of the Worsted Weavers, or Mast∣er-Weavers in the City of Norwich, and County of Norfolk, directed by the Statute of the 13 & 14 Car. 2. Cap. 5. I A. B. do swear, That I will well, faith∣fully, and honestly perform, and discharge the Office of Warden of the said Trade of Wor∣sted-Weavers, according to the best of my skill, power, and knowledge, So help me God. The like Oath taking by the Assistants, muta∣tis mutandis.
The Oath to be taken by the Master, War∣dens, and Assistants of the Manufacture of Broad Woollen Cloath in the West Riding, in the County of York, directed by the Statute of the 13 & 14 Car. 2. Cap. 32. I A. B. do swear, That I will well, faith∣fully, and honestly, perform, and discharge the Office of Master of the Corporation of the Free Cloathiers according to the best of my skill, power and knowledge. So help me God. The like for the Wardens and Assistants, mu∣tatis mutandis. The Oath of the Searchers of Broad Woollen Cloath within the said West Riding direct∣ed by the same Statute. J A. B. do swear, That I shall well, and truly Execute the Office of Searcher of Broad-Woollen-Cloath within the West-Riding of the County of York, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and according to the best of my skill and knowledge. So help me God.
The Oath to be taken by the Commissioners appointed for settling the draining the Fens called Bedford Level, directed by the Sta∣tute of the 15 Car. 2. Cap. 17. I A. B. Shall, and will without favour or af∣fection, hatred or malice, truly and imparti∣ally, according to the best of my skill and knowledge, execute, and perform, all and every the Powers and Authorities Established by this Act of Parliament. So help me God. The Oath of the Surveyors of the same Le∣vel directed to be taken by the Statute of the 20 Car. 2. Cap. 8. I A. B. do swear, That according to the best of my skill and knowledge, I will faithfully discharge the trust of Surveying, Sorting, Dividing, and Rateing of Eighty three Thousand Acres parcel of ninety five Thou∣sand Acres within the great Level of the Fens, known by the name of Bedford-Level, according to seven degrees or more, as I upon my Oath shall think most equal. So help me God.
The Form of the Oath required by the Sta∣tute of the 17 Car. 2. Cap. 2. to be taken by all Ministers dwelling within Five Miles of a Corporation, who have not subscribed the Assent and Consent, and the Declaration mentioned in the Statute of the 13 & 14 Car. 2. Cap. 4. before specified. I A. B. do swear, That it is not Lawful up∣on any pretence whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, And that I do abhor that Traiterous position of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are Commissioned by him, in pursuance of such Commissions; And that I will not at any time endeavour any alteration of Government either in Church or State. So help me God. The Form of the Oath to be taken by the President, Warden, and Assistants of the Kiderminster-Weavers, directed by the Statute of the 22 & 23 Car. 2. Cap. 8. I A. B. do swear, That I will well, faithful∣ly, and honestly perform and discharge the Office of President, or Warden, or Assistant—mutatis mutandis—of the Trade of Cleathiers and Stuff Weavers within the Burrough and Parish of Kidderminster according to the best of my skill, power, and knowledge. So help me God.
The Form of The Oath to be taken by poor Prisoners, not worth 10. l. directed by the Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Cap. 20. I A. B. do upon my Corporal Oath, Solem∣ly profess and declare before Almighty God, that I have not any Estate real or personal in possession, reversion, or remainder of the value of ten pounds in the whole, or sufficient to pay the Debt, or Damages, for which I am im∣prisoned, And that I have not directly or In∣directly, sold, Leased, or otherwise conveyed disposed of or intrusted all, or any part of my Estate, thereby to secure the same, to receive or expect any profit, or Advantage thereof, or defraud, or deceive any Creditor, or Creditors whatsoever, to whom I stand Indebted. The Test or Declaration to be Subscrib∣ed by all Persons that shall bear any Offices, or places of Trust directed by the Act made for preventing dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants, 25 Car. 2. Cap. 2. When the persons concerned in this Act shall take the aforesaid Oaths of see fol. 38 Supremacy and see foll. 36. Allegiance they shall likewise make and Subscribe this Declarati∣on following viz.
J A. B. do declare, That I do believe that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at or after the Consecra∣tion thereof by any person whatsoever. The Form of the Declaration directed by the Stat. 30. Car. 2. Cap. 1. to be subscrib∣ed by all Peers or Members of the House of Lords, and Members of the House of Com∣mons, before they can vote in either of the said Houses. Note, They are first to take the Oath of Al∣legiance, and Supremacy, and then make and Subscribe the following Declaration, viz. I A. B. do Solemnly, and Sincerely in the presence of God, profess, testifie, and declare That I do believe, that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine, into the Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ, at or after the Consecra∣tion thereof, by any person whatsoever: And that the Invocation, or Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious, and Idolatrous. And I do Solemnly in the presence of God profess, testifie, and Declare, that I do, make this De∣claration
and every part thereof in the plain and Ordinary Sense of the words read unto me, as they are Commonly understood by Eng∣lish Protestants, without any Evasion, Equivo∣cation, or mental Reservation, whatsoever, and without any Dispensation already granted me for this purpose, by the Pope, or any other Authority or person whatsoever, or without any hope of any such Dispensation from any person or Authority whatsoever, or without thinking that I am or can be acquited before God, or Man, or absolved of this Declaration or any part thereof, altho the Pope or any o∣ther person or persons or power whatsoever should dispence with or Annul the same, or declare that it was Null, and void from the beginning: The Oath of the Recorder. YE shall swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Soveraign Lord the King of England, and to his Heirs and lawful Successors, and to the City of London in the Office of Re∣corder, and Franchizes and Customs of the same City within the City and without, after your power ye shall maintain, and the Counsel of the said City ye shall not discover which should turn or be to the hurt of the same City; Also ye shall well and continually, keep and rule the Kings Majesties Courts, in the Chamber, and in the Hustings, after the Custome of this City, and
ye shall not let for gift, ne for favour, for promise, ne for hate, but Law and right ye shall do to all manner of people as well to Poor as Rich, Denizens and Strangers, That before you shall plead in Hustings pleas, and other and all manner of pleas, that before you shall be pleaded ye shall well and truly record, and your diligence ye shall do to see the said plea be well and lawfully enrolled. Also right shall none let, neither no Judgments tarry without Cause reasonable; And if ye know where the profit or the right of the City, be it in Lands, or Rents, is with-drawn or concealed ye shall shew it to the Mayor, and to the Aldermen for the Salvation of the right of the City, and rea∣dy ye shall be to come at the warning of the Mayor and Sheriffs, or their Ministers for good and wise Counsel to give, and to ride and go with them at all mes when need shall be to maintain the State of this City, Also ye shall attend to save, and maintain the Right of Or∣phans after the Laws and Usages of this City. Also ye shall Swear, that you shall take no mo∣ny, reward, nor gift, wittingly of any person for any matter moved and hanging before the Mayor, Aldermen, or Sheriffs, or before the Mayor of this City of London, for the time be∣ing, Also ye shall take no manner of money nor other reward, for any matter, or cause mov∣ed or hanging in any Court of this City where∣in by reason of your Office, you shall have any Authority or power, except only the Fees to your Office, of Old time due, used, and ac∣customed:
Also ye shall bear all manner of Taxes and all other charges to you to be levied with∣in this City during your Office, like as Citizens, of this City shall do for their part, and thus ye shall do. As God you help. The Oath of the Common-Council men with∣in the City of London of Old time used and accustomed. YE shall swear, That ye shall be true to our Soveraign Lord the King, That now is, and to his Heirs and lawful Successors, and readily come when ye be summoned to the Com∣mon Council of this City, but if ye be rea∣sonably Excused; And good and true Counsel ye shall give in all things touching the Common∣weal of this City, after your wit and cunning: ANd that for favour of any man ye shall maintain no singular profit against the Common profit of this City: And after that ye be come to the Common-Council, ye shall not from thence depart till the Common-Council be ended, without reasonable cause be, else by the Mayors License: And also that all secret things that be spoken, or said in the Common-Council, the which ought to be kept Secret ye shall in no wise disclose. As God you help.
The Oath of the Attorneys of the Sheriffs Courts, London. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and Law∣fully do your Office of Attorny, and well and Lawfully Examine your Client and their Quarrel without Champerty, and without pro∣cureing of any Juries, or any Enquest embracing; And that ye shall change no quarrel out of his nature after your understanding, Also ye shall plead, Ne Ley, ne suffer to be pleaded, or Ley∣ed by your assent no forreign Release, acquit∣tance, payment, Arbitration, plain account what∣soever it be to put the Court out of its Ju∣risdiction, nor none other matter, but it be such as ye may find rightful and true by the Infor∣mation of your Client, whose Information and saying upon your Oath, and Conscience ye shall think to the true. And ye shall not Inform ne Enforce any man to sue falsely against any person by false or forged Action. Ready ye shall be at all times to come and attend at the warning of the Mayor and of the Sheriffs of the said City, unless ye be letted about the business of this City, or for some other reasonable cause. The Franchizes, Laws, and Ordinances, of this City you shall keep, and do to be kept to your power. And that well and lawfully ye shall do all things that to the Office of Attorney pertaineth to do. As God help you.
The Oath of the Constables within the City of London. YE shall swear, That ye shall keep the peace of our Soveraign Lord the King well and Lawfully after your power: And ye shall Arrest all them that make contest, Riot, Debate, or Affray, in Breaking of the said Peace, and lead them to the House or Compter of one of the Sheriffs: And if ye be withstood by strength of Misdoers, ye shall rear on them an Outery, and pursue them from Street to Street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be arrested: And ye shall search at all times, when ye be required by the Scavengers, or Beadles, the Common Noysance of your Ward: And the Beadle and Raker ye shall help to rear and gather in their Sallary and Quarterage, if ye be thereunto by them required. And if any thing be done within your Ward, against the Ordinance of this City, such defaults as ye shall find there done, ye shall then present to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, And if ye be letted by any person or persons, that ye may not duely do your Office ye shall cer∣tify the Mayor and Council of the City of the name or names of him, or them, that so let you; ye shall also, swear that during the time that ye shall stand in the Office and occupy the Room of Constable, ye shall once at the least every Month certify and shew to one of the Clerks
of the Mayors Court, and in the same Court as well the names as Sirnames of all Freemen which ye shall know to be deceased within the Month in the Parish wherein ye be inhabited, as also the names and Sirnames of all the Chil∣dron of the said Freemen so deceased, being Orphants of this City: And you shall Enquire of all and every the Offences done contrary to the Statutes made. 1.4. &. 21. Jac. to restrain the Inordinate haunting and tipling in Inns, and Alehouses, and for repressing of Drun∣kenness, and other disorders, and thereof due presentments make, according to the same Sta∣tutes. And thus ye shall not leave to do. As God you help. The Oath of an Appraiser of Goods within the City of London. YOu, and every of you shall swear, That the Appraisement of the Goods and Chat∣tles of A. B. Late Citizen and Mercer of Lon∣don, deceased, shall be a just and true valuation and Appraisement of the same Goods and Chat∣tels according to the best of your Judgments and Skill. So help you God. Aliter YOu, and either of you, shall swear, that the Appraisement you have made of the Goods and Chattels in this Schedle, or Inven∣tory
specified whereunto you have Subscribed your names is a just and true valuation and Appraisment of the same Goods, and Chattels according to the best of your Judgments and skills. So help you God. The Oath of a Garnishee upon a Forraign Attachment in London. YOu shall swear, That at the time of the Attachment made which was the  day of  Last past between the hours of Nine and Ten, in the forenoon of the same day, or at any time since, you had not owed nor did detain, nor yet have owed or do detain from C. in the Bill Original and Attachment afore∣said, the Defendant named, any part of the said Sum of  so as aforesaid, nor any peny thereof in manner and Form as the plaintiff by his Bill Original, and Attachment aforesaid hath Supposed. So help you God. The Oath of an Attorney of the Mayors Court. YOu shall swear, That you shall well and lawfully do your Office of Attorney and well, and lawfully examine your Clients and their quarrells without Champerty, and without procuring of any Juries or any Enquests embra∣cing. And that you shall change no qua,
out of its nature after your understanding, and you shall plead ne ley nor suffer to be pleaded or leyed by your assent no Forreign release, ac∣quittance, payment, Arbitration, plain Accompt whatsoever it be to put the Court out of its Jurisdictions nor none other matter but it be such as you shall find rightful, and true by the Information of your Clients whose Information and saying upon your Oath and Conscience you shall believe to be true, and you shall not in∣form, ne inforce any man to sue falsly against any persons, by false or forged Actions; Atten∣dant ye shall be upon the Mayor of the said City for the time being, and ready ye shall be at all times to come at the warning of the said Mayor, but if ye be letted by the business of the said City or by some other reasonable cause ye shall not deliver any Book or any manner of Copy to any person of any thing that toucheth the Liberty of this City without License and oversight of the Mayor, Recorder, and Town Clerks of this City for the time being, or of two of them, or shew to any person any Book, concerning the Customs of the said City, nor suffer any person to look upon any such Book of Customs at any time saving only the Coun∣cil of this City, but that ye shall keep the same Book secret among your selves, The secrets of this Court ye shall keep, and not disclose any thing there spoken for the Common Weal of the said City that might hurt any person or Brother of the said Court unless it be spoken to his said Brother, or to other which in his
Conscience or discretion he shall think it to be for the Common Weal of this City: And that well and lawfully ye shall do all such things that to the Office of Attorney pertaineth to do: As God you help. The Oath of an Executor. YOu shall swear, That this Writing con∣tains the true last Will of the above named A. B. deceased, as far as you know or believe, and that you will well and truly perform the same by paying first his Debts, and then the Legacies contained in the said Will as far as his Goods, Chattels and Credits will thereunto extend, and the Law charge you: And that you will make a true and perfect Inventory of all the said Goods, Chattels and Credits, as also a just account when thereunto required: So help you God. The Oath of an Administrator. YOu shall swear, That the abovenamed A. B. deceased, died without any Will as far as you know or believe, and that you will well and truly administer all and singular the Goods, Chattels and Credits of the said decea∣sed, and pay his Debts as far as his Goods, Chat∣tels and Credits will thereunto extend, and the Law require you. And that you will make a
true and perfect Inventory of all the said Goods, Chattels and Credits, as also a just account when thereunto required: So help you God. The Oath of a Jury of Women returned to try whether a Woman convicted that pleads her Belly be quick with Child. YOu as fore Matron of this Jury shall swear, That you shall search and try the Prisoner at the Bar, whether she be quick with Child, and thereof a true Verdict shall return: So help you God. The same Oath that A. B. your fore Matron hath taken on her part, you, and every of you shall well and truly observe and keep of your parts: So help you God. The Oath of an Ale-taster within a Leet. YOu shall well and truly execute the Office of Ale-taster within this Leet, you shall see that all Victuals, Bread, and Beer put to sale within this Leet, be sweet and wholsome, and of full weight and measure, and you shall in all other things execute the said Office of Ale-ta∣ster within this Leet, according to the best of your skill and knowledg: So help you God.
The Oath of a Surveyer of the Moors. YOu shall well and truly execute the Office of Surveyor of the Moors within this Man∣nor, you shall see that all Orders and By-laws made for the good Government of the Moors be duly observed, and shall present the Offen∣ders at the next Court that shall be holden for this Mannor, and all other things belonging to that Office you shall well and truly execute according to the best of your skill and know∣ledg: So help you God. The Oath of Leather-Searchers. YOu shall do your best and utmost endeavour to see and try all such Leather as shall be brought to this Town to be sold, and such as you shall find to be sufficiently Tanned and dressed, you shall mark and seal according to the Statute for that purpose appointed, and such as you shall find sold or bought, or offered to be sold not sufficiently Tanned and dressed, you shall seize and retain in your hands until the same may be examined and tried by six skilful persons upon their Oaths, according to the Statute in that Case made and provided. You shall also keep a Book, and therein tru∣ly Register all such Bargains and Sales as shall be made of Leather, Hides or Skins, during the times of Fairs or Markets within this Town, to∣gether
with the prizes thereof, and the names and dwellings of the said Buyers and Sellers be∣ing thereunto required by either of them, take∣ing for your pains therein such allowances as by the Statute is appointed. And you shall in all other things appertain∣ing to the said Office well and truely behave your self to the best of your Skill, and know∣ledge. So help you God. The Oath to be Administred to any that prosecute the peace against any Delinquent. THe peace which you require against A. B. is not out of any ill will, or Malice which you bear to him but that you stand in fear of your Life, or some other bodily hurt to be done by him unto you, or by some other person by his procurement. So help you God. The Oath of a Jury upon Traverse YOu shall well and truely try this Issue of Traverse between our Soveraign Lord the King and A. B. whom you have in Charge according to your Evidence. So help you God. The Oath of Tales de Circumstantibus. YOu shall well and truely try the Issue of this Nisi priùs between the parties accord∣ing to your Evidence. So help you God.
The Oath of the Lord Mayor of London. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and law∣fully serve the Kings Majesty in the Office of Mayoralty in the City of London, and the same City ye shall surely and safely keep to the behoof of his Highness, his Heirs, and law∣ful Successors, and the Profit of the King ye shall do; In all things that to you belongeth, and the Right of the King that to the Crown appertaineth in the same City of London, law∣fully ye shall keep. Ye shall not consent to the decrease, ne concealment of the Rights, ne of the Franchises of the King; and where ye shall know the Rights of the King or of the Crown be it in Lands, or in Rents, Franchises, or Suits concealed or withdrawn, to your Power ye shall do to repeal it; and if you may not, ye shall say it to the King, or to them of his Council, that you were will say it to the King. Also lawfully and rightfully ye shall intreat the peo∣ple of your Bailwick, and Right shall ye do to every one, as well to Strangers as others, to Poor, as to Rich, in that belongeth you to do, and that for Highness, ne for Riches, for Gift, ne for Behest, for favour, ne for Hate, wrong shall ye do to no Man, ne nothing shall ye take by which the King shall leese, or Right be dis∣turbed or letted; and good Assise shall ye set upon Bread, [Wine] Ale, Fish, Flesh, Corn, and all others Victuals; Weights and Measures
in the same City, ye shall do to be kept, and due Execution do upon the Defaults that there∣of shall be found according to all the Statutes thereof made, not repealed, and in all other things that to a Mayor of the City of London, belongeth to do, well and lawfully ye shall do and behave you. As God you help. The Oath of an Alderman in London. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and lawfully serve our Soveraign Lord the King in the City of London, in the Office of Alder∣man, in the Ward of N—wherein ye shall be chosen Alderman, and every other Ward whereof ye shall be chosen Alderman hereafter, and lawfully ye shall entreat the People of the same Ward of such things as to them apper∣taineth to do, for keeping of the City, and for maintaining of the Peace in the same; and the Laws and Franchises of this City, ye shall keep and maintain, within the City and without, after your wit and power; and attendant ye shall be to maintain the right of Orphans af∣ter the Laws and Usages of the same City; and ready ye shall be to come at the Summons, and Warning of the Mayor and Ministers of this City for the time being, to speed the Assises, Pleas, and Judgments of the Hustings, and o∣ther needs of this City, if you be not let by the needs of the King, or by some other reaso∣nable Cause; and good and lawful Counsel ye
shall give for such things as touch the common Profit of the City; and ye shall sell no manner Victual by retail, as Bread, Ale, Wine, Flesh, and Fish, by your Apprentice, Allowes, Servants, ne by any other way, ne Profit shall ye none take of any such manner Victual so sold dur∣ing your Office. The Secrets of this Court ye shall keep, and not disclose any thing here spo∣ken for the Common wealth of this City, or that might hurt any Person, or Brother of this said Court, unless it be spoken to your Brother or to any other, which in your Conscience and Discretion ye shall think to be for the Com∣mon-wealth of this City; and well and law∣fully ye shall behave you in the said Office, and in all other things touching the said City. As God you help. The Oath of the Sheriff of London. YE shall swear, That ye shall be good and true unto our Soveraign Lord the King of England, and unto his Heirs and Successors, and the Franchise of the City of London within and without ye shall save and maintain to your pow∣er; and ye shall well and lawfully keep the Shires of London, and Middlesex, and the Offices that to the same Shires appertain to be done well and lawfully ye shall do after your wit and power; and Right ye shall do as well to poor, as rich, and good Custom you shall none break, ne evil Customs arrere; and the Assise of Bread,
Ale, and all other Victuals within the Franchise of this City, and without, well and lawfully ye shall keep, and do to be kept; and the Judg∣ments and Executions of your Court, ye shall not tarry without cause reasonable; ne Right shall you none disturb. The Writs that to you come touching the State and Franchise of this City, you shall not return till you have shew∣ed them to the Mayor and the Council of this City for the time being, and of them have Advisement; and ready you shall be at reaso∣nable warning of the Mayor, for keeping of the Peace, and maintaining the State of this City; and all other things that longen to your Office and the keeping of the said Shires, lawfully you shall do, by you and yours, and the City you shall keep from harm after your Power, and the Shire of Middlesex; ne the Goal of Newgate you shall not lett to farm. As God you help. ADDITION. Ye shall also swear, That ye shall freely give all such Rooms and Offices of Serjeants and Yeomen as shall happen to become void dur∣ing the time ye shall remain in the Office of Shrievalty, to such apt and able Person or Per∣sons as shall be by you nominated to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and by them admitted, without any Mony or other Reward to be had, taken, or hoped for in respect there∣of,
according to the Act of Common Council made and provided in that behalf, the nine and twentieth day of April, in the six and twentieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, &c. As God you help. The Oath of the Common Clerk, or Town Clerk of London. YE shall swear, That you shall be good and true to our Soveraign Lord the King and to his Heirs and lawful Successors; and the City of London, and the Liberties and Fran∣chises of the same, to your power ye shall main∣tain and defend; and the Counsel of the said City ye shall keep, and the Harm of the same ye shall not know, but ye shall open it unto the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City for the time being; and attendant ye shall be upon the Mayor of the said City for the time be∣ing; and ready ye shall be at all times to come at the warning of the said Mayor, but if you be letted about the business of this City, or by some other reasonable cause. Also resiant and dwelling ye shall be within the City during your Office, and all Pleas of Hustings, and all o∣ther Pleas and Records that to you belongeth to enter, ye shall truly enrol and enter; and all things that cometh to your keeping as well Re∣cords as other things of the City, ye shall do your diligence safely to keep; ye shall shew, ne deliver no Rcord, nor other Mynument of the
City, whereby the City might be hurt, nor no Record that toucheth the Right of any Per∣son, ye shall hide, conceal, ne deny; and good Counsel after your Wit and Power, ye shall give in all things touching the Weal of this City. Also ye shall keep no Clerk under you, but such as shall be able and admitted by the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City for the time being, and sworn before the said Mayor and Aldermen; nor any such Clerk remove without the Assent of the said Mayor and Al∣dermen. Also ye shall swear, That you shall take no Money, Reward, nor Gift of any Person for any matter to be moved, or the which shall hang before the Mayor, Aldermen, or Sheriffs, or before the Mayor of this City of London, for the time being. Also ye shall take no manner of Money, nor other Reward for any Matter or Cause which shall be mov∣ed, or hang in any Court of this City, wherein by reason of your Office, ye shall have any Authority or power, except only the Fees to your Office of Old times due, used and ac∣customed. Also ye shall bear and pay all manner Taxes, and all others Charges to you to be laid within this City, like as Citizens of the same City shall do for their part during your Office; and in all other things to your Office apper∣taining, well and lawfully ye shall behave you. As God you help.
The Oath of the Common Serjeant within the City of London. YE shall swear, That ye shall well and lawfully serve the City of London, in the Office of Common Serjeant; and the Laws usages and Franchise of the same City, ye shall keep and defend, within the City and without after your Wit and Power; and the right of Orphans of this City ye shall pursue, save and maintain; and good and lawful Councils ye shall give in all things touching the common profit of this City; and the Council of the same Ci∣ty ye shall keep; and the common harm of this City ye shall not know, but you shall after your power let it, or give it in knowledge to the Council of this City; and attendant ye shall be on the Mayor, Aldermen and Com∣mons, for causes and needs of this City, at all times when ye shall be required and charged, and in all Places where need is, lawfully to shew and declare, and attendantly pursue for the common profit of this City. Also ye shall swear, That you shall take no Money, Reward, nor Gift of any Person for any Mat∣ter to be moved, the which shall hang before the Mayor, Aldermen or Sheriffs, or before the Mayor of the City of London for the time be∣ing. Also ye shall take no manner of Money nor other Reward for any Matter or Cause which shall be moved or hung in any Court
of this City, wherein by reason of your Office you shall have any Authority or power, except only the Fees to your Office, of old time due, used and accustomed. Also ye shall bear and pay all manner of Taxes, and all other Charges to you to be layed within this City, like as Citizens of the same City shall do for their part, during your Office. As God you help. The Coronation Oath of King James the Second. ARch Bishop: Sir, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your Law∣ful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, the Laws, Customs, and Franchizes, granted to the Clergy by the Glorious King Saint Edward your Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel Established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the Ancient Customs of the Realm? King, I grant and Promise to keep them. Arch-Bishop, Sir, will you keep Peace and Godly Agreement (according to your Power) both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy and the People? King, I will keep it. Arch-bishop, Sir will you to your power
cause Law, Justice and discretion in mercy and truth to be Executed to your Judgement? King, I will. Arch-bishop, Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs which the Commonalty of this your Kingdome have, and will you defend and uphold them, to the ho∣nour of God, so much as in you lies? King, I grant and Promise so to do. The Oaths appointed to be taking by Members in Parliament, and others in O∣ffices of Trust, in the Place of the Oaths of Allegeance and Supremacy. Statute An∣no. 1. Willielmi & Mariae. I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true Al∣legeance to their Majesties, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. So help me God, &c. I A. B. do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as Im∣pious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the See of Rome, may be Deposed or Murthered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do Declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, hath, or
ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superi∣ority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. So help me God, &c. The Coronation Oath established per Stat. Primo Gulielmi & Mariae. The Arch-Bishop or Bishop shall say, WIll You solemnly Promise and Swear to Govern the People of this Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereunto belong∣ing, according to the Statutes in Parliament Agreed on, and the Laws and Customs of the same? The King and Queen shall say, I solemnly Promise so to do. Arch-Bishop or Bishop. Will You to Your power cause Law and Justice in Mercy to be Executed in all Your Judgments. King and Queen. I will. Arch-Bishop or Bishop. Will You to the utmost of Your power Main∣tain the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed Reli∣ligion Established by Law? And will You Pre∣serve unto the Bishops and Clergy of this Realm, and to the Churches committed to their Charge, all such Rights and Priviledges as by Law do or shall appertain unto them, or any of them?
King and Queen. All this I Promise to do. After this, the King and Queen laying His and Her Hand upon the Holy Gospels, shall say, King and Queen. The things which I have here before Pro∣mised, I will Perform and Keep. So help me God. Then the King and Queen shall kiss the Book. The Declaration of Fidelity: And Subscripti∣on of a Profession of the Christian Belief to be Subscribed by Dissenters according to the Stat. Primo. Gulielmi & Mariae. I A. B. Do sincerely Promise, and solemnly Declare before God and the World, that I will be True and Faithful to King William and Queen Mary; And I do Solemnly Profess and Declare, that I do from my Heart Abhor, De∣test, and Renounce as Impious and Heretical, that damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the See of Rome, may be Deposed or Murthered by Their Sub∣jects, or any other whatsoever. And I do De∣clare, that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, hath, or ought to have any Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Preeminence
or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. To Subscribe this Profession of their Christian Belief. I A. B. Profess Faith in God the Father, And in Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, the true God, And in the Holy Spirit, one God Blessed for evermore; And do acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration. FINIS.
