I421 27132518 109991
BY THE GENERALL ASSEMBLY OF THE CONFEDERATE CATHOLICKS OF IRELAND. IT is ordered, that any Commander, Captaine or Officer whatsoever, that shall (unlesse thereunto licenced of his or their Commander in Chiefe) refuse or decline the service for the present supply of his Majestie into England, being for the same designed or appointed, shall be for ever hereafter deemed uncapable of any imployment from the publicke, and a man of no repute or esteeme in the kingdome: and shall be further committed to be punished according to the Law of Armes. And all Souldiers now designed, and inlisted under any Command for that expedition, shall not withdraw or run from such their colours upon paine of death. Tertio Martij, 1645. NICHOLAS PLVNCKET. FInding not onely the great care and sense expressed in the order here above (which sufficiently demonstrates how zealous the assembly was to promote his Majesties service, and to preserve the honour of this Nation:) But that also, in prosecu∣tion thereof, the Right Honorable the Supreme Councell, resolved to have the same printed: I asked leave in the same paper to subscribe this addition, whereby it may under my hand appeare, that by the providence of Almighty God, there is now sufficient shipping not onely already preparing to carry above six thousand men (whereof five or six of the Ships are well sto∣red with Ammunition and Ordinance) but I also daily expect seven or eight (if not ten) Frigots for a Convoy; the least of them Carrying eighteen peeces of Ordinance, and one Ship of thirty six. And to the further, honour and praise of God Al∣mighties goodnesse and providence, there came yesterday severall letters, that Chester holds out yet gallantly, having beaten their enemy out of their neerest works; and those parts together with it, expects onely the Countenance of this Army to beate the Enemies to King and Religion out of that Countrey: Besides the same letters import that the Marquesse of Mon∣trosse hath gotten a great victory, and hath taken and slaine 400. of their horse, and that also a certaine expectation of an Ar∣my out of France to land in the other parts of England, hath caused the stoppage of men and shipping designed for this king∣dome. And it evidently appeares that the three ships of burthen and strength which are now come into Waterford, occasio∣ned the report that many of the Enemies Ships appeared upon the Coast, threatning Duncanon: the falshood of which Newes makes it cleerely evident, that the great noyse was onely bruited by such who desired to deterre those, whose Gallan∣try transports them to this service, to the end that their pusilanimities might the lesse appeare: But to conclude, the above printed order doth not threaten greater infamy or punishment, then I in his Majesties Name dare in England promise honour and reward: and that if the great expences I have already been at before I came into this kingdome, and the incessant paines I have and doe take in order to the King my Masters service may gaine favour at his hands, it shall be imployed in encoura∣ging, securing, and advancing this Army: Esteeming their reward my owne, which (God willing) hereafter shall more appeare by my actions then I will now set forth by words: And avoiding further prolixity I will onely attest the verity of what is here set downe by subscribing my name, GLAMORGAN. BY THE SVPREME COVNCELL. It is ordered, that the above Order and Declaration, shall be forthwith printed and published. By command of the Councell, R. Bellings. Kilkenny 9. March 1645.
