I658 27134843 109993
¶ By the Lord Lieutenant and Councell. ORMONDE. VPon consideration of the annexed Instrument, whereby it is con∣cluded and accorded that there shall be a further continuation of the Cessation of Armes, and of all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdome, untill the last day of Ianuary, next ensuing the date hereof, at the hour of twelve of the clock of the same day. We the Lord Lieutenant and Councell do by this Proclamation in His Majesties Name, Ratifie, confirme and publish the same, And doe require all His Majesties Subjects whom it may concerne by Sea and by Land to take notice thereof, and eeld all obedience thereunto in all the parts thereof. Given at His Majesties Castle of Dublin, 18. November, 1644. Ri. Bolton. Canc. Roscomon. Ant. Midensis. Cha. Lambart. Fr. Willoughby. GOD SAVE THE KING. WHEREAS Articles of Cessation of Armes were agreed and concluded on at Sigginstowne in the County of Kildare, the fifteenth day of September, in the nineteenth year of His Maiesties Raigne, By and between Vs the Lord Lieutenant by the name of IAMES Marques of Or∣monde, Lieutenant Generall of His Maiesties Armie in the Kingdome of Ireland, For and in the Name of our Gracious Soveraigne Lord CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland, &c. By vertue of His Maiesties Commission bearing date at Dublin, the last day of August, in the said nineteenth year of His Maiesties Ragine, of the one parte, And Donogh Viscount Muskery, and others authorized by His Maiesties Ro∣man Catholicke Subiects then in Armes in the said Kingdome, &c. of the other parte: Which Cessation of Armes was by the said Articles to continue for one whole yeare, begin∣ning the fifteenth of September, one thousand six hundred forty and three, at the houre of twelve of the clock of the said ay. And whereas by His Maiesties Commission under His Great Seale of England, dated the foure and twentieth f Iune last. We the Lord Lieutenant are Authorized to Treat concerning the settling and establishing of a firme and erfect Peace within this Kingdome. And whereas the Lord Lieutenant by vertue of His Maiesties Authority en∣usted with Vs as His Lieutenant Generall, and Generall Governor of this His Kingdome, and by advice of the Councell, and For and in the Name of His Maiesty of the one parte, And the Lord Viscount Muskery, Nicholas Plunket Esq. Sir Robert Talbot Barronet. Dermot ô Bryen, Patrick Darcy, Geffrey Browne and Iohn Dillon, Esquires. Deputed and Authorized on that behalfe by His Maiesties said Subiects now or late in Armes in this Kingdome, of the other parte, did on the fifth day of September last conclude, and accord that there should be a further Cessation of Armes, and of all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdome, untill the first day of December next, at the houre of twelve of the clock of he said day. Now forasmuch as We finde that by reason of the many and manifold preparations necessarily incident o so great a Worke, the said Treaty of Peace cannot be concluded within the said time limitted for the present Cessation of Armes, Namely the first day of December next. We the Lord Lieutenant by vertue of His Maiesties Authority entrusted with Vs as His Lieutenant Generall and Generall Governor of this His Kingdome, and by advice of the Councell, and For, and in the Name of His Maiesty of the one parte, And We the said Lord Viscount Muskery, Alexander mac Donell, and Nicholas Plunket, Esquires, Sir Robert Talbot Barronet. Dermot ô Bryen, Patrick Darcy, Geffrey Brown Iohn Dillon, Esquires. Deputed and authorized in that behalfe by His Maiesties said Subiects now, or late in Armes in this Kingdome of the other parte, Have concluded and accorded, And it is accor∣dingly hereby concluded and accorded that there bee a further continuation of the said Cessation of Armes and of all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdome, untill the last day of Ianuary, next ensuing the date hereof, at the houre of twelve of the clock the same day, upon the like Articles and agreements, to all intents and purposes as are expressed in the said former Articles of Cessation, concluded on at Sigginstowne, on the fifteenth of September, one thousand six hundred forty and three. And as if the said Cessation first agreed had continuance untill the said last day of Ianuary next, at the houre of twelve of the clocke of the same day. In witnesse whereof, the said Lord Lieutenant to that part of this agreement which remaines with the said Lord Viscount Muskery, Alexander mac Donell, Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot ô Bryen, Patrick Darcy, Geffrey Browne, and Iohn Dillon, hath put his hand and seale, and the said Lord Viscount Muskery, Alexander mac Donell, Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot ô Bryen, Patrick Darcy, Geffrey Brown, and Iohn Dillon, to that part of this agreement which remaines with the said Lord Lieutenant, have put their hands and seales the eleaventh day of November, one thousand six hundred forty and foure, and in the twentieth yeare of His Maiesties Raigne. ORMONDE. Jmprinted at DUBLIN by VVILLIAM BLADEN, Printer to the Kings most Excelle Majestie, Anno Dom. 1644.
