I380 18367720 107370
❧ A Declaration of the General Con∣vention of Ireland, expressing their Detestation of the unjust Pro∣ceedings against the late KING, in a pretended High Court of Justice in ENGLAND. WHereas by the contrivances of some self-designing Persons, a sinfull and unexem∣plary force was put upon the Parliament of England in the year 1648. Those persons having cause to despair of the Parliaments compliance with their horrid and destructive Principles, though never so artificially and plausibly held forth: Which single act in it self, though it was a transcendent violation of that Kingdoms Birth∣rights, yet it seemed too cheap and vile a Sacrifice to their ambition, except they mingled with it the blood of their and our Lawful Soveraign; In Order whereunto, they presumed to erect a Court, called by themselves A High Court of Justice, where (by an Ugly and Execrable Sentence) they Condemned him to death, which was Executed under all the circumstantial aggravations of Barbarism. Since which time, the People of this Kingdom having not had opportunity of Assembling themselves in Ireland, until the meeting of this General Conven∣tion; And being by the blessing of God now met, We judge it our duty to Declare, and do hereby Declare to the whole World, Our unfained and hearty detestation of, and Our Prote∣station against those most inhumane, unparallel'd and barbarous Proceedings against the late KING; which by true Protestants can be termed no other, Then the foulest Murther, and Highest Assassination that Sacred or Prosane Story hath recorded; being perpetrated by the said persons in a Kingdom where the true Reformed Religion eminently flourisht, and be∣ing contrary to that Solemn League and Covenant which they themselves had taken; and all this countenanced under a pretext of Publick Justice. And We heartily beg of God, that he would silence the Cry of that innocent blood, and not further punish these Nations for the same, by continuing them in Confusions and Unset∣tlements, but in the Riches of his mercy, restore them to Peace upon the sure Foundations of Truth and Righteousness. May I. 1660. ORdered, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published. MAT. BARRY, Clerk of the General Convention of Ireland. Imprinted at Dublin by W. Bladen, and Re-printed at London by John Macock: 1660.
