I802 16149224 104874
royal blazon or coat of arms DIEV ET MON DROIT BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND Council of Ireland. ESSEX. WHEREAS his Majestie by his Gracious Let∣ters, bearing Date the two and twentieth day of September last to us the Lord Lieutenant direct∣ed, taking notice, that the late Commissioners for executing the Acts of settlement & explanation, did not by virtue of their Commission proceed to the adjudication of any the Claims of the transplan∣ted persons in the Province of Connaught, or county of Clare, or to the settlement of anytheir estates or interests, except only the interests of such Prote∣stants, who before the first day of September 1663, purchased Lands in Connaught or Clare from the said transplanted persons, so that the estates of the said transplanted persons which continued in their own hands, and were not within that time pur∣chased by Protestants, remain subject to much doubt & uncertainty, where∣by the Improvements of the said lands are very much hindred, and such of the said transplanted persons, as have been dispossessed of the lands set out unto them, have not yet been reprized for the same, according to his Ma∣jesties Declaration of the thirtieth of November in the year (1660) for the settlement of this Kingdom of Ireland, which hath been since Confirmed by Act of Parliament in this Kingdome; For Remedy whereof his Ma∣jestie hath been Graciously pleased by his said Letters, to authorize us the Lord Lieutenant of this Kingdom, to Cause a Commission to be issued under the great Seal of this Kingdome, directed to such Commissioners, as we the Lord Lieutenant with the advice of the privie Council in this Kingdom, should think fit to nominiate and appoint, authorizing them or any three of them, to be his Majesties Commissioners, to hear and determine the claimes of all transplanted persons in the said Province of Connaught and County of Clare, touching the decrees they had, or the Lands set out to them in Lieu of their former Estates, Except onely such Lands as have been already disposed of, by his Majesties late Commissio∣ners for Executing the Acts of settlement and Explanation, and to state the Quit-rents due to his Majestie out of the said Lands, and to Exammine what Irregularities have been in the setting out and disposal of the said Lands, and to confirm the just part thereof, and to enquire of all Lands forfeited to His Majestie by the said Acts in the said Province and County, and to dispose of all or any such forfeited Lands, as are or shall be found to be in His Majesties disposall, towards the satisfaction and Reprizall of such transplanted Interests, as remaine yet unsatisfied or deficient, and to grant Certificates thereof, in order to the passing Letters Patents
therupon, in such manner, as certificats were granted by the late Commissi∣oners for Executing the said Acts of settlement & Explanation, to any per∣sons whose Claims were adjudged before them, and to obserue such In∣stractions, as we the Lord Lieutenant and Council, shall think fit to give unto them, from time to time, for the better Execution of the said Commissi∣on, & His Majestie by his said Letters hath also authorized us the Lord Lieutenant, without any further warrant, to pass letters Patents under the great Seal of this Kingdom, upon the said certificates, to the persons therein Concerned, according to such Estates, as shall be thereby adjudged to belong to them, in such manner and as fully to all intents and purposes, as Letters Patents have been usually passed upon Certificates of his Ma∣jesties late Commissioners for executing the said Acts of Setlement & expla∣nation, and his Majesties hath also thereby further declared, that the said Commissioners, and all Officers and Ministers to be Employed by them, shall and may receive such fees and allowances to be payd by the Parties whose Claims shall be heard before them, as we the Lord Lieute∣nant and Councill shall think fit to appoint, so as the same do not exceed one Moyety of the several fees allowed to his Majesties late Commissioners, for putting in Execution the said Acts of settlement, and Explanation, and their Officers and Ministers. And we the Lord Lieutenant and Council in pursuance of his Majesties said Letters, having Nominated and appointed Sir Robert Booth Knight, Lord Chief Iustice of his Ma∣jesties Court of Common Pleas, Sir Charles Meredith Knight, Chancel∣lor of his Majesties Court of Exchequer, Thomas Ratcliff Esq Henry Henn Esq one of the Barons of his Majesties Court of Exchequer, and Sir Richard Reynell Knight, one of the Iustices of his Majesties Court of Chiefplace, to be his Majesties Commissioners, for hearing and determi∣ning the Claims of all Transplanted persons in the said Province of Con∣naught and County of Clare, and to execute all other the matters contained in his Majesties said Letters, and a Commission being since past unto them under the great Seal of this Kingdome to that purpose. We have thought fit to give this publique notice thereof to all persons concerned in any of the said Transplanted Lands, and that the said Commissioners will begin to sit pupliquely upon the Execution of the said Commission, on the one and twentieth day of August next, at the place where the late Court of Claimes sate in the Kings Inns, Dublin. And we do hereby require all persons concerned in any of the said Lands, that by themselves or their Agents, they do put in their Claims before the said Commissioners at the Office of their Register in the Kings-Inns, Dublin, before the said one and twentieth day of August next. And that they do with all convenient speed apply them∣selves to the said Commissioners for the hearing and determining of their said Claims, and prosecute the same with effect in such manner and at such time, as by his Majesties said Commissioners shall be directed, whereof publique notice will be given by the said Commissioners, assoon as they shall have agreed upon the order and method of their proceedings. Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 26th day of Iune, one thou∣sand six hundred seventy six. Ja: Armachanus. Art: Granard. Hen: Midensis. R: Coote. Heugh: Glenaully. Rob: Fitz-Gerald. J: Povey. Jo: Bysse. J: Temple. Wm: Gore. Ol: St. George. Hans: Hamilton. Wm: Flower. Ran: Clayton. GOD SAVE THE KING Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Tooke, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majestie; and are to be sold by Joseph Wilde Bookeseller in Castlestreet. 1676.
