J1054 99828790 33221
PIETY, AND POESY. Contracted. By T. J. LONDON, Printed for Robert Wood, 1643.
PIETY, AND POESY. On the Title, that was fixed upon the Cross of our Blessed Saviour: Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. Imploration. ALmighty Maker (on whose Power divine The Seraph and the sacred Cherubin Attend with holy Anthems) gracious be To my Defign; Oh make my Poesie Pure as an Angels Essence, that it may Sing in thy Quire, when my neglected Clay
Becomes a prostrate Ruine, and is burld To its first Earth, by the forgetfull VVorld; Oh! may each Line have a celestial Art, To make the Good prove Constant, Bad Convert: Then in this Line I may declare my Muse, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. This was once Pilat's Title, and his Jest John 19.19 When it was fixt on the diviner Crest Of my Eternal Lord: Oh! I must grudge At thee false Pilat, Couldst thou judge thy Judge? Could thy oblivious Soul so soon expell The apprehension of each Miracle His potent Power performed? if he wou'd Legions of Angels had secur'd his Bloud Matth. 26.53 From thy insulting Tyranny, for hee That was thy Pris'ner, could have captiv'd Thee: Oh! then how durst thy Rebell heart abuse Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. Why (like a just Judge) didst not punish them Who (ith' worst form of malice) Spit on him? Mar. 27.30 Why did thy lewder Laws the Traitor miss That seal'd his Master's Murther with a Kiss? Mar. 14.45 Why did thy black thoughts hold conspiracy To send him to thy long-vow'd Enemy? Luke 23.7 His death, Pilat's and Heroa's hatred ends, When True souls suffer, Impious men are Friends. But why did thy injurious Judgement passe Mar. 27.26 On Jesus clear, for guilty Barrabas?
(A Murtherer) that did (like thee) refuse Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. But (Scriptum est) Eternity decreed Mat. 26.24 That on the Crosse the King of kings must bleed, Condemn'd by Vassals; Pilat, dar'st thou sit Upon the Bench for whom the Bar was sit? Obdurate Judge, could not thy Eyes relent To see the glory of an Innocent Brought to thy guilty Session? where the Jury Instead of Good, and True, are fraught with Fury Such (as without Examination) cry'd, (With voyces lowd) Let him be crucified, His Bloud be upon us: thus they accuse Matth. 27.23 Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews Ye are all guilty, and his bloud will bee On all your Generations: yet agree To call your Verdicts back: No? then go on: They love no Good, dread no Damnation: Me thinks the purple purchase Judas sent Matth. 27.4 Confessing he Betray'd the Innocent Should give your guilty Sentence an affront, His words were True, He took his Death upon't: Though 'twas a desperate one; Could he expect A better End for such a bloudy Act? Like Ends must fall to all who do refuse Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews
All that you can alleadge, is this, He said, Destroy this Temple, and (without Man's aid) You shall perceive (in 3 days space) that then Mat. 26.61 (By my own power) it shall be built agen: Where were your Wisdomes then? could not your wise And learned Rabbins know the Mysteries This Oracle pronounc'd? He did foreshew The Temple of his Bodies overthrow: This Temple you do ruine, and you shou'd Pay for the Sacriledge, your guilty Bloud: Although with Stripes and Scorns still you abuse Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. He bears his Cross, toyls till he's out of breath, John 19.17 Oh! cruel, must he Labour for his Death? But Simon takes his Burthen, and goes on Mark 15.21 Under the Tree must bear Salvation: A Fruit that we should for Souls comfort keep, Although the first Plantation makes me weep: Now was their Journy ended, for they saw The place of Death, Skull-bearing-Golgotha; Mark 15.22 There was the Cross up-reared, and on that, My Lord was hovsted, nail'd, derided at, This Title plac'd upon him, which ensues, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. Joh. 19.19. Now doth he Pray, and his dread Father woo To Pardon, cause they know not what they doe; Luke 23.34 Now doth his Human Nature loudly cry, Eloi Eloi Lamasabacthanie: Mark 15.34
Now he resigns the Ghost, his Spirit flies, Mar. 15.37 Hierusalem is fill'd with Prodigies; The Graves are open'd, the cold Dead come out, Ranging the fatal City round about; Mat. 27.52,53 The Temple rends; how could it stand alone After the Jews remov'd the Corner Stone? Ephes. 2.20 Oh! let this prompt my Soul nere to abuse Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. A Dream of Dooms Day. DReams are the Stories of our Sleep, they be The things that best perswade, Security Is not in beds of softest Down, for they Disturb by Night, like our Designs by Day: Yet there be some who have them in election, To be the Prophets of our next days Action: I shall hold no opinion, but refer Them and their Natures to th' Interpreter: But I'le declare my own; The hour of Night, Nature, and Custome, did at once invite My weary Brain to Rest. I made my Prayer To my Preserver, and did straight prepare To entertain their bounty: Not an hour Had Sleep possess'd me with his passive pow'r, But such a Dream I had, as made me flow In my own Sweat and Tears, a greater woe Nere did engrosse the grieving soul of Man, Since those black days, Egipts ten plagues began.
The Dream. ME thought up to a barren Mountains head, High as ambitious Babel, I was led By my own gentle Genius, there to fee What was nere taught me by Cosmography, The Quarters of the World; Casting my eyes Full in the East, the glorious Sun gan rise Just in my Face, his Beams had so much pow'r, They spoil'd my prospect; yet before an hour Was full expir'd, me thought the Sun began His Declination, it backwards ran, Or else my eys deciev'd me; all the Air Me thought grew thick, as if it did prepare To give the Earth a showre; for I could spie The chanting Birds unto their Nests to flie, Beasts to their Caves, the Night-bird to begin Her dismal Note, as when the Day shuts in: And now the Sun was turn'd to darkness to, Night never was so dark, Day did nere shew So opposetly light, so that my Hand Could scarce declare where my own feet did stand▪ My Senses all were numm'd, and did resign Their Faculties; I wish'd the Moon would shine, That, since I was depriv'd the short Days light, I might receive som solace from the Night: The Moon did rise, and yet no sooner shone In her full Sphear of Glorie, but was gone,
And nothing was left to be understood Where she declined, but an Orb of Bloud. Lord! how I trembled then, so did the Hill Whereon I stood, as if't were Sensible Of this prodigious Change, the Stars did sall As soon as fix, and now, were wandring all: Where were (thought I) th' Astronomers this year, They did not quote this in the Kalender? Now down the Hill I creep'd, purpos'd to see How the great City took this Prodigie: I saw't was full of Lights, ere I was there, I heard the cries of Women, a great fear Possess'd the Poorer sort, and such as those, Whom, Heaven knows, had nought but Lives to lose: The Rich were banquetting, ye might have spyed In such a street a Bridegroom and his Bride Wedded for Lust, and Riches; here agen, A Crew of costly Drunkards, that had been Making one Day of seven; there another, Like cursed Cain, destroying his own Brother: Yonder a Fourth, who, in as great excesse, Wasteth his Soul with an Adulteress: Ere I could turn to such another sight, I did behold in Heaven a strange Light, As if't were burning Brimstone, and, at last, I could perceive it fall like rain, so fast, I thought that Heaven would have dropt, I cry'd All you that will by Faith be Justified, Stir not a foot; this is the Fatal Day, For which our Saviour bids you Watch and Pray.
Great Structures were but Bonfires, Turrets swom In their own Lead, whil'st here poor wretches come Half roasted in the Rain, and Mothers flie Laden with pretty Children, till they die: No Dug can still their crying, and each Kisse The Mother gives, a showre of Sulphur is: Letchers, Insatiate Strumpets, with their shames, As they first met in fire, depart in flames; No flattering Epitaph, or Elegie, Hangs on the Herse of proud Nobility. The Epidemick fires, at once, do fling Into one Grave, a Vassal, and a King: Our Judges leave the Senate, throw away Their reverend Purple, and in Ashes pray To that great Judge of Heaven, in whose Eys Relenting Pitty, and Compunction lies: Husbands embrace their Wives, but ere they part, Both burn to Cindars, Death had never Dart That gave such cruel Torments; some do flie To Rivers to asswage their Misery, But all in vain; for fire hath there more power Than ever water had, the flaming showre Is not to be avoided; all do run, But none know whether, now my Dream is done; For here I wak'd, and glad I was to see 'Twas but a Dream; vet Lord, so gracious be To my request, that this Night's Dream may stay Still in my thoughts, then shall I Watch and Pray; Be ever Penitent with holy Sorrow, For fear thou mak'st my Dream prove true to Mor∣row.
On Lot's Wife looking back to Sodom. COuld not the Angels charge (weak woman) turn Thy longing Eyes from seeing Sodom burn? What Consolation couldst thou think to see In Punishments that were as due to thee? For 'tis without dispute, thy onely Sin Had made thee One, had not thy Husband been His Righteousness preserv'd thee, who went on Without desire to see Confusion Rain on the wretched Citizens, but joy'd That God decreed Thou shouldst not be destroy'd, Nor thy two Daughters, who did likewise flie The flaming Plague, without casting an Eye Towards thc burning Towers, what urg'd thee then Since they went on, so to look back agen? But God whose Mercy would not let his Ire Punish thy Crime, as it did theirs, in fire; With his divine Compunction did consent At once to give thee Death and Monument▪ Where I perceive engraved on thy stone Are lines that tend to Exhortation: Which that by thy Offence, I may take heed, I shall (with sacred application) Read.
The Inscription. IN this Pillar do I lie Buried, where no mortal Eye Ever could my Bones descry. When I saw great Sodom burn To this Pillar I did turn, Where my Body is my Urn. You to whom my Corps I shew Take true warning by my wo, Look not back when God cries Go. They that to ward virtue high If but back they cast an Eye Twice as far do from it flie. Councel then I give to those Which the path to bliste have chose, Turn not back, ye cannot lose. That way let your whole hearts lie, If ye let them backward flie They'll quickly grow as hard as I.
On Eve' tasting the Apple. THe Fruit was amiable to the Eys, 'Twas fit for food, 'twas Good, 'twould make one Wise, The subtil Serpent wanted neither tale, Nor terms of Art, to set the fruit to sale: Me thinks the words th' Almighty did repeat, In saying Of this Tree yee shall not eat, Proposing punishment likewise, that by The tasting this forbidden fruit, ye die, Should have sufficient force in ye to fright The Tempters craft, and your own Appetite: Could ye conceit, a Serpent (made as you By th' will of God) more than your Maker knew? But 'tis in vain my passion thus to vent Gainst you that have receiv'd your punishment, Yet give me leave to grieve; for, since your fall, That fruit hath wrought diseases in us all. On the Children of Israel murmur∣ring at Manna. BLind Israelites, can ye no sooner boast Ye are secur'd from Pharaoh, and the coast Of cruel Egypt, but (that to obtain Their Flesh-pots) ye would be their Slaves again? Hath great Jehovah made his Servants free, And are they angry at their liberty?
Are not your Labours ended? or doth Care Perplex your sences for the next days fare? What is't doth cause your murmur and disquiet? Are ye not fed with Manna? Angels diet: Are ye not sated ev'ry Morn and Even, With food in pearly viols, sent from Heaven? Your two first Parents in the Garden, had No greater store, why will you then be sad? And call down angry Justice, to exclude This plenty from you, for Ingratitude? Are ye not God's Elect? doth he not tell, He will protect his chasen Israel? And yet ye grieve, and murmur at the food He sends ye, which is temperately good, Fit for your Constitutions? and doth bless Your Bodies with it in a Wildernesse: These Acts of wonder, were your Food as base As it is very precious, might breed Grace In your ungratefull souls; you should consent Together to be thankfully Content, For these high Favors, which he nere did shew Since Adams fall, to any but to you: It is content, and thankefulness that makes Course Fare appear as fine as Costly Cakes: Then pray for those two Vertues, you that have More then a usefull plenty, yet still crave, Whilst the profusest Banqueter shall sit T' invent strange Dishes, 'til he wasts his wit, And starves his bodie to. It is not Meat Onely, that makes the body shew repleat;
But 'tis the grace of God that must attend Our Meals in their beginning and their end. That feeds the poor man when his Table's spread With a Course cloth, the Rich man's refus'd bread, And his own dear-got penny-worth, which (eat) He neither doth repine, or wish for meat; This is a life of Peace, Content, and Good, It cherisheth as well the Soul, as bloud; The dis-contented stomacks when they spie A dish they like, oft surfet, or else die; So did the Israelites when Quails were sent, Their plenty did become their punishment: But let me crave, Oh! thou Omnipotent, That canst, and dost allow Food and Content, Thou Saviour, that didst the thousands feed With two poor Fishes, and five loves of Bread; That didst the Tempters rude Request deny, VVhen as thou saidst, Man not by Bread onely Must live, but by the precious words that do Proceed from thee, Grant me those Dishes too: For then I know Want never can controul My repleat Body or inspired soul, Let me with joy thy Benefits embrace And, when thou send'st me Manna, give me Grace.
On Mary Magdalen's coming to the Tomb of our Saviour. WHilest the sad night was dark, and silent, then To th' Sepulcher comes Mary Magdalen, She fears no idle Fancies af the Night, Faith in the deepest Darkness, shines most bright, The Temples rending, nor the Prodigies, That came to grace the Worlds great Sacrifice, Frighted not her, but all alone, to th' Tomb Of her dead Lord is poor Maria come, No Apparition could her terror be An Apparition, 'twas she came to see. On Peter called to be a Fisher of Men. WHen Simon Peter from his Fishers trade By Christ was called, and a Man-fisher made, The World soon scorn'd him, and would not be Like Fish, by Peter, nor by Jesus Bought; Yet there is no great wonder in't, for when caught Have ye known Fish affect the Fisher-men,
On Peter's Imprisonment and Release. IS the Great Shepherd, whom our Saviour call'd To feed his Sheep and Lambs, like them, install'd Now by a wolvish Tyrant? Or did he Envy our Peter's office? and would be Himself in that high place? Badmen (we know) Desire a Good-man's Title, though they shew No virtue of their Calling, Thieves wou'd be Term'd True men, though their Trade be Felony, 'Tis a strange govern'd Kingdom, where they keep Shepherds in hold, and Wolves to feed their Sheep: Must Heavens mighty Keeper now obey The wretched bondage of a Jazlors Key? Must Fetters cling about his sacred Bones? And, for his Guard, four bold Quaternions Of Lift-depriving Souldiers, such as flie All acts that tend not unto Tyranny? What is the Saint accus'd of? Can your Laws Inflict a punishment without a Cause? Was he too Holy for your vitious Time? Too just? or, was his Innocence his Crime? 'Tis a hard case where virtue must intreat For right, when Guilt sits on the Judgement seat: Peter this case is thine; yet (thou dost know) Not thine alone, 'twas our great Masters too, Then since his Neck unto that Yoke did come There is no Majesty, like Martyrdom:
Observe the Sequel: In the dead of Night, VVhen Silence rul'd the sleepy VVorld, and Light. VVas quite extinguish'd, (for the Lord did make It darker sure, for his lov'd Peter's sake) For whose abuse Herod and's impious Men Might well despair of seeing day agen: In prison 'twixt two stout-arm'd Souldiers, there Most sweetly slept our holy Prisoner, Though burthened with his Chains, Nought can immure Rest from that Soul that is from guilt secure: A sudden Light more glorious than the Sun Enter'd the Prison VValls, which first begun To strike and awake Peter, it is held A doubt, whether that Peter first did yield The motion of his Eyes unto the smite This glorious body gave him, or his Light, But now he is commanded to arise, To shake his Bonds off, which he doth, off flies The Locks, and Bolts of Prison-Doors, and He Follows this Light that leads to Liberty: Thus, in one Minute, doth the Jailor leese (Spight of his care) his Pris'ner, and his Fees. Imploration. LOrd fill my Soul with Innocence, and then I care not though I be in Daniels denn, I'th' firy Furnace nought can me assail; Were I lock'd up in Jonah's water Goal;
Just Josephs pit, or Peter's prison, all If I remain in Innocence are small: And, as thou saidst to Peter, say to me Shake of thy Bonds, Ile do't, and Follow thee. On the Penitent Thiefe upon the Cross. 'TWas time to cry Remember, 'twas an hour Fit to invoke thy dying Saviour For an eternal life, yet it is strange To see this blessed, un-expected, Change In thee, a Thief, how couldst thou hope to be Preserv'd by him, that was condemn'd like thee? Or if thou didst conceit his power could give A Life to thee, Why didst not ask to live? As did thy Partner, whose desire was thus, If thou be Christ, save thou thy self and Us: Then might ye hope after your strange Reprieves To rob agen, be more notorious Thieves, Resolve to keep the Passenger in aw, To steal in spight of Conscience, or Law; Why didst thou ask his Kingdom, there's no place Fit for thy Trade, No Mask to hide thy face From the known Traveller; the Wealth he gives Can never be devour'd by Rust, or Thieves: But this was not thy Aim, thy Lord could see; 'Twas not for this thou cri'dst Remember me: For thou wert Fenitent, and from cach Eye True drops did fall to purge thy Felony;
What ever thou didst force from any one Thy Teares distill'd a Restitution; But what did cause all this? sure'twas that Eye That look'd and made forgetful Peter cry After his Third Deniall, whose bles'd Sight Can give a Thief Repentance, blinde men, light; Thence came that Faith, which made thee to believe This Jesus had a Kingdom for to give: That taught thee to obtain it, that did shew How by Repentance thou must thither go; That made thee to cry out undauntly, When thou com'st thither, Lord, Remember me: Let me Sweet Saviour take this Thief's advice, And I shall be with thee in Paradise: No Fagot, Gibbet, Rack, or Ax shall fear me, If on my Crosse, I have a Cure so near me. Charity begins at home. WHen Christ (to save Believers from all evils) Gave his Disciples power to cast out Devils, Judas (who did his Master's life betray) It is suppos'd, had no lesse power than they; And yet we cannot read amongst the many Great Acts they did, that ere he cast out any The Obstacle is found, for Judas fins In the first Rule, where Charity begins, It was not strange, he dis-possessed none From others, that could not first cast out': own:
Learn here ye Teachers, ere ye go about To clear mens Eyes, first take your own beams out: That then those beams of darkness being gon Men may behold in you the Beams oth' Son. On holy Fasting, and on holy hunger. AN holy Fasting may be call'd a Feast, It feeds the fainting Soul, and gives it rest, He that would gain a life for Everlasting By God's account, is onely full with fasting, A holy Hunger doth suppresse all Evil, That kinde of Hunger famisheth the Devil. On our Saviour paying Tribute. IT was decreed the King of Kings must pay Exacted Tribute, to a King of Clay: Caesar must have his Image, and his birth May well exact it, 'tis but Earth to Earth: We are Christs Image, our Souls onely easer, Why should not he have's due as well as Caesar? On Paul's healing the Creeple at Lystra. WHen Christ to Paul his Curing power reveal'd And he at Lystra had a Creeple heal'd, The astonish'd People, with hands heav'd on high, Adore him by the name of Mercury,
The God of Eloquence, and well they might Whose Tongue could make a Creeple walk upright. On the holy Ghost descending like a Dove. WHen John (unwilling cause unworthy) lead Christ into Jordan, ore his glorious head Hovers a Dove, whose bright wings would not cease Till they were spread over the Prince of peace; Well may our Turtles grieve their sad estates, When Doves from Heaven come to seek their Mates. Sapiens Dominabitur Astris. GAve the star light to th'three Wise men from far? No 'twas their Faith gave light unto the star. On the Pharisees requiring of a Sign. YE faithless Pharisees, what would ye more To shew the Coming of our Saviour Then ye have seen? hath not his power, and might, Giv'n Creeples legs? and to the blinde their sight? Restor'd to life, and health, a Corps that dyed, Was shrowded, coffin'd, grav'd, and putrified? Fed many souls, turn'd Water into Wine? Yet (for all this) ye still require a Sign; Our Saviour still, some greater Sign must give; It is a sign (vain men) you'll not believe.
On our Saviour's receiving of Children. EXcept we be converted, and become As little Children we shall have no room In God's eternal Kingdom, and who ere Can be so humble, shall be greatest there, Or he that will receive so sweet a flower Into his bosom, hugs his Saviour: But he that shall offend such little Ones That are believing, better 'twere Mill-stones Were hung about his fatal neck; and he Render'd a prey to the devouring sea: If Children Lord, are acceptable then Make me a Childe, Let me be born agen. On our Saviour's saying, he brought a Sword. OUr Saviour said, he came to bring a Sword Into the World, 'tis true, that was his Word, Lord, strike our hearts with that, and so assure us, That way of wounding is the means to cure us. On Saul's Conversion in his Journey to Damascus. WHen Saul was call'd to be a Convertite, God's glorious presence struck him blinde with light: What strange Enygmaes Heaven can devise, Saul then saw clearest, when he lost his Eyes.
The lustre struck him to the Earth, and he At that rebound rise to Eternity; Look here Ambition, learn this of Saul, The onely way to rise high, is to fall. On the words, Scriptum est. OUr Saviour gives the perfect Revelation To his Disciples of his Death, and Passion, When Wisemen see known Dangers they prevent um; Yet Christ fore-saw his Wrongs, but under-went um: He did expect no quiet, ease, or rest, Untill he had perform'd Quod scriptumest. An Eclogue betwixt Saul, the Witch of Endor, and the Ghost of Samuel. The Introduction. WHen as the proud Philistines did prepare Their Bands in frightfull order to make War Against the Israelites, Saul (their wish'd King) March'd forth, and unto Gilboa did bring All Israel, where (till the sad Events The threatning War had brought) they pitch'd their Tents: But when the Host of the proud Foe appear'd To Saul so infinite, he greatly fear'd; The rather'cause he did no more inherit The Divine Power of a Prophetick Spirit:
For now the Power of God had left him so, That he by Prophecy nor Dream could know His future fate, from him all power went That doth support Kings just, and innocent: And now a fearfull rage usurpeth all His nobler thoughts, he doth begin to call For Wizards, Witches, and his Fate refers No more to Prophets but to Sorcerers: A Woman must be found, whose breast inherits The damn'd Delusions of predictive Spirits: So in my younger observation Of this vile World, I have cast my Eyes upon A fawning Parasite who for some Boon His Patron had to graunt, would beg, fall down Before him for it; which being deny'd, His Humblenesse converts to its old Pride, He grows Malicious, what he did desire Before with Meeknesse, now he'll win with Ire: If Cruelty and Murther can prefer His long-wish'd Ends, he'll be a Murtherer, Or any thing of horror, yet will pray And beg, at first, to ha't the safest way; Though 'tis not Love, or Service, he extends, But Flattery to purchase his own Ends: So Saul's resolv'd, since Heaven denies to tell What he would know, makes his next means to Hell: To Endor goes accompanied by No man; And, with these words, invokes th' Inferual Woman.
Saul and the Witch, Saul. THou learned Mother of mysterious Arts, I come to know what thy deep skill im∣parts By Neeromancie: Thou whose awfull power Can raise winds, thunder, lightnings, canst deflower The Spring of her new Crop: Of thee I crave That thou wilt raise some spirit from the grave, Who may divine unto me, whether Fate Will make me happy, or unfortunate In my next Enterprize. Witch. Strange Man forbear; Whose Craft instructed thee to set a snare For my most wretched Life? Dost thou not know King Saul proclaims himself a mortal foe To our black Colledge? Hath not his Command Ruin'd the great'st Magicians of the Land? Is't not enough, I am confin'd to dwell In the dark building of an unknown Cell, Where I converse with nought, but Batts and Owls, Ravens and night-Crows, who, from dismal holes, I send to sick-mens windows, to declare Death's Embassie, to the offended Ear Of the declining Patient: Wherefore (pray) Seek ye this horrid Mansion, to betray The haplesse Owner? Sau. Woman do not fear, I do not seek thee out, or set a snare To get thy Life; for, finish my intent, As the Lord lives, there is no punishment
Shall be inflicted on thee; I will be A gratefull debtor to thy Art and Thee: Be speedy then. Oh! how I long to hear The Message of my Fate! Wit. Whom shall I rear? Sau. Old Samuel. Wit. 'Tis done. Ye Fiends below, That wait upon our will, one of you goe, Assume the shape of Samuel, and appear, With such a Voice, and Likenesse: or declare The Reason why you cannot; for I fear, Ye dare not do it. Spirit. Dare not? I am here. Wit. Oh! I am lost; the unknown Fates decree Have set a period to my Art and Me. Why didst thou thus thy Royalty obscure, To take me Acting my Designs impure; In th' midst of them for to contrive my fall; So sure my Death is, as thy Name is Saul. Sau. Though thou divin'st me right, yet do not fear, But let me understand, what did appear After'thy Incantations? Wit. You shall know: I saw immortal Gods rise from below, And after them, a Rev'rend aged Man, Out of the Deep (with speedy passage) ran, Lapt in a Mantle, his white gentle Hairs Express'd a Brief of many well-spent years: Within whose Cheeks, bright Innocence did move, His Eys reverted to the Joys above,
(Like holy men in prayer) and now appears To hear your will, and terminate your fears. Samuel, Saul, and the Witch of Endor. Sam. Why from the cold bed of my quiet Grave Am I thus summon'd Saul? what wouldst thou have? Why must thy Incantations call up me From secure sleep? are men in Graves not free? Saul Divinest Spirit of blest Samuel, The Causes that by Necromantick Spell I am induc'd to raise thee from thy Grave Are these, within my restlesse Soul I have A thousand Torments, The Philistims are Prepar'd against me with a dreadfull War And the Almighty who hath stood my Friend In many Battels, given victorious End To all my Actions, and (in Dreams) would shew Whether I should be Conquerour or no, All things so near unto my Wishes brought I knew the Battels End, ere it was Fought, But now no Invocations can desire The all-disposing Power to inspire My Ionging Soul with so much Augury As serves to prophesie my Misery; These are the Causes make me thus return To thee, though sleeping in thy peacefull Urn. Sam. Com'ft thou to me to know thy Enterprize? Can Man make manifest what God denies?
Yet I shall ease thy doubt; and now prepare To hear the fatal passage of thy War, So sad a Sonnet to thy Soul I'le sing, Thou'lt say it is a Curse to be a King; That all his Pomp, Titles, and Dignity, Are glorious Woes, and Royal Misery: As good Kings are call'd Gods that suppresse Evils, So bad Kings (worse than Men) grow worse than De∣vils. But these are exhortations fit for those That have a Crown and People to dispose; Alas! thou'st none, but what adds to thy Crosse, Thou hast it, to be ruin'd with the losse; Thy Diadem, upon thy Head long worn In Majesty, shall from thy front be torn, So shall thy Kingdome from thy power be rent, And given to David as his Tenement; Before the sun hath once his journey gone Unto the West, thou shalt be overthrown By the Philistines, all this shalt thou see, And then thou and thy sons shall be with me. But all these sorrows would have been Delights, Hadst thou against the Curs'd Amalekites Obey'd the Almighties will. But 'tis too late Now to exhort; farewel, attend thy Fate, Sau. Oh! dismal Doom, more than my Soul can bear A thousand Furies in a Band appear, To execute their charge; a Ghost dost doth bring News that doth make a shadow of a King. Oh! wretched Dignity! what is thy end? That men should so their fond Affections bend
To compasse their Frail Glory? half these woes That I have on me, would confound my Foes: Must these mysterious Miseries begin With me, the small'st o'th' Tribe of Benjamin? It could not else be stil'd a perfect Thrall; The highest Riser, hath the lowest fall. Would I had still kept on my weary way, To seek my Fathers Asses, then to stray This Princely path of passions; I had then, As now most curs'd, been happiest among men. Ye Princes, that successefully shall Reign After my haplesse End, with care and pain, Peruse my pitied Story, do not be Too confident of your frail Sov'reignty; If Titularity could safety bring, Why was't not mine (a Prophet and a King?) And (for a Friend) what Mortal can excel The Knowledge of Seraphick Samuel? Who had he liv'd, and I his Counsel taken, I had not (as I am) been thus forsaken: But now I shake thee off, vain World, Farewel; Here lies entomb'd the King of Israel. All you that stand, be wary lest you fall, And when ye think you're sure, Remember Saul. LET US PRAY. AFter the Creed, our holy Pastors say Unto their Congregations Let us pray. The Custome is divine, it argues, they That are Beleevers must not cease to Pray.
Sure those three words contain a charm that may Protect Beleevers, therefore Let us pray. Would we resist temptation, the broad way That leads to black Damnation? Let us pray. Would we have Names and Honors nere decay, But flourish like the Spring-time? Let us pray. Would we live long and happy, have each day Crown'd with a thousand blessings? Let us pray. Would we have Jesus Christ the onely stay Of our sick souls and bodies? Let us pray. Are we with Judas ready to betray Our Friends for fatal treasure? Let us pray. Are we grown proudly wise, will know no way To Heaven but our own? pray Let us pray. Are we so full of wrath, that we could slay Our nearest, dearest Kindred? Let us pray. Have we committed Treason, and no way Is left but desperation? Let us pray. Do we with Dives let poor Laz'rus stay Fasting, while we are Feasting? Let us pray. Lest evil-Angels bear our Souls away, As they did his, to torment, Let us pray. Are we in dismal Dungeons doom'd to stay, 'Till Death allow enlargement? Let us pray. Are we so us'd to swear, that Yea and Nay Are words of no Assertion? Let us pray. Doth Pestilence possess us? lest Delay Consume us in a moment, Let us pray. Are we in wrathfull War, where Tyrants sway The sword of black injustice? Let us pray.
Would we return victorious? win the day From our red Adversaries? Let us pray. Doth Famine vex our Nation, and decay Our (once too pamper'd) bodies? Let us pray. Doth Causeless Care oppresse us, that to day We cast for food to Morrow? Let us pray, Are we despis'd? contemn'd? made to obey The wrath of other Nations? Let us pray. Are we in sicknesse, and would gladly play The sanctifi'd Physitians? Let us pray. Doth Death approach us? lest too long Delay Lose both our Souls and Bodies, Let us pray. Would we be ready for Dooms dreadfull day? Let us (like Ninevites) Fast, Watch, and Pray. Sure sinfull Sodom had been sav'd, had they With one entire consent said, Let us pray. And put those words in practise; what we may Obtain by Faith and Prayer, who can say, But those blest Souls in Heaven? If Despair Poyson the Soul, no Antidote like Prayer. If, in the stead of Disputatious, we These seven years, had put our Piety Into the Act of Prayer, we might have bin Free from those Mischiefs past, or now begin: Prayer is the Key of Heaven, way to quiet, The Lands preservative, the Angels diet: It breaks the rage of Thunder, calms the Ocean, It is the sweetest Issue of Devotion; The Soul put into Language, a Design That (by just claim) doth make Gods Kingdom thine
The Princes Treasury, the Earths increase, The Christian's Sacrifice, the Path to Peace, If we would have more blisse than Men can say, Pens write, or Angels tell us, Let us pray. An Acrostick conteining the Ten COMMANDMENTS. EXOD. XX. Thy God of Gods I am, whose hand Hath Ransom'd thee from Egypt's Land, Oh! then no other Gods implore. I Make no carv'd Statues to adore. II Almighty God speak not in vain. III See that his Sabbaoth thou maintain. IV Jn honor let thy Parents be. V Oppose thy Wrath, from Murther flie. VI Reject Adulteries, faint pleasure. VII Do not steal in any Measure. VIII Abandon all false Witnesse, never love it. IX Nor let thy Soul thy Neighbors Riches covet. X
Intemperance. A Fancy upon VVords. HE that's devoted to the GLASS, The Dice, or a Lascivious LASS, At his own price is made an ASS, He that is greedy of the GRAPE, On Reason doth commit a RAPE, And changeth habit with an APE. The Lover whose Devotion FLYES Up to the Sphere where Beauty LYES, Makes burning-glasses of his EYES. If long he to that IdoI PRAY His Sight, by Loves inflaming RAY, Is lost Rob. Wisdom, For ever and for AY.
Elegiack Poems. An Elegie on the Death of Mr. John Steward. IF a sad Stranger may presume to mourn, And build (in Verse) an Altar ore an Urn, If Tears that com from Heart-instructed Eyes Appear no despicable Sacrifice; If you'll conceive Sorrow can keep her Court In Souls that have the Cause but by Report, Or if the loss of virtue you believe Can make its Lover (though a Stranger) grieve: Admit my Wet Oblation which imparts Something that shews th'effects of mourning Hearts. You who have had no Tears for your own Crimes, And cannot vent a Sigh for these sad Times, Within whose juiccless Eyes was never seen, Drops but proceeding from a tickled Spleen: And you who (valor-harden'd) never cou'd Bestow one stream to see a Sea of Bloud, Though of your Sons, or Brothers; Come to me Ile teach you true grief in this Elegie, Steward is dead, a man whom Truth, and Fame With Virtue, ever shall imbalm his Name;
Crave although Young, who in his heart did prize Learning, and yet not wittier than wise; Religious without Faction, and could be Courteous without the Court Hypocrisie, Just to his Friends, not Hatefull to his Foes, For he had none, though Virtue seldom goes By Envie unattended; He was one In whom appear'd much of Perfection, But Death (the due of Nature) must be paid, Beauty, and Strength must in a Grave be laid: So hasty and unwilling to defer The time, is our great grim, Commissioner; Then let us mourn, let our true Sorrow swim, That he is not with us, or we with him: 'Tis Good to mourn for Good, as to Regard, Or pity, is a kinde of a Reward: His latest precious Breathings, had respect To nothing more than divine Dialect, Which he committed to his mourning Friends; In Exhortations for their better Ends Unlocks his breast, which onely could express Aspiring Prayers, and pious pensiveness; Thus like a Traveller (that will not stray To any talk, but's journey, and his way) Our Peregrine discourseth, till at last As Tapers, near their end give greatest blast, He dies, and all the Duty I can do Is on his Herse to fix a Line or two.
The Epitaph. UNderneath this Marble lies Youth's decay, that Merchants prize, Who trades for what is just and wise. On this Urn let no man laugh, Reader, if thou keep him safe, His Name shall be thy Epitaph. Let no one here presume to Read Unless he be by sorrow lead, To drop a Tear upon the dead. It shall be but lent, for when Thou com'st to th' period of all Men, His Friends shall pay thy Drops agen. On the Death of the most worthily honour'd Mr. John Sidney, who dyed sull of the Small Pox. SIdney is dead, a Man whose name makes furrows In his Friends Cheeks, channel'd with Tears for Sorrows, Within whose Microcosm was combin'd All Ornaments of Body, and of Minde:
In whose good Acts, you might such vollumes see, As did exceed th' extent of Heraldry; Whose well-composed Excellencies, wrought Beyond the largest scope of humane thought. Indeed, within his Life's short little Span, Was all could be contracted in one Man; And He that would write his true Elegie, Must not Court Muses, but Divinity. He's Dead: But Death, I have a Speech, in vain, Directed unto Thee, where I complain Upon thy cruel Office, that could find No way to part his Body and his Mind, But by a fatal ficknesse, that confounds The beautious Patient, with so many wounds; Sure when thou mad'st his Fabrick to shiver, Thou could'st not chuse but empty all thy Quiver, What Man (to all odds open) in the Wars, Dies with such a Solemnity of Scarrs? Yet his great Spirit gives the Reason why, Without that Number, Sidney could not die: And therefore we will Pen it in his Story, What thou intend'st his Ruine, is his Glory; So when the Heavenly Globe I've look'd upon, Have I beheld the Constellation Of Jupiter, and on all parts descri'd Th'illuminated Body stellified, Sprinkled about with Stars, so that you might Behold his Limbs and Hair, powder'd with Light: This wee'l apply, that, though we lose him here, His Soul shall shine in a Caelestial Sphere.
The Epitaph. IN this sacred Urn there lies, Till the last Trump make it rise, A Light that's wanting in the Skies. A Corps inveloped with Stars, Who, though a Stranger to the Wars, Was mark'd with many hundred Scars. Death (at once) spent all his store Of Darts, which this fair Body bore, Though fewer, had kill'd many more. For him our own salt Tears we quaff. Whose Virtues shall preserve him safe Beyond the power of Epitaph. An Elegie on the lamented Death of the virtuous Mis Anne Phillips, Dedicate to her Son and Heir Mr. Edmond Philips. REligious Creature, on thy sacred Herse Let my sad Muse ingrave a weeping Verse In watry Characters, which nere shall dry, Whil'st Men survive to write an Elegy:
Dull Brass, Proud Marble, and Arabian Gold, (Though they tyre Time and Ruine) shall not hold Their aged Letters half so long, as we Shall keep thy living worth in Memory: Obedience was thy study, Truth thy aim, Wisdome thy worship, Fortitude thy fame, Patience thy peace, and all good Eys might see Thou did'st retain Faith, Hope, and Charity. Within the holy treasurie of thy Mind, Were the choise vertues of all Women-kind: Nothing that had affinity with good, But liv'd within thy Spirit or thy Bloud; No costly Marble need on thee be spent, Thy deathlesse Worth is thine own Monument. Thoughts of Life and Death, written npon the occasion, ex tempore. I Never look on Life, but with a loathing, When it is sterril, and conduceth nothing To my Eternal Being; but when I Find it devoted to the Deity, To love my Neighbour, and obey that State Which God hath made next, and immediate, Under his sacred Power; when I have will To Forgive him that doth me greatest ill; To calm my Passions, to content my Friends, And do no Acts that savour of self-ends, Then I love Life; but wanting this, I have No joy, but to exchange it for a Grave.
An Epitaph on the Death of an Organist. WIthin this Earth (a place of low condition) Intomb'd, here lies, an exquisite Musician: Living, he thriv'd by Concord, and agreeing, Looking from all things, to Eternal being: In Equal Rule and Space he lead his life; A constant, honest, Consort to his Wife, Much troubled Musick suffer'd such derision By many, that began Points of Division: He now, without controul, no question, sings Eternal Anthems to the King of Kings. An Epitaph on Himself. NAy, Reade, and spare not, Passenger, My sense is now past feeling, Who to my Grave a Wound did bear Within, past Phisicks healing. But do not (if thou mean to Wed) To read my Story tarry, Least thou Envy me this cold Bed, Rather than live to marry.
For a long strife, with a lewd Wife (Worst of all Ills beside) Made me grow weary of my Life, So I fell sick and died. An Epitaph on a Strumpet, buried at Graves∣end, once at my landing there, to go to Canterbury. WE read, that Sacred Solomon would have No nice distinction 'twixt a Whore and Grave: Since it is so, then now it may be said, That heare a Grave within a Grave is laid: She was no Sextons wife, yet now and than Suspition said, she buried many a Man; But now the Grave is dead, why then (my Friend) The worst is past, Thou'rt Welcome to Graves-end. An Epitaph on my worthy Friend Mr. John Kirk. REader, Within this Dormitory, lies The wet Memento of a Widdows Eys; A Kirk, though not of Scotland, One in whom Loyalty liv'd, and Faction found no room: No Conventicle Christian, but he Died A Kirk of England by the Mothers side. In brief, to let you know what you have lost, Kirk was a Temple of the Holy Ghost. FINIS.
