J1074 12561438 63227
A DISCOURSE OF Natural Bathes, AND Mineral Waters. WHEREIN, The Original of Fountains in general is decla∣red. The nature and difference of Minerals, with Examples of particular Bathes. The Generation of Mine∣rals in the Earth, from whence both the Actual Heat of Bathes, and their Virtues proceed. By what means Mi∣neral Waters are to be discover'd. And lastly, of the Na∣ture, and Uses of Bathes, but especially, of our Bathes at Bathe, in Somerset-shire. By EDW. JORDEN, Doctor in Physick. The Third Edition, revised and enlarged; with some Particulars of the Authors Life. To which is added, An Appendix concerning Bathe, wherein the Antiquity, both of the Bathes and City, is more fully discours'd; with a Brief Account of the Nature, and the Virtues of the Hot Waters there. By THOMAS GUIDOTT, M, B. Imprinted at London, and are to be sold by Thomas Salmon, Bookseller in Bathe. 1669.
Imprimatur Sam. Parker RRmo Do∣mino, ac Dno Gilberto Archi-Ep. Cantuar. a sacris domesticis. Ex aedib. Lambeth. Novemb.7. 1668.
TO THE Right Honourable, FRANCIS Lord COTTINGTON, Baron of Hanworth, Chancellour of the Exchequer, and one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. THE profitable use of Bathes, both for necessity and com∣fort, is such, and so well con∣firmed from all antiquity, as I need not labour to illustrate it more; only it hath been the ill hap of Our Countrey Bathes to lie more obscure then any other throughout Christendome, although they deserve as well as the best, because very few have written any thing of them, and they either have not mentioned, or but slightly passed over the main points concerning their causes and originals; contenting themselves with an emperical use of them. This hath made me, through the instigation also of some of my worthy friends, to attempt some∣what of this kind: which if it give not sa∣tisfaction according to my desire, yet may be a provocation to some others, to perfect that which I have begun. And seeing I do it for the use of my Country, I have neglected
curious ornaments to garnish it withall, but have clad it in a plain Sute of our Country Cloath; without welt or gard: not desiring it should shew it self in forain parts: Mea cymba legat littus. But in this mine undertaking, I find my self exposed to many censures, both concern∣ing some Paradoxical Opinions in Philoso∣phy, which notwithstanding I deliver not gra∣tis, but confirmed with good grounds of rea∣son, and authorities: as also concerning the re∣formation of our Bathes, which do daily suf∣fer many indignities more wayes then I have mentioned, under the tyranny of ignorance, imposture, private respects, wants, factions, disorder, &c. so as they are not able to dis∣play their virtues, and do that good for which God hath sent them to us; and all for want of such good government as other Bathes do enjoy. I blame not our City herein, unto whose care the ordering of these Bathes is committed, the disorders and effects being such as are out of their verge, and neither in their power, nor in their knowledge to redress. For they have sufficiently testified their desire of reforming all such abuses, when they vo∣luntarily did joyn in Petitioning the late King James of blessed memory, to that end: by whose death this Petition also died. And they knew well that it must be a superior power
that must effect it. In these respects I have need of some noble and eminent Patron to pro∣tect both me and my Bathes, whose cause I take upon we to plead, and to advance, according to their due desert: but especially for the Bathes sake, which I desire may flourish to the utmost extent of benefit to the people; and to have all impediments removed out of their way, which may hinder them in the progress of their virtues. This is the cause Sir, why I presume to dedicate these my labours to your Honour, who having observed in forrain parts, the uses and governments of all sorts, and being both by the favour of his Majesty well able, and by your noble disposition well inclined and willing to maintain good or∣der and discipline, will, I doubt not, excuse this boldness, and pardon my presumption. Consider Sir, that this is your native Coun∣trey, which naturally every man doth affect to advance, and these Bathes are the principal Jewels of your Countrey, and able to make it more famous then any other parts of this Kingdom, and in advancing them, to ad∣vance your Name to all posterity. wherefore howsoever my self deserve but small respect from you, yet I beseech you respect the Bathes of your Countrey, and me as a wellwisher unto them.
And as the common opinion of your great worth and abilities, have moved me to this boldness, so the particular favours of your Noble Lady, and the encouragement of your learned Physitian, Doctor Baskervill, mine especial Friend, who hath spurred me on to this work, have removed out of my mind all suspition of misconstruction. But that as mine intent hath been meerly the en∣larging of the knowledge of those points con∣cerning Bathes, and more especially of our Bathes in Somerset-shire; so you will be pleased to accept of this publick invitation by me to do your Countrey good, and your self ho∣nour, which I wish may never be disjoyned. And to me it will be no small encouragement to devote my self and my best endeavours to your service. So I humbly take my leave this 23. Aprilis, 1632. Your Lordships most humble servant, ED. JORDEN.
A Preface TO THE READER. THE ensuing Discourse of Natu∣ral Bathes, and Mineral Waters, of the learned Author, Dr. Jorden, having found so kind an enter∣tainment in the World, as to have pas∣sed the Press twice in a Year; and the Copies of both Impressions at this time so few, as not to answer the Enquiries of persons desirous to peruse them, a third Edition was necessary, the Care of which, together with some Additional Enlargements, being requested of me, I thought it might be a thing acceptable to many, to view the Work, and revive the memory of so worthy a Person. E∣specially in this loose, and quaking age of ours, in which Empericks, and jug∣gling Medicasters do so much abound, that tis almost as hard a matter to meet with a regular and well accomplish'd
Physitian now, as it was in former times for Diogenes to find an honest man. The great occasion of this general abuse of Physick I observe to be, mens beginning usually at the wrong end. For the most supposing the Practice of Physick to be a mere Trade, and Medicines the Ware to furnish themselves withall, make what haste they can to get, though upon Cre∣dit, a Pack of Receits, which they cry up as the most effectual, and Triarian Remedies; and having made a shift to truss up, with the former fardle of Com∣mon Receits, some few Specificks, pre∣sently set up for eminent Physitians, when, to give them their due, they de∣serve nothing less then that Honourable Name, being indeed but Pedlers in the Faculty. For there are, besides the use of Me∣dicines, which in its proper place is not to be neglected; many very significant things to be known and studied by a Phy∣sitian; as, after the praeliminary helps of the Tongues, and Natural Philosophy, the structure and uses of the parts of the body; the virtues of Plants; the compo∣sitions of Medicines; the Nature, Causes, and Signs of Diseases; not to mention the knowledge, at least, if not the practice
of Manual Operations, with some Pyro∣technical Endeavours. All these, vast dominions in themselves, a Son of Art (to make bold with one of their expres∣sions) should in some measure command. So that I have in my thoughts sometimes resembled a Compleat Physitian to the draught of a Man, standing on the two Legs of Anatomy & Herbary, Operating (if need be) with the hands of Chyrurgery, and Pharmacy, having a Chymical Head, and the bulk of his body made up of the Nature, Kind, and Cures of Diseases, which we may not improperly, term a Body of Physick. But these Agytrae, and Quacksalvers, are as far from these . They for the most part, know no other tongue then their Mothers, and are as destitute of Philosophy, as a rational me∣thod. Every Plant to them is All-heal, and every trite Medicine a Panpharmacon. The Body of Man, they think contains no other parts then what they see in a Harselet, and the fire is as dreadfull to them, as to the burnt Child. Yet they will sometimes make bold to use the Lan∣cet, and dextrously wound the Heart through the Arm. In brief, they meddle with what they do not understand, and
are the spots, and stains of the Faculty to which they most injuriously pretend. but to resign those Juglers to their Igno∣rance and Self-Conceit, and those that are willing to die at a cheaper rate to their cruel mercies, and confident Un∣dertakings, I shall give what account I can of the Author of this Book (a man of a temper quite different from the former) & what alterations have been made in it. As to the Author (whom I had not the happiness to know otherwise then by this his Picture, being at the time of his death, and some years after in an incapacity of knowing any thing unless only a know∣ledge of Praexistence; yet) I understand he was a Gentleman of a good Family and being a younger Brother, was by his Father designed for a Profession, for which when he had accomplish'd himself by a convenient Course of Studies in his own Country (I think at Oxford) travel∣led abroad to see the manners and cu∣stoms of the Universities beyond Sea; and having spent some time there, espe∣cially at Padua (where he took his De∣gree of Doctor in Physick) returned home, became an eminently solid and ra∣tional Philosopher and Physitian, and one of that famous and learned Society, The Kings Colledge of Physitians there.
In his Travels, undertaking in the company of some zealous Jesuites, the defence of the Protestant Religion, he so much troubled their patience, that they resolved to terminate that dispute of his in a perpetual Silence, which they had effected, had not his Countryman, one of the number, but more mercifull then the rest, (by awaking him out of his natural sleep, preventing the sleep of death) in∣formed him of their design, to be put in execution that night; whereupon he presently withdrew, and left not only the House, but the Place, and escaped the cruelty of these blood-thirsty Reli∣gioso's; who shortly after his depar∣ture, brake open his door, entred his Chamber, and approached his Bed, with a full resolution to have acted their exe∣crable Tragedy. He had a great natural inclination to Mineral Works, and was at very great Charges about the ordering of Allum, which succeeding not according to ex∣pectation, he was thereby much preju∣diced in his Estate; of which he com∣plains in the 4 page of the following Discourse. He was much respected by King James, who committed the Queen to his Care, when she used to Bathe, and
gave him a Grant of the Profit of his Al∣lum Works, but upon the importunity of a Courtier, as I am informed, after∣wards revoked it; whereupon the Do∣ctor made his application to the King, but could not prevail, though the King séem∣ed to be more then ordinarily sensible of his Condition. Whilst he practised in London there was one Anne Gunter, troubled with such strange and unusual Symptomes, that she was generally thought and reported by all that saw her to be bewitch'd. King James hearing of it sent for her to London, and pretending great pitty to her, told her, he would take care for her relief, in which thing he employed Doctor Jorden, who, upon examination, reported to the King, that he thought it was a Cheat; and tincturing all she took with harmless things, made her believe that she had ta∣ken Physick, by the use of which, she said, she had found great benefit. The Doctor acquainting his Majesty that he had given her nothing of a medicinal na∣ture, but only what did so appear to the Maid, and also, that though when he re∣peated the Lords Prayer, and Creed in English, she was much out of order, yet at the rehearsal of the same in Latine she
was not concern'd, the King was con∣firmed in what he had suspected before, and the Doctor had suggested. Where∣upon the King dealing very plainly with her, and commanding her to discover the Truth unto him, the maid, though at first very unwilling to disclose the Juggle, yet, upon the Kings importunity, and promise to her of making up what damage should accrue from the discovery, confessed all, and his Majesty received from her own mouth this Account. That sometime be∣fore there happened a difference be∣tween a Female Neighbour of her Fa∣thers and himself, and having in his own apprehension, no better way to be aven∣ged of her then this, impiously caused his Daughter, on the receiving of the Sa∣crament, to engage to imitate one be∣witch'd, and ascribe it to that woman, which she did, and acted this part in so exact and wonderfull a manner, that she deceived all the Countrey where she li∣ved, who thought it to be a truth. After Which Confession she was very quiet, & the King giving her a Portion, she was afterwards married, being by this subtle artifice perfectly cured of her mimical Witchery. His Wife was a Gentlewoman of a
Name differing but in one letter from his own, Daughter to one Mr. Jordan, a Wiltshire Gentleman; which came to pass after this manner. The Doctor being on a Journey, benighted on Salisbury Plain, and knowing not which way to ride, happened to meet a Shepherd, of whom he made enquiry what places were near, where he might have enter∣tainment for that night; the Shepherd telling him there was no place near e∣nough for him conveniently to reach in any seasonable time, the Doctor asked, what Gentleman lived therea∣bouts; the Shepherd replyed, there was one Mr. Jordan, not far off, a man of good quality, and a great estate. Presently the Doctor (looking on this as a good Omen) resolved on his house, where he was so kindly entertained, and so well accepted, that Mr. Jordan understanding him to be a Batchelour, bestowed hi Daughter on him, with a considerable Fortune. After he had practised some time in London, he came hither, and setled a Bathe, where living many years, his Con∣versation was so sweet, his Carriage so obliging, & his Life so answerable to the port & dignity of the Faculty he profes∣sed,
that he had the Applause of the Learned, the Respect of the Rich, the Prayers of the Poor, and the Love of all. I hear but of four Children he had that attained to any maturity of age (besides one who perished by that, which by the blessing of God, and the assisting help of proper Remedies, hath prolonged the life of many, the Bath.) Two Sons, and as many Daughters. Edward the elder, being an Officer in the unhappy design of the lsle of Rhee, was there unfortunately slain, making his Colours, he managed, his winding sheet. The younger, Ben∣jamin, or rather Benoni, the Son of his affliction, a man more profuse and extra∣vagant, desiring to try his Fortunes in the world, died in obscurity. Elizabeth his eldest Daughter was married to Mr. Thomas Burford, an Apothecary in Bath, and Mayor of the City; and Mary his youngest Daughter died in her Virgini∣ty, before her Father. The Doctor also living a studious and sedentary life, which might encourage his two grand distempers he laboured under, the Stone and the Gout, in the same year in which this Treatise was printed, to which he imparted his last breath, departed this life, in the great
Climacterical year of his Age 63. and of our Saviours Nativity, 1632. leaving behind him the name of a judicious, ho∣nest, and sober Physitian, and the excel∣lent example of a pious Christian; on whom I should have thought it no trouble to have spent more Ink, could my diligence which was not wanting in this thing, have procured me sufficient infor∣mation. But  the Doctor is dead, and this Child of his survives the rest, which happening to fall into my hands for a review, I could not but use it with all the tenderness and respect, confessedly due to the justly celebrated Off-spring of so deserving a Parent, whom it so very much resembles. And, I hope, as I have here done the Doctor right, so I have not elsewhere done his Discourse any wrong, which I had some intentions at first to enlarge much more, but on second thoughts I judged it more convenient, only to draw up a Table of the Minerals he mentions, with the addi∣tion of some few marginal Annotations, and to subjoyn the greatest part of what I had to adde of mine own, by way of Appendix (though some things there are of a different nature from his design)
Which I intend hereafter, as oppor∣tunity shall serve, to augment and am∣plifie into an History of Bathe. By the performance of which, though I shall not be so bold with some, on a more tri∣vial account, to say, I shall oblige man∣kind; yet I think I may this, that I shall then, in any mans judgement, have done enough, to deserve a Civil Respect, from that is concern'd, supposing it now a sufficient honour to bear up the Train of my Learned Predecessor. T. G.
LIbellum istum DE AQUIS MEDICA∣TIS a Doctissimo JORDA∣NO antiquissimo Collega nostro scriptum multiplic eruditione & novarum subtilitatum varia supel∣lectile refertissimum, legi∣mus, & qui ab omnibus tam Philosophis quam Medicis legatur dignissi∣mum judicavimus. JOHANNES ARGENT Collegii Medicorum Londinensium Praesidem JOHANNES GIFFORD. SIMON BAS KERVILLE. THOMAS RIDGELEY.
In laudem operis. PArve Alacri passu liber, Liber, ibis in orbem; Dentesque spernes lividos. Authores pandit, sua dat Jordanus, & usu Quaesita multo protulit. Aera qui totus, flammas msditatur, & undas, Terram, metalla discuit. Quicquid in his veteres, docuit quicquid Noviu Author, Celeri notavit pollice. At sua dum exponit, lucem dat, operta recludit, Pennaque fertur libera. Perge liber; gratus gratum volveris in avum, Lymphae calentes dum fluent. Ed.Lapworth, M.D. In laudem Authoris. NUmine divino Jordan medicalile flumen Dicitur, è gelido licet illud frtgore constet: Tu Jordane decus Medicorum, candide Doctor, Lumine divino gnarus discernere causas AEgris corporibus nosti depellere morbos; Intima seclusae enetrasti viscera terrae, Thermarum vires aperis, reserasque metalia: De gremio telluris aquas manare calentes Qua ratione doces, nobis prius abdita pandis Strutando Physices arcana indagine mira, Nio caperis fama, nec inane laudis amore, Ut patriae prosis, dignaris promere lucem: Qui memoraverunt, vel qui modo Balnea tractant, Non sunt te melius meriti, vel jdice Momo. Jo. Dauntsey.
Ad Authorem. SI foelix, rerum potuit qui noscere causas, Inter foelices tu prope primus eris. Sunt, quaecun{que} tulit vel terra, vel unda, vel aer, Singula nota tibi, singula certatibi. Omnigenae tibi vena reperta, resecta metalli, Nulla{que} te in quovis corpore vena latet. Non tu noinibus veterum terreris, ut umbris, Nec tibi, ce multis, quae nova sola placent. Et docta & just a ratione singula lance Libras, quae veteres, quae{que} tulere novi. Nec causas tantum scrutans tu negligis usum: Utilis est liberi pagina quaeque tui. Hoc unum doleo, quod non sint Anglica nostra Balnea, per calamum facta Latina tuum: Cresceret ut gentis per te si gloria nostrae In lengos celebris per locae cuncta dies. COme hither Reader, bathe thy tender eye In Jordans streams which out of Bath do rist They'l clear thy sight, and make thee clearly se Choice secrets, which in earths deep bosom be Closely laid up, and choicely secret kept, Where unobserv'd they many ages slept. Here come & Bathe in Jordans streams thy mind Thou there a strange yet certain cure shalt find, Of old ore-spreading errors leprosie, Which these clear streams do sweetly mundifie. Here are two miracles of nature met, Here are two miracles of England set;
Our English Bathes, our English Jordans streams Are gathered here as natures choicest creams, Produc'd by her, by learned Art refin'd For th universal good of humane kind. May much good hence be rais'd, & may it raise As well first Authors as Inventors praise. Nicol. Stoughton, of Stoughton, Esq BIS duas gaudes numerare causas (Nam tot Authores varii dederunt) Unde Thermarum calor ortum haberet (candide Doctor) Tu tenax, nulla, tamen acquiescis Ex iis ausis: mihi dic (amice) Cur tibi soli via singularis perplacet ista? Arrogans forsan nimis ipse multis Qui viam linguis, videare, tritam: Zoili & nigro vocitere vanus ore Philautus. Sed cul candor tuus innotescit, Qui tuos mores bene novit; is t Litis osorem vocet, & serenae pacis amantem. Sint licer Plato Socrates{que} amici, Tu licet doctos verearis omnes, Veritas major tamen est amica, quae tibi cordi est. Rob. Pierce Bach. in Theologia.
To the Author. SHall I presume to write in praise of him Whose work hath taught the world more wit and Art, And shall I not mine own dispraise begin, To undertake and cannot reach in part His worth, his wit, his learning which confounds Grave Antients in their long tradition grounds? Celsus could brag Homunculos to make Man to preserve a thousand years or more, Yet on himself he did so much mistake, He could not hold his life till full threescore: Before he made, his maker him did mar, In this his words and works came short by far. But modest Jorden void of these conceits. Hath clear'd obscurest points from darkness soul, His learning, judgement, body, soul all waits. Life to preserve in all; his lifes chief soul Being learning, knowledge, and the love of truth, He hath made men himself perpetual youth. I.St. AGes in former doubtfull errors night From many worthy Stars have borrowed light. Our Sun adorns our daies, whose radiant beams No heat, but truth add to our bathing streams. A fit work for an Artist, whose pen bleeds To death-receiv'd opinions: shews the seeds
Of earth-intombed Minerals, which lend Heat by their birth to fountain Nymphs, who spend Their pious tears in pity to regain Strength to the frozen nerves, sweet case from pain. Who would not strive to celebrate that quill, Which doth no fretting gall, but milk distill To foster truth; being so concise and terse. For to comprise the Protean universe. In this small volume: which who disapprove, Snarling express neglect of lending love To learning, tenant in this worthy pile, Where natures works are polish'd by Arts file. 'Tis strange in dayes of ruffling impudence, Which pamphlets spue of faction fearing sense, Art should be bashfull; if you search, you'l meet It valid in each page, shrouded in each sheet; Asham'd of their rude folly, whose mouths swell To slander worth they nere shall parallel. I'le venture natures tell-tale him to call, And judge my verdict's not Apocryphall. Heaven and earth seldom such conceal'd births steal, But he the cause can publish, means reveal. Take then a true survey, his lines descry, More trusted fables, then the truth did try; And pay Machaon as a friendly fee For purging of diseas'd Philosophy, The tribute of thy praise, though folly fret, Such as it made wise will repay the debt. Purge foul mouths (Bathe) that all applaud his pains, Who purgeth bodies, and refines the brains. Bartholomew Man.
On the Sight OF Dr. JORDEN'S Picture. THis faint resemblance shews the Seat where once dwelt Art and Learning Great; But vail'd with such a modest Meen, That 'twas not easie to be seen. 'Tis skill in Artists to conceal; The Load-stone's strongest cap'd with ste Thrice happy Painter, and more, if Thine Art could lend him breath, as life. That balks with thine, all humane power If but requested for an hour. 'Tis he that Adam made of Dust, And Eve out of his Rib, he must Inspire Atomes, by his might, Mans breath would scatter, not unite. Yet a thing like him thou hast made, And we as well as it, are Shade. T. GUIDOT
OF Natural Bathes, AND Mineral Waters. CHAP. I. Explication of the word Bathe. The scope and argument of this Book. The ancient use and esteem of Bathes among the Romans. The modern use of them among the Turks. Of Me∣dicinal Bathes, and Mineral Waters. Hom esteemed by the Greeks, Latines, Arabians, and other Nations. THE word Bathe or Balneum is of lar∣ger extent then I purpose to discourse of: for it being the name of a form of Remedy applyed to the Body, it may be framed either out of liquid things, or solid substances, or vapours.
Liquid Substances are Water, Milk, Must, Wine, Oyle: Solid Substances are Sand, Salt, pressed Grapes, Corn, &c. Vapours are Stuphs and Hot Houses. My intent is only to treat of Waters, and principally of those which be called Mineral, whether they be used in Bath or in Potion, &c. These kind of watry and vaporous Bathes have been in use from all antiquity, and held in great esteem, both for pleasure, and for preservation of health. For there is no form of Remedy more comfortable to mans body, or which easeth pain and weariness more speedily, and more ef∣fectually. And whereas Hypocrates commends those Remedies which do cure cito, tuto, & ju∣cunde, speedily, safely, and with comfort; these Bathes perform all these intentions: and besides, may be used to all Sexes and Ages, and Tem∣peratures, without hurt or inconvenience, inso∣much as the antient Romans had them in very frequent use: their Diet being liberal, and upon variety of Meats, especially upon Lettuce, Cole∣worts, Asparagus, raw fruits, and such like, which bred crude humours in their bodies, and had need of some such help to digest them: as Co∣lumella faith, Quotidianam cruditatem laconicis excoquimus: We concoct our crudities by the useof Bathes. We read in Plinie, that Agrippa built in Rome 170 publick Bathes for common use, and Pancirollus tells us of 856 in Rome at one time, De deper litis pag. 164 and all of them most sumptuous and magnificent buildings, especially the Anthonin and Dioclesian Bathes: the Walls whereof were of admirable height, with an infinite number of Marble Pil∣lars,
erected for ostentation, and not to support any thing, 1000 Seats to sit in; Their Calda∣ria, Tepidaria, Frigidaria, most sumptuous and stately: the whole fabrick so large and spacious, as they resembled rather Cities than Houses: And so it might well be, when as there were im∣ployed for the building of the Dioclesian Bathes, as Baccius faith. 40000 men, but Salmuth faith, 140000 for some years together. De deper litis pag. 164. They were placed where now the Church of Saint Angelo stands. Bellonius obser∣vat.lib2.3.6.34 Prosper Alpinas de medicina AEgyptiorum. The Turks at this day retain that an∣tient custome of the Romans, and are in no∣thing more profuse, then in their Temples and Bathes, which are like unto great Pallaces, and in every City very frequent. And yet both the Romans and the Turks used those Bathes chiefly for pleasure and delicacy, and cleanliness: the Romans going bare-legged, and their wayes dusty, had need of often washing; and the Turks lying in their Cloaths, subject to Lice and Worms, if it were not for their often bathing. Moreover, the Diet of the Turks, though it be more sparing then that of the Romans, yet it is little better: namely, upon Herbs, Roots, raw fruit, &c. and their Drink, for the most part Water, being prohibited the use of Wine by their Religion, must needs breed many crudities in their bodies, yet by their often bathings, they do not only overcome them, but get a good ha∣bit of body, their Women being accounted as delicate creatures as any in the world, who duly twice a week resort to the Bathes. Now if those Nations would bestow so much upon their Bathes of delicacy and pleasure, which
were only of pure Water; we have much more reason to adorn our Mineral Bathes; which (besides the former uses) are also medicinal and very soveraign for many Diseases, consisting of wholsome Minerals, and approved for many hundred years, of many who could not other∣wise be recovered. At the least wise if we do not beautifie and adorn them, yet we should so accommodate them, as they might serve for the utmost extent of benefit to such as need them. For there is nothing in our Profession of Phy∣sick more useful, nor in the works of Nature more admirable, (man only excepted, which Plato calls the great miracle) then Natural Bathes, and Mineral Waters. The nature and causes whereof have been so hard to discover, as our antient Authors have written little of them, holding them to be sacred or holy, either for that they judged them to have their virtue im∣mediately from God, or at least from the celestial Bodies; from whence, both their actual heat was thought to be kindled, by lightnings or such like impressions, and other admirable Vir∣tues, and sometimes contrary effects derived, which appear in them. Also divers miracles have been ascribed unto those Natural Bathes, to confirm the opinion of a supernatural power in them, as Guaynerius reports of the Bathes of Aque in Italy: and Langius out of Athenoeus, concerning the Bathes of Edepsus, which both lost their vertue for a time. Cap.  Epist. 53.lib.2. The one by the Magistrates prohibiting poor diseased people to use them, the other by imposing a taxation upon them: but upon the reformation, of those abuses
were restored to their former virtues again, I need not herein averring the opinion of Divinity which was held to be in Bathes, make any mention of the Pool of Bethesda, written of by Saint John, and Nonnus the Poet: nor of the River Jordan, which cured Naaman the Syrian of his Leprosie, being indeed true mira∣cles, and done by a supernatural power  yet it is likely that those and such like examples bred in the minds of men a reverend and divine opinion of all Bathes: especially where they saw such strange effects as they could not well reduce to natural Causes. And this hath been the cause that in old time these mineral fountains have been consecrated unto certain Deities: as Hamon in Lybia, unto Jupiter: Thermopilae, unto Hercules, by Pallas: among the Troglodites, another to the Sun, &c. And at this day we have divers Bathes which carry the names of the Sun, Moon, and Saints: and many Towns and Cities named from the Bathes in them: as Thermae in Macedonia and Sicily, Thermidea in Rhodes, Aquae in Italy, Aquisgraue in Germany, Baden in Helvetia: and our antient City of Bathe in Somerset-shire, in honor whereof I have especially undertaken this labour, and I perswade my self, that among the infinite number of Bathes and Mineral Waters which are in Europe, there are none of more universal use for curing of Diseases, nor any more commodious for entertainment of sick per∣sons, then these are. Besides this sacred conceit of Bathes, where∣with in antient times, the minds of men were
possest, we may adde this, that the nature of Mi∣nerals was not so well discovered by them, as it hath been since: and therefore we finde very little written of this argument, either in Aristotle or Hypocrates, or in Galen, De tuenda sa∣uit. lib.4. cap.4. who wrote most co∣piously in all other points of Physick, yet con∣cerning this hath little; See the reason of this in Iones his Bathes Aid, fol. 7. b. where also he proves the inward use of Mineral wa∣ters among Physicians, as well before, as since the time of Galen. and never gave any of these waters to drink inwardly, although he ac∣knowledgeth that they were in use: and for out∣ward uses, held them all to be potentially hot. After these Grecians, the antient Latines and Arabians succeeded Plinie, Celsus, Seneca, Lu∣cretius, Avicen, Rhasis, Seraphio, Averrhoes, it whom we finde some small mention of natural Bathes, and some use of Salt and nitrous, and Aluminous waters, but nothing of worth toward the discoverie of the natural causes of them. I is likely they did pass it over slightly, either by reason of the difficulty in searching out the cause of them, or that they judged them meerly meta∣physical. But in later times the nature and genera∣tion of minerals (from whence the Baths proceed and from whence the whole doctrin of them both for their qualities and differences, originals and use, must be derived) being better looked into and observations taken from such as daily labour in the bowels of the earth, for the search o Mines, or such as afterwards prepare them for ou necessary uses; we have attained to better know∣ledge in this kinde, than the Antients could have, although in all new discoveries there wil be defects for succeeding ages to supply, so falls out in this: Dies Diem docet: Aipham B∣ta
corrigit. And although Agricola, Pallopius, Baccius, Mathetsious Solinander, Libavius, &c. have added much unto that which was formerly known in this point, and reformed many errors and mistakings in former writers: yet they have left many things imperfect, doubtful, obscure, controverted, and perhaps false, as may appear in the discourse following. I do reverence all their worths, as from whom I have learned many things, which else I could hardly have attained unto; and I acknowledg them to have been ex∣cellent instruments for the advancement of lear∣ning: yet I hope it may be as free for me with∣out imputation of arrogancie to publish my con∣ceits herein, as it hath been for them, or may be for any other: Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim.We both this leave, Give and receive. My end and studie is the common good, and the bettering of this knowledge: and if I shall bring any further light to increase that, I shall be glad: otherwise my intent being to search out the truth, and not to contradict others, it will or ought to be a sufficient protection for me, where∣fore I come to discourse of Mineral waters.
CHAP. II. Definition of Mineral Waters. The nature where of cannot be understood, except first considera∣tion be had concerning simple water. Of which in this Chapter are shewed the qualities and use. MIneral waters are such, as besides their own simple nature, have received and imbibed some other qualitie or substance from Subterran∣an Mynes. Libavius de ju∣dicio aquarum ier. cap. 1. I say, besides their own nature, because they retain still their liquidness and cold, and moysture, although for a time they may be actu∣ally hot from an external impression of heat, which being gone, they return to their former cold again. I say, imbibed, to distinguish them from confused waters: as earth may be confused with water, but not imbibed, and will sink to the bottom again: whereas such things as are im∣bibed, are so mixed with the water, as it retains them, and is united with it: being either Spirits, or dissoluble juyces or tinctures; I say from Subterranean Mynes, to distinguish them from animal or vegetable substances, as infusions or de∣coctions of herbs, flesh, &c. Seeing then that the Basis of these Bathes or mineral fountains, is water, we must first consi∣der the nature of simple water, and from thence we shall better judge of Mineral Waters, and their differences. By simple water I do not mean the Element of water, accius i. 1. cap.6. for that is no where to be found among
mixt bodies, but I mean such water as is free from any heterogeneal admixture, which may al∣ter either the touch or taste, or colour, or smell, or weight, or consistence, or any other qualitie, which may be discerned either by the senses, or by the effects. Solinander lib. 2. cap. 1. This water therefore must have his proper colour and taste, without savour or smell, thin, light, cold and moist; if any of these properties be wanting, or any redound, it is mixed and infected. Cold and moisture do abound in water. Solinander lib. 1. cap. 3. For cold appears by this, that being heated by any external cause, it soon returns to his cold nature again, when the cause of the heat is removed. Quaest.nat. 2. Libav. pyrotceh. cap. 20. And whereas Air is held by the Stoicks to be most cold; and confirmed by Senea and Liba∣vius, yet the reason they give for it, doth seem to prove water to be more cold, because they make the matter of air to be water, and to have his cold∣ness from thence. Meteor 4. But Aristotle holds the air to be hot from the efficient cause which rarified it, being of more validity to make it hot, than water (the material cause) to make it cold. De usu partium lib. 8. cap. 3. Galen is of neither side, for he doth not judge it to be hot, neither doth he ever pronounce it to be cold: but by reason of his tenuity, apt to be altered either by heat or cold. I will not here undertake to determine whe∣ther all be bred of water, or whether it be not a distinct substance of it self, and only receiveth watry vapours into it, being agreeable in cold, moisture, tenuity, &c. Daneus phis. Christ part 2. cap. 9. Aristol. 1. Me∣teor cap. 4: with it, and so lets them separate in rain: and so exonerate it self of these vapours, as also of dry exhalations by winds,
thunder, &c. or whether air be only the efflu∣um of the inferiour globe, being within the orbe of his virtue: as all Dominion hath not only a place of residence and Mansion, but also a verg and territory where it exercifeth his authority and government; so the inferior globe of the earth, and water hath his dominion beyond his own globe, as likewise may be thought of all other globes of the Planets, &c. But these points are impertinent to my purpose. It is enough for me to shew what I judge of the temperature of the air concerning heat or cold. And to me it seem most probable, that the air of it self should be cold, as may appear by this, that it is only heated by external causes, which being removed, the, a returns to his former coldness again. So we se that within the Tropicks in Zona torrida, as long as the Sun is within their Horizon, and beats th air with his perpendicular beams, it is exceeding hot, especially in the vallies, where the reflecti∣on is most; insomuch as Aristotle held those parts of the World to be inhabitable, in regar of the extremity of heat. But after the Sun is set the air returns to his natural coldness, until the Sun arise and heat it again. Josephus Acosta ur geth this argument against Aristotle, about the habitableness of the torrid Zone, that the daie and nights being there equal, the presence of the Sun in the day-time may well heat the air, b his absence for twelve hours more in the night reduceth the air to a better temper: and upon this and divers other arguments and experiences, which cannot be denied, concludes, that if there be any Paradise upon earth, it is under or near the
equinoctial. The like reason may be drawn from the coldness of mountains, which being near to the middle region of the air, and wanting that re∣flection of the beams of the Sun, which is in the valleys, are continually cold, and often covered with snow, which would not be if the air were hot. As for the conceit that the middle region is made cold by an Antiperistasis, the element of fire being above it, and the reflection of the beams of the Sun beneath it, it is an idle conceit. For these heats on both sides would rather heat than cool the middle region by their working upon it. Al∣so take away the element of fire from under the Moon, which is an opinion now exploded by the best Philosophers, and then what becomes of your Antiperistasis? Davaeus Philos. Christ.p.2.c.8. Cardan. de sub∣til. lib.2.Vale∣sius contr. lib.1. cap. 5. conra∣dus Assachus de triplici coelo lib.1.cap.4. Laurent. Valla, &c. But I shall speak more of this Antiperistasis, cap. 13. And as for the re∣flection beneath, it is a weak thing, and will hardly extend to the top of a steeple: wherefore this coldness of the middle region is not from any Antiperistasis, but from the nature of the air, which there is not altered either by any influence from above, or by any vapours or reflection from beneath. Neither would it be so cold neer the Poles, if the air of it self were hot. But the long absence of the Sun in those parts, and the oblique beams when it is present, do permit the air to enjoy his natural coldness. And as the airis of it self, and in his own nature cold, so is it probable that it is more cold than water, seeing it hath a greater power of condensation, than water, as we see it congeals water into ice, snow, hail, &c. which the water cannot do of it self. For in the bowels
of the earth, where the air cannot freely, pass, wa∣ter is never found to be congealed, unless it b compasled by some other substance equivalent to air in coldness, as Quick-silver, Nitre, &c. where cold is drawn into a greater compendium, than in water, by reason of the density of their substances: and in ice and snow, the cold ma be greater, by reason of the admixture of air, I is likewise probable that earth is more cold that water, if we consider it as it is in it self, and no mixed with other heterogenities. Arist. 1. Mete∣or. cap. 3. For as motio causeth heat, and levity, and rarity, so want o motion, which is in earth, causeth coldness, den∣sity, and ponderosity. De ortu & in∣ter, lib.2.& moteor.4.cap.1. & 4. Gal. de simpl. med. sac. lib. 1. cap. 8. Item de Ele∣mentis 1. But it is enough for o purpose to prove both air and water to be cold. As for moisture, Aristotle holds the air to be mos moist, and water most cold. Galen holds wate to be most moist. Aristotles reason for the predo∣minance of moisture in Air is, because it is mo hardly contained within his bounds: but the ter∣mination of things proceeds from their opposite qualities, as moisture is terminated by dryness and dryness by moisture: and dryness doth a easily terminate moisture, as moisture doth ter∣minate dryness. And this difficulty of termina∣tion in air, may more properly be ascribed to hi thinness and tenuity of parts, than to his moisture. For dry exhalations will extend themselves a well as moist vapours; and as it is density that compacts, so it is rarity that extends. Fire it self is more hardly bounded than air, and yet not moist. Valesis cot. lib. 1. cap. 2. Those that would reconcile these differ∣ences, do alledge that Galen speaks as a Physi∣tian, and meant that water was bumidissimum me∣dicamentum:
Aristotle as a Philosopher meant it to be humidissimum elementum. But this re∣conciliation gives little satisfaction. For how the could water be humidissimum medicamentum, if it were not humidissimum elementum? For the simple qualities are more intense in the Ele∣ments, then in mixt Bodies, caeteris paribus. We speake of the proper operation of water ac∣cording to his natural quality, and not as it may work by accident. Thinness and levity are two other qualities of simple water, which Hypocrates commends, and adds this experiment in another place, that it is quickly hot and quickly cold. Galen adds another experiment in the quick boyling of Peason and Beans. De aere, aquis & locis. De morbis pop∣lar. lib.2.sect.2. And whereas Galen produceth the boyling of Beans as a familiar example to shew the tenuity of water, we may gather that the use of Beans was common in those dayes, although the Py∣hagorean sect did then much flourish, which were thought to forbid the use of them. But I find that here hath been a great mistake, For Aristoxenus who wrote of the Life and Doctrine of Pythagoras, affirms that he did delight much in that kind of food: and our Physitians com∣mend them for loosing the Belly, and drying of Rheums. Bruerinus de re cibaria. Platerus in praxi. But it seems the cause of this mistake was a Verse of Empedocles, O miseri a fabulo miseri subducite dextras.Thrice wretched men, from Cyams keep your hands.
As if he had forbidden the use of Beans, poor occasion to pronounce them miserable which used them. But he meant it of continen∣cy and abstinence from venery, as Aulus Gel∣lius doth intérpret it: where  are under∣stood to be testiculi. Nt. Attic. lib.4. cap.11. de Divinat. 1. In Aristaeum quaestione 19. Cicero mentioneth the the same of the Pythagoreans, but in another sense, because Beans were thought by their fla∣tulency, to disturb our Dreams, and so to hin∣der the divination which might be gathered from them, as also Middendorpius judgeth: But t return to water: And it is requisite that wae should have these qualities, Brerinus de re cibaria lib. 16. cap. 17. in regard of the manifold and necessary uses of it, both for M and Beast, and Plants: insomuch, as there is n living for any creature, where there is no wate It was our first drink to quench our thirst, an to distribute our nourishment as a vehiculu which it doth by his tenuitie; and after the in∣vention of Wine, it was mixed therewith,  Virgil saith of Bacchus, Poclaque inventis Acheloia miscuit vis,And he that first found out the Vine, Mix'd some Water with his Wine. Where, by Acheloia, he means not only t water of the River Achelous in Etolia, but other waters, as Macrobius proves out of A stophanes and Ephorus: and Scaliger saith th the Greeks called all waters by that name, fro the word . Saturnal. lib.5. cap. 18. And since the planting of Vine yards seeing all Countries could not be
Grapes, Bacchus also taught the world to make vinum è frugibus with water, as Diodorus Sicu∣lus reports, from whence the Egyptians had their Zithum and Curmi, the Spaniards their Cerea, the Turks their Cowset, and we our Ale and Beer; all which are extracted out of Corn, by the pureness of and tenuitie of water. Rerum anti∣quar. lib.4. c. 12. By means whereof we have our Broths, Syrups, Apozemes, &c. extracted with it, as a fit men∣struum to receive the faculties of all medica∣ments and nourishments, especially the second qualities, and therefore it was antiently called Panspermia: besides the manifold uses in wash∣ing, dying, &c. where that water is accounted hest, which lathers most, being mix'd with Soap, of which I will not discourse farther. Le∣vity is another note of pure water, alledged by many, and serves well to distinguish it from many mixed waters, whether we respect the weight of it, or the molestation which it breeds in the bowels. Bacciusl. .c.. This difference of weight is hardly discerned by ballance, both because simple waters do very little differ in this point, and also many mixt waters, if they be only infected with Spirits, and not corporal substances, re∣tain the same proportion of heaviness with simple water: and also because it is hard to have great Ballances so exact, as a small difference may be discerned by them, yet Agricola reports that a cotyle of the water of Pyrene and Euleus, did weigh a dram less then the water of Euphrates, or Tigris, and therefore the Kings of Persia used o drink of it, and held it in great account, as also the water of the River Coaspis. De nat. eo.que cffl.è terra li.1. cap. 15. Thus much
for the qualities which simple water should have; for such as it should not have, I shall not need to spend time in discourse, being either such as the Senses will discover, if it be in taste, colour, smell, or touch; or the effects, if it be purga∣tive, vomitory, venomous, &c. Langius Epist. lib.1. Epist.31. CHAP. III. Of the three Originals of Simple Waters. NOW it followeth that we shew from whence these waters have their Original, which is no other then of the mixt waters, saving that the mixt waters do participate with some Minerals which are imbibed in them. Baccius lib. 1 cap. 3.4. Agric. de ortu & causis subter. lib. 1. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Solinander l. 2. cap. 1. & lib.2. cap. 3. They haue three several Originals: the one from moist vapours congealed by cold in the air the second from the earth; the third by perco∣lation from the Sea. For the first, it is certain that our Springs and Rivers do receive great supply of waters from the Air, where vapours being congealed by cold, do fall down upon the Earth, in Rain, or Snow, or Hail, whereby the ground is not only made fertile, but our Springs are revived, and our Rivers increased. 1 From the Air. As we see the Rhine and Danubius to swell more in Summer than in Win∣ter, because then the Snow which continually lyeth upon the Alpes, doth melt by the heat of the Sun, and fills those Rivers, which have their Originals from thence up to the brinks. Also we see daily after much Rain, our small Lakes
and Rivers to be very high. Also upon much dryth our Springs fail us in many places, which upon store of Rain do supply us again with water. And this is the cause that in most parts of Afri∣ca, near the Equinoctial, where it rains little, they have little water; and many times in two or three dayes journey, can hardly find to quench their thirsts and their Camels. Leo Africanus speaks of an Army wherein were many Camels, which in their marching, coming to a River, (perhaps it was but a Brook) did drink it dry. So that we must acknowledge that the Earth re∣ceives much water this way. But how this should serve the Bowels of the Earth with suffi∣cient for the generations there, and for perpe∣tual Springs, is very doubtfull; whereas Seneca faith that these waters do not pierce above ten foot into the Earth:neither if there were passages for it into the Bowels of the Earth, can the hun∣dred part of it be imployed this way, but is rea∣dily conveyed by Rivers into the Sea.Quoest. natur lib. 3. cap. 7. Where∣fore although much water be yielded to the su∣perficies of the Earth by Rain and Snow, and Hail from the Air, yet not sufficient to main∣tain perpetual Springs; seeing many times, and in many Countries these aerial supplies are want∣ing, or very spare, and yet the Springs the same. Wherefore Aristotle his opinion, which attri∣butes all to aerial water and vapours from thence, is justly rejected by Agricola, and by our Coun∣trey-man Mr. Lydiat.2 Meteorol. & 1. 3. So that we must find out some other Originals, or else we shall want water for the manifold uses the Earth hath of it.Deortu & cau∣sissubt. l. 1. . 6. De orig. font. cap. 1. From the Earth they make another Original of
perpetual Springs and Rivers, seeing the first seems to be ordained by Nature only for the irri∣gation of the superficies of the Earth, which else would be in most places destitute of water, where Springs are not, and so would be barren, Plants and Trees wanting due moisture for their nourishment.a. From the Earth. Wherefore for the perpetuity of Fountains, and for subterranean generations, which cannot proceed without water, they have imagined a generation of water within the Earth; some holding that the Earth it self is converted into water, as Elements are held to b mutable and convertible, the one in the other, As Ovid faith of the conversion of Elements: Resolutaque tellus, In liquidas rarescit aquas, &c.The Earth likewise, when once unty'd Is into Water rarify'd. But we must grant Ovid his Poetical liberty and not tye his words to such a strict sense, al∣though Scaliger in his Criticks would not par∣don a Philosophical errour in the first verse of his Metamorphosis, for saying that forms are chan∣ged into new bodies.Metam. 15. But unless there be some reciprocation between water and air, the other Elements are not convertible the one into the other. For neither Fire will be converted into any other Element being superiour to the rest, and not to be mastered by cold, which only must be the agent of the conversion of it by con∣densation: neither will the earth be converted
into water, or any other Element, as Pla thinks in Timoeo and Aristotle 3. de coelo cap. 7. for either heat or cold must convert it. Heat cannot do it, although it rarifie and attenuate, both for that it consumes moysture, and also be∣cause water is cold, which it should not be, if it were made by heat; for every natural Agent works to that end that it may make the Patient like it self: and heat may convert earth into sume and dry exhalations, but not into water, for all water which is not eternal, is from cold; likewise cold cannot convert earth into water, because cold doth congeal, condense, and con∣gregate, and indurate, and not dissolve and at∣tenuate, &c. as we see in Amber and Gumms. Neither will water be converted into earth. For by heat it turns to vapour and air, by cold into ice and stone; wherefore the Elements are not changed the one into the other, unless it be wa∣ter and air, which have more affinity and more neighborhood than the rest.Aristotel.4. me∣teor. cap. 10. & ultimo. And yet it is doubt∣full, as I have said in the former Chapter: but this generation of water from the earth is impos∣sible. Others will have great receptacles of air within the earth, which flying up and down, is congealed by the coldness of Rocks into wa∣ter, to supply all wants.Valesius de sa∣cra Philosoph. passim. Others imagine huge Lakes and Cisterns, primarily framed in the earth, and supplyed with water, either from vapour or air, or from the sea; which water either by agitation, by winds, or by impulsion from the Sea, or by compression of Rocks, is eleva∣ted to the superficies of the earth: or else va∣pours from thence, made by attenuation, either
from the Sumand Starrs, or from subterranean fire kindled upon Sulphur and Bitumen; which was pours ascending to the tops of Mountains, are there congealed into water by the coldness of the Rocks; where there must be other Ci∣sterns or Castles in the air to feed the inferiour Springs. Others will make the earth to be an animal, and to suck water by veins, to serve his turn for generations and nutritions. But why should it suck more than it hath need of? and how shall it cast it forth beyond the place of use to the superficies of the earth? unless they will say that the Mynes which suck it, do puke it up as Infants do when their stomachs are full, which is absurd to say. These and such like de∣vices are produced for the maintaining of their Original; which as they are all insufficient to afford such a proportion of water as is requisite, so most of them are so improbable, and full of desperate difficulties, as I am unwilling to spend time in the rehearsing of them, or their Authors, much more unwilling in the confuting of them, to trouble my self, and offend my Reader, only the point of subterranean fire which hath taken deepest impression in most mens minds, I shall speak of hereafter, when I come to shew the causes of the actual heat of Springs. The third Original is from the Sea, a sufficient storehouse for all uses, and whereunto the other two may be referred. 3 From the Sea. For that which falls from the air, and that which is bred in the earth, do proceed principally from the Sea. ortu & cau∣sisster. lib. 1. cap.  & 9. Agricola for fear of wanting water for his Springs, is contented to admit of all these Originals, although he relyeth
least upon the Sea, because he knows not how to bring it up to the heads of his fountains, but is contented it should serve for lower places near the Sea-cos. As I remember I have seen in Ze∣land at Westcapell, fresh Springs colated from the Sea, through banks of sand. But I make no doubt but that the Sea-water may serve all other Springs and Rivers whatsoever, although both far remote from the Sea, and high in situation. Neither shall we need to flye for help to those monstrous con∣ceits of Agitation, Compulsion, Compression, Suction, Attraction by the Sun, &c. But holding the sacred Canon of the Scriptures, that all Ri∣vers are from the Sea, &c. I perswade my self, that there is a natural reason for the elevating of these waters unto the heads of Fountains and Rivers, although it hath not yet been discovered. For those opinions formerly mentioned, will not hold water. Ecclesiastes 1. My conceit therefore is this, that as we see in Siphunculis, that water being put in at one end, will rise up in the other pipe, as high as the level of the water (whether by his weight, or by the correspondence with his level, I will not dispute) so it may be in the bowels of the earth; consi∣dering that the passages there are more firm to maintain the continuitie of the water with the Sea, than any leaden pipes can be, being com∣passed on every side with many Rocks: as we see in Venis, fibris & commissuris saxorum. Now although perhaps this water enters into the earth very deep, yet the level of it must answer to the superficies of the Sea, which is likely to be as high as the superficies of the Land, Arist. metroyol. cap. ultimo lib. 3 seeing
the natural place of waters is above the earth. And although neer the Coasts it be depressed and lower than the Shore, yet there is reason for that, because it is terminated by the dry and solid body of the earth: as we see in a cup or bowl of water filled to the top, we may put in a great bulk of silver in pieces, and yet it will not run over, but be heightened above the brims of the bowl. The like we see ín a drop of water put upon a Table, where the edges or extremities of the water be∣ing terminated by the dry substance of the Table, are depressed, and lower than the middle, like half globe: but take away the termination by moistening the Table, and the drop sinks. This way of arguing is questioned by Dr. French, who supposeth the many great Rivers terminated in the Sea to be a sufficient moisture for the taking a∣way the ter∣mination of the water made by the dryness of the earth, and so to make the globous Sea sink to an evenness. vid. French Yorksh. Spaw.p.10, 11, 12.  this be evident in so small a proportion, we may imagine it to be much more in the vast Ocean and our Springs being commonly at the foot o Hills, may well be inferior to the Globe of th Sea, if any be higher, they may perhaps be fe from rain and snow falling upon the Mountains But if Josephus Acosta, his assertion be true, th the Sea towards the Equinoctial, is higher tha towards the Poles, then the level of the Sea m be much higher than the top of our highest Hill but this is a doubtful assertion: yet I dare believe that if it were possible to immure a Sprin without admission of air, which might break th continuitie with the Sea, our Springs might b raised much higher. At Saint winifrids Well i Flint-shire, though there be no high land neer i yet the Springs rise with such a violence, and i plentifully, that within a stones cast, it drives  Mill. It is likely that this Spring might be raised much higher. And whereas we see that River
do run downwards to the Sea per decline, it doth not prove the Sea to be lower than the Land, but only near the shore where it is terminated, and in lieu of this it hath scope assigned it to fill up the Globe, and so to be as high as the Land, if not higher. For if a measure should be taken of the Globe of the earth, it must be taken from the tops of the Mountains, and from the highest of the Sea, and not from the Valleys, nor from the Sea-coasts. This conceit of mine I was fearful to publis;h, and therefore had written unto Ma∣ster Brigges, mine antient friend, for his advice in it, being a point wherein he was well studied: but before my Letter came to Oxford, he was dead. But now I have adventured to publish it, to stir up others to search out the causes hereof, better than hath yet been discovered. Exorsipse secandi, fungor vice cotis.Anothers edge, though blunt, I set, And with the Stone that's dull, I whet.
CHAP. IV. Division of Mineral Waters. Minerals descr∣bed. Their kinds recited. Of Earth, simpl and mixed. Whether it give any medicinabl qualitie to Water. And so of the rest in th following Chapters. THus much of simple waters, and their ori∣ginals, which may serve as Polycletus hi rule to judge mixed and infected waters by: Galen in many places speaks of an exact and sound constitution of body, as a rule to disce distempered and disproportionated bodies. An thus much in explication of the Gens, in the de∣finition of Mineral Waters. Now I come to Mineral Waters, and to the other part of the definition which we call dif∣ference, &c. from Subterranean Mynes by Im∣bibition. These Mineral waters are either simple o compound; simple, which partake but with some one Subterranean Mineral; compound which partake with more than one. And the waters partake with Minerals, either as they a confused with them, or as they are perfectly mixed. Also these mineral waters, whether sim∣ple or compound, are actually either hot or cold the reason whereof must proceed from some Sub∣terranean cause, as shall be shewed hereaf∣ter. Wherefore we must first know the nature o these Subterranean Minerals, and their generati∣on
A TABLE OF MINERALS WITH THEIR QVALITIES. 1. Earthly. Simple, Dry, Cold, Astringent or mixed with Nitre Fullers Earth Marle Abstergent. Allum Coperas All sorts of Boles, Astringent and Desiccative. Turfe Bitumen, Pex, &c. Fat, and Unctuous. Vid. p. 24, 25, 26 2. Stone, vid.p.27. 3. Bitumina. Solid Terra mpelis. Succnum. Gaaes. Ama Canphora. Boneo. Cha. Titantrax, five Carbo fosslis. Liquid Petroleum. Naphtha. Potentially Hot and Dry, in the 2. or 3. Degree; Except Camphir, concerning the Nature and Qualities of which Authosdisagree, Vid. pag. 34.
4. Concrete Juyces. Salt, Astringent, Detergent, Purging, &c. Vid.pag.47. Nitre. Sal Amnoniacum. Borax. Altincar. Vid. pag.44.51. Allum. Vitriol. Very astringent, and cold, Vid.p. 57, 58. 5. Spirits. Quicksilver; Various in it Qualities, vid.p. 61, 62. Sulphur; Moderately Hot and Dry, and somewhat Cooling, vid.p.63. Arsenick Auripigmentum Risagalum, Sandaracha, Rusma, &c. Venomous, vid.p.65. Extreme hot and putrifying, p.66. Cadmia Natural, Liquid Dangerous, and a strong Corrosive, Factitious, Moderately, hot and cleansing, vid. p. 66. 6. Mean, or half Metals; as Bismutum, or Tin-glas; Qualities not mentioned, vid.p.67. Antimony, purgeth vidently upward and downward, ib. Bell-metall, not used n Physick, vid.p.68. 7. Metals Perfect Gold, Qualities unertain, vid. p. 69. & 72. Silver, Esteemed Cold, Dry, Astringent, Emollient, vid p. 69. & 74. Imperfect Hard Iron, Opening and Astringent, vid.p.70.74, 75, 76. Copper, Temperate in heat, less Astringent, and morecleansing than Iron, vid.p.70.77. Soft Tinn, Cold and Dry, yet moving Sweat, P.72.77.78. Lead, Cold and Dry, vid.p.72.78. & 79. Place this between page 24 and 25, where the 4th. Chapter of Minerals begins.
om whence Mineral waters receive their rence, from common simple water, before n judge of the nature and quality of them, er Actual or Potential. y Minerals, we understand all inanimate ect bodies bred in Mines within the bowels e earth. I dare not undertake to muster these ue order by Dichotomies, seeing neither icola nor Fallopins, nor Libavim, nor, any r that I know, have exactly done it, nor satis∣fied either others or themselves in it: and see∣ing there are divers Minerals lately discovered, perhaps more may be hereafter, which have een known in former times, and therefore mentioned; as Calaem in the East-Indies, ma and Terra ghetta in Turkey, &c. Minerals re∣duced to seven heads: Where∣ I will make bold to reckon them up as they e to hand in seven ranks. The first shall be earth. Earth, whether it be bred ab exbalatione sicca Earth. igerata, or ex mistis per putredinem in fimum versis, or ex lapidibus sole aut alore cockis & de aqua solutis, &c. Earth. It is all inconcrete. As tle water gleweth it together in Lutum, so a t deal dissolves it. But this is no proper dis∣tion, but only a disjoyning of parts by Im∣ng the moisture which conjoyned them into greater proportion of water; for waters do urally run together, like drops of quick-silver, melted metal. Wherefore seeing the moisture ch is in the earth, is not natural, but adven∣ous, not united essentially, but only mixed identally, it may well be called an inconcrete stance, whose moisture is easily drawn from
it, being ready to unite it self with other moisture and leave his old body as it found it, Agric. de nat. fossil. lib. 1. cap. 4. that is dust: yet so as that water retains with it soo taste or qualitie which it received from the ear Agricde nat, fossil. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. This dust is neither a simple body, as Ele∣ments are, nor permanent in one and the sam kind: but as it is thought to participate with an∣mates vegetables, and minerals, so to be tran∣muted into any of them, being both Mother and Nurse to all terrestrial bodies. Simple earth, if it be not mixed with other substances, is dry and cold, and Astringent. B if it be mixed, as commonly it is, it altereth h qualitie according to the mixture. Mine inte is to write of it as it is simple, and so of the rest. Simple earth yields but a muddie water of self, and of no use in Physick, but if it be mixed with other Minerals, it makes, the water to par∣ticipate with the qualitie of those Minerals also As if it be mixed with Nitre, as in Fullers eart and Marle, it makes the water abstergent like soap. If with Allum or Copperass, astringer and more desiccative, as in all sorts of Boles. with Bitumen, fattie and Unctuous, as in Tu and Peate, &c. We have divers examples all sorts. Baccius lib.5. Cap. 1. The Bath of Mount Otbon in Italy full of clay, which is a kind of Bole. The Ba Caldaria, full of Ocre. The Bath of Saint Pet full of a yellow earth, tincted belike with som other Minerals. Wherefore these are to be judge of according to the several Minerals which the contain. But seeing earth it self makes little im∣pression into water, neither do we make any Phy∣sical
use of waters, which contain nothing but earth, I need not spend any time about them. CHAP. V. Of Stone. THe second shall be Stone. Stone is another Mineral substance, concrete and more hea∣vy than earth, and our Mineral men confound themselves much in the definition of it. De metallis cap.6. Where∣fore Fallopius implores the help of Marcus An∣tonius Janna about it, as one of the most difficult points in Philosophie: but in the end, defines it by his want of dissolution, either by heat or moy∣sture. And whereas it is manifest that some stones will melt, he imputes it to the admixture of some metal, among which he reckoneth glass. Others define it by his hardness, wherein com∣monly it goeth beyond others Minerals. But you shall have some stones softer than some of those, and therefore the definition is not good. Others by this, that being broken or calcin'd, they will not be consolidated again into their former consistence or shape. But for breaking, the reason of that, is want of fusion; for without fusion or ignition, which is a kind or degree of fusion, Metals also being broken, will not be consolidated into the same Masse again. And there is no more dif∣ference in nature or essence, between a whole stone and a broken, than there is between a mass of Metal, and the powder or filings of the same. As for calcination, other minerals may be so far
calcin'd, and brought to a Crocus by fire, as they will be irreducible, therefore this is not proper to stone. Wherefore I am of Fallopius his opi∣nion in this point, and the rather because other∣wise there would seem to be a species in nature wanting, if there were not Mineral Species wan∣ting, dissolution by heat or moysture, as well as there are, having such dissolution. And this va∣cuum which nature abhors, is not only to be un∣derstood of a local vacuity, but also of a want b such species as are in natures power to produce, for the ornament of the World. For if it be a na∣tural passion to be dissolved, it is likewise a na∣tural passion not to be dissolved: and if some things will be dissolved both by heat and moy∣sture, as Salts, why should there not be other sub∣stances which will be dissolved by neither of them. And this must be stone, for nature affords none other. Moreover, according to Aristotle  Quoe concreverunt a frigido & a calido, a null∣storum dissolvuntar; Those things which come together by heat or cold, are dissolved by neither of them: Of this kind are stones which could never attain to such purity as many of them have, if they were not congealed by heat as well as by cold. Also under what species shall we compre∣hend Diamonds, Talcum, black-Lead, which some think to be pnigitis, Magnetis, Glymmer, Katzensilber, pyrimachus, amiantus, alumen plu∣mosum, saxum arenarium mortnum, &c. if not among Stones? yet these are confessed to be in∣vincible by fire or water. Also all pretious Stones, the more noble and pretious they are, the more they resist dissolution either by fire
water: for this quality sheweth the perfection of their mixture. True it is that some stones will be dissolved by fire or water, and therefore Pliny and Agricola divide Stones into fusible and in∣fusible: but this is in regard of other substances bred in the stone; which if it be Metal, the fu∣sion will be Metalline: If Nitre or mean Mine∣rals, it will be Vitrificatory. As Pliny reports of the invention of Glass by certain Merchants, who melting Nitre upon the Sand in Syria, where with Clods of Nitre they had made a Fur∣nace for their necessary use; found that clear Metal which we call Glass, Ecce liquato nitro oum arenis visi sunt rivi fluxisse nobilis liquoris. Behold, with the Sand, when the Nitre was mel∣ted, ran streams of a noble liquor. If Sulphur, as in Pyrite, it will likewise melt and strike fire. And whereas the striking of fire out of a flint or Pyrites, or any other thing that will strike fire, is held by all men to pro∣ceed from the kindling of air, by the collision of two hard substances together, they are mista∣ken. For then Diamonds, Chrystal Glass, &c. should strike fire as well as flints; but it is the Sulphur contained in them: And G. Fabricius in his observations, although he observes not the reason of this fire, yet he confesseth that out of any Pyrites è quo excutitur ignis, etiam xcoquitur sulphur; Out of which fire is struck, Sulphur also is to be had. Pliny gives the rea∣son of the name, quia inest illi ignis; Because fire is in it. The like we observe in Indian Canes, and some Woods that are unctuous, and ull of Oyle, which yield fire by frication, or
collision, not by kindling the air thereby, but in∣flamable Oyle in them. For air being cold and moist, as hath been proved before, hath no a∣greement with fire, no more then oyle hath with water. And therefore flame is not the kindling of air ('slamma non est aer accensus) but of fub ginous vapours, which have some unctuousness  them, and arise from the mater of fewel, and ha some inflamable parts remaining in them: whi neer unto the matter of fuel, do cause a manife flame: but farther off, no flame doth appear: y so as if you hold Flax near unto the flame, thou it touch it not, yet it will kindle, by reason t fire extends further then it is visible, being a p lucide and transparent body, and thinner then  air it self. Verulamius de vita & morte, pag. 418. & 453. And this is held to be the cause w it is not visible under the Moon. And where without air fire goes out, and is extinguished,  reason is, because the fuliginous vapours want evaporation, do recoyle upon the fireand cho it. This is evident in cupping-glasses, and making of Char-coal: where if the air be altog ther excluded, the fire goes out; if but in p then although the flaming be hindred, yet  fire doth penetrate the fewel, and so conver to coals: which by reason of the fuliginous pours, are commonly black. Do neglecta stirpium culturâ problem. 13. Bellonius s that Char-coals made of the wood of the O cedar tree, are white; which must be ascrib as I think, to the small quantity of fuligin vapours which that wood doth yield: or  that those vapours are rather sulphurous, then any other combustible substance. As wee that Tinby Coals will not black linnen, be
hanged in the smoak of them, but rather whiten it, by reason of the drying and penetrating quali∣ty of Sulphur, which will make red Roses white. But what shall we judge of those Lamps, which have been found burning in old Sepul∣chres? some of them (if we may believe Histo∣ries) having continued 1500 years together, as that which was found in Paulus the third his time, of Tullia, Ciceroes Daughter: and another of Maximus Olibius, near unto Padua, as Ber∣nardinus Scardco reports. It seems here was no air to maintain the Lamps, being closely shut up in glasses, and therefore they burnt without air, and were not extinguished, by reason they bred no fuliginous vapours to choak them. Now whether these Oyles which fed the Lamps were made by Art out of Gold, as some think, and I hardly believe, or rather out of some pure kind of Naphtha, which is most probable, I leave to others to judge: only I judge it to be the purity of that Oyle, which yielded no fuli∣ginous vapours to choak the fire. If air had maintained the flame, it had not continued two minutes, for it would have been spent and wasted by the fire. Wheresore ignis non est aer accensus. If other concrete juice be mixed with Stone, as Salt, Allum, Vitriol, &c. it makes them to relent in water or moist air; and these Stones are never good to build withal. Erastus disput. part. 2. p. 105. But let us take Stone as it is in it self, without the ad∣mixture of other Minerals, and we shall find it to be indissoluble and invincible, either by fire or water. Metallurgians, Refiners, and Assay Masters,
may make use of this for their Shribs, Tiegles, Muffels, Copels, Tests, Hearths, Crucibles, Furnaces, &c. where they desire a defensible substance against fire. But it requires a prepa∣ration to cleer it from all combustible and dis∣soluble admixture: as they may easily do, after they have powdred their Stone, to calcyne  and wash it well. This work being often re∣peated, will make it fit for their purpose: an they may use it either alone in the same manne as they do bone-ashes, or they may mix it with their lome, brick-dust, gestube, &c. Also the may make Bricks of it for their Furnaces, which will hardly receive any injury from fire. Talcu also is a Stone invincible of it self by fire: and Bricks made of Clay that is full of it, as th Guendern Clay in Cornwall, will hardly mel with any heat. Stones are naturally dry an cold, and astringent like a concrete earth. Simple Stones which have no other Mineral mixed with them, and are come to their perfe∣ction, being indissoluble, either by fire or wa∣ter: can yield no quality or virtue to Bathes, an therefore he that seeks to draw any virtue fro stone into water, doth lapidem lavare, that is labour in vain. But by reason of admixtures they may, or whilest they are in succo lapidescer∣te, before they are concreted. For if it be cer∣tain that Metals may yield virtue to Bathes, be∣ing alike indissoluble by water, there is no rea∣son but Stones also may. In ingressu ad infirmos p.373. Venustus in consilio pro Pe∣tro Picardo. Fallopius is again it in both, but contradicted by Julius Caesar Clandinus, and divers others; yet he confesse that Balncum montis Grotti, hath Gyps  and
Gesner affirms the same of the Bathes of Eugesta. Baccius tym. Also he finds ramentdmdrmoris in Balneo Cor∣senae & Agnatio blit he judgeth that they re∣ceive no quality but from the juice, and I doubt not but he is in the right. And for succus la∣pidescens, we have many examples in Agro Pisano & Lucensi in Italy, in Avernia in France, where this juice is so plentifully brought by a clear Spring, that after it is congealed, the people dig the stones, and have made a great Bridge of them. Also neer Vienna in Savoy, in a Village called Giret, is a clear Fountain which turns to stones as hard as flints: Pliny makes Tnention of the like Springs in Eubea, which are hot: and Vitruvius of the like at Hieropolis in Phrygia: Also Josophus Acosta of the like hot Springs in Guaniavilica in Pern, which turns to stone, whereof they build their houses. Anthonio de Herreza, cap. 20. tells of the same Spring at Guainia at Velica, which turns to stone as it riseth, and kills those that drink of it. Also this Succus lapidescens is ob∣served in the Bathes of Apono, where it is con∣verted into stone upon the sides of the Bath. Also in the Bath of Rancolani, where this juice is not confused, but perfectly mixed with the water, and being imbybed by Plants, it har∣dens them like stone. Baccius tells us of a Cave by Fileg in Transilvania, which turns water in∣to stone. Lib. 6. . 14. The like is found at Glainstayns in Scotland, as Hector Boetius reports. In En∣gland also we have many Fountains which turn wood into stone; which must be by reason of this Succus lapidescens mixed with the water.
Coral also being a Plant, and nourished with this juice, turns to stone: so doth the seed of Lithospermon or Gromel. Thus much of Stone. CHAP. VI Of Bitumen. His kinds, qualities. Of Campli in particular. That Bitumen is predominan in the waters of Bathe. NExt I come to those Minerals which we cal Bitumina, which are mineral substance that burn and waste in the fire without metallin fusion, or ingression. The greatest affinity they have, is with Sulphur: but this hath ingression into metal, and therefore I rank it among the Spirits, and Bitumen hath none. Of this kind some are solid, and some liquid. Solid, as Suc∣cinum Gagates, Ambra, Camphora, Terra Ampell Lithanthrax, sive Carbofossilis, &c. Liquid,  Petroleum and Naphta. All these are great fuel to fire, especially those that are liquid, which are thought to draw fire unto them, if it be within their effluvium: So Pliny reports that Medl burnt Creusa by anointing her Garland with Naphtha: and Strabo tells how Alexander Bath-master Athenophanes, had almost burn Stephanus, a Boy in the Bath, by sprinkling Naptha upon him, if it had not been suddenly quenched. And this is that juice or thick wa∣ter which Plato in Times reckons among fires and which the Egyptians used in their Sacrifices, Machab. 2. 1. and was hidden by the Jewish Priests in a dty
pit for 70 years, and afterwards found by Ne∣bemih. But whereas it is a common received opinion, that some of these Bitumina will burn in water, I cannot believe it; although. Pliny and Agri∣cola, and most that have written since, out of them do averr it, and bring arguments and ex∣amples to prove it. For although water were a fewel to fire, as oyle is, yet there can be no fire without air, and water excludes air; and so doth oyle, if the fire be beneath it, and covered with it: As for their arguments, they say that Bitumen being sprinkled with water, burns more, and therefore water is a fewel to it: as wee see that Smiths cast water upon their Sea-cole in their Forges: but the reason of this is, because their Coal being small like dust, the water makes it to cake and bake together, where otherwise the blast would blow it way: also it hinders the quick burning of it, and so makes it continue the longer: so in a Vulcano after Rain, they find the fire to burn more, when the Bitumen is smal, and in dust. Although this may be a reason of it, that the Lyme which hath there been calcined, being by Rain dissolved, increaseth the fire. And whereas they say that water will kindle Bi∣tumen, and quench Sulphur it is not so: neither doth their example of Wild-fire prove it. For in Wild-fire, besides Bitumen and Camphir, there is a double proportion of quick Lymes, which by reason of the sudden dissolution of his Salt, by the effusion of water, is apt to kindle any combustible matter; not by reason of any Bitumen in the Lyme, as some imagine, nor of
any Empyreuma which the fire hath left in it, a Fracasturius thinks: for, how can there be any Bitumen left in the Lyme (if there were any  first,) after calcination: the fire would have con∣sumed that before any thing else. De sympath.& antipath. C.10. And as fo any Empyreums, it is certain that the more any thing is burnt, although the fire leave an adustio in it, the less apt it is to burn again, especially being burnt and calcin'd ad calcem aut cinere where all the combustible matter is spe Wherefore it must needs be by the violent mo∣tion which is in the sudden dissolution of the S in it, as appears by the crackling it makes:  ex motu fit calor; And motion causeth heat The like we observe in Pyrite sterili, where they make Vitriol, which being broken an laid up in heaps, and moistned with water, w gather heat, & kindle any combustible matter p to it. The like we find also in Allum Mines, &c where those mineral juices being concrete in th Mine, when they come to sudden dissolution d grow hot, and will kindle fuel. And as for th example of the Salt Lake whereof Agrico writes, between Strapel and Seburgh, which burns the fishermens nets if they be put near th bottome: and of the Lake Sputa, in Medi mentioned by Strabo, which burns Cloths put into it: I take that to be by reason of th corrsive quality of the Salt which frets them being stronger near the bottome; and not fro Bitumen, as Agricola thinks. De nat y. q. efslu. è tea. l. 4. . 22. The like I judg of the Lake by Denstadt in Turingia. And is very probable that Salt being heavier the Water, will be most towards the bottome: as
is reported of the fountain Achilleus in Mileto, whose water is very sweet and fresh above, and very salt towards the bottom. So is the water of Agnano in Italy, as M. Sandys reports in his tra∣vels. And the more heavy and terrestrial any sait is, the more corrosive it is: and so contraty∣wise, the more corrosive, the more heavy. Ari∣stotle asfirms the Sea-water to be more salt at the bottom than above: and so doth Pliny, who like∣wise makes mention of the Lake Ascanius in Chalcide, whose top is sweet, and bottom nitrous. Metcor. 2. Baccius writes the like of a Well near Toletum in Spain, the water whereof is sweet above, and corrosive beneath; which he judgeth to be from Quick-silver. Lib. 2. . II. Fallopius is also of opinion, that Bitumen doth not only burn in water, but is nou∣rished by water, because it makes the fire to last longer. De Thermis.c.5 But I have shewed the reason of that be∣fore. And for the burning in water, he should have said upon the water; for there it will burn as long as it swimmeth; but dip it under the wa∣ter, and it is presently extinguished. And whereas some report that Queen Ann of blessed memory, being in our Kings Bath, there arose a flame of fire like a candle from the bot∣tom of the Bath to the top near unto her, they must give me leave not to believe it, but rather to think they were mistaken: for, I am not bound to believe any thing against reason, which God hath given me to be my guide. It might have been some bubble of wind which is frequent in our Baths, or some bituminous matter not dissol∣ved in the water, did arise, and being at the top, dissolve it self upon the surface in the form of a
circle; but it could not be kindled. And if it might be kindled in the water (which were im∣possible) yet in all likelyhood it would have burnt better above the water than within it, and not be presently extinct, as they report. These Bitumina (excepting Camphir) are potentially hot and dry in the second or third degree; but concerning Camphir there are two doubts. Of Camphir. First, whether it be a Bitumen or a Gum. Secondly, whether it be hot or cold. Seyaphio de imp. m. d.c. 344. The Arabians aff it to be the gum of a huge tree with white leaves, under whose shadow many wild beasts may lye and that after earth-quakes there is great plenty found; that it is in quality cold and dry in th third degree; some late writers follow them i their opinion of a Gum, as Mathiolus, Amat Lusitanus, Garcias ab borto, &c. Plateareus hold it to be the juyce of an herb. Avicen.lib. I. tract.1. c.z. Item.l.2. tract. 2.cap. 133. Item. de med. cordial, tract. z. cap. 3. But we must con∣sider that they make two sorts of Camphir, th one of Borneo, the other of Chyna. For that  Chyna they confess it is adulterated with Bitu∣men: and that is the only Camphir in use with us. But that of Borneo to be a simple Gum, and that a pound of this is valued as dear as an hun∣dred pound weight of the other. So that all th doubt lieth in this Camphir of Borneo; which whether it be a Gum or no, is still in controver∣sie. For the Arabians not trading into those parts had the notice hereof only from others, as Sera∣pio and Avicen do confess: and Amatus Lusita∣nus faith the inhabitants will not suffer stranger to come ashore to see it. In Dioscoridem cap. de mastich. So as we have been kept in ignorance a long time from the true knowledge of it. And Garcias Ab horto tells us
that all his knowledge of it, is but by relation; himself not being able trável to see it, partly by reason of his age, and partly for his continual imployment about the Viceroy, yet be faith, that that he had a piece of the wood given him: On∣ly Edvardus Barbosa reports that he did see the place in Borneo, and found it to be of a mineral nature. Lib. I. cap. 9. But Barbosa his testimony is not authen∣tical, having failed much in other of his relations: as where he reports that the Purcelan of China is made of Oyster-shells, &c. He is contradicted by Consalvus Mendosa a man employed in those parts by the King of Spain, for such discoveries, and also by Hugo a Linschoten, a man of great observation, and both of them of far better credit than he. I procured some of that Camphir to be brought from thence by my worthy friend Captain Best, but whether it be a Gum or a Bitumen, by the view I cannot discern. But if it be a Gum, faith Solinander, why should it abound more af∣ter earth-quakes? and why should it burn and not dissolve in water? No Gums will burn, and all Gums will dissolve in water: and earth-quakes make no trees fruitful, but may cast forth mine∣rals. That there is a natural bituminous Cam∣phir, I make no doubt: and Agricola proves it sufficiently: And the Bath in Remandiola near Rhegium shews it. De nat. fossil. lib. 4. cap.2. Also the Well by Muntz∣bach, where Tabernomontanus faith there is mi∣neral Camphir, Averroes faith, it is affinis Bitu∣mini. Thesaur. aqu lib.I. cap. z. I confess that when I published my first edi∣tion, I was perswaded by Solinanders judgement, to think all Camphir to be a Bitumen, and name∣ly
that of Borneo, but since upon better enquiry, I find it otherwise. For Captain Best, beside the relations made unto him in the Indies, con∣cerning this Camphir, that it was from a tree, hath also procured me the testimony of Master Andrew Gogganel, under his own hand, that both the Camphir of Borneo and Sumatra, are gum of a tree, and no Bituminous matter, himself ha∣ving been at the gathering of it, and at the cut∣ting down of some of the trees. He hath also tra∣ded much in that commodity, and vented it a Japan; where it seems, as also at Chyna, they mix and adulterate it with some other matter, to increase the substance, and abate the price; which mixture perhaps may be some Bituminou substance. This Master Cogganell hath lived 1 years in those parts, and speaks the usual lan∣guage, and hath been often upon that Island o Borneo. Now for Solinanders reasons, they are easily answered: no Gums, faith he, will burn, and all Gums will dissolve in water. I grant it, if you take the word Gum in a strict sense, for wary Gums, as Tragacanth, Arabick, &c. But we use the word Gum in a more general sense, compre∣hending under it all Rosins, Turpentines, Pitches, &c. which being unctuous and oily, will rea∣dily burn, and will not dissolve in water. Among these Gums or Rosins, we reckon Camphir, and so that argument is answered. As for his other ar∣gument drawn from earth-quakes, mentioned by the Arabians, after which there is commonly more plenty of Camphir: this doth not prove it to be a mineral; For earth-quakes are as apt
to cast up fresh mould, whereby trees are made fruitful, as minerals. Wherefore let us subscribe to the antient Arabians, although they were not eye-witnesses hereof, and to the later observati∣ons of Spaniards and others; especially now that we have a Countrey-man of our own, who hath had as good means to learn the truth of this, as any European ever had; who is yet living, and able to give satisfaction to any that are curi∣ous in these points. Now for the qualities of it, the most general and truest opinion is, that it is cold and dry. Co Divs. 1.3. Tha. Nemico. Matthiolus judgeth it to be hot for three special reasons. First, because it burns, and is a great fuel to fire. If this argument be good, then flax, and straw, and paper, and touch-wood, and spunck should be hot; for they are apt fuels to fire. Secondly, because it is, odorata, and he holds all odorata, to be calida: Galen is of ano∣ther opinion, and holds the judgement of sim∣ples by favour to be uncertain. De simpl. med. facult.l.4.c.22. And as for Cam∣phir, Galen knew it not. Avicen faith expresly of Camphir, that although it be oata, yet it is frigida. And if Mattbiolus his rea were good, then Roses and Violets, and Vinega should be hot; for they are odorata. It is true that all fa∣vours arise from heat, as Galn faith, and all com∣pounded bodies have some hot parts: but we speak of the predominancy in the subject, and of the operation it hath upon mans body. Lib.I.tract c.2. Thirdly, because it bites the tonge. So doth juice of Le∣mons, and Barberies, and Vinegar, &c. and yet they are cold. Wherefore I conclude our Cam∣phir to be in quality cold and dry, and of very
subtil parts. These Bitumina being unctuous and oily, dissolve not of themselves in water, without the help of some mineral juice, but may be con∣fused with it. And we have many fountains and lakes which participate with them. In Shro shire at Pitchford, is a Spring that casteth for Bitumen swimming upon the water. The like w read of in Avernia in France, between Clart∣mond and Monferan, where the people gather  for their uses. In Italy there are many fountains yielding Bitumen; at Maianum, and Sasso and Salsa, and Herculanum at the foot of the Mountain Vesuvium, at Baia, and also at the cape of S. Helena, and in the Isle of woolfs there are fountains of pitchie Bitumen, which are used to pitch ropes and tackling, as Josepbus Acost reports. Bellonius de Naphtha c. 7. And we have that famous lake Aspha tites in Judea, so full of Bitumen, that it hardly suffers any thing to sink in it. The River Lipari in Cilicia, by reason of a Spring near Solos, is  full of liquid Bitumen, as they which swim or wast in it, seem to be anointed with oyle. Agric. de nat. cor. quoe cfflu. è terra l.2.c.7. Also there are Bituminous Springs in Saxony at Bruno, i Swevia the lake Tegera, at Gersedorf under the mount Jurat, in Asia by Tralleis and Nissa. Al∣so in the West-Indies there are many found which they put to use for shipping. And this Bitume is the chief ingredient in our Baths at Bathe i Somerset-shire, although diluted with much Ni∣tre, which makes the solution the better, and the water more clear. Bitumen pre∣dominant in the Bathes of Bath. That Bitumen is predominan in these our Baths, may be proved by the effects, because we finde them exceedingly to comfort the nerves, supple the joynts, dry up theumes,
cure Palsies, and Contractions, being distinctly used, tinct silver into the colour of gold, &c. Also by the Bituminous favour of them, and by the neighbourhood of Cole-mines in those parts. All which do argue Bitumen to abound in them. And whereas Doctor william Turner in his trea∣tise of these Baths, thinketh Brimstone to be the chief mineral, and Copper next; I am not of his opinion. The actual heat is no argument of Brimstone, as shall be shewed when I come to that point: neither doth the favour bewray it. But his reason for Copper is very weak. He found a Marchesit upon one of the Hills, which he thought to hold Copper: But Marchesits al∣though they shew yellow, yet they seldom hold Copper, or any other Metal. But his discourse hath perswaded John Bauhinus to publish it con∣fidently to the World. De thermis Boll. L.3.c.6 1. I shall have occasion to speak more of this hereafter. And thus much of Bitumina.
CHAP. VII. Of Mineral juyces concrete: called by the Al∣chymists, Salts. The four principal sorts of them; Salt, Nitre, Allum, Vitriol. A Fourth sort of minerals are concrete juyce which are mineral substances dissoluble in water. Libavius in Syntagm.p. 221 These the Alchymists call Salts, and are the means of communicating all other minerals with water. For as water is apt to dissolve and extract vegetables, so are these concrete juyce apt to dissolve and extract mineral substances. And although they are found sometimes liquid being dissolved by moysture; yet we call the concrete, because they will be concrete whe the adventitious moysture is removed. Our mi∣neral Authors do make many sorts of these ac∣cording to the several minerals which they im∣bibe: but in truth they may be all reduced to four heads; Salt, Nitre, Allum, and Vitriol. And each of these hath divers species, as Gebe and Casalpinus say of Salt, quot genera calcium, tot genera salium. Concerning Vitriol there may be some doubt whether it be a distinct specie from Allum, and have received only some tin∣cture from Copper or Iron, or from some of their brood, which are called excrements. For in di∣stilling oyle of Vitriol, the lute wherewith the glasses are joyned, will yield perfect Allum. And Vitriol being boyl'd, ariseth in bullas as Allum doth, and shoots like Allum in glebas; as Salt doth in tesseras, and Nitre in stirias. The shoot∣ing
or roching of concrete juyces, is worthy to be observed, seeing every kind hath his several manner or fashion of shooting, whereby a man may see the perfection of each kind. For exam∣ple, if Salt-peeter be brought you to examine whether it be perfect good or not, dissolve it in water, and set it to shoot in a wooden-dish, or with sticks of Ash, or other porons wood: and if it shoot in needles, (in stirias) it is right. But if any of it shoot in squares or angles, or lumps, it is mixt, and unfit either for Medicine or Gun∣powder. The common Salt-peeter being prepa∣red and cleansed with ashes, hath commonly much of the salt of the ashes mixt with it in the liquors, which being brought to shoot, will settle first upon the wood in squares, (in tesseras) and then the Salt-peeter will shoot upon it in nee∣dles. These needles are good Salt-peeter, but the squares are other salt, and weaken the Salt∣peeter in his operation; the like you may judge of other concrete juyces. There are also certain stones which we call fluores, which do naturally shoot in divers forms: as Christal into fix squares (in sexagulos.) Sparr, which the Dutch call Sput or Querts, shoots into points like Diamonds, as we see in those Cornish or Bristol-stones: Osteocolla found by Darmstadt, in the Palatinat, like bones: others like Oyster or Muscle-shells, &c. The reason of this several shooting in con∣crete juyces and other minerals, is hard to give. For if it did lye in the thinness or thickness, or clamminess of the matter whereof they were made, that difference were taken away when di∣vers sorts are dissolved together in the same wa∣ter,
for one would qualifie the other. But we find that this mixt water will yield his several salts di∣stinctly, and all at once. So that it seems, for the ornament of the universe, that nature hath so di∣stinguished these species, as it doth plants; among which some have thick leaves, some thin, some long, round, jagged, &c. some have bulbous-root, some long, stringy, &c. So in their flowers, fruits, colours, smells, &c. every kind hath his own fa∣shion. The reason hereof Scaliger saith cannot be drawn from the Elements, nor from the thin∣ness, thickness, clammíness, heat, cold, dryness, moysture, plenty, scarsity, &c. of the matter but only from the form, anima, seed, &c. which frames every species to his own figure, order number, quantity, colour, taste, smell, &c. ac∣cording to the science, as Severinus terms it which every seed hath of his own form. In lib. de plan∣tis Aristoteli ascriptum lib. 2. passim. So als it is in minerals, which have their several and di∣stinct species in nature, and their seeds to main∣tain and perpetuate the Species. Now that thes concrete juyces are not bred commonly in thes forms in the earth, the reason may be, either be∣cause they are often intermixt with other mine∣rals in their generation, or that their matter be∣ing plentiful, and room scanty, they have n scope to display themselves in their proper forms or perhaps they want water to dissolve then. But by artificial preparations, we find these d∣stinctions: in which it is doubtful whether hot or cold, or dryness, do procure this shooting  roching in concrete juyces, and whether the sam causes procure it in all. For dryness it is certain that as moysture dissolves them, so dryness co∣geals
them; but dryness being a passive quality, is, not sufficient; it must be the action either of heat or cold, or both; and the right ordering of these will open a door to the artifice of Bay-Salt, here in England, as well as in France or Spain, or the Isle of Mayo. Among these con∣crete juices, Agricola reckons Sulphur, Bitumen, Auripigmentum, Sandaracha, Chusocola, AEru∣go, Myfi, Sori, Melanteria, &c. Caesalpinus de metallisc.3.l.1. But if we exa∣mine, them aright, we shall find, that either they are not dissoluble in water as concrete juices should be, or they are some of those juices tincted or incorporated with other minerals. All these mineral juices are accounted hot and dry, and astringent, and detergent, some more, some less; and we take it so upon trust. But this point requires further consideration and distin∣ction. Salt is a fixed substance, not volatile in the fire, astringent, detergent, purging, dispersing, repelling, attenuating, makes an escar, and preserves from putrifaction, as Dioscorides in∣forms us, and Galen confirms the same, adding that it is hot. Salt. Diosc. l.5.c.84. De simpl. med. sault.l.4.c.20. & l.11.c.50. But we must understand Galen with his limitation, lib. 6. cap. 30. That the more it is detersory, the less it is astringent. And all astringent things are cold, as he avouch∣eth, lib. 4. cap. 6. Acida, acerba, & astringen∣ia omnia frigida. Now if Salt be astringent, it must be cold by Galens own rule, and it is not enough to say it hath warm parts in it, but being an uniform substance, we must determine of it expredominio. Also Galen lib. 1. Sympt. cap. 4. comparing pure water with sea water,
seems to affirm that sea waters, before it have re∣ceived any great adventitious cold, may cool our bodies. And so this place is understood by An∣thonius Maria Venustus in consilio pro Petro pi∣cardo. The repelling quality, and the making an escar, and the preserving from putrifaction, are arguments of driness, and not of heat. For as heat and moisture are principal agents in ge∣neration and corruption; so cold and driness in preservation. Also I should impute the purga∣tive and detersory qualities in Salt rather to the tenuity of parts, and the stimulation which i hath from thence, then to any heat; for then  Sennertus faith, all hot things should purge; Instit. lil. 5. part. 1. cap. 11. Vuleriala in G de constit, artis pag. 447. And Mesne Can universal. cap. 1. rejects all elementary quali∣ties, temperaments, similitudes, or contrarietio of substances, &c. in purging thedicines. All Tamarinds, Myrabolans, and Antimony  purge, and yet are cold, Venustus, pag. 13 But the purgative faculty of Medicines is fro stimulation of the expulsive faculty of the sto∣mach and guts, and not from attraction b heat of peculiar humours, as hath been imagin∣ed. Heat may serve as an instrument to actu stimulation, as cold doth dull and benumb  faculties, but neither heat nor cold are princi∣pal agents in this work. And whereas Rhub is thought to purge choller only, Sena and Po∣lipody melancholy, Agarick flegme, &c. be∣cause we see the excrements tincted with the same colours, it is a deceit; for these purgation do colour humours in that manner. Yet I do
not deny a distinction to be made of Purgations in other respects. And our antient Physitians through long experience have found out the right use of purging medicines, and their true distin∣ctions for several uses for mens bodies: as that some do purge gross humours, and some thin, some are strong, and some weak: some are com∣fortable to the Stomach, or Liver, or Spleen, &c. and some hurtfull to some of those parts: some are too hot in some cases, and some temperate, &c. but they have not discovered the true cause of this purging quality: some attributing it to a celestial influence, some to a hidden quality, which is as much as if they bad said nothing: some to a Sympathy, Antipathy, &c. For my part I hold the purgative quality of mixt bodies to lie principally in the terrestrial part of them, which is their Salt: and therefore the Chymists use to acuate their purging extracts with their proper Salts. It were much better if they could make their Salts without calcination; for then they should retain the taste of the Sim∣ples, which lyeth in the Salt, and much other virtue which the fire consumes in calcination. Three wayes to make Vege∣table Salts to retain the taste of the herbs from whence they are drawn. 1. It were a delicate thing to have all our vegetable salts to retain the taste of the herbs and simples, from whence they are drawn: as of Wormwood, bitter; of Sorel, sour; of Licoris, sweet, &c. There are in mine opinion, three several wayes for it, although they be laborious. The one is by precipitation, when the juice or strong de∣coction of any simple is precipitated by the ad∣dition of some appropriate liquor which will strike down all other parts in the juice or deco∣ction;
but the Salt which is in it will not easily precipitate, but will remain in the liquor, and must be severed either by evaporation, or by roching. But in this work we must make choice of such a precipitator, as may not infect our Salt with any strange quality. Three wayes to make Vege∣table Salts to retain the taste of the herbs from whence they are drawn. 2. Another way it to make an extract of the simple which we de∣sire to work upon, and when we have made it so dry as it will be powdred, then pour upon it pure spirit of Wine, which will dissolve no Salt, if it be without flegme. By this means throngh often repetitions of new infusions, untill the extract will yield no more tincture unto the spi∣rit of Wine, you shall find the Salt in the bot∣tome, as a substance which the Spirit of Wine will not work upon, nor dissolve. Three wayes to make Vege∣table Salts to retain the taste of the herbs from whence they are drawn. 3. A third way, as I conceive, may be in manner of the working of Salt-Peeter, by putrifying great quantities o the herbs, untill they become earth: and the by infusions with water, to extract the Salt, which will not putrifie with the herb, but will remain in the earth. The second course I have tryed, the other wayes are very probable. In these salts do lie the chief virtues of many simples either for purging by stool, or urine, or for clean∣sing, cooling, drying, stimulating, opening o obstructions, attenuating of gross humours, astriction, corroboration, &c. according to the nature of the simples: whereas the other Salt which are made by calcination, have lost these virtues by the violence of fire, and cannot be distinguished the one from the other. Nitre. Nitre is a volatile substance which doth dry
and attenuate more then Salt, and although it hath not so much astriction as Salt is said to have, yet it seems to cool more then Salt, perhaps be∣cause it is of thinner parts, and penetrates more, and that is the reason that it serves better for the dissolution of Metals. In Physick we find our Sal Nitrum (which is a kind of it) to cool the body mightily, and therefore used in Juleps. These Nitres also are apt to move sweat, espe∣cially those that are drawn artificially from mixed bodies, as from Boles, Cordial Herbs, Bones, Horns, Teeth, Claws, Hoofs, &c. which are drawn by sublimation. And these parts of Ani∣mals are found to be very soveraign against ve∣nome and maligne humours. The reason of it I take to be, not only the drying quality they have, whereby they resist corruption of humours, but also & principally by reason of their volatile Salt or Nitre, whereby they move sweat, and expell from the center of the body. For all their Salt is volatile, as may appear by this, that you can never make any lixivium, out of any of these animal Medicines, by calcination, as you do out of vegetables; their Salt being altogether eva∣porated by the fire. This volatile salt being taken into our bodies, and actuated by our natural heat, is commonly very Diaphoretick: and this is it which makes our Bezoar Stones, Contrae-yer∣va, Ungula del Bado, and supposed Unicorns Horn to be in such esteem. SAl Ammoniacum, is also a kind of Nitre, and volatile, and so is Borax and Altincar: but these are commonly mixed with Sal Alcali, and Urin or Vinegar, and so made more fix. Sal Ammoniack. There is
also a natural Fix Borax found in the Isle of Lamlay neer Dublin in Ireland, which perhaps the Sea water hath fixt. Allum and Vitriol are much alike, but that Vitriol hath a garb from Copper or Iron. These are very astringent, and without doubt cold, whatsoever hath been held of them. The waters or slegms distilled from them, do exceedingly cool in Juleps, as Quercitan and Claudius Dariot, have observed, and we also by daily experience do find true; by reason of the intense acidity they have, being distilled from their Terrestrial parts. In pestis Alexic. Dariot de pra∣parat. med. Tract. 2. cap. 23, 24. Also those Acidula which the Germans call Saurbrun, pro∣ceeding from these Juices, are much used to quench the heat of fevers. It may be objected, that they are corrosives, and will eat into metal, and therefore must be hot. But by the same reason, the Juices of Lemons, Barberries, Howsleek, &c. should be hot, for they will carve Iron. To bite and eat as a Corrosive, are not arguments of heat, but of piercing. lib. de Humi∣orum usu. Wherefore Hypocrates saith, Frigus ulceribus mordax, Cold bites Ulcers; and frigus est principium destru∣ctivum, ut calor generativum; Cold is a de∣structive principle, and Heat a generative. And therefore it is more probable that these corrosives are more cold then hot. These two mineral juices are not so readily dissolved in water, as the other two, and wil be more easily precipi∣tated by any opposite substance that is more fa∣miliar to water. I omit the several sorts or these concrete juices and their admixtures with other minerals, as impertinent to my purpose: where∣fore I will shew some examples of each of them in natural Springs.
For salt Springs, Josephus Acosta tells us of a rare Spring at a Farm neer Cusco in Peru, which as it runs, turns into very white Salt, with∣out any fire or art, in great abundance. Salt Springs. In Ger∣many are many salt Fountains, at Luneburg, Stafford, Salt burgh, Aldondorf, Halstat, &c. In Italy, in agro Volaterano, &c. In Sicily, at Solinantia, is a salt Well which is hot; and so are the Pegasaei Fontes in Caria. Also the Fountain by Medon in Traesen is both salt and hot. Our Wiches in Cheshire are well known. There are also Rivers of salt water by the Caspian Streights, and in Spain, and Caria, and in Bactria, Ochus and Oxus. Also there are salt Lakes, as the Terentine Lake in Italy? the Lake between Strapela and Seburgh (mentioned before) in Germany, three Lakes in Sicily, and besides an infinite number in other Countreys, the Lake of Lakes, the Sea. All which receive their saltness from Mines of Salt in the Earth, which are very frequent and huge in bigness, as may appear by the Rocks of Salt in Bohemi, in Monte Carpato, in Polonia, within two miles of Cracovia, in Helvetia, and Rhetia, where they have no other Salt but from the Rock. As also by the Caspian Streights, are great Rocks of Salt. But Marous Paulus Venetus, tells us of a Rock or Mountain of Salt in Thaican, able to furnish all the world with Salt. Lib. 3. So that it is no marvail that the Sea is salt, seeing it pierceth into the bowels of the earth, and discovereth many great Rocks of Salt which dissolve in it. The true cause of the saltness of the Sea. And this is the true cause of the saltness of the Sea. The
other causes alledged for it, are very improbable. For whereas Aristotle and his followers attribute the saltness of the Sea, to the evaporation of the fresh and sweet parts of the water, by the Sun, and to an adustion procured also thereby: I answer, that neither the one nor the other can breed a substance in the water, which was not there before. For qualities can breed no sub∣stance, and adustion is but a quality imprinted, and no substance. Neither can evaporation breed any, but only discover that which was in it be∣fore, by taking away the thin parts, and leaving the terrestrial behind. Aliquid aquae admixtum Arist. 2. Meteo∣rol. cap. 3. But we see the Sea water to contain in it the substance of Salt, and most of the Salt which we use is made of Sea water and no man will deny that this Salt is differing from water in his substance and generation, be∣ing a distinct species in it self. And whereas they alledge for confirmation of their opinion, that under the torrid Zone, the Sea is more salt then in other parts, the Sun exhaling more there, and making a greater adustion; I doubt it, both for the large & plentiful Rivers which those parts afford, beyond any other parts of the world, and also for that the Sea water there is not hot, neither are the beams of the Sun so hot, but that men do endure them: and therefore not likely to breed an adustion in the Sea water, which must first be hot, before it be adusted. Also it may be that those parts do abound in Rocks of Salt, as we read of people in Africa, called Ammantes, who make them Houses of Rock-Salt, and Castles, as that in Sin Geraico, which is five miles in compass, and all of Salt: also
the Mountain Oromenus in India is all of Salt. Moreover if the Sun be able to do this in the Sea, which is alwayes in motion, whereby it eludes the force of the beams; why should it not do the like, and much more in standing Lakes, as the Lemanus and such like? They answer that Lakes are continually supplyed and fed with fresh water from Springs. But so is the Sea con∣tinually fed with fresh water, and in as large a proportion, caeteris paribus, as Lakes are. For as the Sea is not increased by the influx of fresh waters, no more are divers Lakes, but keep the same fulness, and sometimes are lessened. And whereas they say that the upper part of the Sea is more salt then the botome, they speak against all reason, salt being heavier then water, and against experience, as I have shewed in the former Chapter. Also Aristotle in some places confes∣seth it. Meteor. 2.c.3. But if any man will take the pains to vapour away 100. Tun if he will of fresh water, I do assure my self he will not find one grain of salt at the bottome, if it were not in the water before. This may be tryed also in any distilled water, which we are sure can have no Salt in it, (for Salt will not arise in distillation) and is as apt to yield Salt as any other water, if adustion or e∣vaporation would breed it. Wherefore the saltness of the Sea is not from evaporation or adustion, but must needs proceed from Rocks of Salt in the Earth, which the Sea doth, wash, and dissolve much of it. And considering the great use of Salt, both for other uses, and for Generations, Nature hath provided enough of it, especially in the Sea, which is more fruitful in that respect,
the Land. Wherefore Venus was called A: Est Venus orta Mari. Nitre is seldome found in Bathes alone, but mixt with other minerals, which it dissolves, and infects the water withall. Nitrous Wateys. Yet we read of a Nitrous Lake called Letis, neer Cālestria in Macedonia, where they use to make Nitre, and vent it to all parts. So they do at the Nitrarit in Egypt. Also the Lake Arethus in Armeniae, is full of Nitre. At Menis in Phrygia is a Spring of Nitrous water which is hot: Also in Leonte is a hot Nitrous Spring. Observat. l. 3. c. 76, 77. Bellonius makes mention of a Nitrous Fountain neer Belba, and of abundance of Nitre upon a Plain neer there∣unto, which seems to be that which Pliny calls Halmariga. But he denieth that there is any Mine of Nitre under the earth, but that all i bred out of the soyle as an Efftorescens of the earth: Baccius saith the same of Salt-peeter. Lib. 5.c.7 Agricola saith, that as the true Nitre is gathered upon the Plains of Media above the earth, so is Salt-peeter found above the earth in many pla∣ces of Saxony: That Nitre is gathered upon the Plains of Media, are Plinies own words. Lib. 31. c. 10. Exi∣guum fit apud Medos canescentibus sscitate con∣vallibus; There is a little to be found among the Medes, where the Valleys are white with Drought. So that it seemeth, his opinion was, that Nitre is not bred in a Mine under the earth, as Gesner also saith, Epist. lib. 3. pag. 134. but in the earth it self, as the chief fatness it hath to further generations. And seeing earth is the mother of all terrestrial bodies, it is not left un∣furnished with those mineral juices, nor ought
else that is requisite for the production of Spe∣cies: It hath been observed by some, that Ni∣trous water is the best soyle for ground, and brings all Plants to perfection far sooner then any other dung, and therefore the Egyptians water their Coleworts with Nitrous water, Nitrosa viridis brassica fiet aqua. Martial.If you a Colewort green would see, Then let your water Nitrous be. Our Salt-peeter men do find, that any fat earth be covered from Rain and Sun, so as it spendeth not his strength in producing of Herbs or Grass, it will breed plenty of Salt-peeter, otherwise it will yield none. The difference between Salt-peeter, and the antient Nitre, ap∣pears in this, that a pound of Nitre being burnt, will leave four ounces of ashes; Salt-peeter will leave none. Salt-peeter is actually so cold, as be∣ing dissolved in water, it is used in Rome and Naples to cool their Wine, and doth it as well as Ice or Snow. Also we use it inwardly in cool∣ing Juleps, and therefore it seems also to be po∣tentially cold, as Bellonius judgeth. Now I come to Allum (Indignum vix ipsa jubet renovare dolorem) the greatest debtor I have, and I the best benefactor to it, as shall appear when I shall think fit to publish the Ar∣tifice thereof. Allum Spring In Illua, a mile from Rio, is an Allum Fountain: also there are divers in Agro Senensi, Volaterano, Lucensi, in Italy: Balneum de villa is full of Allum; and with us in Shrop∣shire
at kenyate, are Allun springs, whereof the Dyers of Shrewsbury make use instead of Allum. As for Allum Mines, they are frequent almost in all Countreys, but the chiefest that are wrought, are at Capsylar in Thracia, at Telpha neer Civita Vecchia in Italy, at Commato by Aussig in Germany, and With us in York-shire. In Ireland there have been allum works neer to Armagh, as Thurneiser reports: also at Metelia in Spain, at Mazaron neer Carthage, at Helles∣pont, Massa, Montrond, Piambin, Volterra, Campilia, &c. as Beringaccio Sienese reports. Also there are divers earths yielding allum, as at Guyder in Carnarvan-shire, at Camfurt in Dor∣set-shire, and in the Isle of Wight. Pyrotech. l. 2. c. 6. But I will contract my self for allum, and come to Vitriol. Vitriol, as I have said before, doth participate much with allum in the manner of shooting  roching, which is in glebas, in the hard dissoluti∣on and easie congelation, in their arising in bul∣las being burnt, and in their precipitation: in∣somuch as it is probable that the basis of Vitriol is nothing but allum. Vitrioline waters. It is found in mineral wa∣ters of two sorts. Simp.med.facul. l. 9. c. 61. The one where the very bod and substance is dissolved; as in Cyprus, which Galen describes, where the water is green: also at Smolnicium in Hungary, in Transilvania al Carpatum montem, at Nensola, &C. In which places Copper is ordinarily made out of Iron by infusing it in these waters. Libav. in Sy∣mag. 3. part. l.7. Item singulari∣um part. 1. I will not determine whether this be transmutation of one species into another, as some do hold, or rather a precipita∣tion of the Copper which was formerly dissol∣ved in the water by means of the sharp Vitriol
which meeting with Iron, corrodes it, and im∣bibeth it, rather than the Copper, and so lets the Copper fall, and imbraceth the Iron in place of it. We daily see the like in Aqua-sortis, which having imbibed one metal, will readily embrace another that is more familiar to it, and let fall the first. So Allum or Copperass-water having some strong Lixivium of Tartar or other calcin'd salt put to it, the Allum or Copperass will presently salt to the bottom, and precipitate and give place to the Lixivium, as a thing more familiar to wa∣ter, and of more easie dissolution. But as I said, I will not determine this question, because it is not much pertinent to our business. Yet I will not omit the judgement of Lazarus Ercker the Emperors chief Mine-master in the Kingdom of Behemia who professeth that he was long of this opinion, but altered it upon this reason; That by exact proof he found more Copper stricken down this way by Iron, than the water before did contain, and with the Copper some Silver. Lib. 3. Von. Kupffer ertz. The other kind of Vitriol water is, where not the bo∣dy and substance of Vitriol is dissolved, but the spirit or vapour, or quality communicated to the water: of this sort are our Vitriol Baths for the most part, and these are in themselves wholsome, and are sour, if the Vitriol be predominant. Such are most of our Acidulae; whereof we have ma∣ny in Viterbio & Volaterano, Balneum ad mor∣um dictum, Saurbrun by Franckford ad Oderam, &c. There are sour waters also from Allum, but milder: also from Sulphur, whose spirit or vapour being burnt, is little differing from the spirit of Vitriol, but somewhat fatter. 10. Baubinus de thr. nis l.2.c.2. But the most part
of our Acidulae are from Vitriol. This sour spirit of Allum, Vitriol or Sulphur, Libavius judgeth with Thomas Jordanus to be, in the terrestrial parts of these minerals, because it goeth not a∣way by boyling or distillation, and therefore to be communicated with water by the corporal sub∣stance or juyce of them. De judicio aqu. niner.p.26.36. But that holds not in mineral spirits which are heavier than water, as may appear by evaporation of any water made sour with spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, where af∣ter long evaporation, that which remains will be more sour than before evaporation. So it is also in Vinegar, being a vegetable juyce. The spirit of wine doth certainly arise first in distillation, and the first is the best, being more volatil than the vapour of water. But this spiritus acetosus which is in Sulphur, Allum, Vitriol and Vine∣gar, ariseth last; and the more you distill away from it, the sharper it ariseth, and the sourer is that which remaineth. Thus much for Vitriol and concrete juyces.
CHAP. VIII. Of Mineral Spirits; Quick-silver, Salphur or Brinsstone, Arsenick, with his kinds, Cadmia. AFist kind of Minerals are called Spirits; these are volatil in the fire, and have in∣gression into Metals, but no metalline fusion. These are Quick-silver, Sulphur, Arsenick, Cad∣mia, Rusma, &c. All which being volatil, will easily sublime, and being mixed with metals, as Cadmia's ordinarily to make Brass, will alter the colour of the metal, and make it less fusible, and less malleable. I will briefly run over the exam∣ples of these and their virtues or qualities, being more obscure, and in our Baths less useful than the former, and more rare. Qnick silver was not well known to Galen, for he confesseth that he had no experience of it, and did think it to be meerly artificial, and not naturally bred in the earth. Simpl. med. fa∣cult. 1. 5. 0. 59. Dioscorides makes no mention of the temperature of it, but holds it to be a pernitious venome, and to fret the en∣trails; although Matthiolus affirms that it is safely given to women to further their deliver∣ance, and we find it so by often expcrience, both in that cause, and in Worms, and in the French Disease and Leprosies, if it be skilfully prepared, and with judgement administred. Fallopius holds it to be one of the miracles of nature. Those that take upon them to determine of the qualities of it, are much distracted; fome reckoning it to be hot and dry, and some cold and moist; and both
in a high degree. But in this account they con∣sider not the qualities of the ingredients in the preparation; whether it be sublim'd or precipi∣tated. Vidus Vidius turat. generat. p. 2. sect.2.1.3.C. 13. Fallopius de petallis 6. 37. For my part I know not how to reduce  to the Elementary qualities: neither am I asht∣med of mine ignorance in it, seeing no man hi∣therto hath given true satisfaction herein. And if it be true that the elements do not concur to the generation of mixt bodies, (as I shall shew, cap. 11.) we need not marvail if we find the not where they be not. Quick-silver not reducible to the Elemen∣tary Qualities But for our own use, where reason fails us, let us be guided by experience. We find by experience, that it cuts, attenuates, penetrates, melts, resolves, purges both ad cen∣trum & a centro, heats, cools, &c. and is a tran∣scendent beyond our rules of Philosophy, and  monster in nature, as Renodaus faith. For our pur∣pose it is enough to know whether it will impr any quality to water; which Fallopius, Bacei Solinander, Banbinus, and Felix Platerus do ac∣knowledge. But it gives no taste to it, neither have we many examples of Baths which contin it. In Serra Morena in Spain, near the Village Almedien, is a Cave where are many Wells i∣fected (as is thought) with Quick-silver, because much of that mineral is extracted from thence out of a red stone called Minium nativum. A∣bout fifty miles from thence in V alentiola, then is another fountain called La Nava, of a sha taste, and held to proceed from Quick-silver and these waters are found wholsome. So are  waters at Almagra and Toletum, and others by the River Minius, which are hot. There are man venomous springs attributed to Quick-silver,
the red fountain in Athiopia, others in Boetia, Caa in Trigloditis, Stix in Arcadia, Stix in Thessalia, Licus in Sicilia, &c. which perhaps are from other minerals, feeing we find some from Quick-silver to be wholsome. For Mines of Quick-silver, we read of many in Baetica, Attica, Ionia, out of a stone which Pliny calls Vomica liquoris aterni. In Germany at Lands∣berg, at Creucenacbum, Schenbach, Baraum above Prage, Kunningstien, &c. In Scotland three miles beyond Barwick, I found a red stone, which I took to be minium nativum, seeing Agricola makes mention of it in Scotland, but by a mis∣chance could not try it. Sulphur attracts, contracts, resolves, mollifies, discusses, whereby it shews a manifest heat, though not intense, yet the sume of it is very sour, and therefore must cool and dry: and I perswade my self that there is no better sume to correct veno∣mous and infectious air, than this of Sulphur, or to remove infections out of rooms, clothes, bed∣ding, vessels, &c. Sulphur. We must acknowledge dif∣fering parts in all compounded bodies; as Rhu∣barb hath a purgative quality in the infusion, and an astrictive in the Terrestrial substance, where the salt hath been by infusion extracted. The substance of Sulphur is very fat (Sulphure nihil pinguius) faith Felix Platerus, and this is the cause of his easie taking of fire, and nor any pro∣pinquity it hath with fire in the quality of heat: for if it were very hot, Dioscorides would not comment it purulenta extussientibus, the next door to a Hectick. Also Galen faith, that fat things are moderately hot, and are rather nutri∣ments
than medicaments. Now for Sulphurous Baths, they are very frequent, and if we should believe some, there are no hot Baths but parti∣cipate with Sulphur, but they are deceived, as shall appear hereafter, when we come to shew the true causes of the heat of Baths. Neither are all sulphurous Baths hot. Gesner reports of a Bath by Zurich very cold, and yet sulphurous, Agricola of another by Buda in Pannonia. In Campania by the Leucogaean Hills, are cold Springs full of Brimstone. Also there are hot Baths without any shew of sulphur that can be discerned, as the Baths of Petriolum in Italy, the Baths Caldanelloe and de Avinione in agro Senensi, de Gratta in Viterbiensi, de aquis in pisanis col∣libus. Divi Johannis in agro Lucensi, in Alsatia another not far from Gebersallerum, &c. All which are very hot, and yet give no sign of Sul∣phur either by taste or smell, or effects. And yet no doubt there are many Baths having a sulphu∣rous smell from other minerals; as from Bitu∣men, Vitriol, Sandaracha, Allum, &c. which are hardly to be discerned (if at all) from Sul∣phur. So we commonly say, if a house or a tree be fet on fire by lightning, that it smells of Brim∣stone when there was no Brimstone there. Mans things combusted, will yield a nidorous smell, not discernable after burning what the things were. But there are divers truly sulphurous Baths which contain Sulphur, although not per∣fectly mixt with the water without some medi∣um, but only confused: for perfect Sulphur will not dissolve in water no more than Bitumen, The spirit of Sulphur may be communicated to
water, and so may the matter of Sulphur before it hath attained his perfect form and consistente : otherwise it is only confufed with water, and alters it into a milky colour. Sulphurca Nar al∣bus aqua, Nar with Sulphurous water white. At Baia are divers hot fulphurous Baths, and every where in Hetrnria, in Sicily, in Diocesi Panormitana ; the Baths of Apono, as Savana∣rola Muntagna, and Fallopius avevs, although John de dondis denieth it; the Bath of Astru∣num, of Callatura, S. Euphemie, Aquisgran, Bri∣genses thernmae in V alesiis Helvetiorum, Aqua san∣cta in Picenis, and an infinite number every where. Baccius reckons our Baths of Bath among fulphurous Baths, from the relation of Edward Carne when he was Embassador to Jnlius tertius, and Panlus quartus. I will not deny some touch of Sulphur in them, seeing we sind among bitu∣minous coals, some which are called metal coals, with certain yellow vains which are Sulphur. But the proportion of Sulphur to Bitumen, is very little, and therefore I do not hold them Sul-phurous & pradominio. This is enough for Sul∣phur. Concerning Arsenick, it is a venomous mi∣neral, and therefore I need speak noth ng of the Baths which proceed from it, but that we take heed of them; It is likely that those venomous waters and vapours which kill suddenly, do pro∣ceed from Arsenick, as at Cicrum in Thracia, font Neptunius in Terracina, at Peraut by Mom∣pelier, the Lake Avernus. Arsenick. The cave of Charon by Naples. Under Arsenick we may comprehe. d Auripigmentum, Risagalum, Sandaracha, Rus∣ma,
&c. I hear of but one Mine of Rrsma in Ci∣prus, from whence the Turks have it to take off hair, and it doth it best of any thing known, as Bellonius and Platerus report, and I have made tryal of it oftentimes: The former sorts of Arse∣nick are found in Misia Helltspontia in Ponu, by the River Hippanis, which is made bitter by it. In the lesser Afta, between Magncsia and Euphesus in Carmania, &c. It is accounted to be extreme hot and putrifying. Cadmia is either natural or fictitious: Th natural is often dangerous in Germany, as Agri∣cola saith, especially that which is liquid, whic is a strong corrosive : the other is of the natu of Copper, moderately hot and cleansing. as especially good to clear the eyes, as Calamina and Tntia. Cadmia. It is found in Copper Mines, and  it self in Ciprus, as Galen saith by the City Sol Also in Agro Senensi, Vicentino, Bergomensi, no Como, where they make Brass with it. Unde Meadip hills there is much of it. The Baths  Saint Cnssian do participate with it, and Cicp his Baths neer Baia. Also the Bath at Zurich  Helvetia, and Grotta in Viterbio. Thus much for Spirits.
CHAP. IX. Of mean metals, or half metals. Bismutuin or Tin-glass, Antimony, Bell-metal. ASixt sort I make to be mean metals, or half metals, which are mineral substances, ha∣ving metalline susion, but are not malleable, as metals are : and therefore being mixt with me∣tals, do make them brittle. These are Bismutum, or plumbum cinereum, Antimony, Bell-metal, which Geber calls Magnesta, in Dutch Speiss∣Calaem also may be reckoned among those, which is a kind of white metalline Cadmia, brought out of the East-Indies, which hath both metalline ingression, and metalline fusion, but not perfectly malleable. These although they are more volatil than metal, yet by reason of their fusion into a King, are not so easily sublim'd as the Spirits. Bismutum is tnat we call Tin-glass, differing both from Tin and Lead. Bismutum, or Tin-glass. Candidins nigro, sed plumbo nigrins albo, whiter than black, but blacker than white lead. It was not known to the Anti∣ents, and therefore we can say little of the qua∣lities of it. It is found in England, and in Mis∣nia, and at Sneberg in Germany, and in very few places else. I read not of any waters that partici∣pate with it: neither can I say much of Anti∣mony, but that Dioscorides saith it cools, binds, opens obstructions, &c. And Galen, that it dry∣eth and bindeth, and is good for the eyes, &c. But of the purging quality they write nothing, al∣though we find it to purge violently, both up∣wards
and downwards: whereupon we may g ther that all purging medicines are not hot, as  have touched before. Cambden faith there is  Mine of it in Cumberland: It is found in Italy in Thinni montibus, in Senensi agro in the Coun∣ty of S. Flora, and in Germany in many place But I read of no waters that participate with  unless we should judge all purgative waters to be infected with it, as neer Ormus, Purchas write of such a Spring which purgeth. Sawanarola  Balneis Romandiolae, mentions a. Spring at M dula, which purgeth. Part, 3.pag.72. Also Balneum Tertutii  agro Pistoriensh, Fallopio; also the sour wat of Mendich and Ponterbon do purge choler, Rulandus saith. At None-such we have also a p gative Spring, which may participate with A timony or Nitre, or both: But purgative wa are rare, unless it be ratione ponderis, by the we and quantity, and so any water may purge,  our Bath-waters do purge in that manner, and the addition of Salt, which gives stimulation  it. This our Bath-guides do ordinarily presc to such as will be perswaded by them, not kno∣ing how it agreeth with their griefs, nor ho may do hurt in many respects, as oftentime doth. Bell-metal is thought to be a mixture of ward and Copper-Oars, as Kentman judgeth, an found in our Tin and Copper-Mines in C wall. I read of no waters infected with it, no any use it hath in Physick.
CHAP. X. Of Metals; Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, Ti Lead. THe seventh and last sort are metals, mineral substances, fusible and malleablé. Fallop. de me∣tallis cap. 10. Libav. de nat. metall. part. 3. cap. 5. These are commonly distinguished into perfect and im∣perfect; perfect, because they have less impu∣rity or heterogenity in them, as Gold and Silver. The rest are called imperfect, because they are full of impurities, and they are either hard or soft. Hard, as those which will indure ignition before they melt, as Iron and Copper: Soft, which will not, but melt at the first, as Tin and Lead. All these metals are found in His Majesties Dominions, and many of them I perswade my self, might be wrought to better profit, if our Smelters were skilful, or were not hindred by si∣ister respects. Gold. But especially we abound in the imperfect metals more than enough to serve our own use. And for the perfect metals, I have seen both in Cornewall and at Crayfordmuir in Scot∣land, perfect Gold (which the Dutch call Gedi∣gen) in grains among Sparr. Also among other metals, it is ordinarily bred, as Iron and Copper, and Tin. But from Tin it is hardly separated without more waste of Tin than the Gold is worth. From Iron and Copper I see no reason but it might be separated with advantage. For silver, there is much lost for want of taking t forth of Lead-Oars: for whereas those Oars which are rich in silver, Silver. are commonly hard of
fusion; our mineral men either neglect those Oars, and work them not, or else they mix some sll proportion of them with their poor Oars, which are easie of fusion, and so make the me∣tal so poor, as it is not worth the refining. Where∣as if they were wrought by themselves, they would yield in silver upon every Tun, some 20 ounces, some 40, some 60, some 80, more o less. For Copper, Whereas we fetch our Pins an Tags of Points from other Countreys, yet n doubt we might be furnished of our own, bo for these and other uses. Copper. We have but one Cop∣per work that I hear of in all his Majesties Do∣minions, and that is at Kesnick in Gumberland but Copper Mines are found in divers other pa as in Cornwall at Trevascus, and other places  York-shire, Scotland, Ireland, &c. And no dou many are concealed, by reason they are Min Royal. If these were wrought, and wrought  ter a good manner, it is likely they would bri a good advantage to his Majesty, and to  Kingdom. For Iron, we have the Oar in abundance,  it is pity that so much good wood should be w sted upon it for so bad iron; and yet the g which it holds, is lost. Iron. Many have propound the melting of it with stone-coal, but perh they have failed in their projects: yet this do not prove the impossibility of it. And for  goodness of this metal, if it were rightly made, would melt as readily as other metal, and wo be tough, and not so brittle as it is, and wo not be so apt to rust. For these inconvenience
happen to it for want of separation of the impu∣rities which are bred with it. For Tin, we have as good as any in the World, although it is not wrought to the best advantage. Tin. The Countreys where it grows, are barren of wood, and they are fain to fetch it far off. Now if it were wrought, as I know it may, by many experiments which I have made upon it, with stone-coal, there would be much saved, and the wood might be otherwise employed. The Tin also would be as good as now it is, and the pro∣duct not diminished. For Lead, although for soft Oars the ordinary course of melting at Mondip and the Peak, may serve Well, and much better than their Baling at Alendale in Hexamshire and at Grass in the Bishoprick of Duresme: yet for hard Oars (which are commonly rich in silver) there might be bet∣ter courses taken, by common or proper Agents. Common agents are fire and water; proper are dissolvents or additaments. Lead. By fire they might amend their working, if they did roast their Oars well before melting, to breath away volatil and combustible substances which are mixed with their Oars. By water, after calcination or roast∣ing, they may separate all dissoluble juyces, &c. Dissolvents do chiefly serve to separate the silver or gold out of the Oars: as in the quick∣silver work, or by Lyes of Nitre, Allum, Salts, &c. Additaments are also of great use, whether they be segregatory for separation of spirits, or mean metals from our Oars, and so to facilitate
their fusion: or propugnatory to defend the Oares from consuming or vitrifying. Segregatory ad∣ditaments are either such as are more easie of fu∣sion than the Oare, and so draw the Oare into fusion with them, or such as will not melt at all, as Geber saith, Cujus intentio non sit fundi: which keeps the Oar asunder from clodding, and giyes it a greater heat, like fire in his bosom. By these means well applyed and used, all Lead Oares might be wrought, be they never so stub∣born, and none need to be neglected. Hitherto I have digressed out of mine intended course, through the desire I have to advance mineral works. Now I will return to shew the nature and qualities of these metals, as I have done of other minerals. Gold of all Metals is the most solid, and there∣fore the most heavy, as having few impurities or heterogeneal substances mixed with it. Nature and qualities of Gold. And therefore it is not subject to corruption, as other metals are, neither will it lose any of his sub∣stance, either by fire or water, although it should be held in them a long time: so as it is an idle and vain perswasion that many have, who think by boyling Gold in Broth, to get some strength from thence, and so to make the Broths more cordial. Bascius lib. 6. cap. 8. The like I may say of putting Gold in∣to Electuaries or Pills, unless it be in case of Quicksilver taken into the body, which the Gold by touch may gather to it, otherwise it goes out of the body as it came in, without any concocti∣on or alteration, or diminution. And if it be dissolved in strong water, it will be reduced a∣gain to his metalline substance, without diminu∣tion,
much less will it be dissolved without cor∣rosive Spirits, to make Aurum Potabile, as some do undertake. Basilica chimia Pag. 204. Crollius doth acknowledge, that there is but one Menstruum in the world that may do it, and that he knows not. But if we had it dissolved, we are yet uncertain what the quality of it would be, or what use to make of it in Physick; only because it loseth none of his substance, we know it can do no hurt, and there∣fore we use it for Cauteries, & to quench in Beer or Wine, &c. to warm it, or to give it some a∣striction from the fire. De Thermis cap. 8. Fallopius in these regards disclaims it in all mineral waters, as he doth all other metals: and will not believe that any metal doth impart any quality unto water. In ingressu ad infermo, pap.373. Claudinus holds otherwise, and so doth Baccius, Savanarola, Montagnana, Venustus, Solinander, and almost all that have written of Bathes. For if we should exclude Metals, we must likewise exclude Stones, and Bitumina and Sulphur, and almost all minerals, except concrete juices. For none of these, after they have attained to their full consistence, will of themselves dissolve in water, without the help of some concrete juice, as a medium to unite them with the water. But before they have their full consistence, whilst they are in Solutis principiis, as Earth, Juice, or Vapour, they may be communicated with wa∣ter. Gold is so sparingly bred in the bowels of the Earth, as in that respect it can hardly furnish a perpetual Spring with any quality from it: yet some Bathes are held to participate with Gold, as Ficuncellenses, Fabariae, Piperinae, de Grottae in Viterbio: Sancti Cassiani de Buxo, &c.
Silver comes next in purity to Gold, but is inferiour unto it, as appears by the dissolution of it, and by the blew tincture which it yields, and by the fouling of the fingers, &c. Of Silver. For the qua∣lities of it, there is not much discovered. But as all other things of price are superssitiously ac∣counted cordia, so is this, especially in hot and moist distempers of the heart: for it is esteemed to be cold, and dry, and astringent, and yet emollient. Theod Taberno∣montaus, p. 2. cap. 8. We have no Bathes which do ma∣nifestly participate with it: perhaps, by reason, nature doth hot produce it in sufficient quantity to infect waters. John Baubinus thinks there may be Silver in the Bathes at Boll: because he faith there was a Pyritis or Marchesit exami∣ned by Doctor Cadner, and out of fifty pound weight of it, he drew two drams of Silver: a very small proportion to ground his opinion upon. Iron is the most impure of all metals, as we have it wrought, and will hardly melt as metals should do, but with additaments and flusses. Of Iron and Steel. Neither is it so malleable, and ductible as other metals are, by reason of his many impurities. Yet we see that at Damasco they work and re∣fine it in such sort, as it will melt at a Lamp, and is so tough, as it will hardly break. And this is not by reason of any special Mine differ∣ing from other Iron Mines, for they have no Mines of Iron near to Damascus, as Bellnius re∣ports, but have it brought thither from divers other places, only their art in working and pu∣rifying it is beyond ours. So the Spanish Steel and Iron is purer then ours, and we do esteem of
Bilbo-blades beyond others, which are quenched in the River Bilbilis: as Turnus his Sword in Virgil was quenched in the River Styx. Ensem quem Dauno ignipotens Deus ipse parenti Fecerat, & Stygia candentem extinxerat at unda. AEnead 12.A Sword the god of fire, of his own make, Gave Daune, Turn's Father, quench'd in Stygian Lake. But the hardning of Steel lyeth not in this point: other waters no doubt may serve as well. But I perswade my self that our Iron may be made much purer, and perhaps some Gold ex∣tracted from it which it holds. Concerning the temperature of Iron and Steel, Galen reckons it among earth, and there∣fore it must be cold. Simpl. lib. 9. Manardus is absolutely of that opinion, and so are most of our Physitians. Libs 16. Epist. 5. De motallis cap. 20. Only Fallopius holds it to be hot, because Scri∣bonius Largus prescribes it in Ulcers of the Blad∣der, which it doth cure, not in regard of heat∣ing, but drying; for it dryeth and bindeth much, and therefore by Galens rule it must be cold. Simpl. l.7.c.4. Astringentia omnia frigida; all binding things are cold. I have observed in Iron and Steel two distinct qualities, the one opening, or deo∣pilative; the other astringent. Two distinct qualities in Steel. The opening quality lyeth in a volatile Salt or Nitre, which it is full of, the astringent quality in the Crocus, or Terrestrial part. These two substances are thus discerned and severed. Take of the fylings of Steel or Iron, and cast it into the flame of a
Candle, and you shall see it to burn like Salt∣peeter or Rosin. Take these fylings, and infuse them three or four times in Water or Wine, as we use to make our Chalibeat Wines, till the water or wine have dissolved all this Salt, and then dry it and cast it into the flame, and it shall not burn, but the liquor will have a strong taste from this Salt. And this is it which opens ob∣structions. The astringent quality lyeth in the terrestrial substance, as is evident, after either, by infusions, or by calcination, the volatile salt is departed from it, that which remains, is very astringent, and stayeth all manner of fluxes, &c. Concerning Bathes participating with Iron, we have too many examples of them for Fallopius to contradict. We may let him injoy his opi∣nion of the Calderiana, Veronensia & Villensia, Lucensia; although it be against the judgement of all other who have written of them, and it is hard for him to be confident in a negative. Solinander, pag. 193. Veustus, pag. 159. Bcius lib. 6. cap. 3. Srola. Reaeus pag. 305. We have examples more then enough to prove the quality of Iron in our mineral waters. Balneum Reginae in agro Pisano is actually hot, and from Iron. So is Balneum Sancti Cassiani in agro Se∣nensi: So is Balneum Ficuncellae, de Russellis, Bora in agro Florent. Brandulae in agro Regi∣ensi, Visicatoriae in Tuscia, Isenbrun by Liege, Forgense in Normandy: the Spaw-water, Tun∣bridge-water, Bristol-water by S.Vincents Rock: all which, some being hot, and some cold, par∣ticipate with Iron, as may be proved, not only by the consent of all writers, which have made mention of them, but by the Mines from whence they come, or by their taste, or by their virtues.
Copper comes nearest to the nature of Iron, but is more pure, and more easie of fusion, and will be almost all converted into Vitriol. Quality of Copper. They are convertible the one into the other, as I have shewed out of Erker, in Vitriol. Libav. de nat. metall. c. 10. And by the practice at Commataw and Smolnicium: The like also hath been shewed in Cornwall, at the Confluence by Master Russel. Aristotle also tells of a Copper Mine in Thalia, an Island of the Tyrrhen Sea, which being wrought out, turned into an Iron Mine: in this similitude of nature, we cannot but judge that there is a simi∣litude in qualities, and that Iron being cold, Copper cannot be hot. Temperate it may be, because less astringent then Iron, and more cleansing: Rhasis saith that it purgeth like a Ca∣tharticum, and in his continent, prescibes it to purge water in Dropsies. Another argument that all purgatives are not hot: it dryeth exceeding∣ly, and attenuates and digests. We have divers waters which participate with it, which if they be pure from Copper it self, are very safe and wholsome: but if they be foul, and proceed from the excrements of Copper, they are not whol∣some to drink. Balnea Collensia sen ferina in Martiana Silva, do consist in Copper and Al∣lum. The Bath of Faberia in Rhetia, of Cop∣per and Gold. Aqua de Grotta in agro Viter∣biensi, is full of Copper; so is Aqua Jasielli, Balneum Lucense in Valesiis: Marcus Paulus Venetus, tells us of a greenish Fountain in Per∣sia, which purgeth exceedingly, and is held to come from Copper. Tin and Lead are two of our Staple Commo∣dities
which our Countrey yields plentifully, not only for our own use, but to supply other Na∣tions. Of Tin. Tin is bred in Cornwall, and part of Devonshire, and in the Isles of Scilly, which from thence were called Cassiterides. It is melt∣ed out of little black stones, which the Dutch call Zwitter, with great charge, because they cannot melt it, but with wood coals, which is brought them far off, and they are fain to run it over two or three times, before they can get out all the Tin, and yet much of it is wasted in the blast. I doubt not but it might be done with Sea-coal, if they knew the Artifice, and with as great a product of Tin. There is both Silver and Gold found in it, but without wasting of the Tin, we know no means to sever it. It is in quality cold and dry, and yet moves sweat abua∣dantly, as I have proved. Lead is melted commonly out of an Oar com∣mon to Silver and Lead, as Pliny saith called Ga∣lena. Of Lead. And although Agricola saith of the vil∣lachar Lead, that it holds no Silver, and there∣fore fittest for assayes; yet Lazarus Erker con∣tradicts it out of his own experience. Our Countrey abounds with it every where, especial∣ly at the Peak in Darbishire, and at Mendip in Somersetshire; Wales also and Cornwall, and Devon, are full of it, and so is Yorkshire and Cumberland. The qualities of it are cold and dry. But for these two metals, we find no wa∣ters which are infected with them. In Lorain, they have Bathes called Plumbaria, which some think by reason of the name, to proceed from Lead: but John Bauhinus thinks they should be
called Plumiers, as Pictorius writes it from the French word Plumer, a deplumando, because they are so hot as they use to scald fowls in them, to take off their feathers. Pag. 90. Thus much for metals, and all other sorts of Minerals, with their several Natures and Baths infected with any of them. As for mixed bodies, and flores, and recrements, &c. they are to be referred to the simple bodies from whence they proceed: As Tutia, Pompholix, Minium, Ce∣russa, Sublimatum, Praecipitatum, &c. CHAP. XI. Of the generation of Metals in the Earth; Their seminary spirit, That it is not from the Ele∣ments. NOw I must shew the generation of these minerals in the bowels of the earth, which of necessity we must understand, before we can shew the reasons how mineral waters receive either their actual heat, or their virtues. Fallop. de me∣tallis cap. 11. Libav. de nat. metal. cap. 12. Some have imagined that metals and minerals were created perfect at the first, seeing there ap∣pears not any seed of them manifestly, as doth of Animals and Vegetables; and seeing their sub∣stances are not so fluxible, but more firm and per∣manent. But as they are subject to corruption in time, by reason of many impurities, and differing parts in them, so they had need to be repaired by generation.
It appears in Genesis, that Plants were not created perfect at first, but only in their Semi∣naries: for Moses Cap. 2. gives a reason why Plants were not come forth of the earth, scil. be∣cause (as Tremelius translates it) there had as yet neither any rain fallen, nor any dew ascen∣ded from the earth, whereby they might be pro∣duced and nourished: The like we may judge of minerals, that they were not at first created perfect, but disposed of in such sort, as they should perpetuate themselves in their several kinds. Agricola de ortu & causis Sub.lib. 5.c.1. Wherefore it hath ever been a received Axiome among the best Philosophers, that mine∣rals are generated, and experience hath confirmed it in all kinds. Our Salt-peeter men find that when they have extracted Salt-peeter out of a floor of earth one year, within three or four years after, they find more Salt-peeter generated there, and do work it over again. The like is observed in Allum and Copperass. As for metals, our Tinners in Cornewall have experience of Pits which have been filled up with earth after they have wrought out all the Tin they could find in them; and within thirty years they have opened them again, and found more Tin generated. The like hath been observed in Iron, Lib. 3.c.19. as Gaudentius Merula reports of Ilva, an Island in the Adriatick Sea, under the Veneti∣ans, where the Iron breeds continually as fast as they can work it, which is confirmed also by A∣gricola and Baccius; and by Virgil who saith  it, : lib 10.
Insula inexhaustis Chalybum generos a matallis;Brave Ilva Isle, whose teeming womb, Breeds Iron till the day of Doom. The like we read of at Saga in Lygiis, where they dig over their Iron-mines every tenth year. In Sarept. co. 3.II. &c. John Mathesius gives us examples almost of all sorts of minerals and metals which he hath ob∣served to grow and regenerate. The like exam∣ples you may find in Leonardus Thurneiserus. Erastus affirms that he did see in S. Joachims dale, silver grown upon a beam of wood, which was placed in the pit to support the works: and when it was rotten, the workmen coming to set new timber in the place, sound the silver sticking to the old beam. In Alchimia magna. De metallis pag. 17. & 19. Also he reports that in Germa∣ny, there hath been unripe and unconcocted sil∣ver found in Mines, which the best workmen af∣firmed, would become perfect silver in thirty years. The like Modestinus Fachius, and Ma∣thesius affirm of unripe and liquid silver; which when the workmen find, they use to say, We are come too soon. Von probierng der crtze. In Sarept. But I need not produce any more proofs for this purpose, as I could out of Agri∣cola and Libavins, and others, seeing our best Philosophers, both antient and modern, do ac∣knowledge that all minerals are generated. Sebast. For l.3.c.6. Scverinus c. 8. P. 125. The manner of generation of minerals and metals, is the same in all, as is agreed upon both by Plato and Aristotle, and heophrastus. And as the manner of generation of minerals is alike in all, so it differs from the generation of
animate bodies, whether animals or vegetables, in this, that having no seed, they have no power or instinct of producing other individuals, but have their species perpetuated per virtutem seu spiritum semini analogum, by a spiritual substance proportionable to seed, which is not resident in every individual, as it is in aimals and plants, which Moses saith have their seeds in themselves, but in their proper wombs. Caesalpinus de metal. lib. 1. C. 2. This is the judge∣ment of Petrus Severinus, howsoever he doth ob∣scure it by his Platonical grandiloquence. Cap. 2. And as there is not Vacuum in Corporibus, so much less in Speciebus: For that the Species are perpetua∣ted by new generations, is most certain, and pro∣ved bofore: that it is not out of the seeds of in∣dividuals, is evident by this, that if minerals do not assimulate nourishment by attraction, reten∣tion, concoction, expulsion, &c. for the main∣tenance of their own individual bodies, much less are they able to breed a superfluity of nou∣rishment for seed. And how can they attract and concoct nourishment, and expel excrements, which have no veins nor fibres, nor any distinct parts to perform these Offices withal? Moreover they are not increased as Plants are, by nourish∣ment, whereas the parts already generated, are extended in all proportions by the ingression of nutriment, which sills and enlarges them: but only are augmented externally upon the super∣ficies, by super-addition of new matter concocted by the same virtue and spirit, into the same Spe∣cies. Erast. disput. part. 2. p. 261. Thus much for the manner of all mineral ge∣nerations, which is not much controverted: the
chief difference is about the efficient and the matter. About the efficient cause of generations (for we must handle them all together) there are divers opinions, as there are divers causes which concur to all generations of animals, vegetables or minerals. But there must be one principal ef∣ficient cause, to give the form to all Species, as thee are other adjuvant and attending causes: The principal cause and agent in this work, is by most attributed to the influence of the Planets, especially to the Sun, who either by his light, or by his heat, doth frame the species of all things, and so of minerals, but chiefly in regard of his heat. The principal Efficient Cause of the Genera∣tion of Mine∣rals, not the Sun. This heat working upon apt matter, is thought to produce the several species which we see. As for the motion of the Planets, it is cer∣tain that they move continually in a constant or∣der, and the World could not subsist as it doth without it so as it may be cans a sine qua non; a very remote cause, as there may be a hundred more causes of that nature. So likewise the light, which the Peripateticks make the instrument of coelestial effects, can do as little to the further∣ance of generations, seeing they proceed as well by night as by day: and for minerals, it is per∣petual night with them, the density of the earth and rocks not suffering the light to pass. Where∣fore they insist chiefly upon the heat of the Sun: but Moses tells us that Plants were created with their seeds in themselves upon the third day, be∣fore the Planets, which were not created till the fourth day; the shew us that Plants and terrestrial substances depend not upon Planets for their ge∣nerations, Dorn. phisica Geresis. nor for their virtues, but have the prin|
cipal causes of them in themselves. The same we may judge of minerals, being terrestrial sub∣stances, and propagated by seeds, as Plants are, and likely to be created upon the same day with Plants, seeing there is no other mention of their creation in Moses. Now for the heat of the Sun, no doubt it is an universal fosterer of all inferior substances: but that it should beget particular Species, is very improbable. The heat of the Sun is no more apt to breed a Nettle than a Dock, Brimstone than Salt, &c. For it cannot give the essence to any thing: heat being only a quality which can breed no substance, and such a quality as can only segre∣gate heterogeneral substances; and thereby con∣gregate homogeneal. Whereas in all generati∣ons there must be a further power and virtue, to proportion the Elements fit for every Species (if they will have all things made of the Elements) and to bring the Species form a potential being to an actual, giving to every thing his proper shape, quantity, colour, smell, taste, &c. and to unite them, which before were of different na∣tures: It must be an internal and domestical agent, and efficient cause which must perform this: and such a one as is not common to all Species alike, but proper to that which it produ∣ceth: otherwise there would be no distinction, of Species. Gal. de Maraes. And therefore Moses saith of Plants, that they have their seeds in themselves, accor∣ding to their seyeral kinds. Neither can any ex∣ternal cause give an essential form to any thing, which form must be , inbred in the thing it self, and not adventitious. And therefore Sca∣liger
saith, Formae, non Solis est quantitatem ter∣minare, and Aristotle, Calore natura utitur tanquam ministro aut instrumento, non tanquam opifice aut legislatore. Wherefore we will grant the Sun to be an adjuvant cause, and by his heat to foster and cherish inferiour generations: but not to be a principal and begetting cause. And so Zabarella doth mollisie the harshness of the former opinion: and doth acknowledge that the Sun doth further generations only as an in∣strument of another superiour power, whereby in minerals it may make the matter more apt to receive the form, but it makes no minerals, no more then it makes blood in our bodies. De catore. Others make the Elements to be the princi∣pal causes of all species by their qualities. Neither the Elements. For the matter of the Elements, being a passive matter, cannot be an efficient cause of genera∣tions. These qualities must be heat or cold: for the other two are passive, and attend rather upon the matter of generations, then upon the efficient. Fire therefore by his heat is thought of all the Elements to have the greatest hand in all generations, being most active and superiour to all the rest of the Elements together, for the generation of every Species, and rank them in due order, proportion, weight, measure, &c. This is he than must reconcile the differences which are in their natures, and bring them to union. This must attract nourishment, and pre∣scribe the quantities, dimensions, parts, figures, colours, tastes, savours, &c. of every thing. A large Province he hath to govern, with one na∣ked and simple quality, which can have but one
simple motion. Simplicibus corporibus simplices tantum motus congruunt. Heat can but heat, and the effects of this heat are by separation of different substances,  to congre∣gate those that are alike, : But in this work we make heat to unite differing sub∣stances: for all generation is of differing substan∣ces united into one. Again, fire having but one quality to work withall, whereby he must unite the other three Elements, what shall bring and unite fire unto them? This must be another power superiour to them all, for we must not ima∣gine that they meet by chance as travellers do. And therefore Aristotle explodes this efficient of fire, and attributes it to the forms of natural things. 1 De anima Item 2. cap. 4. As for cold in the other Elements, it is far more unlikely then heat, to perform these offices, being rather a distructive, then a generative quality, and is not called in by any Author to this work, before the species have received his form by heat: and then it is admitted only for consolidation, but how justly, it is doubtfull: for heat doth consolidate as well as cold, by drying up moisture. But we will not grant this to either of them, as principal Agents, but as they are in∣struments attending the forms of natural things. The Alchymists make Sulphur to be the prin∣cipal efficient of all minerals, especially of me∣tals, and Mercury the matter. If they mean common Sulphur and Mercury, which are perfect Species in their kinds, they are much deceived, and this opinion is sufficiently con∣futed by all that oppugne them. But it seems
they understand some parts in the seminary of metals which have some analogy with these: and so their opinion may be allowed. For the spirit, which is the efficient in these generations, doth reside in a material substance, which may be resembled to Sulphur or Oyle, as some other part may be resembled to Mercury. For all ge∣nerations are framed of different parts united by this Spirit. Thus much of the different opinions concerning the efficient of all generations, and in particular of minerals. The matter whereof minerals are bred, is attributed chiefly to the Elements, as the general matter of all animate and inanimate bodies: insomuch as both the heavens, and the very souls of men are made to proceed from the Elements. Concerning the Heavens, it hath been the ancient opinion of the Platonicks, Pythagoreans, and Epicureans, that not only these inferiour bodies, but also the coelestial, have been framed out of the Elements. Trismegistus in Asclepio cap. 1. Plato. In Timco in Dialogo de natura. Plato speaking of the hea∣vens, saith, Divini decoris ratio postulabat talem fieri mundum, qui & visum pateretur & tactum. Sine igne videri nil potest, fine sulido nil tangi: solidum sine terra nibil. Wherefore holding the heavees to be visible and solid, they must be made of the Elements. The Pythagoreans, and the Brachmanni of India held the same opi∣nion of the Heavens: where Apollonius Tyanaeus was instructed in all the Pythagorean Doctrine, as Philostratus reports. In vita Apol∣loci. The Epicureans also were of the same opinion, as appears in Virgil, Elcoga 6. where he brings in Silnus, one of the sect, and one of Bacchus his crew, singing in this manner,
Namque canebat, uti magnum perinane coacta Semina, terrarumque, animae{que} maris{que} fuissent, Et liquidi simul ignis: ut his exordia primis Omnia, & ipse tener mundi concreverit orbis.Silenus sung, how through the Chaos vast, The seeds were set of Earth, of Air, of Seas, Of purest fire: how out of these at last, All things have sprung, and also out of these The infant world was moulded. Of this opinion also was Lucretius, Philo Ji∣doens, Valesius, &c. although Valesius doth make more pure Elements for the Heavens then ours. Desacra Philo∣soph. cap. 51. Aristotle forsook his Master Plato in this point, and frames the Heavens of a quintessen∣tial substance. But howsoever the Heavens may participate with elementary qualities, and be subject to ge∣neration and corruption in their parts; yet me thinks they should exempt our soals from this original, and not make them out of the fragment of the Elements. Scaliger inveys against Alexander Aphr∣disiensis, for this opinion, and saith that he had poysoned our Philosophy herein: Venenav∣hanc Philosophiae partem. So both he and others derive the sense, motion, understanding, growth, and the natural faculties of our souls, and the pe∣culiar properties of every thing, from this origi∣nal, turpissimo errore, as Severinus saith. Cap. de mixtie∣. And Scaliger in another place concerning this: D intelleclu & ratione ipsaque anima quae ontami∣narunt
istoe nebuloe Aphrodisienses, & pudet dicere & piget meminisse. I am ashamed to speak, and grieved to think how this Aphrodisiensis hath pol∣luted our reason and understanding, and our very souls with his foggy doctrine, in ascribing all these unto the Elements. By the same reason they may ascribe the barking of Doggs, the sing∣ing of Birds, the laughing and speech of men, to the Elements. Their opinion is more probable, which hold, animam ex traduce, and to be com∣municated as one light to another: as Timoth. Bright proves in Physicam Scribonii, and not to ascribe it to the Elements. nor to miracles, or new creations. But there is far more reason to derive from the Elements, the tastes, colours, smells, sigures, numbers, quantities, orders, di∣mensions, &c. which appear more in corporal substances, and yet these are not from the Ele∣ments. For how can they give these affections to other things, when they have them not them∣selves? Si non est ab elementis gustare, quare sit gustari? What taste have any of these Ele∣ments? Fire or heat which is the most active Element, hath none. And whereas it is thought, that bittterness proceeds from heat, we find that many sharp and tarfruits, being also very bitter before they are ripe, (as Olives for ex∣ample) yet let them hang upon the tree till they be ripe, and they lose their bitterness, and also their sharpness, by reason of their better con∣coction by heat. The like difference wefind between our oleum omphacinum, and therpe oyle. So likewise opium, which is held to be very cold, yet it is extream bitter, so as the cold
parts in it are not able to master the bitterness, but this is still predominant: wherefore heat can be no cause of bitterness, unless it be in excess or defect, as Scaliger confesseth. Wormwood is very bitter, being hot and dry in the second or third degree: if heat were the cause of it, then all other simples which are hot and dry in the same degree, should be also bitter. As I have said of tastes, so I may say of all the other affections of natural things, that they proceed not form the Elements, but from the seeds and forms of every thing. So for fat and unctuous substances, as Sulphur, Bitumen, Oyle, Grease, &c. unto what Element shall we ascribe them? Not unto fire, because this is extream hot and dry, that is temperate in heat, and very moist. Moreover, fire would rather consume it, then generate it: and Physitians judge the generation of fat in our bodies to proceed rather from cold, then from heat. Air, if it have any ingenerate quality, as some do make doubt out of Aristotle it is cold and moist, as I have shewed before, cap. 2 & 5. 1 Mteool. 4. Item de mundo ubi dicit aerens comparatum esse ad aliam & aliam turam inducedam. and therefore as it cannot agree with fire, nor be a fuel to it, so it cannot be any material cause of fat, or oylie substance: being more agreeable to water, from whence it is thought to be made by rarifaction, and in∣to which it is thought to be reduced by conden∣sation. Wherefore being of a watry nature, it cannot agree with oyle or fatness, nor be the mat∣ter of it. The like we may judge of water, which doth terminate both water and air, and therefore must be opposite to them both. As for earth, being cold and dry, and solid, it cannot be the
matter of this which is temperate, and moist, and liquid; Neither can all the Elements toge∣ther make this substance, seeing there is no un∣ctuousness in any of them, and they can give no more then they have. So as I cannot see how this oylie substance, which is very common in all natural things, and wherein the chief facul∣ties of every thing doth reside, as their humi∣dum radicale, should be from the Elements. So likewise for the substance wherewith every thing is nourished and increased, and into which every thing is resolved, it appears not how it should be from the Elements. In som. Scipio∣nis cap. 6. Hypocrates, of whom Macrobius saith, Nec fallere nec falli ptuit, hath two notable axioms for the clearing of this point. The one is Vnumquong; in id dis∣solvitur unde compactum est. De nat hominis. Every thing is dissolved into that whereof it was made. The other. Iisdem untrimur ex quibus constamus, we are nourished by such things as we consist of. 2 De gen. cap. 8. Item libde s∣su & sensibile. Aristotle also hath the same. If this axiom be true, as I hold it to be, and I know none that contradict it, then we must consist of such things as we are nourished withall. But we are not nourished by the Elements, and therefore we consist not of them. Fire nourisheth nothing, water nourisheth not, as Physicians conses: Air is too thin a substance, and Earth to thick. And as they do not nourish them when they are single, so being compounded, they can do as little. 3 De gen. ani∣mal. cap. ultimo. Aristotle saith that some Plants are nou∣rished with water alone, some with earth alone, and some with both together. But if earth and water be mixed for our nourishment, they making
but mud, would make us have muddy brains. We will grant the Elements to be matrices rerum naturalium, the wombs and nurses of natural things, but we will not grant them to be material causes. Neither can we attribute more dignity unto them, then we do to our Mothers, who de∣part from their substance whereof they consist, as flesh, bones, sinews, veins, arteries, &c. to the nourishment of their Infants, but only pre∣pare blood for them, from the nutriments which they receive. And all the Elements in the world cannot make this blood, neither as the matter nor as the efficient. But as the Mother is furnished with blood to nourish the Infant, and with conve∣nient heat to foster it withall, so are the Elements stored with all manner of matter sit for all gene∣rations: so as the seeds or forms of natural things, will never want matter to nourish them, nor will ever want forms. So that it is manifest that if natural bodies be not nourished by the Elements, they are not compounded of them: but being nourished by other substances then the Elements, they must be compounded of the like; Simile simili nutritur: composit a compos constant & nutriuntur. Thus much for the Genesis or generation and naration of natural things, that thereby we can∣not gather that they are either mad or nourish∣ed by the Elements. Now let us examine whe∣ther by the Analysis or dissolution of them, we may find the four Elements, according to the for∣mer axiome, that every thing is dissolved into that whereof it was made, and is made of than whereinto it is dissolved, as Aristotle, Hypo∣crates,
and Galen do affirm. So that if the Ele∣ments enter into the composition of natural things, especially as the principal materials whereof they consist, they must needs appear in the dissolution of them. This dissolution is either natural or artificial. In the natural disso∣lution of all things, Hypocrates observes three distinct substances, calidum, humidum sive flui∣dum, & siccum five solidum, according to the three Elements or principles where of they are framed. His instance is principally man, but he ffirms it to hold in other animate and inanimate bodies. Ifagoge cap. 8. 1 de Elementis cap. 15. These Elements he termeth continen∣a, contenta & impetum facientia, as Galen ex∣bounds it. Those which he calls continentia,  bones, nerves, veins, arteries, and from hence, muscles, &c. Contenta are humida, or humores, blood; flegme, choller, melancholy, which after death, are cold, and congeal, being beated as Galen saith, from the heart, in living bodies: Impetum facientia, are spirits animal, vital and natural. These three Elements, Galen acknowledgeth to be the nearest, but the other which are more remote, to be most universal. De veteri me∣diina. Bat Hypocrates aith that heat and cold, &c. are very powerless Elements, and that sharp, bitter, sweet, &c. are more powerfull, . So that these are the three Elements whereof ll things do consist, and into which they are aturally resolved: and these do seem to re∣emble the four Elements, but are not the same. For heat may resemble fire, although this heat be ocured by motion in every thing whilest it
liveth, and not extrinsecally. Moisture may re∣semble water and air. Driness may resemble earth; cold appears in them all after the heat or spirit is departed. In the artificial Analysis of natural bodies, the Alchymists tells us that they find three Ele∣ments, and no more, whereof every thing doth consist, and whereinto it is resolved: namely, Vaporosum, inflammabile, fixum: which they call Mercury, Sulphur and Salt, and they seem to agree with Hypocrates. For their Mercury may well resemble Hypocrates his spirits, or impet facientia: Sulphur his humour or flu dum or ∣tenta: and Salt, his siccum or densum, or coni∣nentia. These they say are found in every thing, animal, vegetable, or mineral, and no other. And as for the four common Elements, seeing they are distinct in place and scituation, and therefore cannot concurre and meet to the gene∣ration of every animal, Plant and Mineral, &c but by violence, the earth being someti carried upwards, and the fire downwards, co∣trary to their natural motions: and this, not one for all, but daily and hourly: it is not likely t these substances can be bred of the Elements,  be maintained in a perpetual succession by a vi∣lent cause. And therefore it is no marvel these Elements be not found in the dissolutions natural bodies. Thus much in general concet∣ing all generations, that hereby we may the ∣ter judge of the particular generations of M∣nerals, which differ not from the rest, but  in this, that their seeds are not in every indi∣dual, as the others are, but are contained
matricibus, in their wombs, and there they are furnished with matter to produce their Species: not out of the Elements, no otherwise than ex matricibus, as the child in the mothers womb, but have their matter and nourishment from the seeds of things which are agreeable to their species: which seeds wanting means to produce their own species, do serve others, and yield matter and substance unto them. Now let us come more particularly to the ge∣neration of minerals, wherein we will first ex∣amine Aristotles opinion, as most generally re∣ceived, then I will presume to set down mine own. CHAP. XII. The generation of Minerals examined, the Authors opinion herein. A Ristotle makes the humidity of water, and the dryness of earth, to be the matter of all minerals: the dryness of earth to participate with fire, and the humidity of water with air, as Zabareila interprets it; so that to make a perfect mixt body, the four Elements do concur; and to make the mixture more perfect, these must be re∣solved into vapour or exhalation by the heat of fire, or influence from the Sun and other Planets, as the efficient cause of their generation: but the cause of their congelation to be cold in such bodies as heat will resolve. Erastus, Care∣rius, Casali∣nus, Martiu, Moista, Fox∣ias, Magyrus, Libaius. This vapour consi∣sting partly of moysture, and partly of dryness,
if all the moysture be spent, turns to earth or salt, or concrete juyces, which dissolve in moysture: if some moysture remain before congelation, then it turns to stone: if this dry exhalation be unctuous and fat, and combustible, then Bitumen and Sulphur, and Orpiment, are bred of it: if it be dry and incombustible, then concrete juyces, &c. 3 Metor. c.ult. Caesalp.l.3.0.1. But if moysture do abound in this vapour then metals are generated which are fusible and malleable. And for the perfecting of these gene∣rations, this exhalation is not sufficient, but to give them their due consistence, there must be the help of cold from Rocks in the earth to con∣geal this exhalation. So that here must be two ef∣ficients, heat and cold. And for the better ef∣fecting of this, these exhalations do insinuate themselves into stones, in the form of dew o frost, that is, in little grains; but differing from dew and frost in this, that these are generated af∣ter that the vapour is converted to water; where∣as Minerals are generated before this conversi into water. Libav. de nat. metall.c. 14. carerius 178. Septal. in Hipp. But there is doubt to be made of frost, because that is bred before the conversio of the exhalation into water, as may appear, M∣teor. 1. de aëre, aqu. &c. According to this assertion there must be two places for the generation of minerals; the one a matrix, where they receive their effence by heat in form of an exhalation, and from thence they are sent to a second place to receive the congelation by the coldness of Rocks: and fro this matrix come our mineral waters, and no from the place of congelation. This is the generation of minerals, according to Aristotle; but it is not so clear, but that
leaves many scruples, both concerning the mat∣ter, and the efficients. For the matter, it seems not probable, that water and earth should make any thing but mud and dirt; for you can expect no more from any thing than is in it, the one is cold and dry, the other cold and moyst; and therefore as fit to be the matter of any other thing, as of particular minerals. And water, whereof principally metals are made to consist, is very unfit to make a malleable and extensible sub∣stance, especially being congealed by cold, as we may see in ice. But some do add a mineral qua∣lity to these materials, and that simple water is not the chief matter of metals, but such as hath imbibed some mineral quality, and so is altered from the nature of pure water. This assertion doth presuppose minerals in the earth before they were bred; otherwise what should breed them at the first, when there was no mineral quality to be imparted to water? Again, this mineral qua∣lity either gives the water or the vapour of it the effence of the mineral, and then it is not the ef∣fect of water, but of the mineral quality, or the potential faclty to breed it. If the effence, then this metall  water, or vapour, must have the form of the metal, and so be fusible and malleable. If it have only the power and potential faculty, then the generation is not perfected, but must expect further concoction. This concoction is said to be partly by heat, and partly by cold; if by heat, it must be in the passages of the exhalation as it is carried in the bow∣els of the earth: for afterwards, when the ex∣halation is setled in the stones, the heat is gone.
Now if the concoction be perfected before the exhalation be insinuated into the Stones, as it must be, if it be like dew, then it is perfect me∣tal, and neither is able to penetrate the Stones, nor hath any need of the cold of them to perfect the generation. If by cold, it is strange that cold should be made the principal agent in the ge∣neration of metals, which generates nothing; neither can heat be the efficient of these gene∣rations. Simple qualities can have but simple effects, as heat can but make hot, cold can but cool, &c. But they say cold doth congeal metals, because heat doth dissolve them; I answer, that the rule is true, if it be rightly applyed: as we see ice which is congealed by cold, is readily dis∣solved by heat. Valcsius sacra Philosoph. 49. But the fusion of metals cannot properly be called a dissolution by heat, because it is neither reduced to water or vapour, as it was before the congelation by cold, nor is it per∣manent in that kind of dissolution, although af∣ter fusion it should be kept in a greater heat than the cold could be which congealed it. For the cold in the bowels of the earth cannot be so great, as it is upon the superficies of the earth, seeing it was never observed that  was any ice bred there. Also this dissolution which is by fusion, tends not to the destruction of the me∣tal (but doth rather make it more perfect) as it should do according to the former rule rightly applyed. And therefore this dissolution by fu∣sion, doth not argue a congelation by cold; which being in the passive elements, doth rather attend the matter than the efficient of generations: for it is apt to dull and hebetate all faculties and
motions in nature, and so to hinder generations, rather than to further any. It is heat and moy∣sture that further generations, as Ovid faith; Quippe ubi temperie sumpsere humorque ca∣lorque, Concipiunt:When heat with moysture's temper'd well, Then 'tis their bellies 'gin to swell. And thus much for Aristotles generation of minerals, where his vapours or exhalations do rather serve for the collection or congregation of matter in the Mines, than for the generation of them; as Libavius doth rightly judge. Singularium lib. 1. part. 1. Agricola makes the matter of minerals to be Succus Lapi∣descens Metallificus &c. and with more reason, because they are found liquid in the earth: Gil∣gill would have it Ashes; Democritus Lime: but these two being artificial matters, are no where found in the earth. The Alchymists make Sul∣phur and Mercurie the matter of metals: Liba∣vius, Sulphur and Vitriol. De nat. metall. Cap. 10. But I will not stand upon discoursing of these materials, because it makes little to my purpose.. It is enough for my purpose to shew the manner of these generations, which I take to be this. There is a Seminarie Spirit of all minerals in the bowels of the earth, The Authors opinion con∣cerning the manner of the Generation of Minerals. which meeting with con∣venient matter, and adjuvant causes, is not idle, but doth proceed to produce minerals, according to the nature of it, and the matter which it meets withal; which matter it works upon like a fer∣ment, and by his motion procures an actual heat,
as an instrument to further his work; which a∣ctual heat is increased by the fermentation of the matter. The like we see in making of Malt, where the grains of Barley being moistned with water, the generative Spirit in them is dilated, and put in action; and the superfluity of water being removed, which might choak it, and the Barley laid up in heaps; the seeds gather heat, which is increased by the contiguity of many grains lying one upon another. In this work natures intent is to produce more indivi∣duals, according to the nature of the Seed, and therefore it shoots forth in spires: but the Ar∣tist abuses the intention of Nature, and con∣verts it to his end, that is, to increase the spi∣rits of his Malt. The like we find in mineral substances, where this spirit or ferment is resi∣dent, as in Allum and Copperas Mines, which being broken, exposed and moistened, will ga∣ther an actual heat, and produce much more of those minerals, then else the mine would yield; as Agricola and Thurneiser do affirm, and is pro∣ved by common experience. The like is gene∣rally observed in Mines, as Agricola, Erastus, Libavius, &c. do avouch out of the daily expe∣rience of mineral men, who affirm, that in ma∣ny places, they find their Mines so hot, as they can hardly touch them; although it is likely that where they work for perfect Minerals, the heat which was in fermentation, whilst they were yet breeding, is now much abated: the Mine∣rals being now grown to their perfection. And for this heat we need not call for the help of the Sun, which a little could will take away from us, much more the body of the
earth, and rocks; not for subterranean fire: this inbred heat is sufficient, as may appear also by the Mines of Tinglass, which being digged, and laid in the moist air, will become very hot. So Antimony and Sublimat being mixed together, will grow so hot as they are not able to be touch∣ed: If this be so in little quantities, it is likely to be much more in great quantities and huge rocks. Heat of it self differs not in kind, but only in degree, and therefore is inclined no more to one Species, then to another, but as it doth attend and serve a more worthy and su∣periour power, such as this generative spirit is. And this spirit doth convert any apt matter it meets withall to his own species by the help of heat; and the earth is full of such matter which attends upon the species of things: and oftentimes for want of fit opportu∣nity and adiuvant causes, lies idle, without pro∣ducing any species: but is apt to be transmuted by any mechanical and generative spirit into them. And this matter is not the Elements themselves, but subterranean seeds placed in the Elements, which not being able to live to themselves, do live to others. Mussetus in dia∣logo apologetics. Sic Roma crescit Albae ruinis; the Death of one is the life of ano∣ther. From this confluence of seeds arise all the varieties and differences, and alterations which are observed in the generation or nutri∣tion of natural things: as in their colours, tastes, numbers, proportions, distempers, &c. Also from hence proceed the Transplantations which we find in animals, vegetables, and minerals. In animils these Transplantations are not very
frequent; yet all our monsters may be referred hereunto, as also the issue which comes from Dogs and Wolves, Horses and Asses, Partri∣ges and Hens, &c. Some do think that the de∣struction of Sexes is a Transplantation, and that all seeds in themselves are hermophroditical, and neither masculine nor feminine, but as they meet with strong and weak impressions from superve∣nient causes; From hence come our Androgyni, Carm. lib. 3. od. 6. or masculine women, such as Horace speaks of, Sabellis docta ligonibus versare glebas.That dig the ground themselves (stout Jades!) Managing well Sabean Spades. Among those Animals which we call Insecta, these Transplantations are more frequent, be∣cause their seeds are more equivocal, and easily transmuted from one species to another: as we may see in Worms and Flies, and most evident∣ly in Silk-worms called Cavallieri. In Vegetables these Transplantations are very frequent when one species is grafted upon ano∣ther, as Virgil faith, Et steriles platani malos gessere valentes Castaneae fagos: ornusque incanuit albo Flore pyri, glandemque sues fregere sub ulmis. Georg. 2.The barren Planes did Apples bear; The Beeches Chesnuts; th' Ash a Pear; And Hogs did under Elm-trees Acorns tear.
Thus by commixtion of several species, the first seeds do oftentimes being forth other fruits then their own. Miranturque novas frondes & non sua poma.And stand admiring, double mute, To see new leaves, and stranger fruit. But all, as Hypocrates saith, by divine neces∣sity, both that which they would, and that which they would not. De Dieta 1. So likewise Wheat is changed into Lolium, Basil into Thyme, Masterwort into Angelica, &c. In Minerals we find the like transplantations: as Salt into Nitre, Copperass into Allum, Lead into Tin, Iron into Copper, Copper into Iron, &c. And this is the transplantation whereupon the Alchymists ground their Philosophers stone. This Seminary Spirit is acknowledged by Aristotle: Continent (inquit) semen in se cujus{que} faecundit atis suae causam: and by most of his In∣terpreters: and Morisinus calls it Elphesteria, not knowing how to attribute these generations to the Elements. De gen. animal. lib. 2. Foxius, Mrti∣nus, Morisaus, Magyrus, Liba∣vius, Veluri, Valesius, Ca∣rerists, Erastus, &c. And this is the cause why some places yield some one vegetable or mineral species above another, Quippe solo natura subest. Non owsnis fert omnia tellus.It is the nature of the ground. Not in all Soils are all things found.
This seminary spirit of minerals hath its pro∣per wombs where it resides, and is like a Prince or Emperour, whose prescripts both the Ele∣ments and matter must obey; and it is never idle, but alwayes in action, producing and main∣taining natural substances, untill they have ful∣filled their destiny, donec fatum expleverint, as Hypocrates saith. De Dieta lib. 1. So as there is a necessity in this, depending upon the first benediction (crescite & multiplicamini:) and this neces∣sity or fatum is inherent in the seeds, and not adventitious from the Planets, or any other na∣tural cause. And this is the cause of uniformity in every species, that they have all their proper figures, dimensions, numbers of parts, colours, tastes, &c. most convenient and agreeable to each nature; as Moses saith, that God saw that every thing was very good: and Galen saith, Deus in omnibus optimum eligit. 6 De usu parti∣um . 12. & 13. And this I take to be the meaning of his Lex Adrastia, which he alledgeth against Asclepiades. Erasmus in Adagis. For it he should mean it as commonly it is understood, of punishment which alwayes follows sin, nem crimen in pectore gestaet, qui non idem Nemesi in tergo; No man, though privately, commits a fault, but is degg'd by revenge: in this sense he could not apply it to the confuting of Asciepia∣des. There are also other laws in nature which cannot be altered, both Mathematical, in Arith∣metick and Geometry; and Logical, in the con∣secuting of arguments, &c. But these serve not for Galens purpose in this place. He must mean it of a natural necessity or fatum, or prede∣stination, that frames every member & part of the
body to the best use for the creature. And there∣fore where Asclepiades propounds an inconve∣nient frame of parts, he confutes him by this in∣bred law of nature, which he saith, no man can alter or avoid, nor any subtility elude, as also Aristotle saith. De mund. c. ult. Thus much for the generation of Minerals and other natural substances. CHAP. XIII. Of the causes of actual heat, and medicinal virtue in Mineral Waters, divers opinions of others rejected. NOW I come to shew how our mineral waters receive both their actual heat, and their virtues. Causes of heat in mineral waters not. I joyn them together, because they depend upon one and the same cause, unless they be juices which will readily dissolve in wa∣ter, without the help of heat: other minerals will not, or very hardly. This actual heat of waters hath troubled all those that have written of them, and many opinions have been held of the causes of them. Some attribute it to wind or air, or exhala∣tions included in the bowels of the earth, which either by their own nature, or by their violent motion, and agitation, and attrition upon rocks and narrow passages, do gather heat, and impart it to our waters. Wind, Air, Exhalations in the Earth. Of their own nature these ex∣halations cannot be so hot, as to make our water hot, especially seeing in their passage among cold rocks, it would be much allaied, having no sup∣ply
of heat to maintain it. Moreover, where water hath passage to get forth to the superfi∣cies of the earth, there these exhalations and winds will easily pass, and so their heat gone withall, and so our waters left to their natural coldness: whereas we see they do continue in the same degree and tenor, many generations together. Agitation and violent motion. If by their agitation and violent mo∣tion they get this heat, because no violent thing is perpetual or constant, this cannot be the cause of the perpetual and constant heat of water. Besides, this would rather cause earthquakes and storms, and noyses in the earth, then heat our springs. Moreover, we daily observe, that exhalations and water are never heated by mo∣tion, or agitation; as in the Cataracts of the Rhine by Splug; the agitation and fall of water upon rocks is most violent, and makes a hideous noyse; yet it heats not the water, though it be very deep in the earth. Valeseus centre. lib. 4. cap. 3. Solinand. l. 1. cap. 4. Neither can any attri∣tion heat either air or water, or any soft and li∣quid thing, but rather make it more cold. Others attribute this actual heat of Bathes unto the Sun, whose beams piercing thorow the pores of the earth, do heat our waters. The Sun. If this heat which heats our Bathes be caused by the beams of the Sun, then either they bring it in∣tirely from the Sun, as a quality proceeding from thence, or they make it by their own motion. If it come from the nature of the Sun, the Sun must be extream hot that can heat these inferiour parts at such a distance; especially the beams which must carry it, passing thorow the middle region of the air, which is alwayes extream cold,
and cannot but cool those beams before they come to us. And if they were able to pass that region without losing their heat, yet they cannot but warm that region, being nearer to their foun∣tain of heat, as well or better then they can warm our waters, in despite of any Antiperi∣stasis. But it is doubtfull whether the Sun be hot of his own nature or no. It may be so in former times, but few, I think, do doubt it now; I am sure not those who hold the Sun to be a Flame. The Peripate∣ticks hold it to be hot and dry moderately; yet it must be extream hot, if in this manner it do heat our Bathes. And if the Sun be capable of heat, they must also make it capable of cold (ele∣mentary qualities) and then they make celestial bodies obnoxious to generation and corruption; which they are not willing to grant. Although in this respect they need not fear the decay of the Sun, no more then of the globe of the earth: which though it suffer in his parts many altera∣tions, yet the whole remains firm and perpe∣tual, as Mr. Doctor Hakwell proves in his learn∣ed work upon that argument; and will so do un∣till it be dissolved by that omnipotent power which framed it. His Apology. If they make this heat to come from the motion of the Sun, we must consider how the Sun by motion may get such a heat. The Sun is either moved by his own motion, or as he is carried in his Sphear wherein he is fixed. If by his own motion, it must be either by vo∣lutation upon his axis, which is called , or by circumgyration, which is called , round about the globe of the earth: and this is the common opinion; which if it be so, he must be carried more swiftly then a bullet out of a peece of Ordnance. I read in the Turkish Hi∣story
at the siege of Scodra, of a bullet of twelve hundred weight called the Prince, and it seems a great matter. But to have such a bullet as the globe of the Sun, which is held to be 166 times bigger then the globe of the earth, to be carried in a swifter course, and that perpetually, is a monstrous, furious, and mad agitation, insa∣motus, as one termeth it. The like may be said of the motion of the Sphears: but I will leave the confutation of this to others. Gilbertus de magnete lib. 6. Taurellus de primis rerum principiis. Conrad. Aslacus de triplici coelo. But admit it to be so; and that this violent agitation is not repugnant to the perpetuity of the Heavens; and that it is able to breed an extream heat in the Sun and celestial Spheres, notwithstand∣ing their tenuity, &c. which is unapt to breed heat by motion or collision, for that is proper to solid substances: yet this heat must be conveyed to us by the same beams of the Sun, and must be subject to the former impediments. Wherefore the beams of the Sun by their mo∣tion must make this heat, by the collection a many beams together. For if they be dispersed, no fire will be kindled, but only some moderate heat: as we see in a burning-glass, which will heat a white paper or cloth, but not burn it. O∣ther things it will burn, which are apt fewels; but the whiteness of the paper or cloth it seem disperseth the beams. But no doubt the Sun by his light and beams do warm these inferiour parts, especially where they have free passage, and reflection withall, and it is to be judged, that the heat not being essentially in the Sun, is an effect of the light by whose beams it is im∣parted to us: So that where light is excluded,
heat is also excluded. And if we can exclude the heat of the beams of the Sun by the in∣rposition of a mud wall, or by making a Cel∣r fix foot under the ground; how is it likely that these beams can pierce so deep into the earth, as to heat the water there, as Lucretius aith, Qui queat hic subter tam crass corpore terram Percoquere humorem, & calido sociare vapori? Lib. 6. Prasertim cum vix possit per septa domorum lsinuare suum radis ardentibus aestum.Under this massie bulk of earth how shall The Sun boil water, and there raise a steam Whereas we see it scarce can pierce a wall, And through't into a Chamber dart a beam. And if the beams of the Sun be not able to heat a standing Pool in the midst of Summer, how should they heat a subterranean water, which is alwaies in motion, especially in the winter time? Again, if this heat come from the Sun, then in the Summer, when the Sun is hottest, the waters should be so also, and in winter cold, because of the absence of the Sun; but we find them always alike. Also, why should the Sun heat some few Fountains and pass over an infinite number of o∣thers, which are left cold? And why should there be hot Fountains in cold Climates, where the Sun hath little power to heat, either by reason of his oblique beams, or by reason of his long ab∣sence; and yet in hot Climats they should be so re? wherefore it is very improbable that our Springs are heated by the Sun.
Others have devised another cause of this actual heat of Bathes, more vain then the for∣mer, which they call Antiperistasis: where by reciprocation or compression, any quality is in∣tended and exalted to a higher degree. Antiperistasis. As where heat or cold are compassed by their con∣trary quality, so as the vapours or effluvium of it is reflected back again, the quality thereof is in∣creased. Hypocrates gives us an example of it in our own bodies, where he saith, ventres hi∣calidiores; our stomachs are hotter in Winter then in Summer, by reason the ambient air be∣ing then cold, doth stop the pores of the skin, and repell those fuliginous vapours which nature would breathe forth, and so our inward heat is increased: whereas in the Summer, by reasoned too much eventilation, our natural heat is di∣minished; and therefore we concoct better i Winter then in Summer. And although it be not simple heat which concocts, and makes eby∣lus in the Stomach, Blood in the Liver, Seed is the Spermatick Vessels, or Milk in the Breast &c. as Joubertus saith: yet heat attending upon the faculties of those parts, doth quicken them as cold doth benumb them. In Paradoxis. But if we examine this example aright, we shall find a great diffe∣rence between this and our hot Bathes. For the heat in our bodies is continually fed and main∣tained from the Heart by his motion: that a Bathes hath no such supply according to their doctrine, from any cause to make or continue this heat. And therefore the repelling of va∣pours cannot make water hotter then it is: and being naturally cold, and without any heat
where heat is not, how can it be pend in or re∣pelled? Again, in Hypocrates his example there is an interstitium (our skin) between the fuli∣ginous vapours and the external air, which keep them from uniting: but in our Bathes there is nothing to hinder the meeting and conjunction of these qualities, and then the one must dull the other. Moreover, we see that any thing that is naturally cold, as Iron or a Stone, if it be made hot accidentally by fire or otherwise, it is sooner cold in cold air, then in a warm place. So that the Antiperistasis doth rather diminish then increase the heat of it. Wherefore unless water were naturally hot, or the heat maintained by some continual cause, this Antiperistasis can do no good, but by his opposite quality would rather cool it. Nay heat it self cannot make any thing more hot, unless it be greater then the heat of the thing it self. But to ascribe the genera∣tion of heat to cold, and so to make it the cause of his contrary, is against the law of Nature. No quality of it self is increased by his contrary. It is true, that a pot of water set over the fire, will be sooner hot, being covered, or otherwise the vapours kept in, then being open: but there must be fire then to heat it, and to continue the heat: otherwise the Antiperistasis will do no∣thing, unless it make it more cold, and congeal it into Ice, if the air ambient be more cold then the water. Some may object, that they find some Fountains warmer in Winter then in Summer, and to reak when they break forth into the air; as I have seen at Wercksworth and Bakewell in Dar∣byshire: and therefore this doth argue an Anti∣peristasis.
3 Simpl. medic. facult. cap. 7. Galen thinks that these waters do but seem so to our sense: our hands being hot in Summer, and cold in Winter, as our Urins seem cold in a hot Bath. But I will grant with Va∣lesius that many deep Fountains may be so in∣deed, and not in appearance only, as partaking with some warm exhalations, especially in Mine∣ral Countreys, as Darbyshire is. Moreover, if our Bathes were heated by a Antiperistasis, then they should be hotter in Winter then in Summer; but we find them al∣wayes alike. Also if a cold ambient be able to make cold water hot, why should not a hot am∣bient make it more cold? especially seeing the vapours are cold, which being repelled by heat, which doth terminate cold, should increase the coldness of the water. Also if we should grant this Antiperistasis, we must deny the reaction and resistance between the qualities of the Ele∣ments: and so overthrow all temperaments which arise from thence: and also our composi∣tion of medicines were in vain. Valesius contro. lib. 1. cap. 5. Magyrus lib. 3. cap. 3. Wherefore this Antiperistasis is an idle invention to main∣tain this purpose. Others attribute this actual heat to quick Lyme, which doth readily heat any water call upon it, and also kindle any combustible sub∣stance put into it; this is Democritus his opi∣nion. Quick Lyme. To this I answer, that Lyme is an artifi∣cial thing, not natural, and is never found in the bowels of the earth. Besides, if it were found, one fusion of water extinguisheth the heat of it, and then it lyeth like a dead earth, and will yield nor more heat, So as this cannot procure a perpe∣tual
heat to Bathes: neither can the Lymestones without calcination, yield any heat to water, nor will break and crackle upon the affusion on wa∣ter, as Lyme doth. Wherefore this opinion is altogether improbable. Others attribute this actual heat to a subter∣ranean fire kindled in the bowels of the earth. Let us consider how this may be. Subterranea Fire. Fire is a qua∣lity and the highest degree of heat, which can∣not subsist without a subject; for I define it to be intensissimus color in corpore cremabili: The highest degree of heat in a combustible body: And it is received into his subject either by pro∣pagation or coition, as when one candle lights another, or by motion, as collision, concussion, dilatation, comprission, putrefaction, fermenta∣lion, reflection, &c. yet all motion doth not kindle fire although it heat; neither are all sub∣stances apt to be heated by motion. Air and water are rather colder by motion: but this rule holds in such things as are apt to receive heat by motion, as solid substances, combustible substan∣ces, &c. And the heat of animals, vegetables, and minerals, which they have for their genera∣tion and nutrition, is from motion: although this heat is not in so high a degree as fire is, for then it would consume them; but as the motion is moderate, and agreeable to each nature, so is the heat. This motion in natural things proceeds from their seeds, or forms, and may be called internal or natural. External motions are vio∣lent agitations, concussions, &c. which com∣monly kindle fire in apt matter. As for the ele∣ment of fire, which should be pure, not shining,
and therefore invisible, and subsisting without a subject or fewel: let them find it who know where to seek for it. For my part I know no element of fire, unless we should make it to be that which is natural to all creatures and their seeds, causing their fermenting heat, whereof I shall speak anon. And this interpretation we may well make of Hypocrates, where he faith, that all things are made of fire and water; and that these two are sufficient for all generations; fire giving motion, and water nutrition. D: ditca lib. 1. And it is not likely that this fire should be fetched from: a remote place, and downwards, against the na∣ture of fire, for every generation: but that it be near hand, and inbred in the seeds themselves, as the principal ingredient into every natural thing; whereas if it were remote, what should bring it continually, and unite it with the other elements in these generations? Where∣fore this is most likely to be the element of fire, Our burning fire is all of one nature, not differ∣ing in kind, but only in degree according to the quality of the fewel. Some fewels will make a manifest flame, as all thin and light substances, Sulphur, liquid Bitumen, Oyle, Fat, &c. Some only a glowing coal, with little or no flame, as some forts of Stone-coal. Yet all fire doth send forth fuliginous vapours, which would choak it if there were not vent for them into the air: as we see in the making of Char-coal, although they cover their fire with lome, yet they must leave some vent for the smoke; though not so much as may make it to flame, yet enough to maintain the fire. Of the first flaming fort there
are divers degrees, as that of Straw, Brimstone, Spirit of Wine, Naphtha, Petroleum, &c. Some of which will scarcely take hold upon other fewel: as one may wet a linnen cloath in Spirit of Wine, and being kindled, he shall hardly find the cloath scorched. The like hath been ob∣served in that exhalation which is called ignis satuus, being of a very thin substance, for Bi∣tumen or Naphtha. Some reckon Comets a∣mong these fiery exhalations: but I can hardly believe that they are any kindled substances. Comets, pro∣bably not kn∣dled substan∣ces. First because their flame is not pyramidal, as it is in all kindled substances. Secondly, because if they be of a thin substance from Sulphur and Bitumen, the flame would be greater, seeing it must be plentiful, if it continue so long in burn∣ing, as we find them to do. Or admit that this matter be kindled by succession, yet it is incre∣dible that it should continue burning above a year together; as that Comet Xiphian, which lasted a whole year: Another, Anno 1572. un∣der the constellation of Cassiopaea, lasted a year and a half, others six months, others three, &c. If the Sulphurous or Bituminous matter be thick, it will melt in burning, and rain down Brimstone and Bitumen upon us. Thirdly, if Comets were kindled substances, what enter∣tainment could they find above the Moon, and among the spheres, where they say no corrup∣tible or elementary substance can be indured. But many of our Comets have been observed to have been above the Moon, and some among the fixed Starrs, as hath been observed by Tycho Brahe, and Clavius: and upon due observation
they could find some of them to admit no Pa∣ralaxis, or diversity of aspect to any star in dif∣ferent Climats. This argumnnt may be good against a Peripa∣tetick; but a Platonist, or a Pytnagorean, who hold the Heavens to be made of elementary matter, and subject to generation and corruption, will not allow it, no more will many of our Divines. For glowing fires, we have none but they must be kindled, and then they must have vent for their fuliginous vapours, and they must be kindled either by propagation or coition from some other fire, or by violent motion able to kindle them, which we shall hardly find in the bowels of the earth, where all is quiet, and no space for any such perturbation. But they say there is an ignis subterraneus, which being kindled upon Sulphur and Bitumen, disperseth it self among other Mines of the like nature, and sets them on fire. Now we are come from Heaven to Hell, or to Purgatory at the least, which Pyhagoras calls materiam vatum falsique pericula mundi; The dream of Poets, and a forged fear. Metamorph. 15. The largest description of it is in Virgil: from whence both Divines and Philosophers derive much matter: and Beccius doth believe that there is such a thing in the Center of the Earth. But if we observe Virgil well, we shall find that he propounds it but as a dream: for in the end of that Book he saith,
Sunt gemina somni portae; quarum altera fortur Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris: Altera candenti perfecta nitens Elephauto, Sed falsa ad Coelum mittunt insomnia manes. AEnta. 6.Dreams have two gates, the one is said to be Of Horn, through which all true conceits de flee; The other framed all of Ivory rare, But lets out none but such as forged are. Now saith he, when Anchyses had led AEne∣as and Sibilla through Hell, he lets them forth at the Ivory gate (Portaque emittit Eburna:) As if he should say; all that I have related of Hell, is but a fiction; and thus Ludovicus Vi∣ves interprets it in his Comment upon this place. I hope none will think that I deny a Hell, but I approve not of the assignment of it to the center of the earth, or that that fire should serve as Baccius would have it, to further all genera∣tions in the earth: and as others, to be the cause of Fountains, Winds, Earth-quakes, Vulcanoes, Storms, Saltness of the Sea, &c. nor of the actual heat of our Bathes, although it be the most com∣mon received opinion. First for the place, it is not likely that the center of the earth, whither all heavy things do tend, should be hollow, but rather more com∣pact then any other part of the earth, as likewise Valesius thinks; but if there be any concavities, they are between the Center and the Superfi∣cies; and these concavities being receptacles of water from the Sea, cannot also receive fire.
These two will not agree together in one place, but the one will expel the other: for whereas some hold that Bitumen will burn in water, and is nou∣rished by it, it is absolutely false, as experience shews; and I have touched it among the Bitu∣mina. Agricola. Bacciusl. 1. cap. 19. Moreover, if the heat which warms our Bathes did proceed from hence, there must be huge vessels above the fire to contain water, whereby the fire might heat it, and not be quenched by it. Also the vapours arising from hence, must be hotter then water can endure, or be capable of; for as they ascend towards the superficies of the earth, they must needs be cooled as they pass by Rocks, or else they could not be congealed into water again: and after this congelation, the wa∣ter hath lost most of his heat, as we find in our ordinary distillations of Rose-water, &c. where we see our water to descend into the receive; almost cold; so that they cannot derive our hot Bathes from hence. Secondly, for the fire it self, although water and air may be received into the bowels of the earth, yet there is great difficulty for fire. For the other two need no nourishment to support them, as fire doth. If there be not competency of air to nourish the fire by venting his fuligious vapours, howsoever there be fewel enough, it is suddenly quenched, and such huge and flaming fire as this must be, will require more air then can there be yielded: a great part thereof pas∣sing away through the secret creeks of Rocks, and little or none entring through the Sea. And therefore daily experience shews, that our mi∣neral
men are fain to sink new Shafts (as they call them) to admit air to their works, other∣wise their lights would go out. Although one would think, that where many men may have room enough to work, there would be space enough for air to maintain a few lights. The like we see in Cupping-glasses, where the light goes out as soon as they are applied. Also there are no fires perpetual, as hot Bathes are, but are either extinct, or keep not the same te∣nor. Wherefore fire cannot be the cause of this constant heat of Bathes. It must be a continual cause that can make a continual hea. Also where fire is, there will be smoak, for as it breeds exhalations, so it sends them forth. But in most of our hot Bathes we find none of these dry exhalations. Moreover, fire is more hardly pend in then air; yet we see that air doth break forth: wherefore fire should also make his way, having fuel enough to maintain it. So they say it doth in our Vulcanoes at Hecla in Iseland, AEtna in Sicicy, Vesuvio in Campania, in Enaria, AEolia, Lipara, &c. But it is yet unproved that these eruptions of fire do proceed from any deep cause, but only are kindled upon or neer the su∣perficies of the earth, where there is air enough to feed it, and means enough to kindle it by lightnings, or other casual means. Whereas in the bowels of the earth, there is neither air to nourish it, nor any means to kindle it; seeing neither the beams of the Sun, nor Wind, or other Exhalations, nor any Antiperistasis, nor Lyme, nor Lightnings can do it. For the same reasons that exclude the Beams of the Sun and
exhalations, will likewise exclude lightnings. Thirdly, for the fuel, there are only two sub∣stances in the bowels of the earth, which are apt fuels for fire, Bitumen and Sulphur. Douatus de a∣quis Lucensibus lib. 1. cap. 18. Sulphur is in such request with all men, as they think there can be no not Bath without it: nay many hold, that if water do but pass thorow a Mine of Brimstone, although it be not kindled, but actually cold, yet it will contract from thence, not only a potential, but an actual heat. Gesaer. Epist. lib. 3. pag. 90. But we do manifestly find, that neither all hot waters are sulphurous, nor all sulphurous waters hot (as is said before in Sulphur.) The Bathes of Caldaneila and Avinian in agro Senensi, de Grotta in Viterbio, de aquis in Pisano, Divi Johannis in agro Lacenss, Balneum Geber suilleri in Halsatia, &c. are all hot, and yet give no signe of Sulphur, either by smell, or taste, or quality, or effect. Contrariwise that all sulphurous waters are not hot, may appear by the Bathes in Zurich in Helvetia, of Buda in Pannonia, at Cure in Rhetia, Celenses in Germa∣ny. In Campania between Naples and Pateolum, are many cold sulphurous Springs. At Brandula in agro Carpensi, &c. All which Bathes shew much Sulphur to be in them, and yet are cold. And no marvel, for if we insuse any simple, be it never so hot potentially, yet it will not make the liquor actually hot. Wherefore this Sulphur must burn before it can give any actual heat to our Bathes; and then it must needs be subject to the former difficulties, and also must be con∣tinually repaired by new generations of matter, which actual fire cannot further, but rather hin∣der.
The fire generates nothing, but consumes all things. Lib. 1. cap. ult. The like we may judge of Bitumen, that unless it be kindled, it can yield no heat to our Bathes; as Solinander reports of a Bituminous Mine in Westfalia, in agro Tremonensi, where going down into the Grove, he found much water, having the smell, taste, and colour of Bitumen, and yet cold. Agricola imputes the chief cause of the heating of Bathes, unto the fuel of Bitumen; Baccius on the other side to Sulphur. But in my opinion, they need not contend about it. For, as I have shewed before in the examples of mineral waters, there are many hot Springs from other minerals, where neither Sulphur nor Bi∣tomen have been observed to be. John de Don∣dis, and Julius Alexandrinus were much unsa∣tisfied in these opinions, and did rather acknow∣ledge their ignorance, then that they would subscribe unto them. I need not dispute whe∣ther this fire be in Alveis, or in Canalibus, or in vicinis partibus, &c. because I think it is in nei∣ther of them.
CHAP. XIV. The Authors opinion concerning the cause of actual heat, and medicinal virtue in Mineral Waters. VVHerefore finding all the former opi∣nions to be doubtfull and weakly grounded concerning the causes of the actual heat of Bathes; let me presume to propound an∣other, which I perswade my self to be more true and certain. But because it hath not been men∣tioned by any Author that I know, I have no mans steps to follow in it. Avia Doctorum peragro loca, nullius ante Trita solo.I travel where no path is to be seen Of any learned foot that here hath been. Which makes me fearfull in the delivery of it. But if I do err in it, I hope I shall not be bla∣med; seeing I do it in disquisition of the truth. I have in the former Chapters set down mine opinion concerning the generation of minerals, that they have their seminaries in the earth re∣plenished with spirits, and faculties attending them; which meeting with convenient matter and adiuvant causes, do proceed to the genera∣tion of several species, according to the nature of the efficient, and aptnes of the matter. In
this work of generation, as there is generatio uni∣us, so there must be corruptio alterius. And this cannot be done without a superiour power, which by moisture, dilating it self, worketh up∣on the matter, like a ferment to bring it to his own purpose. This motion between the agent spirit, and the patient matter, proceedeth from an actual heat (ex motu fit calor) which serves as an instrument to further this work. What Dr. French hath said against this opinion, may be seen if the 19, 20, & 21. pages of his Yorkshire Spaw. And this motion being natural and not violent pro∣duceth a natural heat which furthers generations; not a destructive heat. For as cold dulls and benumbs all faculties, so heat doth quicken them, This I shewed in the example of Malt. It is likewise true in every particular grain of Corn sown in the ground, although by reason they lie single, their actual heat is not discern∣able by touch, yet we find that external heat and moisture do further their spiring, as adiuvant causes; where the chief agent is the generative spirit in the seed. So I take it to be in minerals, with those distinctions before mentioned. And in this all generations agree, that an actual heat, together with moisture, is requisite: otherwise there can neither be the corruption of the one, nor the generation of the other. This actual heat is less sensible in small seeds and tender bodies, then it is in the great and plentifull ge∣nerations, and in hard and compact matter: for hard bodies are not so easily reduced to a new form, as tender bodies are; but require both more spirit and longer time to be wrought upon. And therefore whereas vegetable generations are brought to perfection in a few months, these
mineral generations do require many years, as hath been observed by Mineral men. Moreover, these generations are not terminated with one production, but as the seed gathereth strength by enlarging it self, so it continually proceeds to subdue more matter under his government: so as, where once any generation is begu, it con∣tinues many ages, and seldome gives over. As we see in the Iron Mines of Illua, the Tin Mines in Cornwall, the Lead Mines at Mendip, and the Peak, &c. which do not only stretch further in extent of ground, than hath been observed heretofore; but also are renewed in the same groves which have been formerly wrought, as our Tinners in Cornwall do acknowledge; and the examples of Illua and Saga before mentioned, do confirm. This is a sufficient means for the perpetuity of our hot Springs; that if the actual heat proceed from hence, there need be no doubt of the continuance of them, nor of their equal tenor or degree of heat. Now for the nature of this heat, it is not a de∣structive heat, as that of fire is, but a generative heat joyned with moysture. It needs no air for eventilation, as the other doth. It is in degree hot enough for the hottest Baths that are, if it be not too remote from the place where the wa∣ter issueth forth. It is a means to impart the qua∣lities of minerals to our waters, as well as heat, by reason the minerals are then in solutis prin∣cipiis, in their liquid forms, and not consolidated into hard bodies. For when they are consolida∣ted, there are few of them that will yield any quality to water, unless they be the concrete
juyces, or any actual heat, because that is pro∣cured by the contiguity of bodies, when one part lyeth upon another, and not when they are grown in corpus continuum; as we see in Malt, where by turning and changing the contiguity, the heat is increased, but by suffering it to unite, is quen∣ched: But before consolidation, any of them may yield either spirit or juyce, or tincture to the wa∣ters, which by reason of their tenuity (as is said before) are apt to imbibe them. Now if actual fire kindled in the earth, should meet with these minerals whilst they are in generation, it would dissipate the spirits, and destroy the minerals. Thurneiser Al∣chimia magna lib. 4.c.8. If it meet with them after consolidation, it will ne∣ver be able to attenuate them so, as to make them yield their qualities to water. For we never find any metals or minerals melted in the earth, which must be, if the heat of actual fire were such as is imagined: neither do we ever find any flores of metal sublimed in the earth. This natural heat is daily found by our Mineral men in the Mines, so as oftentimes they are not able to touch them, as Agricola testifieth; although by opening their groves and admission of air, it should be well qualified. Whereas on the other side, it was ne∣ver observed, that any actual kindled fire was ever seen by workmen in the earth, which were likely to be, if these fires were so frequent. Wherefore seeing we see that Mineral waters do participate with all sorts of Minerals, as well metals as other, as hath been shewed in the par∣ticular examples of all of them: seeing also that few of them, unless Mineral juyces, are able to impart their quality to water, as they are con∣solidated,
but only as they are in solutis principiis, and whilst they are in generation, as is agreed upon by all Authors: seeing also this natural heat of fermentation must necessarily be present for the perfecting of their generation, and is suf∣ficient, in regard of the degree of heat to make our Baths as hot as they are: seeing also that the other adventitious fire would rather destroy these Minerals, than further them: seeing also we can∣not imagine it either likely, or possible, without manifold difficulties and absurdities: I do con∣clude that both the actual heat of Baths, and the Mineral qualities which they have, are de∣rived unto them by means of this fermenting heat: The cause of the heat in Bath, assigned by Dr. Rouzee, is their motion and agitation in the bowels of the Earth, falling from Cataracts and broken Concavities in the same. But afterwards, lighting on this opinion of Dr. Jordens, he is so far from disliking, that he ap∣deservedly plauds it, and callls this work learned and elaborate. Vid. Lud. Rouz. Tr. of Tunbr. water, p.20, 21. & 22. in margine. Which is still in fieri, not in facto esse, as the Schoolmen term it: and therefore makes the heat continual. Examples might be brought from all kind of generations, and from some artificial works, of this sermenting heat proceeding from the seeds of natural things. Martin. de pri∣ma generations. These seeds containing the species and kinds of natural bodies, are not from the Elements, but are placed in the Elements, where they propagate their species and indivi∣duals, according to their nature, and have their due times and seasons of appearing upon the Stage of the World. Animals have their set times when their spermatick spirits are in turgescence,
some once, some twice a year, and some oftner: especially in the Spring; Vere magis, quia Vere calor redit ossibus; as Virgil speaks of Mares: only man in regard of his excellency above other creatures, is not so confinde. Vegetables have likewise their seasons of set∣ting and planting, as they may have the earth and the season most convenient: yet at any time, if their seeds get moysture and heat to dilate them, they will ferment and attempt the production of more individuals: but oftentimes the Artist doth abuse this intention of nature, and converts it to his ends: and oftentimes nature being set in action to proceed a potentia in actum, doth want convenient means to maintain her work: as when we see a Rick of Hay or Corn which hath received moysture, burnt to ashes. So in the making of Malt, or Woad, or Bread, or Beer, or Wine, &c. we make use of this generative spirit for our ends: that we may stir up, and quicken it. Otherwise our Bread would not be so favou∣y, our Beer would be but Wort, our Wine would be but Must or Plum-pottage, and want those spirits which we desire; and which lie dead and benummed in the seeds, untill they come to fer∣mentation. And in all these there is an actual heat, although it appear not in liquid things, so well as in dry: because it is there quenched by the abundance of moysture; yet we may observe active spirits in it, by the bubling and hissing, and working of it. This is evident in artificial Wines, which may be made of Figs, Daes, dryed Ray∣sing, Currants, Slows, Strawberries, Bramble∣berries, and such like, when they are infused in
water. They will ferment of their own accord, by virtue of the seeds which are in them, and make as good and as natural Wine as the juice of the green fruit, as I have often proved. The Turks have a drink which they Call Couset or Pos∣set, which is made of Barly after such a manner, as Bellonius reports in his observations. Lib.2: cap. 98. It seems also that the Scythians drink was made in this manner, which Virgil speaks of. Hic noctem ludo ducunt, & pocula laeti Fermento atque acidis imitantur vitea sorbis. Georg. 3.They dance and quaff, by the Moon-shine, Fermented juice of Slows, like Wine. And I perswade my self that we have not yet attained to a perfect artifice of our Beer and Ale, which stands upon the same grounds, and may be wrought in such a manner, if they would take the pains to try some conclusions upon it. It might save much fuel, and vessel, and labour, and perhaps with advantage in the product. For I see but two points to be observed in the work∣ing of it: the one is to extract the substance of the Malt into water: the other to give it his due fermentation. And both of these may be done without boyling. But the artifice will differ somewhat from Wine, and will require many conclusions to be tryed upon it, before it be brought to perfection. I do mention these arti∣fices only to shew the power of this seminary and fermenting spirit, and how it may be drawn to other uses for our benefit. As this is found in
vegetables, so likewise in Minerals; which as they have this generative spirit for the propaga∣tion of their species, as hath been shewed before, so they have this means of fermentation, to bring them from a potential quality, to an actual exi∣stence. And as their matter is more plentifull, and in consistence more hard and compact; so these spirits must be more vigorous and power∣full to subdue it: and consequently the heat of their fermentation must be in a higher degree, then it is in other generations. A brief col∣lection of the the Authors arguments a∣gainst the opi∣nions of others touching the actual heat of Bathes. Now having shewed the erroneous opinions of others concerning this actual heat of Bathes, and explain'd our own conceit of the true cause of it; let us collect our arguments together, the principal whereof are here and there dispersed in this Treatise, Quem nos stramineum pro tempore fecimus,Which for the present I have made of Straw. Hoping that hereafter some worthy pen may handle this argument more accurately, and give it a better flourish, Et dare perpetuo caelestia fila metallo.And on firm metal lasting threads bestow. We must not imagine that the government and ordering of the world and nature in a con∣stant course, is performed by miracle, but that natural effects have natural causes, and must
be both under the same genus. Wherefore fol∣lowing the ordinary distribution, seeing it com∣prehends all, and not questioning the celestial bodies, whether they be elementary or no, that is, subject to alterations, as intention and re∣mission, generation and corruption, &c. We say that this heat must proceed either from the superiour and celestial bodies, as the Spheres and Starrs, or from the inferiour or sublunary. From the superiour Spheres or Globes it can∣not proceed, seeing (as is shewed before) they are neither indowed with such a degree of native heat, nor can acquire it accidentally by their motion, being thin and liquid bodies; neither, if they had it, can they convey it unto the earth, but by their beams, which are not able to re∣tain it as they pass thorow the cold region of the air, nor able to warm that, although it be nearer to their fountain of heat. Wherefore if these beams can any way do it, it must be by their motion and reflection upon the earth: and this is no constant heat, but varieth according as the beams are perpendicular or oblique, and accord∣ing as the air is cleer or cloudy, &c.. And as they are not able to give this constant heat, so the earth in her bowels is not capable to receive it, being hindered by the density of the earth and rocks, and the heat of reflection taken away before it can come three foot deep. From the inferiour parts of the world if it proceed, it must be either from the Elements, or from mixt bodies. From the Elements it can∣not come, but from fire; for all the other Ele∣ments are cold, as I have shewed, especially the
earth where this heat is ingendred. And as for the Element of Fire, seeing we know not where to find it, neither, if it be any where, doth it perform the office of an Element in production and nutrition of creatures; as A∣ristotle faith, Ignis nil generat, and therefore nil nutrit; 3. De gen. ani∣mal. nam nutritio fit ex iisdem ex quibus constat: therefore as it begets nothing, so it nourisheth nothing; and so cannot be an Ele∣ment, nor as an Element maintain this heat of Bathes. 2. De gen. ani∣mal, cap. 3. But contrariwise if it have no power of begetting or nourishing any thing, it must have a power of destroying or hindering nature in her proceedings; for nature will admit of no vacuum or idle thing. Also seeing Nature useth no vio∣lent means to maintain her self, this elementary fire cannot be pen'd in the center of the earth, being of a thin subtilnature, and naturally aspiring upwards: and if it have any place assigned unto it, it must be above the other Elements, and then it cannot be drawn downwards against his nature, and that continually, without breach of the order and course of nature. And whereas they place the Element of Fire under the concave of the Moon, being in it self lucid and resplendent, it is strange that it is not seen by us, neither makes our nights light. For although by reason of his transparency it doth not terminate our sight, yet it should remove the obscurity of our nights much better then the Via lactea. Moreover, if it were there, we must see the Starrs through a double Diaphanum, one of air, and another of fire, and so would make a double refraction: which is elegantly confuted by John Pena and Conr∣dus Aslacus. In praefat. in Opticum Eucli∣dis. De triplici caelo lib.. c.4.
But there is another thing substituted in the place of this element of fire, and maintained by air, and by mineral substances in the earth; which is neither an Element, nor a mixt body, nor any substance at all, but a meer quality: and this is preferred by most to be the cause of the heat of our Bathes. And this is our common kitchin-fire, which is kindled by violent mo∣tion, maintained by servel, without which it cannot subsist, and extinguished by his contrary. And although it may be derived by communica∣tion or coition, as one candle lights another, yet originally it is kindled by violent motion, and what violent motion can there be in the bowels of the earth to strike fire, or who shall be the fueller? Exhalations and lightnings cannot do it, being aereal meteors, and no more pe∣netrable then the beams of the Sun. And there∣fore although they may kindle a Vulcano upon the surface of the earth, yet they cannot pierce deep, and their very reflection upon the super∣ficies of the earth takes away their strength: so as they can neither kindle new fire, nor commu∣cate that which is kindled to any other fuel. For if it be by communication or coition, that must be by touch, per contactum, and then in the earth it can make but one fire, and not many, being not distinct in place, and must increase in heat: and then it will not keep a constant tenor, as our Bathes do. Secondly for the nourishment of it, being a quality, it must have a subject, that is fuel, and it must have means to vent the fuliginous vapours which it breeds in the dissolution of the fuel, lest
they recoyle and quench the fire; as also there must be conveyance for the ashes which will fall down continually upon the fire, and quench it. Moreover, by consuming such great quantities of Sulphur and Bitumen, and by mollifying and breaking of Rocks, it would cause a great sinking of the earth in those places; as we see in our Vulcanoes, where whole mountains have been consumed and brought to even ground. Thirdly, this fire being a quality, is subject to intention and remission, and to utter extinguish∣ment, not only by want of fuel, which cannot be regenerated where this actual fire is, nor for want of vent, or choaking of ashes, &c. but also by rea∣son of the abundance of water which the earth receiveth for the generations of Minerals, which being opposite to fire, would quench it. Where∣fore we cannot rely upon any subterranean fire for the maintenance of our hot Bathes. From the air this heat of Bathes cannot pro∣ceed, seeing it is neither hot in it self, as hath been proved, nor can get any heat by motion, being of a thin liquid substance, which no attri∣tion or collision can make hot. And as for aereal meteors, bred from exhalations, and kindled, as is imagined, by an Antiperistasis: if they be bred in the air, they are not able to penetrate into the bowels of the earth, as hath been said before: if in the earth, besides the difficulty of finding room enough for such plentiful exha∣lations as those must be which procure lightning and thunder, and the vanity of their Antiperi∣stasis to kindle these exhalations, as hath been she wed before; it is a sufficient refutation to
take away the subject of the question, that is, all subterranean fire, as I hope I have done; and then we need not dispute about the means of kindling it, &c. these momentary meteors being produced only to kindle, and not to maintain this fire. From the water no man will derive this fire, being a cold and moist Element, and apt to quench it; unless it be by dilating the seminary spirits of natural species; and then they concur with us, and renouncing the actual fire, do con∣firm our heat of fermentation. From the earth some have imagined an inbred heat, ingenitum terrae calorem, whereby it seems they had some glimmering of this light which we have given, but have left it in as great obscurity as the Antipenstasis or Antipathy; and earth being a cold and dry Element, cannot be the cause of this heat, as it is earth. So as it is manifest that naturally the Ele∣ments cannot procure this heat of Bathes; and by violent motion they can do as little. For the earth being immovable, cannot be stirred by any violent motion; and the other three Elements, as Fire, Air, and Water, being thin and liquid substances, can procure no heat by any motion or collision either upon themselves, or upon the earth; especially in the bowels of the earth, where all is quiet, and no room or scope for any such motion as this must be. So that neither the other three Elements, nor the earth, either in the whole, or in the parts, can be the cause hereof by any violent motion. From mixt bodies if this heat come, it must be
from animals, vegetables, or minerals. Ani∣mals are not so plentiful in the earth as to cause this heat of Bathes, either alive or dead. We read of subterranean animals which have both motion, and sense, and understanding, in Vin∣centius in speculo naturali; in Lactantius; in A∣gricola, de animantibus subterraneis; in Bellonius, Ortelius, Paracelsus, &c. who calls them Gnomi, the Germanes Bergmaenlin, the French Rabat, the Cornish-men Fairies. The Danes are ge∣nerally perswaded that there are such creatures. But if any such living creatures be able to pro∣cure this heat, it cannot be by their hot comple∣xions, but it must be by violence and striking of fire. Perhaps Democritus hath hired them to make his lyme there, or some other to erect for∣ges for thunder, lightning, and such like fire∣works. Brontes{que} Steropes{que} & nudus membra Pyracmon.But these opinions deserve no confutation. From dead animals in their putrefaction some heat may appear, but such as neither for the de∣gree, nor for the continuance, can be answerable to our Bathes. For vegetables there is the same reason as for dead animals; neither doth the earth breed such plenty of these in her bowels, as to procure a months heat to a tun of water, in one place. Wherefore we have nothing to ground upon but mineral substances, whereof the earth affords enough. For there is no part of the earth but is reple∣nished with mineral seeds. And although some may think that because minerals are not found,
or not wrought in all places: and that some wa∣ters are also found which do not participate of the virtues of minerals, that therefore our hot Bathes proceed not from the fermentation of mi∣nerals, but from some other cause; they are mi∣staken. For although metals are not frequent in some places, or at the least not discovered; yet a man shall hardly dig ten foot deep in any place, but he shall find rocks of stone, which have their generation as well as other minerals, or some of the Salts, or Bitumina, or Spirits, or mean me∣tals, &c. And how can Bathes receive mineral qualities, but from minerals? Therefore where Bathes are, there must be Minerals, although where Minerals are, there are not always Bathes, But perhaps they are not so accumulated, as by their contiguity they are able to yield any mani∣fest heat; their matter being dispersed as grains of corn sown in a field, which by reason of their lying single, do not shew a sensible heat in their fermentation; or most metals breeding between a Hanger and a Lieger, which Agricola calls pendens and jacens, are seldome above a foot thick, and therefore cannot yield much heat to our waters. And this is the cause why we have so few Bathes from Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, &c. But where much matter is accumulated together, the very contiguity (one part lying upon ano∣ther) will make a manifest heat, untill it grow to a corpus continuum, when the generation is per∣fected, and then the heat is extinguished, Or perhaps they have not water so plentifull as may yield a living spring, although they may have sufficient for the use of their generation. Or per∣haps
where they break forth, they meet with desart sands, as in Arabia, China, Africa, &c. Which drink up the water, and hinder the eruption of it. And whereas there are some hot springs found which do not shew any mineral quality in them, the reason of this may be the want of con∣crete juice, which, as I have said before, is the medium of communicating mineral qualities and substances with water. For without them, water is as unapt to imbibe minerals, as it is to unite with oyle. So as water may of it self receive actual heat from the fermentation of minerals, but not their qualities, without the mediation of some of the concrete juices: as contrari∣wise we find some Fouutains that receive mineral qualities, and yet are cold: whereof I have given many examples. The reason whereof is either for that they have passed a long way, and by ma∣ny Meanders from the place of generation to the place of their eruption, and so have lost their heat; or else the concrete juices, which will dis∣solve in water without any heat, being impregna∣ted with other minerals, do impart them to wa∣ter, and yet without heat. But to say that there is any earth without mineral seeds, is to make a vacuum in rerum natura, and to destroy the use of the Elements. It is true that the seeds do do not alwaies meet with opportunity to display themselves, and sometimes they are fain to serve under other colours, which are more predomi∣nant: but there is no part of the earth without some seeds or other. And from hence we must derive the original of the actual heat of Bathes: for nothing else in
the world will serve our turn to procure so lasting and so uniform a heat unto them; and that not by kindling any actual fire about them, for most of our minerals whereof our Bathes consist, and from whence they receive both their actual heat and virtues, will not burn, neither have any actual heat in themselves, being all cold to the touch, but receive it by a fermenting heat which they have in their generation: without which there is no generation for any thing. And this heat continues so long as the work of generation con∣tinues: which being once begun, doth not cease in many ages, by reason of the plenty of matter which the earth yields, and the firmness and so∣lidity thereof. And although after that the mi∣nerals have attained to their perfection, this heat ceaseth, yet the generation extends further then where it first began, and enlargeth it self every way, the works of nature being circular: so as the water which was heated by the first ge∣neration, cannot avoid the other succeeding ge∣nerations, but must meet with them either be∣hind or before, beneath or above, on the one side, or on the other (especially seeing no ge∣neration can proceed without water:) and yet keeps the same tenor and degree of heat, accord∣ing to the nature of the minerals fermenting, and to the distance from the place of eruption. And this is a far more probable cause of the con∣tinuance of our Bathes, then any subterranean destructive fire can be, or any other of the sup∣posed causes can yield. I do not deny but that hot Bathes may cease and become cold; as Ari∣stotle saith of Salt Fountains which are cold, 2 Meteorol.c.2; that
they were once hot, before the original of their heat was extinct: which I interpret to be when the work of generation ceased, and the Salt brought to his perfection. But I do not read of any hot Bathes that have ceased: unless near onto some Vulcano, where either the sinking of Rocks hath altered the course of them, as at Tripergula and Baia, or the flaming fire which heated them at their eruption being extinguish∣ed, as in the AEolian Islands. These Vulcanoes are far more subject to decay then our gene∣rative heat, because they consume their fuel; this doth not, but increaseth it daily, viresque acquirit eundo. Of the other Ovid saith, Nee quae sulphureis ardet fornacibus AEtna Ignea semper erit; ne{que} enim fuit ignea semper.AEtna with its sulphureous flames will dy, And as a kindling had, will want supply. But of this we can hardly bring an Instance of any that have decayed; because where a gene∣ration is begun, there seldome or never wants matter to propagate and enlarge it. And seeing minerals have not their seeds in their individuals, as animals & vegetables have, but in their wombs, as hath been shewed before; it were to be fear∣ed that there would be a decay of mineral spe∣cies, and so a vacuum left in nature, if these ge∣nerations should be no more durable then the other. Animals are propagated by begetting of their species, the power whereof is in every in∣dividual, which, no doubt, will not give over
this trade as long as the world lasteth. Vege∣tables are also fruitfull in their kinds, every one producing 100, or perhaps 1000 seeds of indi∣viduals yearly, to perpetuate their species. Minerals have no such means, but only have their seeds in their wombs, whereby they are propagated: and if these generations, being longer in perfecting of their species, were not supplyed with a larger extent for their producti∣ons; nature had been defective in not providing sufficient means for their perpetuity, as well as for others, and might easily suffer a decay, and a vacuity of mineral species; which agrees not with the providence of nature, and the ornament of the world. The necessity hereof depends upon the first benediction, (crescite & multiyli∣camini) which, no doubt belongs as well to mi∣nerals in their kinds, as it doth to animals and vegetables, and by vertue hereof we see that they are propagated daily, as I have proved before, Cap. 11. Trismgistus in Asclepio.c.7. In Pimandro cap.1. And this is that necessity whereof Hypocrates speaks, and that fatum naturale in∣harens rebus ipsis, Natural fate inherent in things themselves, as Lipsius faith; and that Lex Adrastiae mentioned by Aristotle and Gal, Locis aute citatis, so firmly established, as no∣thing can contradict it. Lib. de constat. Arithmetick, Geome∣try, and Logick, which are but attendants upon nature, have their principles so firmly grounded, as nothing can shake them; and shall we think that nature it self is grounded upon weaker foun∣dations? wherefore we need not doubt of the perpetuity of these generations, but that as some parts attain to their perfection, so other
puts will be alwayes in fieri or in via ad genera∣tionem: whereby our Bathes will never fail of their heat or their virtues. This I hope is susficient for the confuting of other opinions, and the clearing of mine own from all absurdities concerning the degree of heat, which is as much as the nature of water can endure without utter dissipation: concer∣ning the equal tenor of the heat, the duration of , the participation of mineral qualities, &c. The other kind of confirmation which we call Apodeictical, is also here and there dispersed in this Discourse: as that all minerals have their continual generation: that this generation is not without heat and moysture, which do necessari∣ly attend all generations: that few mineral sub∣stances or qualities can be imparted to water, but whilst they are in generation, and yet we find them much impregnated with them: that our Miners do find an actual heat, and in a high de∣gree, in the digging of Minerals, where the fer∣mentation is not throughly extinct: that we ob∣serve the like course of nature in the generations of animals and vegetables: that we are led to the acknowledgement hereof by many artificial conclusions and artifices, &c. Wherefore I for∣bear to make any larger repetition hereof. And this is in brief (though plainly deliver∣ed) my opinion concerning the actual heat of Baths, and of the mineral qualities which we find in them; which I refer to the censures of those that be learned. There are two other motions which resemble this fermentation: The one is Motus dilatationis,
the Other Antipatheticus. Motus dilatationis is evident in Lime, in Allum, in Copperass, and other concrete juyces, whereby the affusion of water, the Salt in the Lime, or the concrete juyces being suddenly dissolved, there is by this motion, an actual heat procured for a time, able to kindle any combustible matter put to it. The like we observe in those stone Coals, cal∣led metal Coals, which are mixed with a Mar∣chesit containing some mineral juyce, which re∣ceiving moysture, doth dilate it self, and grows so hot, as oftentimes great heaps of those Coals are kindled thereby, and burnt before their time; as hath been seen at Puddle-Wharf in London, and at Newcastle. But this is much different from out fermentation. Another Motus resembling this fermentation, is that which is attributed to Antipathy, when disagreeing substances being put together, do fight, and make a manifest actual heat; as An∣timony and Sublimat, oyle of Vitriol and oyle of Tartar, Allum liquor and Urine, Lees, Chalk, &c. But the reason of this disagreement is in their Salts, whereof one is astringent, the other relaxing; the one of easie dissolution in water, the other of hard dissolution, &c. where one mi∣neral hinders the dissolution or congelation of another; and not by reason of any antipathy: for it is not likely that nature would produce two contrary substances mixed like atomes in o subject, but that in their very generations the o would be an impediment to the other. So in ve∣getables where one plant sucks away the nou∣rishment from another, we call it antipathy. B
if we examine aright what this sympathy and an∣tipathy is, we shall find it to be nothing but a re∣fuge of ignorance, when not being able to con∣ceive the true reasons of such actions & passions in natural things, we fly sometimes to indefinite generalities, and sometimes to this inexplicable sympathy and antipathy; attributing voluntary, and sensitive actions and passions to insensible substances. This motus also is much different from fermentation, as may easily appear by the former description. And thus much for this point of fermentation, which I hope will give better satisfaction then any of the former opi∣nions. CHAP. XV. By what means it may be discovered what mine∣rals any water containeth. THE nature of minerals and their genera∣tions being handled, and from thence the reasons drawn, both of the actual heat of Bathes, and of their qualities: Now it is fit we should seek out some means how to discover what mi∣nerals are in any Bath, that thereby we may the better know their qualities, and what use to make of them for our benefit. Many have at∣tempted this discovery, but by such weak means, and upon such poor grounds, as it is no marvail if they have failed of their purpose: for they have contented themselves with a bare distilla∣tion or evaporation of the water, and observing
the sediment, have thereby judged of the mine∣rals, unless perhaps they find some manifest taste, or smell, or colour in the water, or some unctu∣ous matter swimming above it. Some desire no other argument of Sulphur and Bitumen, but the actual heat: as though no other minerals could yield an actual heat, but those two: But this point requires better consideration; and I have been so large in describing the natures and generations of minerals, because without it, we cannot discern what minerals we have in our waters, nor judge of the qualities and use of them. Our Minerals therefore, are either confused or mixed with the water. If they be confused they are easily discerned: for they make the water thick and pudly, and will either swim above, as Bitu∣men will do, or sink to the bottom, as Earth, Sul∣phur, and some terrestrial juices; for no confused water will remain long unseparated. If they are perfectly mixed with the water, then their mix∣ture is either corporal, where the very body of the Mineral is imbibed in the water, or spiritual, where either some exhalation, or spirit, or tin∣cture is imparted to the water. Corporally there are no minerals mixed with water, but juices, either liquid, as succus lai∣descens, metallificus, &c. before they are per∣fectly congealed into their natural consistence, or concrete, as Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, and Allum, these concrete juices do not dissolve themselves in water, but oftentimes bring with them some tincture or spirit from other Minerals. For as water is apt to recive juices, and tinctures, and
spirits from animals, and vegetables; so are con∣crete juices, being dissolved, apt to extract tin∣ctures and spirits from minerals, and to commu∣nicate them with water. And there are no Mines, but have some of these concrete juices in them, to dissolve the materials of them, for their better union and mixture: and there are few minerals or metals, but have some of them incorporated with them; as we see in Iron, and Copper, and Tin, and Lead, &c. And this is the reason that water being long kept in Vessels of any of these metals, will receive a taste or smell from them, especially if it be attenuated, either by heat, or by addition of some sour juice; and yet more, if the metals be fyled into powder as we see in making Chalibeat Wine, or Sugar of Lead, or Puttie from Tin, or Verdegrease from Copper. There may be also a mixture of spiri∣tual Substance from minerals, whilst they are in generation, and in Solutis Principiis: the water passing through them, and the rather if it be actu∣ally hot, for then it is more apt to imbibe it, and will contain more in it, being attenuated by heat, then being cold; as we see in Urins, which though they be full of humours, yet make no great shew of them so long as they are warm, but being cold, do settle then to the bottom. These spiritual substances are hardly discerned in our Bathes, but by the effects; for they leave no residence after evaporation; and are commonly as volatile in sublimation as the water it self: neither do they increase the weight of the water, nor much alter the taste or smell of them, unless they be very plentiful. Wherefore we have no
certain way to discover them, but by the effects. We may conjecture somewhat of them by the Mines which are found near unto the Bathes, and by the mud which is brought with the water. But that may deceive, as coming from the pas∣sages through which the water is conveyed, or, perhaps, from the sweat and strigments of mens bodies which bathe in them. The corporal sub∣stances are found, either by sublimation or by precipitation, By sublimation, when being brought to the state of congelation, and sticks of Wood put into it, within a few dayes, the con∣crete juices will shoot upon the wood; in Needles, if it be Nitre; in Squares, if be Salt; and in Clods and Lumps, if it be Allum or Co∣perass, and the other mineral substances which the waters have received, will either incorpo∣rate a tincture with them, or if it be more terr∣strial, will settle and separate from it, and by drying it at a gentle fire, will shew from what house it comes, either by colour, taste, smell, or vertue: There is another way by precipitation, whereby those mineral substances are stricken down from their concrete juices which held them, by addition of some opposite substance. And this is of two sorts: either Salts, as Tartar, Soap-ashes, Kelps, Urine, &c. Or four juices as Vinegar, Lemons, oyle of Vitriol, Sulphur, &c. In which I have observed that the Salts are pro∣per to blew colours, and the other to red; for example, take a piece of Scarlet cloath, and wet it in oyle of Tartar (the strongest of that kind) and it presently becomes blew: dip it again in oyle of Vitriol, and it becomes red again. P∣notus
hath a strange precipitating water from Tin, Mercury Alkali, &c. which separate any mine∣rals Pidr it pes authorem. These are the chief grounds of discovering mineral waters, according to which any man may make tryal of what waters he pleaseth. I have been desirous heretofore to have attempted some discovery of our Bathes, according to these prin∣ciples: but being thought (by some) either not convenient, or not usefull, I was willing to save my labour, which perhaps might have seemed not to be worth thanks; and in these respects am willing now also to make but a bare mention of them. CHAP. XVI. Of the use of Mineral Waters, inwardly, out∣wardly. In this Chapter is shewed the inward use of them, first general; then particu∣ly of the hot waters of Bathe. THE nature and generations of Minerals being handled, and how our mineral waters receive their impressions, and actual heat from thence; and by what means they are to be tried, what Minerals are in each of them. Now we are to shew the uses of them; which must be drawn from the qualities of the Minerals where∣of they consist; which are seldome one or two, but commonly more. These qualities are either the first, as hot, cold, moyst, and dry: or the second, as penetrating, astringent, opening, re∣solving, attracting, cleansing, mollifying, &c.
For the first qualities, it is certain and agreed upon by all Authors, that all mineral waters do dry exceedingly, as proceeding from earth; but some of those do cool withall, and some do heat. Cooling waters are good for hot distempers of the Liver, Stomach, Kidneys, Bladder, Womb, &c. Also for Salt distillations, sharp humours, light obstructions of the Meseraicks, &c. Heating waters are good for cold affects of the Stomach, Bowels, Womb, Seminary Vessels, cold distillations, Palsies, &c. For the second qualities, cleansing waters are good in all Ulcers, especially of the Guts. Mollifying waters, for all hard and schirrous Tumors. Astringent waters, for all Fluxes, &c. and so of the rest. Now these waters are used either inwardly or outwardly. Inwardly, either by mouth, or by injection. By mouth, either in potion, or in Broths, Juleps, &c. Galen never used them imwardly, because he judged their qualities to be discovered by expe∣rience, rather then by reason. 6 De tuenda sanitat. cap.9. And seeing we find many of them to be venomous, and deadly, as proceeding from Arsenick, Sandaracha, Cad∣mia, &c. We had need be very wary in the in∣ward use of them. Neptunes Well in Tarracina was found to be so deadly, as it was therefore stopped up. By Monpellier at Perant is a Well which kills all the
Fowls that drink of it; the lake Avernus kills the Fowls that fly over it; so doth the vapour arising from Charons Den between Naples and Puteolum. So there are divers waters in Savoy and Rhetia, which breed swellings in the thro. Others proceeding from Gipsum do strang  But where we find waters to proceed from whol∣some Minerals, and such as are convenient, and proper for our intents, there we may be bold to use them as well inwardly as outwardly: yet so as we do not imagine them to be such absolute remedies, as that they are of themselves able to cure diseases without either rules for the use of them, or without other helps adjoyned to them. For as it is not enough for a man to get a good Damasco or Bilbo-blade to defend himself with∣all, unless he learn the right use of it from a Fen∣cer; so it is not enough to get a medicine and remedy for any disease, unless it be rightly used, and this right use must come from the Physitian, who knows how to apply it, and how to prepare the body for it, what to add and joyn with it, how to govern and order the use of it, how to prevent such inconveniences as may happen by it, &c. Wherefore, where we speak of any Mineral water, or of any other medicine that is proper for such and such a grief, we must be so under∣stood, that the medicine is not wise enough to cure the disease of it self, no more than a sword is able of it self to defend a man, or to offend his enemie, but according to the right and skil∣full use of it. And as it is not possible for a Fen∣cer to set down absolute rules in writing for h Art, whereby a man may be able in reading
them to defend himself; no more is the Physi∣tian possibly able to direct the particular uses of his remedy, whereby a patient may cure himself without demonstration and the particular directi∣on of the Physitian. It is true, that we have ge∣neral rules to guide us in the cure of diseases, which are very true and certain; yet when we come to apply them to particular persons, and several constitutions, these general rules are not sufficient to make a cure, but it must be varied according to substance. Hereupon we daily find, that those patients which think to cure them∣selves, out of a little reading of some rules or re∣medies, are oftentimes dangerously deceived. And this is enough to intimate generally con∣cerning the uses of our Mineral waters. Inwardly we find great and profitable use of such waters as proceed from Nitre, Allum, Vi∣triol, Sulphur, Bitumen, Iron, Copper, &c. Ex∣amples whereof I have set down before in the several Minerals, referring the particular uses of each to such Authors as have purposely descri∣bed them. My intent is chiefly to apply my self to those Baths of Bath in Summerset-shire; which con∣sisting, as I judge, principally of Bitumen, with Nitre, and some Sulphur, I hold to be of great use both inwardly and outwardly. Baths of Bath consist princi∣pally of Bitu∣men With Ni∣tre, and some Sulphur. And I am sorry that I dare not commend the inward use of them as they deserve, in regard I can hardly be perswaded that we have the water pure, as the springs yield them, but do fear, lest where we take them, they may be mixt with the water of the Bath. If this doubt were cleared, I should
not doubt to commend them inwardly, to hear, dry, mollifie, discuss, glutinate, dissolve, open obstractions, cleanse the kidneys and bladder, ease cholicks, comfort the matrix, mitigate fits of the mother, help barrenness proceeding from cold humors, &c. as Tabernomoutanus affirms of other Bituminous Baths. Thesauri aqua∣rii pag.cap. 40. Also in regard of the Nitre, they cut and dissolve gross humors, and cleanse by urine. In regard of the Sulphur, they dry and resolve, and mollifie, and attract, and are especially good for uterine affects proceeding from cold and windy humours. And I would wish these waters to be drunk hot as they are, for better penetration, and less offence to the stomach. The antient Grecians and Romans did drink most of their water and wine hot, as we find in many Authors, which Salmuth hath diligently collected: and Antho∣nius Percius hath purposely written a book of it, entitaled Dei bever caldo castumato da gli Anti∣chi. Is Pancirollum de deperditis pag. 540. We find also that it is in use at this day, both in the East-Indies and in Turkey, where they have a drink called Capha, sold ordinarily in Taverns, and drunk hot, although in the Sum∣mer. Prosper. Alpi∣nus de medic. Agyptioiuml. 4.c.3. De vita & marte pag. 304. Verulamius doth marvel that it is so much grown out of use, and adviseth to drink our first draught at our meals, hot. There is great reason for it, both for preservation of health, and for cure of many diseases. The stomach being a nervous part, must needs be offended by that which is actually cold: and being the seat of natural ap∣petite, Warm drink commended. and of the first concoction (whose errors and defects are not amended in the other conco∣ctions) had need to be preserved in his native
vigour and strength, that it may breed good nou∣rishment for the whole body. But the much use of cold drink, although it seem to refresh us for the present, by dulling the appetite and the sense of thirst and hunger, as a stupefictive narcotick will do: yet it destroys the faculties of the sto∣mach, which are maintained and quickned by heat: and thereby breeds crudities in our bo∣dies, from whence many diseases proceed. The East-Indans are seldome troubled with the Stone or the Gout, and it is imputed to their warm drink: the like we may judge of obstructi∣ons, cholicks, dropsies, rheumes, coughs, hoars∣ness, diseases in the throat and lungs, &c. in which cases, and many more which proceed from ill concoction and crudity of humors, no doubt it is an excellent preservative to drink our drink warm. I.W. I know a worthy Gentleman of excellent parts, who in his travels observed the benefit hereof, and for many years hath used to take his drink hot: and being now above 80 years old, enjoyeth his health of body, and vigour of spirits, beyond the ordinary course of men of his age. Likewise in the cure of diseases, I perswade my self it would prove very profitable, if it were in use. For example in feavers, I see no reason but it would do more good than our cold waters, ju∣leps, posset-drinks, &c. which I approve well of, but if the patient did drink them hot, the sto∣mach would be less offended thereby, the moy∣sture (which we chiefly desire in them) would penetrate more, and the eventilation by sweat or insensible transpiration, would not be hindred. Lib. ae humio∣um usu. Hypocrates is very plain in this point, and
reckons many inconveniences of cold drinks, to the teeth, bones, nerves, brest, back, lungs, sto∣mach, &c. I will not insilt longer hereupon, be∣ing a practical point of Physick: only I thought good to intimate it to our learned Physitians to contemplate upon, for the benefit of our pati∣ents. Our Bath Guides do usually command the drinking of this water with salt to purge the bo∣dy, perswading the people that the Bath-water hath a purging quality in it, when as the same proportion of spring-water, with the like quan∣tity of salt will do the like. Our Baths have true virtues to commend them, so as we need not seek to get credit or grace unto them by false sug∣gestions. The Bitumen and Nitre which is in them, although it serves well for an alterative re∣medy, yet it is not sufficient for an evacuative: and therefore we must attribute this purgative quality, either to the great quantity of water which they drink (and so it works) ratione pon∣deris) or unto the stimulation of salt which is dissolved in it, or unto both together. Our Com∣mon salt hath a stimulating quality, as is shewed before, Chap. 7. and Erastus saith that it pur∣geth much. Bulcasis gives it to that purpose from 3 ij to 3 iiij. Mesue also prescribes it to purge gross humors, and so doth Avicen. Wherefore there is no doubt but salt will purge of it self, be∣ing dissolved in our Bath-water. Simpl.cap. 16. lib.5. sum 1. tract.4. s lib. 2. tract.3. cap. 624. But I should like much better to dissolve in it some appropri∣ate syrup or other purgative, for this purpose, as Manna, Tartar, Elaterium, syrups of Roses, of Cichory, with Rhubarb, Augustanus; or to
move urine, Syr, de 5. rad. Bizantinus de Limo∣nibus, Sambuclnas, de Altzhca, &c. And this course is usual in Italy, according as the Physi∣tian sees most convenient, but with this caution, that when they take it in potion, they must not use the Bath, because of contrary motions. Inwardly also Bath-waters are used, for Broths, Beer, Juleps, &c. although some do mislike it, because they will not mix medicaments with ali∣ments: wresting a text in Hypocr. to that pur∣pose. Baccius lib. 2. Claudiaus p. 377. De aere, aquis & locis. But if we may mix Diureticks, Deoppi∣latives, Purgatives, &c. with aliments, as usually we do: I see no reason but we may as well use mineral waters, where we desire to make our ali∣ments more alterative by a medicinal quality, al∣waies provided that there be no malignity in them, nor any ill quality which may offend any principal part. And thus much for the use of them by mouth. By injection they are used also into the Womb, to warm, and dry, and cleanse those parts; into the passages of urine, to dry and heal excoriations there; into the fundament for like causes, as also for resolutions of the Sphincter, and bearing down of the fundament, &c. And thus they are used either alone, or mixed with other medicines, according as the Physitian thinks most sit, and we daily find very good success thereby in uterine affects, depending upon cold causes. Thus much for the inward use of our Bath-waters.
CHAP. XVII. Of the outward use of the the Hot Waters of Bathe; first, the general use of them to the whole body in Bathing: secondly, the parti∣cular use of them by pumping, bucketing, or applying the mud. OUtwardly our Bath-waters are principally used, because they are most properly for such affects as are in the habit of the body, and out of the veins: as Palsies, Contractions, Rheums, cold Tumors, affects of the skin, aches, &c. And in these cases, we use not only the water, but also the mud, and in some places the upour. The water is used both for his actual and po∣tential heat, as also for the second qualities of mollifying, discussing, cleansing, resolving, &c. which the minerals give unto it. The use hereof is either general to the whole body, as in bathing; or some particular to some one part, as in bucket∣ing or pumping, which antiently was called Stil∣licidium. The Italians call it Duccia. The ge∣neral use in Bathing, is most antient: for our Bathes were first discovered thereby to be whol∣some and soveraign in many diseases. Nechams Verses concerning the use of these Bathes, are four hundred years old. Bathoniae Thermas vix praefero Virgilianas Confecto prosunt Balnea nostra seni: Prosunt attritis, collisis invalidisque, Et quorum morbis frigida causa subest.
Which I will English out of Dr. Hackwels learned work of the perpetuity of the world. Our Bains at Bathe with Virgils to compare; For their effects, I dare almost be bold, For feeble folk, and crazie good they are, For bruiz'd, consum'd, far spent, and very old, For those likewise whose sickness comes of cold. We have antient traditions (famae est obscu∣rior annis) That King Bladud who is said to have lived in the time of Elias, did first discover these Bathes, and made tryal of them upon his own Son, and thereupon built this City, and distinguished the Bathes, &c. But we have no certain record hereof. It is enough that we can shew the use of them for 400 years, and that at this day they are as powerful as ever they were: Cambden gives them a more antient date from Ptolomy and Antonine, and the Saxons: and saith they were called Aquae Solis, and by the Saxons, Akmanchester, that is, the town of sick people, and dedicated to Minerva, as Solinus faith. The opinion that the Bathes were made by Art, is too simple for any wise man to believe, or for me to confute: And Necham in his Verses which fol∣low after those I have mentioned, doth hold it a sigment: you may see them in Cambden. We have them for their use in bathing, distinguished into four several Bathes, whereof three have been antiently; namely the KingsBath, the Hot Bath and the Cross Bath. The Queens Bath was taken from the Springs of the Kings Bath, that being farther off, from the hot Springs, it might
serve for such as could not endure the heat of the other. We have likewise an appendix to the hot Bath; called the Leapers Bath, for un∣clean persons. We find little difference in the nature of these Bathes, but in the degree of heat, proceeding no doubt, from one and the same Mine. Yet as the Mine may be hotter in one ptthen in another, or the passages more direct from it, so the heat of them may vary. Some little difference also we find among them, that one is more cleansing then another, by reason (is I take it) of more Nitre. For in the cross Bath we find that our fingers ends will shrink and shrivel, as if we had washed in Soap-water, more then in the other Bathes. The Kings Bath, as it is the hottest of all the Bathes, so it is the fittest for very cold diseases, and cold and phleg∣ck constitutions: And we have daily expe∣ence of the good effects it worketh upon Pal∣es, Aches, Sciatica's, cold Tumors, &c. both by scuation, by Sweat, and by warming the parts facted, attenuating, discussing, and resolving the mors. Also in Epilepsies and Uterin affects in e Scorbute, and in that kind of dropsie which t call Anasarca. The hot Bath is little infe∣r unto it, as next in degree of heat, and full in the same cases. The Queens Bath, d Cross Bath are more temperate in their heat, d therefore fittest for tender bodies, which are t to be inflamed by the other, and where e is more need of mollifying and gentle ming, then of violent heat and much evacua∣m by sweat. And in these Bathes they may dare longer without dissipation of Spirits, then
in the other: the Queens Bath is the hotter of the two, but temperate enough for most bodies. The Cross Bath is the coldest of all, as having but few Springs to feed it: yet we observe it to supple, and mollifie more then the rest, both be∣cause they are able to stay longer in it, and be∣cause (as I said before) it seems to participate more with Nitre, then the rest, which doth cleanse better, and gives more penetration to the other Minerals. Wherefore in contractions, Epilepsies, Uterin affects, Convulsions, Cramps, &c. This Bath is very useful, as also in cutaneal diseases, as Morphews, Itch, &c. Thus much for the nature and difference of our Bathes, and the general use in bathing. They are used also to particular parts by pum∣ping or bucketing, or applying the mud. Pumping or bucketing are not used in that fashion, as we use them in any other Bathes that I can learn, but only the Duccia or Stillicidium But I hold our fashion as good as that. The water comes more plentifully upon the part, and may be directed as the patient hath occasion. O bucketing hath been longest in use: but finding that it did not heat some sufficiently, being take from the surface of the Bath, we have of lat erected Pumps, which draw the water from th springs or near unto them, so as we have it muc hotter from thence, then we can have it by buc∣keting. A worthy Merchant and Citizen  London, Mr. Humphrey Brown, was perswade by me to bestow two of these Pumps upon the Kings and Queens Bath, whereby he hath do much good to many, and deserves a thankfu
remembrance. The like also I procured to be done at the other Bathes, although that of the CrossBath is not so useful, by reason it wants heat, unless for yong Children. Also we have a Pump out of the hot Bath, which we call the dry Pump, where one may sit in a Chair in his Cloaths, and have his Head, or Foot, or Knee pumped with∣out heating the rest of the body in the Bath; and devised chiefly for such as have hot Kidneys, or some other infirmities which the Bath might hurt. This we find very usefull in Rheums, and cold Brains, and in Aches and Tumors in the Feet. For these Pumps we are beholding unto the late Lord Archbishop of York, and to Mr. Hugh May, who upon my perswasions were contented to be at the charge of them. It were to be wished that some well disposed to the publick good, would erect the like at the Kings Bath; This is now done, and a dry Pump there erected in the year 1661. at the City charge, by the pro∣curement of Mr. Iohn Ford, Apothecary, then Mayor of the City. where, perhaps, it might be more use∣full for many, in regard of the greater heat which those springs have. The lute of Bathes is in much use in some pla∣ces, where it may be had pure, both to mollifie, and to resolve, and to strengthen weak parts. But we make little use of it in our Bathes, be∣cause we cannot have it pure, but mixed with strigments. In divers other places either the springs arise a good distance from the bathing places, or else there be other eruptions from whence it may be taken. But our springs arising in the Bathes themselves, it cannot well be sa∣ved pure. Besides, we have not those means of the heat of the Sun, to keep it warm to the parts where it is applyed: so as growing cold, it
rather does hurt then good. Wherefore it were better for us, to use artificial lutes, as the An∣tients did, of Clay, Sulphur, Bitumen, Nitre, Salt, &c. or unguents of the same nature, as that which they call Ceroma. But the best way is to referr the election of these remedies to the pre∣sent Physitian, who will fit them according to the nature of the grief. CHAP. XVIII. In what particular Infirmities of the Body, ba∣thing in the Hot Waters of Bathe is profi∣table. TO come more particularly to the use of ba∣thing, we must understand, that there are many mineral waters fit for bathing, which are not fit to drink: as those which participate with Lead, Quicksilver, Gypsum, Cadmia, Arsenick, &c. Also those that contain liquid Bitumen, are thought to relax too much: but those that proceed from dry Bitumen are permitted, and prescribed in potion by Paulus AEgineta, and Trallian: Sulphur also is questioned , Whether it be fit to be taken inwardly by Potion, because it relaxeth the stomach, and therefore Aetius forbids it: yet Trallian allows it, and so do others, if the Sulphur be not predominant. 1 Tetrah. serm. 3 cap. 167. Trallian. l. 10. cap. 1. But for outward bathing there is no question to be made of these Minerals, nor of any other which are not in themselves venomous.
And whereas Oribasius, AEgineta, Actuarius, &c. are suspitious of Sulphur and Bitumen for the head: Orib.l. 10.c.3. AEgin.l.1.c.52. Actu.l.3.c. 10. they must be understood of hot di∣stempers there, and not of cold rheumatick brains; where by daily experience we find the profitable use of them, both by evacuation in bucketing, and by warming and comforting the cold part. Cap. 5. And Oribasius doth ingeniously con∣fess, that the nature of these Baths was not then perfectly discovered; and therefore they were all held to be, not only dry, but very hot; al∣though we find them not all so: for Iron waters do cool, and so do those of Camphir, and Allu∣minous, and Nitrous waters also. Hypoc. de aere; aquis, & locis. But for our Bituminous and Sulphurous waters which Galen forbids in hot brains, there is no reason to suspect them in cold affects of the brain and nerves, in which cases we make especial choice of all things, which either in tast or smell do resemble Bitumen: as Rue, Castorium, Valeriana, Herba Paralyseos, Trifolium, Asphaltitis, &c. which both by his warming quality, and by his suppling and mollifying substance, is most proper and conve∣nient for those parts. .de tuenda sa∣nitate cap. 9. The like I may say of Sul∣phur, in which nothing can be excepted against, but his sharp spirit, which is made by burning: and we have none of that in our waters, nor I hope any fire to make it withal. The other parts of Sulphur are hot and dry, and very unctuous. As for Nitre, it cleanseth, purgeth both by stool and urine, and helpeth the incorporation of the other Minerals with the water, and qualifies the heat of them, and gives them better penetration
into our bodies. In regard of these Minerals, to∣gether with the actual heat, we find that the bath∣ing in our Baths doth warm the whole habit of the body, attenuate humors, open the pores, procure sweat, move urine, cleanse the matrix, provoke womens evacuations, dry up unnatural humors, strengthen parts weakned, comfort the nerves, and all neutrous parts, cleanse the skin, and suck out all salt humours from thence, open obstructions, if they be not too much impacted, case pains of the joynts and nerves and muscles, mollifie and discuss hard tumors, &c. Wherefore this bathing is profitable for all palsies, apo∣plexies, caros, epilepsies, stupidity, destuctions, gouts, sciaticaes, contractions, cramps, aches, tumors, itches, scabs, leprosies, cholicks, windy∣ness, whites in women, stopping of their courser, barrenness, abortions, scorbuts, anasarcaes, and generally all cold and phlegmatick diseases, which are needless to reckon up. In all which cure our Baths have a great hand, being skilfully di∣rected by the Physitian, with preparation of the body before, and addition of such other helps as are needfull. And whereas without the help of such Baths, these diseases could not be cured without tormenting the body, either by fire, of lancing, or causticks, or long dyets, or bitter and ungrateful medicines, &c. In this course of bathing, all is pleasant and comfortable, and more effectual than the other courses, and therefore it is commonly the last refuge in these cases, when all other means fail. I will not undertake to reckon up all the benefits which our Baths do
promise; but if we had a register kept of the manifold cures which have been done by the use of our Baths principally, it would appear of what great use they are. But as there is a defect in not keeping a Catalogue of rare Cures, so many per∣sons of the better sort would be offended, if a Physitian should make any mention of their cures or griefs: wherefore I must speak but gene∣rally. CHAP. XIX. The manner of bathing, chiefly referred to the in∣spection and ordering of a Physitian. Yet some particulars touched concerning the government of the patient in and after bathing; the time of day, of staying in the Bath, of continuing the use of it, The time of the year. Of covering the Baths. NOw for the manner of bathing, I will not set down what the Physitian is to do, but leave that to his judgement and discretion : but what is fit for the patient to know: for there are many cautions and observations in the use of bathing, drawn from the particular constitutions of bodies; from the complication of diseases, and from many other circumstances which cannot be comprehended in general rules, or applyed to all bodies alike: but many times upon the suc∣cess,
and the appearing of accidents, the Phy∣sitian must exre nat a capere consilium, and per∣haps alter his intended course, and perhaps change the Bath either to a hotter or cooler, &c. In which respect, those patients are ill advised which will venture without their Physitian upon any particular Bath, or to direct themselves in the use of it: And this is a great cause that ma∣ny go away from hence without benefit, and then they are apt to complain of our Baths, and blas∣pheme this great blessing of God bestowed up∣on us. It is fit for the patient when he goeth into the Bath, to defend those parts which are apt to be offended by the Bath : as to have his head well covered from the air and wind, and from the va∣pours arising from the Bath : also his kidneys (if they be subject to the Stone) anointed with some cooling unguents; as Rosatum Comitissae, Infri∣gidans Galeni, Santolinum, &c. Also to begin gently with the Bath, till his body be inured to it, and to be quiet from swimming, or much motion, which may offend the head by sending up va∣pours thither: at his coming forth, to have his body well dryed, and to rest in his bed an hour, and sweat, &c. A morning, hour is fittest for bathing, after the Sun hath been up an hour or two; and if it be thought fit to use it again in the afternoon, it is best four or five hours after a light dinner. For the time of staying in the Bath, it must be accor∣ding to the quality of the Bath, and the tolera∣tion of the patient. In a hot Bath, an hour or
less may be sufficient: in a temperate Bath, two hours. For the time of continuing the Bath, there can be no certain time set down, but it must be according as the patient finds amendment, some∣times twenty daies, sometimes thirty, and in dif∣ficult cases much longer. And therefore they reckon without their Host, which assign them∣selves a certain time, as perhaps their occasions of business will best afford. For the time of the year, our Italian and Spanish Authors prefer the Spring and Fall; and so they may well do in their hot Countreys; but with us, considering our climate is colder, and our Baths are for cold diseases; I hold the warmest moneths in the year to be best; as May, June, July, and August, and I have persivaded many, hereunto who have found the benefit of it; for both in our Springs, and after September our weather is commonly variable, and apt to offend weak persons, who finding it temperate at noon, do not susp ct the coolness of the mornings and evenings. Likewise in the Bath it self, although the Springs arise as hot as at other times, yet the wind and air beat∣ing upon them, doth do them much harm, and also make the surface of the water much cooler than the bottom : and therefore Clauidinus wish∣eth all Baths to be covered, and Fallpius finds great fault with the Lords of Venice, that they do not cover their Bath at Apono. We see also that most of the Baths in Europe are covered, where∣by they retain the same temperature at all times. And it were to be wished that our Queens Bath, and Cross-Bath, being small Baths, were cover∣ed,
and their Slips made close and warm. By this means our Baths would be useful all the year, wh neither wind and cold air in Winter, nor the Sun in Summer should hinder our bathing. Moreover, for want of this benefit, many who have indifferently well recovered in the Fall, do fall back again in the winter before the Cure be perfectly finished : and as this would be a great benefit to many weak persons, so it would be no harm to this City, if it may be a means of pro∣curing more resort hither in the Winter time, or more early in the Spring, or more late at the Fall. I desire not novelties, or to bring in innova∣tions, but I propound these things upon good grounds and examples of the best Baths in Eu∣rope, and so I desire to have them considered of, referring both this point, and whatsoever else I have said in this Discourse, to the censure of those who are able to judge. I do purposely omit many things about the virtues and uses of our Baths, which belong pro∣perly to the Physitian, and cannot well be inti∣mated to the patient without dangerous mista∣king. Do compos. med. s.locos 1.8. c.7. For as Galen faith, our Art of Physick goes upon two legs, Reason and Experience;and if either of these be defective, our Physick must needs be lame. Experience was first in order: Per varios usus artem experientia socit, Exemplo monstrante viam.From much Experience, th'Art of Physick e, Directed by Example to the same.
Reason followed, which without Experience, makes a meer contemplative and theorical Phy∣sitian. Experience without Reason, makes a meer Emperick, no better than a Nurse or an attendant upon sick persons, who is not able out of all the experience he hath, to gather rules for the cure of others. Wherefore they must be both joyned together: and therefore I refer Physitians works unto Physitians themselves. FINIS.
AN APPENDIX CONCERNING BATHE: Wherein The ANTIQUITY Both of The Bathes and City Is more fully discours'd; with a brief account of the Nature and Vertues of the HOT WATERS there. By THO. GUIDOTT, M. B. Practising at BATH. Pythag. apud Stob. Serm. 34. Nunc Te marmoreum protempore fecimus: at Tu, Si fatura gregem suppleverit, aureus esto: Virg. Ecl. London; Printed for Thomas Salmon Book-seller, living in Bath. 1669.
TO MY HONOURED AND Learned Friend, JOHN MAPLETT, Doctor in PHYSICK. SIR, HAving bad the happiness in a strange place to light on so good an acquain∣ance as your self (whose Sober, Candid, and npassionate temper receives an Additional  its native lustre from the perfunctory, dis∣bliging, and illiterate Genius of others:) I ould not but take the first opportunity to te∣ifie my Respects; and the rather, because
having fallen on a Subject in which you may claim some right; I thought it not safe to enter your ground without your leave. Besides, we are told by Solinus (whose As∣sertion admits a further probability from the Epithetes of  &c. given her by Pausanias, Plutarch, Aristides, mentioned also in Hesychius, Suidas, Harpocration, and others, of which I have In Historia AEsc laii, . elsewhere more largely treated in another Language, that Minerva was for∣merly the Patroness of these Baths; and what fitter person could I find out to address this brief Discourse of Baths unto, than him. — Tritonia Pallas, Quem docuit, multa{que} insignem reddidit arte. I have joyntly discours'd of the Baths and City, which seem to me to resemble the two parts of a Compositum, Body and Soul: And as there is a more than ordinary respect due to the body, on the account of its being the Case and Cabinet of that pearl of great price, out more noble and diviner part, the Soul; So I thought it my Concern to make some refle∣ctions on the City also, as well as the waters,
by which I think it doth in some measure ap∣pear, that it cannot justly be said of the Baths, what was once of the wit of Galba the Ro∣man Emperour lodg'd in a deformd body, that they have a bad habitation. If I have not here drawn the Baths to the life, it may be considered that it was intended only for a rough draught, and (what is more) that I had not your Pensil. The thing it self, as to the Composure of it, is the hasty product of less than 14 daies, and those too in the middest of, and stollen from my other Employ∣ments; what therefore is wanting now, I hope hereafter to supply. In the mean time, Sir, I humbly offer to your kind acceptance this small acknowledge∣ment of my real respects, as to one whose high∣er seso with Academical Studies, together with the helps and advantages of Travel, hath made a Pillar of your faculty, which your courteous disposion and civil Deportment, hath so nearly polish'd that you seem to have attain'd, if we believe the Poet, the utmost perfection, having in you that which doth at once, both delight and profit. Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci. Her. de Art. Poet. As for those that are meer husks and out∣sides of Physitians, that desire to be thought to be what they are not, and are nothing less than what they seem to be; whose empty heads
serve for no other use than Rattles, only to make a pretty noise to please children, whose mouths also are open Sepulchres, and they themselves little better than painted ones. Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis, &c. We may well spare, or rather not spare them, as being not the true Sons, but the By∣blows of AEsculapius. Sir, I beg your pardon for giving you this trouble, and assure you, That I Am Your very Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, THOMAS GUIDOTT. Bath, Oct. 24. 1668.
THE Contents. CHAP. I. Of the Antiquity of the Bathes of Bath GEnealogie of Bladud, and Time when he liv'd, Contemporary to the Prophet Elias. These Baths not dis∣covered by Julius Caesar. Names of Bath, Bathancester, Hat Bathan, Akmanchester,  Aquae Solis, Badiza examind. Brittish names, Yr Ennaint, Caer Badon, Caer Palladdur, Minerva Patroness of Bath, Nechams Verses.
CHAP. II. Of the Antiquity of the City of Bath, and things relating thereunto. BAth called first Caer Blaeidin, after∣wards Caer Bath, and Badon: when inhabited. Coill and Edgar, (whose Statues stand at the end of the Council house;) who, and when they flourish'd. Bath besieged by the Saxons; Relieved by King Arthur. Offa's Church, Hospitals, Free-School. The Author of the Histo∣ry of the Worthies of England censured, and some of his mistakes discovered. CHAP. III. Of the Church of Saint Peter and Paul. AN account of the Church of Saint Peter and Paul in Bath, from its first foundation to the time it was finish'd: a Latin Poem on the same Subject, written to Bishop Mountague, with the answer of the Bishop.
CHAP. IV. Of the Roman Antiquity of Bath. ROman Antiquities of Bath divided into three sorts: an Enumeration and Explication of them. Many read, and understood otherwise than by Mr. Camb∣den. Some Additions. Roman Coins. CHAP. V. Of the Nature and Virtues of the Baths. BAthes of Bath much of the nature of the Thermae Aquenses in Germany: Certain parallels between Bath and Akin. Bladud, and the Baths Vindicated. CHAP. VI. Of the Baths in particular Here. OF the three Hotter Baths; namely, the Kings, Queens, and Hot Bath; but chiefly of the Kings, and in what di∣stempers bathing therein is profitable. CHAP. VII. OF the Cross-Bath, and its Virtues.
A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF BATH. CHAP. I. Of the Antiquity of the Baths of Bath. Genealogie of Bladud, and Time when he lived. Contemporary to the Próphet Elias. These Baths not discovered by Julius Caesar. Names of Bath; Bathancester, Hat Bathan, Akman∣chester, . Aquae Solis; Badiza Examin'd. Brittish names, Yr Ennaint; Caer Badon, Caet Palladdur. Minerva, Patroness of the Baths. Minerva's Temple in Bath. Ne∣chams Verses. I Shall not here Treat of the Antiquity and Nature of Baths in general, nor put you in mind of the Pool of Bethesda, or River of
Jordan, but intending a brief Discourse concern∣ing Bath, both as to the City, and Hot waters there, Shall, without any further preface, begin with the Waters, afterwards proceed to the An∣tiquities of the City; and last of all, give a taste of the Nature and Virtues of the Baths. That the Baths, or Hot waters of Bath in So∣merset-shire, are of great Antiquity, cannot be doubted by any one who hath in the least cast an eye on antient Records. Many are the Opinions and Conjectures about the time of their disco∣very, which I shall as briefly as I may examine. And because there is very frequent mention made of King Bladud, and the Prophet Elias, the one as the Founder, the other as being dis∣covered in his time: I think it may be for the satisfaction of some, if I give a particular account who this Bladud was, and upon what score the Prophet came to be concern'd in this business. The substance of which I take out of a Latine Manuscript intituled Brutus Abbreviatus, being an Epitome of a larger History, not concerning my self much in the truth of the Relation, but leaving it to the judgements of those that shall peruse it, to determine of it as they shall think fit. G. M. My rise I must take from Brutus, who after the destruction of Troy, is said to have come into this Island, then called Albion, about the year before our Saviours Nativity 1100. where find∣ing none but Gigantick Inhabitants possessing the Hills, and seeing a fruitful soil, and full of de∣lights, was pleased one day to call his Company together to offer a solemn Sacrifice to Diana, by
whose guidance and direction he had lighted on so pleasant an Island. But as they were all at Meat, thirty mighty Giants came down upon them, and in a short time slew as many of Brutus his men, yet were all afterwards quell'd by Bru∣tus and the surviving Company, except one that was greater than the rest, whose name was Gog∣magog. Now Brutus had a Companion related to him called Corineus, who being not only like Saul from the shoulders upwards, but from the waste higher than his Brethren, was designed to under∣take Gogmagog, in which Combat Gogmagog brake two of Corineus his ribs, who notwith∣standing grasping the Giant in his arms, wasted him along the Sea-side, and threw him down a precipice, where he was dashed in pieces, whence that place now bears the name of Gogmagog's leap. Nephew, as some write. Supposed to be the fall of Do∣ver by some; by others, the Haw at Plim∣mouth. On this Corineus, Brutus bestowed the ad∣jacent Countrey, which he after his own name, called Cornwall. For the first arrival of Brute Was at Totness in Devonshire, so named quasi Tout en ease, i. e. Totus in quiete, from the great delight and recreations that place afforded. Af∣terwards, finding a more fruitful and noble place on the Thames, built there a City 390 years be∣fore that of Rome, which he called the City of New Troy, in memory of that Troy whence he and his progeny came: and having reigned here 20 years, he dyed, and was honourably buried at New Troy, or Troia Nova, now London. Brutus had three Sons, Loegrius or Lorinus, Albanactus, and Camber, between whom he
parted this Island, viz. the Northern part, to wit, Scotland, he gave to Albanactus; the Southern part Wales, to Camber; and England to Loe∣grius. Called there∣fore by the Wlch, Loygar, & gors. After some time, Humbardus King of Hum∣landia, came into Scotland with a great Army, and slew Albanactus; which his two Brethren, Locrinus and Camber hearing of, came with a considerable force to find him out, and coming upon him whilst he was making merry, put him so to it, that having no way to escape, he drowned himself in the River Humler, to which he gave name. Called by other Writers, Huys or Hun∣nys, King of Hunesy or Scy∣thia, receiving the name of Humber or Humbardus, af∣ter his comeing into Scotland. Humbardus had a daughter called Estrilda, whom Locrinus having taken captive in a ship, had a mind to make his wife, although he was before married to Gwenthlea daughter to Cori∣neus, which accordingly he did, and left Gwenth∣lea. Others write she was daugh∣ter to a King of Almaine, and brought with two others thence by Humbardus. Gwenthlea being thus repudiated, returned into Cornwall, and as Heiress to her Fathers right, took possession of all the places there, and received homage from the Inhabitants; and raising an Army in her own defence, made war upon her Husband Locrinus, cut off him with his Army, and took Prisoners Estrilda and her daughter Avana; and drowning them in the Ri∣ver Severn, caused her self to be crowned Queen. Alias . Otherwise called Habre. She had one Son by Locrinus, named Mahan, whom when he was of age, she made King, her self retiring into Cornwall, died there, and was interred with great pomp and magnificence. Mahan, the Son of Locrinus and Gwenthlea, had two Sons, Memprice and Manlinus, who fell out about the Crown. Alias Madan, & Madian. Manlinus treacherously
slaying his elder Brother Memprice, aspired to the Throne, a wicked and lewd man, who sha∣ring with Cain in the sin of murdering his Bro∣ther, partook also with him in his punishment, in being a Vagabond, dying wandring too and fro in the Woods and Deserts. Some make Mempricc to have slain his younger bro∣ther Manlinus (as he is some∣times called) and Ebranc to be the Son of Memprice. Or part of Germany, as others. Caer Ebranc. Others write he had 20 Wives, of which he be∣gat 20 Sons, and 30 daugh∣ters. Alias Brut.-greveshield, and Brutgren∣shield. Ebranc the Son of Manlinus succeeded his Fa∣ther, and with great rejoycings was Crowned King, a prudent and valiant man, who conquered France, and with treasure brought thence, built the City, Eboracus or York, bearing his own name: He built also the Castle called Maiden-Castle, now Edenburgh. By several Wives he had 23 Sons, all slout and war-like Lords, and his Daughters stately Ladies. He reigned 60 years. After the death of Ebranc, the Government of the Kingdom was devolved on his Son Bent∣grevestheld, a wife man and good Souldier, who built the Town Carlyle, where after he had reigned 20 years, he was buried. In his time So∣lomon governed in Jerusalem, to whom came the Queen of Sheba, Sibilla by name, to understand his wisdome, and those things that were spoken of him. Ludhudebras after the decease of his Father Bentgrevestheld, built the City of Canterbury and Winchester, and was buried at winton. Alias Lud, Ludhurdebras, Rudibras: He is said by others to be the Son of Leill. Bladut the Son of Ludhudebras was next in Succession, a great Necromancer, who as 'tis said in his Acts, made the Hot Waters in Bath by the Art of Magick. Called some∣times Bladud and Baldud. But this is rather to be ascrib'd to Nature, since there are Baths in other places hotter than these: But I have read, that
when the Prophet Elias desired it mignt rain, then three Springs of Hot Water arose in that City, useful for the Cure of Diseases of men. He had a son named Leir, who built Leycester. Thus far the Author of the Manuscript, whose rougher Latine Phrase, I have smoothed what I could, by a Paraphrastical Version. From what hath been delivered may be col∣lected that Bladut (or Bladud as he is commonly called) was the eighth King of the Britains from Brute, and that his line was thus. Brute, Lo∣crinus, Mahan, Manlinus, Ebranc, Bentgre∣vesheld, Ludhudebras, Bladut. Now Brute be∣ing said to have come hither 1100 years before Christ, allowing to the seven preceding Kings (of which some Reigned more, some less) thirty years a piece for their Reign, one with another, it follows that Bladud lived near 900 years be∣fore Christ was born. He is sometimes called Blaeydin Cloyth, that is Blaeydin the Magician. As to the Prophet Elias, the time when he desired rain, falls out to be according to compu∣tation, in the year of the world 3040. nine hun∣dred, and some odd years before Christ; so that this Prophet and King Bladud were Contempo∣raries, and the antiquity reaches no higher on the account of the later opinion then the first. And this is the highest pitch of Antiquity I find assigned to the Bathes; as for the Periods asserted by others, they come much short of both the former; some ascribing their inventions to Julius Caesar, fifty years, or thereabouts, before Christ, which the learned Antiquarian,  Malmsb.  Mr. , thinks not so probable, because Soli∣nus,
who lived in the time of Titus Vespasian, 130 years after, or 83 years after Christ, was the first of the Romans that made mention of them. To which may be added, that perhaps Julius Caesar came not so far up in the Land. For whatever some flattering Poets and Historians may faconiously deliver; certain it is that Ju∣lius Caesar made not so great a Conquest here, as some do imagine. Whence Tacitus writes, that he discovered only, not delivered unto the Ro∣mans, Britain. His words in the Life of Julius Agricola, are these : Primus omnium D. Julius cum exercitu Britanniam ingressus, quanquam prospera pugna terruerit incolas, ac littore potitus sit, potest videri ostendisse posteris, non tradidisse, Horace also calls the Britan before Augustus, untouch't. Epod. 7. By. p.38. And Mr. Cambden faith, that it is so far off from being true, which Patereulus re∣ports, bis penetrata Britannia à Caesare, that Caesar passed twice through Britain, that he scarce made entry into it. For many years after this entrance of Caesar, this Island was left to the free Government of their own Kings, and used their own Laws. The Saxon Names of Bathancester, Hat Ba∣than, and Akmanchester, are of later date, the Saxons not arriving here till the time of Theodo∣sius the younger, about the year of Christ, ac∣cording to the most probable Computation of Venerable Bede, 428. Nay, the later name of Akmanchester was not given till some few years after the year of Christ 577, when from a mean Condition, to which this City was then reduc'd by War, it again recovered strength and great
dignity, and from the great concourse of diseased people, that came for Cure, was called Akman∣chester, that is, The City of Sickly Folks. Cambden By. p. 234. Neither can their Antiquity be much advan∣ced by the , or Hot waters, in Pto∣lomy; Aquae Solis, or Waters of the Sun of An∣tonine; or Badiza of Stephanus, (more recent then the former) but that which seems to come the nearest to the forementioned Opinion of Bladud and Elias, is the British names of Y Ennaint, Caer Badon, and above all Caer Palad∣dur, that is the City of Pallas, or Minerva's Water; especially since Solinus affirms Miner∣va to have been the Patroness of these Bathes, of which no doubt, he writes in these words, In Britain there are Hot Springs very curiously ador∣ned, and kept for mens use, the This is also mentioned by Bale, de script. Aug. in his ac∣count of Bla∣dud. vid. insra Cap. 5. Patroness of which is the Goddess Minerva: There being also a tradition that there was formerly a Temple de∣dicated to Minerva, where now the Church of St. Peter and Paul, commonly called the Abbey Church, stands. I have read also in an Author that wrote of these Bathes almost 100 years ago; and the first that wrote any thing considerable concerning them (Dr. Turner, in his Discourse of the En∣glish, German, and Italian Bathes, making little better then a bare mention of them) That the chief Spring of Bathe was in the Church-yard then dedicated to Minerva, and after consti∣tuted to the Abbey of the Monks of the Order of St. Benedict. Iocs Bathes Aide p. 2. b. Bede. Basil. Bale. Erected first by Blaeidin Cloyeth, or Bladudus Magus that wife Magician, a Bri∣tain, the ninth King after Brute, about the year
of the world, according to the Scripture ac∣count 3080 before the Incarnation of Christ Others, 863. 890. Helisaeus Prophet then in Israel, But although I have some reason to distrust this Genealogie of Bladud, which he, acccording to the Custome of his Countrey, drives as high as may be, even unto Adam, making Bladud the thirtieth man, in a direct line from him; yet I cannot but in some measure, commend his Chronologie, as being not much different from the account given before. And whereas he af∣firms Bladud to have been the nineth King from Brute; I find, by comparing other Histories, that Leill (if the same with him whom the Author of Brutus Abrviatus calleth Leyr) was not Son to Bentgrevesheld, but great Grand-child, be∣ing Son to Bladud, his, that is Bentgrevesheld, Grand-childs Son: and so Leill, whom he ma∣keth Father to Ludhudebras, not to come in before, but after Bladud, as being his Son, and he the ninth King from Brute, and not his Fa∣ther. Yet on the other hand, I must say thus much, that the name Carlyle, a City said by the Author I fellow, to be built by Bentgrevesheld, dissonant from the custome of those times, where∣in the Founders usually called places after their own names, and many of those especially to which they added Caer, doth somewhat incline me think there might have been one Leill, Son to Bentgrevesheld, as some Historians mention, and Founder of that place ascribed to his Father. By Bale he is said to be the tenth King of the Britains. However, the matter is not great whether Bladud was the eighth King from Brute, as my Author supposes, or the ninth, or tenth, as others; I
inferring no more from the preceding History then this, That Bladud lived near 900 years before Christ; since of the exact time of his flourishing, more then by Conjecture, by reason of the Confusion and Disagreement among Hi∣storians touching the Number, and Succession of the Kings, and time of their Reign, we have no certain account. But to be as particular as I may, because some years passed between the Birth of those seven Kings mentioned before, and the begining of their Reigns, and also because Gwenthlea, or Guendoloena, and Leill, are said by other Histo∣rians to have Reigned 40 years (viz. the former 15, the later 25) which are not there accounted for, the surer way will be to take our account from the Year of the World. Now Brute being reported to have entred Albion A.M. 2855, and Bladud to have begun his Reign A.M. 3100, the difference between these two numbers is 245 which being taken out of 1108 (the year before Christ, in which Brute came hither, answering to the Year of the World 2855) the Remainder will be 863 (the Year before Christ, answering to the Year of the World 3100) so that accord∣ing to this Computation, Bladud began his Reign over the Britains, just 863 years before Christ was born, and Reigning 20 years, died in the Year Ante Christum, 843 I know Fabian the Author of Polychronicon, and others, differ some∣what in their Chronologie concerning Bladud from that I have given, but I look on this to be as probable as any. Alexander Necham a Poet of our own, some∣what
above 400 years ago (with whom, as to the Antiquity of the Bathes, Dr. Jorden contents himself) wrote these Verses on the Bathes. cap. 17. BAthoniae Thermis vix praefero Virgillanas, Confecto prosunt Balnea nostra seni, prosunt Attritis, Collisis, Invalidisque, Et quorum morbis frigida causa subest. Praevenit humanum stabilis natura laborem, Servit naturae legibus artis opus. Igne suo succensa quibus data Balnea fervent AEnea subter aquas vasa latere putant. Errorem figmenta solent inducere passim. Sed quid? Sulphureum novimus esse locum. Which I thus made English; BAthes Bains with Virgils I compare, Usefull for antient folk they are; Bruis'd, weak, consum'd, as well as old. And in al griefs whose source is cold. Nature mans labour doth prevent And art again serves her intent. There's fire under-ground, some say, That thus makes Bathes great pots to play. Fancy doth often Error breed. But what? from Brimstone these proceed.
CHAP. II. Of the Antiquity of the City of Bath, and things relating thereunto. Bathe called first Caer Blaeidin, afterwards Caer Bathe. When inhabited. Coill and Edgar (whose Statues stand at the end of the Coun∣cil-house) who, and when they flourished. Bathe besieged by the Saxons; relieved by King Arthar. Offa's Church. Difference be∣tween the Mayor and Covent. Hospitals. Free-School. The Author of the History of the Worthies of England censured, and some of his mistakes discovered. IT is not I think, to be doubted, but that the Bathes were before the City, and gave Name to it: Sick people, in all probability that came hither for relief, first making small Cottages for their Conveniences, which were afterwards im∣proved into fairer Buildings. So that now in this particular, there are few places in England that exceed it. That this place was built, or rather begun, by King Bladud, is the opinion of some, and that he called it by his own Name Caer Blaeidin, which sometime after came to be Caer Bathe. Mat. Westm. That it was inhabited in the time of the Britains, at least 50 years before Christ, appears from the names they gave it of Caer Badon, and Caer Palladdur (of which before) unless it be said that these Names might be given by some Britains, in the
Romans or Saxons time, which seems not to car∣ry any great probability. Nay, I find it recor∣ded, that in the year ante Christum 684. Sisillus, or, after some. Writers, Sylvius Brother of Gur∣gustus, was made Ruler over Britain, and reign∣ing 49 years, was buried at Caer Badon, or Bath. Engl. Chron. Lanquet. However, many Roman Monuments there are, Inscriptions and Images in the City walls, and elsewhere, (of which Chap. 4. gives a particular Account) which evidently prove its being fre∣quented before the 412 year of Christs Incar∣nation, about which time (or as others account, 430) the Roman Jurisdiction ceased in this Island. The Statues also of Coill a British King, and Edgar a Saxon (who are said to have given Char∣ters to this City) placed at the end of the Town-Hall, or Council-House, are Arguments of its Antiquity. Coill (that I may speak somewhat briefly of him) was an Earl in the time of Asclepiades (whom the Britains after the death of Lucius, being wearied out with a bloody intestine War, which lasted more than 50 years, were at last conftrained to elect their King,) about the year of Our Lord 250. Ant. Br. Ab. Ms. Alias Aselepio∣datus. Others 256. Afterwards aspiring to be greater, and building a Town which from himself he called Colchester; Asclepiades began to fear him, and raising an Army, met him in the field, in which Battle, Aselepiades was slain, and short∣ly after Coill chosen King, who governed the Bri∣tains with a great deal of honour; and having married his Daughter Helena to Constantius, sent from Rome into Britain to demand Tribute,
not long after dyed, and was buried at Colchester: yet some there are who ascribe the building of this Town to Coilus, Son of Marucis, and Father of Lucius, King of the Britains, A. D. 126. Britannice Caercolyn. Edgar, one of the later Kings of the Saxons, bestowed on this City (as Mr. Cambden reports) very many Immunities, the memory of which thing, even in his time, the Citizens yearly with solemn playes, did celebrate. Br. p. 234. He was a stout man, and is said to have had none like him on this side Arthur, bearing this stile about the year 970. The Monarch of all Albion; Or, as it is elsewhere more largely express'd, King of Eng∣lish-men, and of all the Kings of the Islands of the British Ocean, and all the Nations contained in Britain, Emperour and Lord. Anglorum Basi∣lcus omnium{que} Regum Irsula∣rum oceani quae Britanniam circumjacent cunctarum{que} Nationum quae infraeam inclu∣duntur im∣peytor & Do∣minus. Henr. Spelm. Coc. Tom. 1. p.432. & Seldenus in Mar. Clans. Militat omnis amans, & ha∣bet sua castra Cupido. Ovid. A Souldier he was in the Camp of Cupid as well as Mars and is noted for this, That having a mind to Estrilda the Wife of Athelwold, he placed him (as David did Uriah) in the front of a Battel against the Danes, in the defence of York; where Athel∣wold being slain, Edgar married his Widdow, but was so severely check'd by Saint Dunstant, that he ever after lived a religions life; and having reigned 17 years, bid adieu to the World, and was buried at Glastonbury. Edgar began his reign about the year of Christ 959. but was not Crowned till 12 years after, A.D. 971. which was done, according to some writers, at Bath, to others at Kingston by Dunstan Arch-Bishop of Canterbury (who, some say, was ba∣nished at that time) and Oswald Arch-Bishou of York: his Coronation was deferred, because of his impetuous inclinations to the female Sex,
and especially to one wilfride, who to avoid the Kings Caresses, took on her the habit of a Nun, but in vain; for he had his pleasure, and got on her a daughter named Edith; for which offence he was enjoyned seven years penance, and lived not long after his Coronation. An. 973. Mat. Westm. About the year 472, or 44 years after their arrival here out of Germany, the English Saxons besieged this City, with whom King Arthur fought a great Battel on Mons Badonicus, now called Bannesdowne, and slew so many of them, that they had little heart to make any further at∣tempt for a considerable time, but left it to the quiet possession of the Britains. Cambden ubi supra. Yet N. Ninnius writeth, that the 12 of King Arthur's Battels against the Saxons, was at the Hill or Town of Bath, where many a one was slain by his force and might. Bath was also in the time of King Arthur, by whom it was relieved, besieged by Cheldericus King of Almain. The story as mine Author re∣lates it, was thus; Eodem rempore venit Chel∣dericus, &c. Aut. Br. Abb. Ms. At the same time (speaking of the reign of King Arthur) came Cheldericus a va∣liant King out of Almaine, and landed in Scot∣land with 500 Ships: Arthur hearing of this at the siege of Colegrin near York, left the siege, and coming to London, sent letters into Britain the less, to King Hoel his Sisters Son ; who in a short time came into England with a great Ar∣my, and was met by Arthur at winchester with great rejoycings. These two going both to Not∣tingham (which Cheldericus had besieged, but not taken) Arthur came upon him unawares, and made a great slaughter among his men; Chelde∣ricus
himself fied into a wood, where Arthux find∣ing him, he swore, that if he and his Souldiers were permitted to depart, he would never more for the future trouble his Kingdom: Arthur con∣descended hereto, but the wind proving cross when they were on the Sea, they came back a∣gain, and landing at Totness, did a great deal of mischief, destroying the Countrey as far as Bath. They of Bath shutting their Gates, made a stout resistance: but when this was known to Arthur then in the Marches of Scotland he came to the relief of Bath, fought with Cheldericus, and dis∣comfited his Army, &c. yet in the year 577. On a strong siege, and strong battery by the Saxons, it yielded, but afterwards grew into great repute, and got a new name, viz. Akmanchester. Not long after the year 552. Ceaulmus King of the West Saxons fought with the Britains, and took from them the Cities of Bath, Gloucester and Worcester. A. D. 676. Cambden. Br. p. 234. Osbrich founded here a Nun∣nery, and not long after, Off a King of Mercia built a Church, both which in the time of the Danish Wars were demolish'd; out of the ru∣ines of those two arose the Church of Saint Peter, in which Edgar was Crowned (as is mentioned before) but of the Church, more in its place. This Offa was Brother to Oswald, surnamed Christianissimus, and is said to have spent much of his time at Bath. Concerning his supposed Tomb, and place of burs∣al, see Chap.4. Domesday-Book. Offa (saith the Author of Brutus abbreviatus) frater Oswaldi; Iste Offa, multum morabatur Bathoniae. In the time of Edward the Confessor, Bath flourished exceedingly, the King having there
64 Burgers, and 30 Burgers of others; the Ci∣ty paying tribute according to 20 Hides, which amounts to about 80 yard land. In the reign of William Rufus, Robert Mow-Cambden. bray, Nephew to the Bishop of Constance, sack'd Br. p. 234. and burnt it. Cambden, Br. p.234. The Industrious Mr. Prynne (to whom I am obliged for some marginal Remarks) in his Bre∣via Parliamentaria Rediviva, and fourth part of a brief Register of Parliamentary Writs, hath given an account of Citizens returned to serve in Parliament for this City, ever since the 26th. year, of King Ed. 1. about A. D. 1298. p. 298. p. 299. It is also recorded, that in the year 1418, in the time of H. 5. there arose a contest between the religious persons, John Telyford Prior, with his Covent, and the Mayor about ringing of the Bells, which lasted some, years, but was afte∣wards composed, and brought to a good issue. Libell. Rub. de Bath. Ms. In Bath are three Hospitals (it self, indeed, being but one great one) St. Johns, Bellots, and the Bimburies, sometimes called St. Katherines; besides a Free-school erected, (as by the In∣scription over the door it appears) in the time of King Ed. 6. The Hospital of St. Johns was founded A. D. 1174. by. Reginald fitz Joceline, a Lumbard, Bishop of Bath and Wells, and afterwards trans∣lated to Canterbury, but before he was possessed of his new honour died, and was buried at Bath. It was valued at the yearly Rent of 22 l. 19s. 6d. since which time its Revenues are much encrea∣sed; he gave it this name, as I suppose, from St. Johns in the Savoy, where he was consecrated
Bishop after his return from beyond Sea, by Richard Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. God. Cat. p.364. Where, by the way, I cannot but take notice that this Hospital is said to be built by Joceline of Wells, and Hugo Bishop of Lincolne in the late Account of the Worthies of England. In which History (besides the Confusion of Joceline de Wells, with Reginald fitz, Joceline) the Author is guilty (that I may say no worse) of many mistakes; To give an instance or two instead of a larger Catalogue that might be produc'd; he af∣firms, that Joceline of Wells was the first man that fixed on the title of Bishop of Bath and Wells, and transmitted it to all his Successors, when 'tis manifest out of Bishop Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, that Robert Bishop of Wells was the man, the 18th. Bishop of that See, and not Jo∣celine who was the 21. p. 363. He writes also, (which is a thing I confess of no great moment, but yet a mistake) that the famous Dr. Harvey was never married, when his Wife is mentioned by himself. De Gen. An. Exer. 5.p.m. 60. And to in∣stance in no more now (because I would not di∣gress too far) he avers the same person, though living a Batchellor, to have left behind him three Children, which he calls his three Books, viz. De Sanguinis Circuitu, De Generatione, & De Ovo; whereas the Doctor that ever I could find (who possibly have made as diligent a search af∣ter the writings of that modest, ingenious, and (however the ignorance and envy of some have endeavoured to traduce him) learned Physitian, (whose memory I deservedly respect and ho∣nour) as any other can, I say Dr. Harvey (that
ever I could understand) never printed any thing besides his Treatise of the Circulation of the Blood, and his Exercitations concerning the Ge∣neration of Animals, the Historian making two Books of De Generatione, & de Ove, when in∣deed they are but one. I acknowledge he mentions many things in∣tended for the publick; as 1. Exercitations a∣bout Respiration of Animals. 2. A Treatise of the Love, lust, and gendring of living Creatures. 3. Of Nutrition. 4. Medicinal Observations. 5. Physiologia, with some others, wherein no doubt that excellent Person had made many rare and considerable discoveries, which we are so happy now to enjoy; but that any thing else, save the two forementioned Treatises, was per∣mitted, or any other Book De Ovo, composed by Dr. Harvey, besides that De Generations Ani∣malium (wherein he ingeniously observes the Primordium, or first beginning of all living Crea∣tures to be either an egg, or something Analogi∣cal to it.) I should be very glad to be infor∣med. Bellots Hospital was built by Thomas Bellot Esquire, one of the Executors of the Lord Cecill, in the time of King James, of whom we shall speak more largely in the next Chapter of the Church, to which he was a great Benefactor. As for the Bimburies, I can learn no more concerning it, than this, that it was built by seven Sisters, who left this Hospital behind them, as a Monument to Posterity, both of their Charity and Name.
CHAP. III. Of the Church of Saint Peter and Paul. An account of the Church of St. Peter and Paul, in Bathe, from the first foundation to the time it was finished. A Latin Poem on the same Subject, written to Bishop Mountague, with the Answer of the Bishop. THE Church of St. Peter and Paul, com∣monly called the Abbey Church, as now it is, is a neat, and curious Fabrick; of which, that I may give some account, from its Original, ma∣ny Periods, and great alterations it hath under∣gone, as far forth as my Observation, Informa∣tion, and what Records I have seen will reach. The first Church I find mentioned since the Temple of Minerva, (which some place here) was that built by Off a King of Mercia, and bro∣ther to Oswald (of which before) in the year after Christ 775. which was afterwards destroyed by the Danes, and in the year 1010, re-edified by Elphegus, who being a man of great Parentage, and Prior of Glastonbury, left that place, and be∣took himself to Bathe, where living a very strict and exemplary life, even to admiration, he was chosen Abbot, and in the year 984 Bishop of Winchester, and A. 1006 promoted to the Arch∣Bishoprick of Canterbury, in which time he new built this Church, four years after his coming to that See. 775 1010 But the Fabrick he erected stood not long; for 77 years after, or A.D. 1087. both
it, and almost the whole City, was consumed by fire, by Robert Mowbray, Nephew to the Bi∣shop of Constance, in the first year of William Rufus. The next year following, viz. A.D. 1088. appeared John de Villula, a French-man, born at Tours, and sometime Practitioner in Physick, or to speak more plain, an Empirick (such as now almost every place doth abound withall, we having just cause to renew the Complaint made by Hypocrates in his time, that there are now adays, . 1088 L. de leg. Many, by a sort of people, their own Creatures, much admir'd, but what Artists they are is easi∣ly to be said) for the Historian brands him with this Character, that he was usu, non literis, medi∣cus probatus, a man practised more by rote, then any great cunning, and if he chanced at any time to do any good, it was more to be attribu∣ted to the strength of Nature, and his good hap, then to any Art in the man, or accountable Vir∣tues in his Medicines. Gul. Mal asb. This man however, al∣though not for his reach in Physick, was to be commended in this that he had a good liking to the Abbey, and though a poor Physitian, was a rich man, and a great Benefactor to the Church, which he building from the ground, and augmen∣ting the Revenues from a small mater to a con∣siderable proportion, may seem to deserve the name of the first Author, and Founder of it. He lived not to see it finish'd, being prevented by death, which happened the 29th. of December, 1122, and was buried at Bathe, in the Church he built.
This John was Bishop of Wells, but upon some dislike The Char∣ters of William Rufus and H. 1. for translating his See to Bathe, and the manner there∣of, may be seen in Mr. Dugdales Monast. Augl. pp. 185, 186. removed his Episcopal Chair to Bathe, and was known by the title of Bishop of Bathe, renouncing that of Wells, and bought this City of William Rufus, (or, as some say, H. 2.) for 500 Marks, which continued in the Bishops hands till the 4th. year of Rich. 1. about A.D. 1192. at which time Saverick, first Arch-Deacon of Northampton, afterwards Bishop of Bathe and Wells, a German, and Kinsman to the Emperour, in order to the more speedy effecting his design of being Bishop, to the performance of which, among other things, as Conditions of the Kings Release, (being taken Prisoner by Leopold Arch∣Duke of Austria) the Emperour had engaged him) returned the Possession of the City to King Richard the first. In the year 1137 July 29, 15 years after the death of John de Villula, the Church he lately built was consumed by fire, and re-edified by Robert, a Monk of Lewes, born in Normandy, but by Parentage a Flemming, then Bishop of that See. 1137 He not only made good what the fire had destroyed, but carried on the work to a grea∣ter perfection. In the troubles between Maud the lmpress, and King Stephen, he suffered a long and a close restraint at Bathe, from the King, and after his enlargement, endeavoured an Ac∣commodation between the two Churches of Bath and Wells, which had differed many years about the Episcopal See, and at last, with consent of both parties, made this agreement, that the Bi∣shops hereafter should be called Bishops of Bathe and Wells; That each of them should by Com∣mission
appoint Electors, the See being void, by whose voices the Bishop should be chosen; And that he should be installed with both of these Churches. The second of which Articles was not long observed, for A.D. 1244. in the 29th year of Hen. 3. The Monks of Bathe, refusing to joyn with the Chapter of Wells, chose of them∣selves one He was con∣firmed Bishop  by King Hen. 3. his Patent, ad instantiam De∣mini Papae, de gratia Regis Speciali, salve jure Regis, & Ecclefiae Wel∣lensis. P. 28. H. 3. m. 6. intus. Roger for Bishop, which occasion∣ed a long Suit in Law between the two Chur∣ches, composed afterwards by the Bishop, who died not long after, and was buried at Bathe. The Condition of which Compos;ition was this; That they of Wells must be satisfied for the pre∣sent, and they of Bathe promise performance of the Agreement made by Robert, for the future, which was done accordingly. This Structure erected by Robert, continued till the time of Henry the 7th; when Oliver King, the 23d Bishop after the Union of Bathe and Wells, pulling down the old Church built by Robert, not John de Villula (which was burnt, as Mr. Cambden affirms) began the foun∣dation of a fair and sumptuous Building, but left it, by reason of his death, whatever the lately mentioned Historian relates, very imperfect. Br. P. 234: For besides the Cost bestowed on it by Cardinal Ha∣drian de Castallo, chosen Bishop A.D, 1505. which I think, was not great; William Bird, the last Prior of the Abbey, undertook it, and partly of himself, and partly by the help of others, al∣most brought it to perfection, when in a short time after the dissolution of Religious Houses ensuing in the time of Henry the eighth, it was again demollish'd. In memory of this Prior
Bird, there is in the Chappel, on the South side of the Quire, at the East end, a Coat of Armes in Stone, a Cheveron between three Falcons, their Wings and Members-displai'd; on a Chief, a Rose between two pretious Stones, and for a Crest a Miter and Crozier. And in the out-side of the Chappel Wall, Southward, a W. and a Bird. Neither are there wanting memorials of the Name of the foresaid Oliver. For in the Front of the Church, on both sides, on a Pillar, are placed two Elephants about an Olive Tree, and an Inscription engraven in Stone under it, in al∣lusion to the parable of Jotham, Judges 9. of which this is part, Trees going to chuse their King Said, be to us the Oliver King (Which in the late times caused some to su∣spect it for a Prophesie) with a Miter over all. This Oliver King was Doctor of Laws, of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, Principal Secretary to three Monarchs of this Land, Edward the 4th, Edward the 5th, and Henry the 7th. Register of the Knights of the Garter, Bishop of Exe∣ter, and thence translated hither, Novemb. 6. 1495. died Jan. 34. 1503. and is thought to lie buried at Windsor, where he was sometime Canon. The Death of Bishop King obstructed this Structure (as a Reverend Doctor is pleased to quibble) so that it stood a long time neglected, which gave occasion to one to write on the Church Wall with a Char-coal. D.F.
O Church I wail thy woful plight Whom King, nor Card'nal, Clark, nor Knight Have yet restor'd to antient right. Alluding herein to Bishop King, who began it, and his four Successors in 35 years, viz. Car∣dinal Hadrian mentioned before, who sat Bi∣shop 12 years, and was afterwards deprived of this, and all other promotions, for conspiring with some other Cardinals, the Death of Pope Leo the 10th. Cardinal Wolsey, who held the Bi∣shoprick in Commandam four years, and was then translated to Durham. Bishop Clark, who sate 19 years, and died in the end of the year 1540, being poysoned, as was supposed, in Germany, when he went Ambassadour to the Duke of Cleve, to give a reason of the Kings Divorce from the Lady Anne of Cleve, his Sister; and Bi∣shop Knight. These four contributing nothing considerable to the finishing thereof. Also one Cassadore, a popishly affected person, wrote a Prophesie of this Church, to be seen in Fullers Worthies, with what he thinks is the meaning of it. Soers. p. 19. Upon the dissolution of the Abbey, the Church was uncovered, the Lead taken away, and the Walls much ruin'd, and so continued for some time. But since its last demolition, in the Reign of King Henry the 8th, it hath thrice been attempted to be re-edified; First in the time of Queen Elizabeth, by a General Collection, by which the Work was not much advanc'd. The Second, in the beginning of the Reign of King James,
A. D. 1604. in whose time it met with many Benefactors; the principal whereof to this se∣cond work was Thomas Bellot Esquire, Steward of the House, and one of the Executors of the Right Honourable, William Lord Barkley, some∣time Lord Treasurer of England, who made some entrance on this Work in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and last of all, about the middle of King James's Reign it was finish'd and brought to perfection, as by the Munificence of Noble men, Knights, Gentlemen, and others, whose Names are on Record, so especially by the libe∣ral hand of Dr. James Mountague, sometime Bi∣shop of this Diocese, who at one time gave 1000 pounds toward its Reparation, and lies buried in the body of the Church, deceased July 20.1618. It appears also from the Memorials of the Church, that before the first of these three last at∣tempts to repair it, there was little of the Church standing, save the bare Walls, and those too, in many places, much impaired, which being then, as it was, decayed in the hands of Edmund Cole∣thurst Esquire, was by him bestowed on the Ci∣ty, though uncovered, and much ruin'd, as it had long stood after the dissolution; and therefore he bears the name of the principal Benefactor to the first work. The particulars of the Reparations, with the Names, and Sums of the Benefactors from the time of Queen Elizabeth downwards (which are not for me here distinctly to mention) are Re∣corded in a Book kept for that purpose in the Library belonging to the Church, begun by Bi∣shop Lake, and augmented by some others, but
yet stands in need of the helping hands of more Benefactors. And although I have said so much concerning this Church already, yet I shall crave leave to add as a Conclusion to this Matter a Poem, which ac∣cidentally came to my hands by the means of Mr. John Parker, Citizen of Bathe, a lover of Anti∣quity, and my good Friend (to whom I acknow∣ledge my self engag'd for the assistance he afford∣ed me in my search after the Antiquities of the the City) found in the Study among other Pa∣pers, of that learned Knight, Sir John Harring∣ton, whether made by himself, as some imagine (who well might do it, having a great genius to Poetry, and called by Dr. Fuller, one of the most ingenious Poets of our Nation) or some other, I know not; written, and as it seems, spoken to Bishop Mountague, at his first coming to Bathe, and Sight of the Church; which I should have translated, but that the Substance of it, as much as is necessary to be known for History, is con∣tained in the foregoing account. However, to preserve it from perishing, and to gratifie the lover of Antiquity, (to whom I chuse rather to incur the censure of being Prodigal, then any way Nice, in with-holding any thing I think may deserve their acceptance) I shall insert it here, in Latin, as I found it. The Title thus,
Conditionis Variae ECCLESIAE SANCTI PETRI & PAULI Bathoniensis, A PRIMIS FUNDAMENTIS, Actis an.775. AD ANNUM DECURRENTEM, 1609. Historico-Poetica  De{que} Faelicissima ejusdem Ecclesiae restauratione VATICINIUM. Ad Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem, Ja∣cob. providentia divina, dignissimum Ecclesiae Bathoniensis & Wellensis Episcopum, Bathoniam primo faeliciter invisentem, & visitantem. MActe, bonis avibus; recidivi limino Tem∣pli (In Christo reverende Pater) gratissimus in∣tras.
Macte, sed haud pigeat prius aequa mente parum∣per Pristina delubri perpendere fata miselli. Temporis elapsi studio monumenta revolvens Historia. Attento, invenies hujus fundamina Templi, Prima Off am, priscum regem, jecisse; secunda 775. Ephegum, regni primatem; Tertia tandem 1010. (Cum duo Danorum rabies, ignis{que} priora Vastasset) sumptu posuit majore Johannes 1088. De Villa, natu Gallus, non infimus artis Agyrta. Professor medicae, Wellensi ingratior aedi; Qui, postquam variis viguisset Episcopus an∣nis, Sedem Thermopolin Cathedralem transtulit il∣linc. Urbe hac, quingentis Marcis, a Rege coempta, Pulchrius antiquis fanum construxit: at ipsum AEvo combussit pariter Jovis ira sequenti. Structorem celebris misit Normannia Quartum, Officio Monachum, Roberlum nomine, molem 1137. Subversum toties qui restauravit; & inter Presbyteros, litem, de Sedis honore, diremit, Exornans titulis utram{que} aequalibus orbem. Tandem post seriem numerosam, munificam{que}, Infignis praesul pietate, vicesimus at{que} Tertius, hunc sequitur; qui faustum nominis omen, Expressit factis, Oliver King dictus, Olivam 1495. Et Regem vere referebat, ad instar olivam Pacis erat populo, simul ubertatis & author. At magis hoc retulit regalis munere Regem, Quippe opus incultum Rodberti sustulit, at{que} Illius, extemplo vice, fundamenta locavit, Ista; dedit solidis speciosa pleromata muris.
Tecta superstruxit sublimibus alta Columnis, Areolas soleis tongas substravit & amplas, Omnia ad hanc pulchram structuras caetera for∣mam, Et fundis, dubio procul, instructurus opimus, Morte immortales subito est arreptus ad arces. Tantae molis erat tam clarum condere Tem∣plum! Ne tamen his tantis perfectio debita caeptis Deforet, huic operi Colophonem attexuir, al∣mus Abbatiae Rector Gulielmus Birdus, At eheu! Sanctis stare diu fatis (proh fata!) negatum est. Horrida de innocuis fertur sententia famis; Abbatiae pereunt, fpoliantur Templa, rapinis Tecta patent, reditus, fundi, Sacraria; quid non? (Unde nefas tantum Zeli fautoribus?) una Iste, vel in Cunis, insons discerpitur infans. Impete diripitur violento haec fabrica; prae∣stant Saxa, vitrum, plumbum, Campanae, ac omnia praeter Hoc miserum  Tantae at quae Causa ruinae? Num pietatis amor an amor sceleratus habendi? Hic amor exitio est Templis, Templi{que} mini∣stris, Hic amor extinxit clarissima lumina regni. Nec sinit hic Amor haec extincta resumere lu∣cem, Nemo bonum Templi, Templi bona quis{que} re∣quirit. Hinc haec Cimmeriis, per tot, tam turpiter, an∣nos,
Maxima lux urbis, latuit suppressa tenebris, Sed pater omnibonus, cui provida cura Suarum est, Hanc piceam nuper, caelesti campade, noctem Dispulit e multis Sanctorum cordibus, unde Accendere suo nostrum de lumine lumen. Sic tamen, ut quivis magis hinc sibi luceat ipsi, Ut tanto ad praesens reliquos veneremur ho∣nore, Vivida quos totum celebravit fama per orbem, Nobile Bellotti sidus, sic emicat, omnes Inter nutritios Templorum jure colendos, Plena velut stellis praefulget Luna minutis. Singula quae cernis pulchrae ornamenta Capellae, Area, porta, solum, Subsellia, Rostra, fenestrae, Bellottum unanimi Compellant ore parentem. Bellottum sonitu reboat Campana canoro, sonant Bellottum, Balnea, vici, Compita, Bellotti jactant ad sidera noman, Quod Christi est cultor simul excultor{que} sacro∣rum. VATICINIUM. DEsine plura: sat est veterom, peragenda peractis Succedant; meliora bonis, majora minutis. Auspiciis huc misse sacris (Sanctissime Praesull) Sensibus hoec imis superum Consulta repone, Quae tibi fatidico dispandit carmine Vates, Laeta ruinoso proclamans omnia Templo. Quo decet, haenc specta, vultu, sine nube, se∣reno, Faecundam laudum segetem sine fine Tuarum.
Molliter ossa Cubant Offae, ac Elphegl, Oliveri Rodberti, ac Birdi, merito celebrentur honore; Debita Bellotto reddatur palma benigno. Pet-pius extento Bellottus floreat aevo. Non equidem invideo, laetormage, gratulor illi. Quod si tam celebrem mereatur guttula laudem, Praemia quae referet largos qui funditat imbres? Tantum at honorisico cedes, Bellotte, Jacobi, Effuso tenuis quantum imbris guttula cedit. Bellotti guttis rorata Capella virescit, Imbribus assiduis Divi madefacta Jacobi Integra quam laetos diffundent Templa racemos. Nec tamen haec aqueo vitis cupit imbre rigari: Aureolo hanc Danaem saturabis, Jupiter, imbre, Hinc quae spreta diu languenti Ecclesia morbo Intabuit; vitam, Te Te medicante resumit, Ut redit infuso flaccescens vena Lyaeo, Hujus sint alii fautores, sydera, fani; Cynthia Bellottus; solus Tu , Apollo. Haec Tu vivifico reparabis membra Calore; Haec Tu magnifico decorabis Tecta nitore. Aspice surgenti laetentur ut omnia Templo. Grandaevum videor mihi prospectare Jacobum, Aspectus virtute Tui, torpore solutum, At{que} reornato scandentem climate Caelos. Ut renovat vires, ut concipit aethera mente; Insuper alatos, ultro{que} citro{que} meantes Coelicolas video, bona climacteribus illis Nuncia portantes superis: ac gaudia divum Inde renarrantes terris de Praesule tanto; Te{que} cohortantes (propria sat sponte citatum) Euge! opus hoc mirae pietatis perfice Praesul. Te nempe ad decus hoc peperit natura, replevit Dotibus eximii sDeus, ars perfecta polivit,
In gremio reforet ter magni gratia Regis: Ditavitque bonis tanta ad molimina natis. Huc opulenta Tibi sua fundit viscera tellus, Huc Tua Te virtus, sorte ancillante, propellit. Euge l opus hoc mira pietatis perfice Praesul Aggredere aeternos, servit Tibi tempus, honores His petitur Caelum Scalis, hac itur ad astra. Nec mora, fervet opus, structor, lapicida, peritus Gypsator, sculptor, fustor, vitrarius: omnes Artifices instant ardentes. Moenia surgunt, Dissita quae fuerant loca concamerantur Erismis, Extima plumboso velantur tegmine, pulchris Intima Caelantur laquearibus: omnia miris Sunt decorata modis: respondent omnia vatis. Nec deerunt mystae, Celebrent qui sacra, fre∣quentes. Sed numerosa brevi totam quae Compleat aedem. Pompa Sacerdotum, Psalmodorum{que} Decano Producente Chorum, Cantabit grata Jehovae Cantia, tantorum fonti, authori{que} bonorum. Haec mihi praesagit meus non ignara futuri. Corpore (quis neget hoc?) specioso haec templa Jacobus Donavit praesul (pia nam decreta bonorum AEquivalent factis) animam Rex ipse Jacobus (Hoc quo{que} quis dubitat?) tribuet. Deus alme Jacobi, Decretis benedic factis{que} utrius{que} Jacobi: O fortunatam nimium, bona si tua noris, Thermopolin, tali fruenis quae praesule, Rege l Funde Deo summas ex imo pectore grates, Et cola, perpetuo pietatis honore, Jacobos. Quo pede Caepisti, Praesul dignissime, pergas.
Episcopi Responsio. CUpivi dilu has ruinas, & haec rudera videre, & contemplari, has vero ruinas, & haecru∣dera videre, & contemplari jam dolet. Ingre∣diar tamen, sed hoc animo, ut nunquam hoc more sim reingressurus, priusquam isthaec melius tecta videro. The Bishops Answer. I Have long desired to see and contemplate these ruines and rubbish, and now it grieves me to behold them. However, I will enter, but with this intent, never to re-enter, till I see them better cover'd. CHAP. IV Of the Roman Antiquities of Bathe. Roman Antiqulties of Bathe divided into three Sorts. An Enumeration and Explication of them Many read, and understood otherwise, then by Mr. Cambden. Some Additions. Roman Coins. THE Roman Antiquities, Inscriptions and Images, in the Walls and elsewhere of this City, were taken notice of by Mr. Cambden at his being here, and inserted into his Britannia: yet because some alterations have hapened to
some of them since his time, and others seem to me to be read and understood otherwise, then he hath there represented them(not to mention what I have added, not to be found in him) I shall give a brief account, and what Explication I can, of them all, in order as they stand. I shall distribute them into three Sorts. Tbo that are between the South and West Gates, Those that are between the West and North Gates; And those in the Garden, formerly Ro∣bert Chambers's, now belonging to William Burvurd. The first, of the first fort we meet withall, (not taken notice of by Mr. Cambden) is the draught of a great Face, (which yet I cannot affirm to be truly Roman) about a foot in bredth, and near as much in length, much resembling the Moon, as it is usually drawn. Whether this was a memorial of the Idoll of some Pagan (which it not very likely) or rather set up in memory of some Gyagntick person, whose parts were proportionable to this Face (which is more probable) I know not. Sure I am that England hath had those Sons of Anack as well as other Countries, as, besides Histories, the prodigious Bones digged up in several places thereof, do witness; and particularly (seeing we are apt to suspect things done many years ago, relations of this nature being not like Pictures, Quibwè lon∣ginquo reverentia major) the entire Bones of a man of unusual dimensions, found not 20 years since, in Glocester-shire, in a Field, between Over, and Thornbury, do sufficiently evince. This Sceleton (as I heard it related by a cre∣dible
Author, who had it from an eye-witness) was inclosed within the body of a massie Stone, so artificially cemented together, that the joynts were indiscoverable. In the middle thereof (as it were in a Vault) sate the Bones of two persons, one very great, and the other less. The Scull of the greater was half an Inch thick, and the Ulna, as big as the Gentlemans Wrist, who saw it (who yet is a corpulent man, and hath none of the least) and as long as from his shoulder to his fingers ends. There were Inscriptions also, and some Coins, both Silver and Brass, about, and in it, but what they were, I cannot yet learn, having not hitherto had the opportunity to see either the one, or the other. Since the Relation of the former person, ha∣ving occasion lately to ride into that part of Glou∣cester-shire, where the bones were found , I re∣ceived a Confirmation of it from two of the Sons of the Gentleman, in whose ground, and at whose great charges, they were discoverd , the Father being dead some fout years since; only with this difference, that whereas the former Relator in∣timated the Bone, mentioned before, to be the Ulna, or the Radius, they apprehend it rather to be to the Os Humeri, or Bone from the Soulder to the Elbow, which they affirmed to have been as long as from the Elbow of any ordinary man to his Fingers ends, or the length of that Bone usually and half the Ulna or Radius. Also, that both the Sceletons were of extraordi∣nary dimensions but one bigger then the other, & not both in one Sepulche or Vault, but two di∣stinct ones, distant about 2 yard each from other.
The Vault of the greater was not above five foot long, in the form, (according to their resem∣blance) of a Jews-harp, narrow at the Feet, and broader about the Seat: so that this body must sit, being judged by some intelligent persons that saw it, to have been a man of nine foot in heighth. The other was longer, and the Bones supposed to lie at length, yet very little within the ground; having both great stones about and over them, in the manner of a Tomb. After I had received their Information, they were pleas'd for my further satisfaction, to ac∣company me to the place, about a quarter of a mile from their house, in an Inclosure, hard by the high-way side, now made meadow ground, where I saw one Stone, which was at the entrance of the Vault of the greater Sceleton, standing in the same place it was first set, about 4 foot above the ground; to which the other Stones did Answer: so that the length being five foot, and the heighth four, confirms the Conjecture of the Stature of the Body mentioned before. The Tomb-stone that lay over the greater person, of an uneven, and (as I may term it) mazzardy surface, was so vast and weighty, that it was a business of great difficulty and labour to remove it; of a grayish colour without, but reddish within, and in many places studded with a bright shining Stone, somewhat resembling the Stones ot St. Vincents Rock near Bristow. I cannot understand by them there were any Inscriptions, and but two or three Coins, one having a Falcon (as they called it) which might be a Roman Eagle; another a Caesars Head, with
a wreath of Lawrel about it, supposed to be the Head of Claudius the Emperour. The common report there is, that it was the Tomb of Off a, King of Mercia, who yet was one of the middle Kings of the Saxons, and li∣ved neer 250 years alter the Romans departed out of Britain, of whose extraordinary stature, I know no Historian that takes any notice. It seems to have been a Golgotha, or common place of Burial, in those times, the ground thereabouts, in a round, or rather an Oval figure, for neer half an Acre, affording great plenty of other Bones, and the place bearing the name of Bone-hill. The time of it's discovery was about the year 1652. Whe∣ther this great person were a Roman, or a Saxon, is not very easie to determine; if a Roman, 'tis much they should here , contrary to their com∣mon Custom, both preserve the Bones, and leave no Inscription, and if Saxon, 'tis as different to solve the Phaenomenon of the Roman Coins, being hot accidentally found among other rub∣bish, but in the Sepulchre it self. However, whether Roman, Saxon, or other, which I shall not at this time any further dispute, it is enough for my present purpose that it was a body of more then ordinary dimensions, and exceeding the heigth of an ordinary man in those times by 3 foot, that is higher by the half then most men now. 2. A Foot-man with a Spear. 3. A Foot-Soldier brandishing his Sword, and bearing out his Shield. 4. Two kissing and clipping one another, which by the Crook in the right hand of one,
seems to be the remembrance of the kindness of a Shepherd to his Mistris. 5. A naked man laying hold of a Soldier, which may represent an insulting Roman, apprehending a poor, distressed, and captivated Britain. 6. Upon a Stone, with Letters standing over∣thwart, This Inscription: ILIA ILIA This seems to have been part of the Monu∣ment of some Strumpet, ILIA, if I erre not in my conjecture, being the Relict of IVLIA, Wife to Sèptimus Severus, of whose Lewdnes AElius Spartianus gives an account in the life of that Emperour; and ILIA to be understood of Ilia the Mother of Romulus, concerning whom (omitting Ovid, Juvenal, and others) that make mention of her Chastity) I shall content my self with the single testimony of Horace, who brings in Lydia, his Courtezan, making him this reply; Dones non aliae magis Arsisti, neque er at Lydia post Chloen, Multi Lydia nominis Romana vigni clarior Ilia, Id est,Whil'st to Thee none else was dear And Thou to me didst not prefer, Cloe, then I great of Name Did outstrip the Roman Dame. ad. lib. 3.
Not that I conceive either of these to have died here, (though Severus himsesf did, and was buried at York) but some of the Sisterhood may, of later date, and might have the Superscription of more noted names. For, that they bestowed Monuments of this sort of Creatures, is evident from a Stone, taken up not long since, very op∣portunely, at the Bell in Walcott, with this short Inscription: VIBIA IVCVNDA H. S. E.Here lies Mary Vibia. It being by them accounted somewhat absurd, that those who had so great a name whil'st they liv'd, should be destitute of one, when dead. Another thing that inclines me to this opini∣nion also, is, a Hare, a venereous creature, and embleme of Lust: witness that question in the Comaedian, Tute lepus &: pulpamentum quaeris? unto which these letters were formerly annexed; for in Mr. Cambdens time it was here running, but since this light-foot is run quite away. 7. Two Roman heads, one within the Cope of the wall, and another in the outside thereof, hard by, whereof that within the Cope of the wall, hath an ear standing up, somewhat like the ear of horse. 8. A little higher, to ward the West-gate, leters standing cross, which I place thus: III. VS. ISA. IS. VXSC.
9. As for Medusa's head, with hair all snakes, I cannot upon the best, enquiry I can make, find it out, unless Mr. Cambden meant that little Image close by the West-gate, which seems now rather to be one, with hands listed up, and meet∣ing above the head, as it were rejoycing. 10. Neither doth Ophiucus occur to me, which I am apt to think that learned Antiquarian, in haste, might mistake, for something between the loving couple and the naked man, like a Rose, with a branch about it, resembling a Serpent. Of those of the second fort, between the West and North-gates, the First is part of the Grave∣stone of one, whose name began with these three letters IOP. The Inscription thus: VRN IOP. 2. The next is a Monument of one of the children of two Romans, Mulus & Victisarina, with a longer, and exactly Roman Inscription, in a Sepulchre Table, between two little Images, whereof the one holds the horn of Amalihaa, the other flourisheth a Banner. The Inscription which I read somewhat different from Mr. Camb∣den, is this:
D M  SVCC: PETRONIAEVIX ANN.III.M.III.D.IXV.TO MVLVS·ETVICTISARINA: FIL. KAR·FEC: i.e. To the dead Ghost of Succ. Petronia, who lived 3 years 4 moneths, and 14 daies, Mulus & Victisarina, in memory of their dear Child, made this. What that EO at the end of the second line is, unless put for Et mo, and signifies Et moritur, I cannot at the present conjecture. 3. Hercules bearing his left hand aloft, with a Club in his right hand. Yet I leave it to others to judge, whether it may not something resem∣ble one of those little Images mentioned but now. 4. The last I observe, and neerest to the North-gate, is a memorial of a Roman Senator of the Colony of Glocester, a City built by the Romans, who also placed there a Colony called Colonia Glevum.  B. p. 360. The Inscription after this man∣ner.
DEC. COLONIAE GLEV. VIXIT AN. LXXXVI i.e. Decurioni Coloniae Glevi, vixit An. 86. yet in the stone, after the figures LXXX. I ob∣serve a Q, in this sort, LXXXVI. which seems to be without some signification. If I may be allowed the liberty of a conjecture, I sup∣pose it might be put for quluque, and ought to be read LXXXVINQ. There being room enough for, and as it were the marks of two other letters, N and Q, and the party aged 85, not 86. And whereas I render Decurio a Senator, I pitch on this signification of the word, as most proper here, of which Rosenus gives the reason; Senatores in Coloniis, ut etiam in Municipiis, Decurionos vocabantur, eam ob causam, quod Pom∣ponio C. Ant. Rom. L. 10. c. 2. Auctore, decima pars corum qui dedu∣ocrentur, publici consilii gratia, sit solita conseri∣bi. I know Festus mentions another, and more usual signification of the word, to wit, an Officer over ten horse-men. Decuriones, inquit, ap∣pellantur, quis denis equitibus praesunt; of which, if any one please to understand it, he shall have my leave. 5. As for leaves folded in, and Hercules strein∣ing two snakes, I cannot be so fortunate yet, (though my search hath been particular) to light upon it. The Antiquities in the Garden are only two
Inscriptions in two Grave-stones, with their Urns: The one an Epitaph of Cains Murrius, of the tribe called Arniensis, (the 25 tribe among the Romans, so called from Arnus, a River in Tuscany, as Car. Sigonius, and On. Panvinius relate; a modest pleader in the Julian Court, a Souldier of the second Legion, and continuing in pay 25 years. The Inscription as follows. C. MURRIVS C. F. ARNIENSIS FORO. IVLI. MO DESTVS. MIL LEG. II. AD. P. F. IVLI. SECVNDI. AN. XXV. ST H 2. The other, an Epitaph of Marcus Valerius, a Latin, (for so I read, and not Eatinus, as Mr. C. a Souldier of Augustus his Legion (if not the xx) 35 years of age, and 20 years in pay. The true Copy thus:
DIS. MANIBVS MVALERIVS. M. SOL. LATINVS. C. EQ MIIES. LEG. monogram resembling V imposed on inverted V AN. XXXV. STIPEN. XX. H· S· E· Where it may be noted by the way, that this man had some favour to be admitted at 15 years of ageAl. ab. Alex. Gen. dier. L.8. c.20., when as the usual time of listing Souldiers was not till 17. Also, whether C. EQ. be to be read, as some would have it, Cohortis Equitum, I somewhat doubt, the Copia pedestres, or foot, commonly among the Romans, being divided in Cohortes, Manipulos & Centurias, the Equestres, or Horse, in Turmas & Decurias.
Many Roman Coins are also found in these parts two of which I have by me, digged up at Walcott (whence the two last Inscriptions came) in the same house with the Inscription of Vibia before-mentioned. The one neer 1600 years old, being a Brass-piece of Vespasians, in which all the letters on the face side are decayed, ex∣cept AES.VES, and some marks of PAS. on the reverse,Cat. Sion. de Jur. Rom. l. 1. c. 15. Rosc. Ant. Rom. 1. x. c. 5. PIETAS AUGUSTI (as I think) the three former letters of Pietas being very obscure) with an Image between S C. signifying Senatus Consultum. The second, some 200 years after, bearing the name of Carausius, who in the time of Diocle∣sian and Maximian Emperors, took upon him the Imperial Ensigns, and seized Britian. Cabden. Br. p. 72. Caius. Carausius. Pius. Falix. Augustus. The Circumscription thus: C. CARAVSIVS P.F. AVG. on the other side, PAX AVG. and un∣der an Image, MLXX. which I suppose to be the year ab Hrbe Condita. CHAP. V. Of the Nature, Use, and Virtues of the Baths. Baths of Bath much of the nature of the Thermae Aquenses in Germany. Certain Parallels between. Bath and Akin Bladud in some mea∣sure vindicated. I Come now to speak something of the Na∣ture, Use, and Vertues of the Baths. And here it cannot be expected I should say much, because my experience of them as yet hath been but little, and the Observations I have made seem fitter, (as they are intended) for a founda∣tion to a greater work, (which time, and variety of experiments must compleat) then, at the pre∣sent to be communicated to the publick. And to make some compensation for my brevity in this thing (which is justly deemed the most material of all other) I shall take the boldness to engage, as soon as time and opportunity shall permit, to
make a through search into the cause of the Heat, Nature, and efficacious operations of the Baths, and perhaps give a more satisfactory account of the former, than yet hath been given by any; and for the later, I shall not build on the hay and stubble of the talk and relations of persons by∣ass'd and concern'd, but on the solid basis of rea∣son, observation and experience. In the mean time, as I would not seem ridiculous to some, treating too largely of what I have not yet made a clear inspection into, so I would not be accoun∣ted absurd by others, in wholly waving the prin∣cipal part of my Subject. To offer then a course bit to the eager ap∣petite, till time shall favour us with a better treat; I conceive that the Baths of Bath come very neer the nature of the Aqueuses in Germa∣ny, the knowledge of which may be a great help to the better understanding of our own. I shall therefore, out of the succinct, but pithy discourse of these waters, composed by the learned and Ju∣dicious Physitian Fran. Fabritius Ruremundanus, sometime Physitian there, take notice of some Parallels between that place and Bath, in which, besides many pretty remarkable Coincidences, the nature of the Countrey, and parts adjacent, is in some measure discovered. The first is, that Histories relate, that the Hot Waters there were found out by a Prince, one Granus, brother, as tis said, to Nero the Roman Emperor; who first discovering these Baths, among the mountains and woods, built a Castle, and dwelt there, of which, in the Authors time, there was a monument standing, called Turris Grani.
Secondly, That the City was called by the name of the Waters, to wit, Aquae Granis, which some improperly call Aquisgranum. Ab incolis Aquoe Grani appellatae sunt, cum Thermae, tum locus ipse, deducto scil. nomine ab Aquis Calidis, & Grano repertore, mansitque appellatio postea & Urbi, nisi quod quidam non satis apte immuta inflexione, Aquisgranum appellent. The Inhabitants saith Ruremundanus, call the Place, as well as the Waters, Aquae Grani, by a name drawn from the Hot Waters, and Granus the Founder, which name afterwards the City had, but that some, not so properly, changing the ter∣mination, call it Aquisgran. Thirdly, That the City is sita in valle, & mon∣libus circumquaque cincta, seated in a bottom, and encompassed about with Hills. That the Hills (besides Wood for Fire and Timber) con∣tain Quarries of Stone for Building. That cold Springs arise within & without the City in great abundance. That at some distance off is found Lead, and a Bituminous Earth, which mine Au∣thor calls Terra nigra, foco culinaria aptissima. That in the City are two Chief Bathes, The one called the Kings, the other the Cornelian. p. 14 In the Suburbs, not far from the South Gate, are more Hot springs, called, from the abundance of Hogs that are there about, the Porcetan Bathes, which being not so powerfull as the rest, are less used. And lastly, that I may mention something that would be advantageous to both, and both do want, viz. a Navigable River, which saies Rurem. would compleat its happiness. Nibil,
inquit, ad faelicitatem deesse videtur, quam Na∣vigabilis Fluvius. Now to give you the Counter-part of the pa∣rallel: 'Tis obvious to observe, that to the first corresponds the History of King Bladud, which seems not to be so fabulous, as many men imagine. For, probably, many Relations we have of persons, and things, and of those elder times, when ignorance so much prevail'd, and men had little subtilty in their actions, and less politeness in their speech, may have much of truth in them, though they now seem odd, and rediculous to us. And I am apt to think, that many old Realities do suffer much, on no other account then to the temper, and genius of those times. Just as 'tis reported of some old women in Lancashire, that they go for Witches, meerly because they look like such. Not considering, that a great deal less time then 2000 years, hath made considerable alterations, in the manners, lives, and customs of men. And whereas King Bladud had the name of a Magitian, I look upon it as a greater argument of his more then ordinary learning, then note of reproach, the wisest men in those times, and long after to, being reputed such, and he record∣ed a wife and eloquent Philosopher, and Ma∣thematian, accomplish't (as the times then would bear) with treasures of forrein, and domestick knowledge, having spent in Study, (as is report∣ed) besides many, doubtless, afterwards, in his own Countrey, eleven years in his Minority, at Athens, Of whom that you may receive a more
particular account, I shall not think much to give you the English of what J. Bate in his Book De Scriptoribus Anglicis, writeth of him. Bladud surnamed the Magician, the 10th King of the Britains, was sent in his Youth, to the famous City of Athens in Greece, there to be instructed in Philosophy, and the Liberal Sciences. And when he had there studied a certain time, hear∣ing of the death of Ludhudebras his Father, he returned home again, bringing with him four ex∣pert Masters in many Sciences, not thinking it meet that his Countrey should lack any longer such singular ornaments of Learning as they were. These Philosophers, as Merlin writeth, he placed at Stamford, in a very pleasant Soyl, and made Schools for them, to the intent they should there read the liberal Sciences, where they had many times a great Audiences. He was a man very cunning and skilfull, as well in Pro∣phane Sciences of the Gentiles, as in all Wis∣dom and Knowledge that the Graecians excel∣led in; but especially studious and very well seen in the Mathematical Arts and Sciences, whereupon one of the Sybils, that lived in his time, wrote and dedicated unto him a Book of Prophesies. Some affirmed that the same Bladud built the City of Bathe, and therein made by a wonderfull Art, certain Hot Bathes, for the use and commodity of the people, which do yet remain to this day, committing the Con∣servation thereof to the Goddess Minerva, in whose honour be caused a Temple to be there erected, to the intent, that being preferred by so mighty a Goddess, they should never fail, but
continue for ever, they write also, how that he read and taught Necromancy throughout all his Realm. But these things I suppose are seigned matters. To the second particular answers the Name of Bathe, taken from the Waters. For this Name, as is noted before, was given to the Ci∣ty, some time after its foundation, when the Hot Waters came into greater request, being called first, after the name of the Founder, Caer Blaeidin. To the third, agrees the situation of Bathe, being exactly the same. To the fourth, the Quarries of Stone, upon Claverton Down, Horse∣comb, &c. To the fifth, the Springs of Cornwall in Wallcot-fields, Beechenclift, &c. To the sixth, Timsbury, Burnet, (and though the distance be somewhat greater) Mendip-Hills. To the se∣venth, the Kings Bathe, with its apperdage, the Queens and Cross-Bath. To the last, the Horse-Bath, without the South-Gate, doth in some measure, answer, though it hath no Hot Springs of its own, but is supplyed by the Overplus of Water coming from the Kings Bath. And whereas it is recorded, That these Bathes are not wholsome at all hours, being from 8 of the Clock in the morning, to three in the Afternoon, Scalding Hot. Carblus Br. pag. 233. It is clear, that the inequality of the heat proceeds not so much from the Waters (which in themselves, are observed to vary very little from a constant, and equal degree of heat, both Winter, and Summer) as from the beating of the Beams of the Sun in hot weather on the Surface of them, which being more troublesom
to the Bathes, and Mornings and Evenings more convenient for Bathing, the middle part of the day is not made use of, though the Waters then are as wholsome as ever. But we may well pardon this learned and industrious person, if he hath not in this, and some other particulars, done the Bathes right, in regard the vastness of his de∣signe, and urgency of his occasions, might ha∣sten him hence, so that, haply, he could not throughly inform himself in things of this Na∣ture. To conclude this Chapter, I shall mention some parts of the description of that City, men∣tioned before, in the Authors own words, and compare them with what Description Dr. Ven∣ner hath given of this of Bathe. Aquae Grani appellatae sunt ab incolis, cum Thermae, tum locus ipse, deducto scilicet nomine ab Aquis Calidis &c. Ruewuad. De Baln. Aq. p. 11. 12. &c. Haec urbs tametsi in valle sita, & montibus cir∣cumquaque septa sit, incredibili tamen gaudet aeris salubritate. In proximo urbis ambitu lata fere planities est, in qua & pascua sunt, alendo pecori commodissima, & agri pingues. Nec de∣sunt funtes, tam feris pascua irrigantes, quam in∣tus diversis urbis locis, publice in plateis scatu∣rientes. Ad Orientem Rhenum, ad occidentem habet Mosam. Sed alias dotes mnes, meo qui∣dem judicio, vincunt Aquarum Calidarum uter∣rimi simul ac Saiuberrimi fontes. The words of Dr. Venner, as neer the English of the for∣mer as may be, are these.  Bath. Bathe, so called from the Bathes in it, is a little, well compacted Ci∣ty, &c. Although the site thereof, by reason of the Viciity of Hills, may to some seem not
pleasant, being almost environed with them, yet for goodness of Air, neerness of great and delectable Rivers, pleasant Meadows, and plenty of excellent Water, brought down from the adjacent Hills into the Streets, it is plea∣sant, and happy enough; But for the Hot Wa∣ters, that boyl up even in the midst thereof, is more delectable, and happier then any other of the Kingdom.
CHAP. IV Of the Bathes in particular here. Of the three Hotter Bathes, viz. The Kings, Queens, and Hot Bathe. But chiefly of the Kings, and in what Distempers Bathing therein is profitable. HAving thus far drawn the Parallel between Bathe and Akin which, as they cannot be conceived to agree in every punctilio, (no Com∣parison, as they say, running on four feet) so it seems they cannot correspond in some of those particulars before recited, without a Commu∣nication also in the Waters of many of the same Medicinal Vertues. Having done this, I pro∣ceed to a light gast and relish, of the Vertues, and usefulness of every Bath in particular. And here taking it for granted, till better in∣formation, what the very learned and incompa∣rable Doctor Jorden hath observed, That there is very little difference in the Nature of the Bathes of Bathe, but in the degree of heat, they all proceeding from the same Mine, which ac∣cording to the intenseness or remissness of its heat in divers parts, and the directness or in∣directness of the passages from it, may cause this Variation; and also, that the Minerals impreg∣nating the Bathes in general, are Bitumen, Nitre, and Sulphur, I shall run the Parallel a little further, and speak something in particu∣lar of all the Bathes; and first of the Kings. The Kings Bathe exceeds the rest in Heat
and Dimensions, being the hottest, and largest of all. And whereas there is another that for some time hath, I know not how, appre∣priated the name that is common to them all, and therefore gives most people occasionto ima∣gine the heat to be more intense there then any where else, I conceive, at present, the heat of that Bath, to come as much short of that of the Kings, as the Cross Bath, in that instance, yields to the Queens. This Bath, as to its vertues, much resembles the Kings Bath at Akin, that is, consists of the same Minerals, though probably, not in the same proportion; the German Kings Bath being ac∣counted chiefly Sulphurous; This of Bath, Bitu∣minous. Which, yet notwithstanding considering the great affinity Bitumen hath with Sulphur, and the slender difference in their qualities, being bothsupposed moderately hot and dry, and there∣fore must both (according to the common no∣tion) attract, resolve, mollisie, and discuss, will not alter much the Case, not to mention that Baccius and Bauhinus, and (what is more natu∣ral) two of our own Countreymen, Doctor Turner, and Doctor Venner, do all agree, That they are chiefly Sulphurous. And whereas Ru∣rem. faith of the Kings Bath at Akin; Refert haec aqua modis omnibus naturam Sulphuris, cum admissione Nitri modici; making mention of Sulphur and Nitre, but omitting Bitumen, I question not, but upon Examination, it would be found that Bitumen also was concern'd in that Bath, as well as the Cornelian in the same City. De Baln. Aq. p. 18. And the Catalogue of Diseases, for
which this Bath is profitable, suggests as much: bituminous waters being of a heating, drying na∣ture, and suppling the nerves. The Encomium he gives of this Bath, and the Diseases he affirms it to do good in, (which for the most part agree to this of Bath also) are as fellows. This Bath is profitable for many di∣stempers, especially cold and moist: for it heats powerfully, dries, drives the humors from the in∣ward parts to the outward, discusses, attenuates, abstergeth, and that I may speak more particu∣larly, good chiefly in affections of the Nerves, as Convulsions, Palsies, as well alone, as accom∣panying an Apoplexie, in defect of sense or mo∣tion, or both. It helps stiff, benumm'd, and trembling limbs, does good in the several sorts of Gouts, especially Hip and Hand-gout. Dis∣cusseth Tumors: Relieveth those that are streightened about the Midriff: those that have a Cachexy, or ill habit of body: The Dropsie (especially the Anasarca) and Jaundice. Those that are troubled with a cold distemper of the Stomach, Liver or Spleen. Excites and restores Appetite. Easeth pains in the sides (without a favour) Bowess or Loins. Helps cold and moist distempers of the Womb; furthers Conception, provokes the Terms, giveth ease in uterine pains; takes off weariness as well spontaneous, as by excessive labour and travel, &c. most proper for those of a cold Constitution, and somewhat cor∣pulent, and not so convenient for dry and ente∣nuated persons. To which may be added Le∣thargies, Epilepfies, Cramps, Deafness, Forget∣fulness, Aches, and many others of the like na∣ture,
with the Scorbute, (provided the body be duly prepar'd before, and the  in that distemper well corrected) and the extremity of the pains of the Spleen. The Hot Bath is somewhat cooler, and pro∣fitable in the like cases; and Dr. Venner hath observed most essicacious for any weakned and relaxed limb. The Queens Bath is the next for heat, and hath the same virtues with the Kings, out of which it was taken, having no hot springs of its own, but is supplyed out of the Kings, where the water standing as it were in a Cooler, is made more temperate, and fitter for tender bodies, that cannot well endure such a degree of heat, as in the Kings Bath.
CHAP. VII Of the Cross Bath, and its Virtues. THE Cross Bath, as to its degree of Heat, abating somewhat of the Queens, is the coolest of all, of which I may say, as a stranger sometime did of this City, that it is E minimis pulcherrimum, and though it be little, is not on that, nor any other account despicable; Inest sua gratia parvis. This Bath is thought by Dr. Jorden to parti∣cipate more of Nitre than the rest, and therefore is observed to supple & mollifie somewhat more, receiving a greater degree of cleansing and pe∣netrating from the Nitre; Consonant to which 'tis said of the Cornelian Bath in Akin. Cap. 17. Rurem. de Bal. Aq. p. 21. Aqua hujus Balnei sulphurea quidem est, sed salis non paruns habet admistum, quin & bitaminis nonni∣hil in esse certis indiciis deprehenditur; Quo fit ut haec aliquanto valentiore sit exiccandi, extennan∣di{que} potissimum facultate, quam aliae, discut it, ab∣stergit, ac mollit, i.e. The water of this Bath is indeed sulphurous, but hath a considerable quan∣tity of salt mixed with it, and some Bitumen; wherefore this hath a more powerful drying, and attenuating faculty than the rest, discusses, clean∣ses, and mollifies. And whereas instead of Nitre, he mentions Salt, the difference, though something I confess, cannot be great, since many of the same vertues are both by him and others attributed to saline Waters, as Nitrous; Nitre it self being a kind of Salt. Therme Nitrosae omnino easdem facultates ha∣bent, quas Sal∣sae, &c. From the mixture of the Sulphur and
Bitumen, it heats, discusses, and supples; from the Nitre, it receives an addition of clean∣sing, and penetrating. Fuch. Inst. Med. lib. 2 S. 5. c. 28. This Bath then must be of Excellent Use in all Contractions, Indurations, and Resolutions of nervous parts, disperse, and dissipate cold Tu∣mors; relieve Cachectick, Hydropick, and Corpulent persons; oppose the Sciatica, Cramps, Convulsions, Defluxions, Barrenness, and the Whites in Women; usefull in Cutaneous Di∣stempers; as the Itch, Scabs, Morphew, and Le∣prosie. Good for fleshy, cold, moist bodies; and not so proper for hot, and dry Constitutions. And here I must crave leave to add, that the reason I conceive why the Cross Bath comes not up to the heat of the rest, is partly on the ac∣count of its being served by four Springs, but chiefly proceeds from the greater proportion of Nitre it contains, which being of a cooling nature, may more allay the heat arising from the Sulphur and Bitumen there, then in the other Bathes. And that Nitre doth more a∣bound in that Bath, then in the rest, may pro∣bably be collected, as from other reasons, which I here forbear to mention, so partly from this, that it sooner penetrates the body, and hath an easier, and quicker ingress into its pas∣sages and pores, to the great relief of some, though it seems Paradoxical, in Nephritick Distempers. But I hope I may be excused on the Score of my former Engagement, if I am not more par∣ticular at this time, in things of this nature, till a just amassment of Observations and Expe∣riments,
and a rational deduction of Conclusions from them, (which I hope in some time to ac∣complish) shall either confirm me in the opi∣nion I now have of the Nature and Vertues of the Baths of Bathe, or supply me with a bet∣ter. At{que} haec Hactenus. FINIS.
Sphalmata Typographica. PRef. Page 1. Line 14. Read review. l. 16. r. quacking. p. 4. l. 15. for only, r. with. p. 5. l. 27. for the fig, 48. r. 57. p. 11. l. 9. r. from the Place. Epist. Ded. Page 3. in the marg. against Galba, insert Ingenium Gal∣bae male habitat. Appendix. Page 4 in margent, for Hunesey, r. Hunes. p.5. in marg. r. Manlius.p.7.l.7. r. fawningly. p.8. l.7.r. names in l. 10. for is, r. are. l. 31. blot out to. p.9. l.29. r. me to th. p.14.r. Ma∣rius. p.16. l. r. along siege.p.19.l.16. r. printed. p.21. l.12. for 0, r. . l.r.a man that pr.p.26.l.5. for Burkeley, r. Burghley. p.28.l.9. r. Jactis, l.20. r. limina. p.29. l.17. r. Rodb. l.20.r. urbem. l.22.r regalis. l.ult.r. pteromata. p.30. l.2. r. longas. l.11. r. fanis. l.16. r. prostant. p.31.l.2.r. suorum.l.3.r. lampade. p.33.l.5.r. Miae. l.9.r. fusor.l.14. r.votis. l.18.r. praeducente.l.19.r. Cantica. p.34. l.1. r. diu. p.39. l.13. r. Sep∣timius. p.40. in marg. r. Merry Vib. p.43. l.23. r.qui. for Rose, Rosin. p.48. l.2. r. Grani. l.8. r. immutat . p.50.l.33.r. pre∣served. p.55.l.23.r.material. p.56.l.15.r. fevour. l.31.r. Exten.
