J1106 R217106 99828807 33239
A JOURNAL OF THE Siege of Mentz, Under the Command of His Serene Highn THE Duke of Lorrain. AND THE CONFEDERATE PRINCES. Who Attack'd that Important Place on the 21. of June, and took it on the 31. of August, in the Year, 1689. With all the Bravery, Courage, Resolution and Prudence, as ever has been shewn in any Nation. Written in the German Tongue by an Eminent Officer, and Translated into English from a Manuscript sent to His Ma∣jesty, King WILLIAM, of GREAT BRITAIN. LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley, and are to be sold by R. Baldwin, in the Old-Baily. 1689.
TO THE READER. THIS Brief and Exact Account of the Besieging and Taking of such an Important Place as the City of Mentz, cannot but be acceptable to all sorts of Persons, not excepting that Party that lost it; For in it they will observe the Candor of a Generous Conqueror, who gives all the Praises to his Enemies that they deserve: He omits nothing of Importance that the Besieged did to defend themselves, and he lays down the advantageous Articles upon which this Strong Place was surrender'd. Here even Generals, and Subordinate Field-Officers, will have a full View of those Methods which those brave Hero's who attack'd it, did observe. The Inferiour Officers will see with what Cou∣rage and Valour they led on those Men which each command∣ed in their respective Posts. The Common Centries will be fill'd with a Generous Envy and Emulation, to imitate those that were employ'd in this Remarkable Siege: And even such Persons as are not addicted to Arms, will find a Delight in Reading with what Bravery it was Attack'd and Defended:
The rather, because that this Relation of it has been trans∣mitted to us by an Eminent Officer, who had a great Share in the Action, and that was an Eye-Witness of the greatest part of the whole Proceeding, so far as the Considerable Em∣ploy which he had, would permit him: And where his Eye could not reach, he made use of so exact an Inquisition from those who Commanded in their respective Posts, that it will give sufficient Satisfaction. In a word, This is the most Ex∣act Journal that could be made of such a Siege. I shall no longer detain the Ingenious Reader from satisfying his Curio∣sity therein.
A DIURNAL, &c. Concerning the Siege and Reduction of Mentz. June 21. HIS Serenissime Highness the Duke of Lorrain decamped this day from Mayen with the whole Army, and having le a Garrison of 2000 men in divers small Towns on the other side of the Mosel, to cover the Country of Treves and the Towns of Cochheim, Mayen, Kayserseck, Andernack, and o∣thers, and to fill some places situated on the Rhine, in the Ringga near Coblence, as also Konnigstein, he marc'd that very day as far as Munster. June 22. At Noon he took up his general Quarters towards  on the Mosel, where he caus'd the Bridge of Boats to be brought, which could be put up in three hours time, and his High∣ness pass'd it that very day with all the Foot, and one Regiment of Dragoons, and encamped his Troops on the other side of the Mosel near Alcken, the Artillery and all the Baggage passing the River in the night. June 23. The Horse, with the rest of the Dragoons, pass'd the Bridge, the resolution of fording the River over, having been chan∣ged; and the whole Army leaving on one side the Castle of Eren∣stein, ruin'd by the French, continu'd its March the same day over high Mountains and strait Passes, where the Horse was oblig'd to file off. The Camp was on a Line between Herwiesen and Buckholtz, and they advanc'd but two hours March that day.
The Lunenberg Army encamp'd beyond Buckholtz, where it was come the day before, having taken its March on this side the Mosel over the Mountains. The Imperialists left Wing did reach to it: Towards night the Baggage, which had taken another way, joyn'd the Army. June 24. The Duke of Lorrain's Horse and the Dragoons, march'd first, the Imperial Foot follow'd them, and they march'd before the Army of Lanenberg, which had plac'd it self near the way, and whose Foot joyn'd that of the Imperialists, and the Horse were to form the Reerguard. The Camp was not far from Leuningen, and it was upon two Lines. June 25. That day the Army rested. Till then there had been no talk of any considerable Motion of the Enemy, and there was a Ru∣mour that there was a great Consternation amongst them: We had information that 14 Cornets were gone from Mayance or Mentz to∣wards Homburg, that the Enemies had carried away a great number of Waggons loaded with Baggage and Wine, that they had reduc'd to ashes the Cities of Landau, of Kim on the Nohe, and Keyserlautern. The Country-people told us also, that on the 23d a Party of 50 Horse of the Enemy had advanc'd within two miles of this place. But some Party of our Forces having been sent to get intelligence of the E∣mies Motions, return'd without information. Two Deserters from Mount Royal told us, that that place was furnish'd with 12 Battalions, but that the Garrison deserted in great numbers, so that some Com∣panies consisted but of 15 or 20 men; they also inform'd us, that a considerable Party of Dragoons had intrench'd themselves at Trar∣ack under the Cannon of that Place, and that they were working with all possible diligence on the Fortifications of Trarback and Mount Royal, that they were already for the most part set in a posture of defence; and that the Governour Montal did frequently send out Parties to burn the Country; and that the Enemy had abandon'd the City of Treves, without burning or plundering of it, having lodg'd the Garrison that was in it, in Mount Royal and Thionville. Here follows an Account of the Field-Officers. GENERALS. General Lieutenant: The Duke of Lorrain. General Field-Marshal: Count Starenberg. The Foot is commanded by The Grand Master of the Tutonick Order, General. Souches, Feldzeugmeister.
Sachsen Cobourg, Major General. tersdorff, Major General. The right Wing is command by his Highness the Margrave , in quality of General of the Horse. Under him, The Field-Marshal Lieutenant, Count of Thurn, commands the Regiments of Horse belonging to Dunewald and Taffe. The Field-Marshal Lieutenant, Prince of Commercy, commands the Regiments of Curassiers of Franconia, and that of the Dragoons of Beith. The left Wing is commanded by Count Palfi, in quality of Ge∣neral of the Horse. Under him, The Field-Marshal Lieutenant, Duke of Wirtemberg, commands the Regiment of Horse of Palsi and of Newbourg. The Count of Serau is to command in quality of General Major, in both the Wings. June 26, 27. The Army remain'd those two days in the same Camp, and there pass'd nothing of Remark: according to Country-peoples Reports, there had been seen near to Castellan, not far from Creutzenach, some French Parties considerable strong; but some Im∣perial Parties, which were sent after them, commanded by the Prince of Cmmercy, saw none of the Enemy. June 28. The Army being on its March, and having gone through such narrow Defiles, that in some places the Horse could not go but one after another, encamped between Kisselbach and Richereda, the Camp being posted all in a Line. June 29. We decamped again, and march'd near two hours through Defiles, on the Hundsruck, to a small River named Gildenbach, which falls into the Nohe, and the great Forest of Sohn, which extends as far as Metz. The Army encamped there on two Lines. June 30. The Army rested. The same day came the old Foot Re∣giment of Count Staremberg, with a Battalion of Auersberg, who had pass'd the River on the Flying Bridge, which had been brought from Coblence to Rudesheim. July 1. We took that day our March through narrow Defiles, which were very troublesom, high Mountains, and Woods, which last∣ed above three hours; we went and encamp'd between Schwabenhauson and Wald Labersheim, two Villages that are distant, in a direct Line, two hours from Creutzenach and Scomberg; 2000 Foot were command∣ed to hide themselves in the Wood, to observe the Enemies Motion.
July 2. We were ready to decamp; but because that Newbourg's and Palfi's Regiments of Horse, and the Foot Regiments of New∣bourg, Wirtemberg and Erf, as also the Munster Regiment of Dra∣goons (which had been left to cover the Baggage and the Artillery, on a report that the Enemy had appear'd in a Party of 500 men) were not yet return'd, and that they joyn'd us in the Camp but towards three in the Afternoon, the March was countermanded, and the whole Army remain'd encamped in the same place. July 3. That day we decamp'd, and we took our March within an hour of Creutzenach, the Camp being on two Lines, between Creutze∣nach and Pretsenheim; in this last place was found a Castle, whose Jurisdiction is parted betwixt Lorrain and a certain Count of Velon: that day we also work'd in the Construction of the Bridge of Boats, which had gone up the River from Coblence, that was done below Bingen, a little beneath the fall of the River Nohe, which cover'd the said Bridge; another was also made close by on the River Nohe. General Thungen, who was commanded thither with a small Body, causing some Forts to be rais'd, to secure the first of the said Bridges. Since that the Bridge of Boats of Bingen was taken away, because that his Electoral Highness of Saxony (whose Army was to pass over it) desired that it should be remov'd a little higher. Which was done ac∣cordingly, conveying it gently near to the Army, it was thought that it should be fix'd at Ingelheim. His Highness the Duke of Lorrain, not thinking it convenient to have it so near Mayence; and thereby expos'd to the Enemies insults. July 4. We encamped that day, and a Detachment of 10 Battalions of Foot with a Regiment of Dragoons with 6 Pieces of Cannon and 4 Morters, were sent to make themselves Masters of Eberbourg, a Castle within three quarters of a mile of Creutzenach, where the French had plac'd 150 men, which the Duke of Lorra with the Ge∣neral Officers, had been to view a little before; but those Troops were countermanded again, after it had been consider' that the re∣duction of that place would require four days. The same day came to the Army Caraffa's and Commercy's two Regiments of Horse, who had pass'd the Rhine on the Bridge of Boats at Bingen. July 5. This day the Army decamped, and march'd one hour and half; the Camp was on two Lines, between Groltzheim and Sponheim, within an hour of Bingen. July 6. The Army being on two Collumns, march'd during three hours through Ockenheim and Altzheim, the Horse on the right, and the Foot on the left, not far from the Rhine, and the Baggage being
inclosed between the Two Collumns, we made an Halt at Nider-Ingel∣hei: The Enemy made no great Fire with their Cannon, with which they might have done much Damage, the Squadrons having insensibly drawn too near to that place: The Reason must be, That most part of their Cannon was not yet mounted on the Rampert. We did not unbridle all that Night. July 7. Our Horse got a little further from that place before day, to avoid the Enemies Cannon. The Foot came that morning with the Bag∣gage and the Artillery. The Camp was on one single Line; the Re∣giments of Horse and Foot being intermixed, and fronting the ield: The Camp was extended from the Rhine, above the City, to a Wood beneath the City; but it wanted much yet from joyning the Rhine be∣neath, seeing that the Contravallation extends it self near Two Hours and an half. The Enemy made all the day long a great fire with their Cannon, which kill'd during those Two Days but Twelve of our Men, and some Horses. Hitherto they made no Sallies: They post∣ed Three strong Horse-Guards within 2 of 300 Paces of the Counter∣scarp, and they were seen to work diligently both at the Rampart and at the Glacis. A Party of Twelve Masters of the Regiment of Pelfi, who were gone to forrage, having no other Arms but their Car∣bines, brought that day to the Camp 18 Prisoners from Kira, on the Notice of a French Party which was strong of 20 Fool. His Electo∣ral Highness of Saxony came that Day to the Camp, with his Marshal of Camp, and a small Retinue. The said Elector alighted at the Prince of Bareith's, where the Duke of Lorrain went to give him a Visit. They entertain'd one another for some time in private, and after that, in presence of Monsieur Flemming, Marshal of Camp; after which his Electoral Highness pass'd over the Rhine at Russelsheim. July 8. That Day the Foot of Saxony pass'd the Rhine in Boats, a∣bove Mayence. The Horse, which till then had encamped some time over-against Worms, was to do the same presently after. That Day there also came into the Camp of Lorrain Two Regiments of Foot of the Prince's of Saxony, another of Horse being order'd to follow. The Enemy fired greatly their Cannon on the General Quarters, where it did some Mischief, but of no great consequence: That Day there also came into the Camp a great number of Peasants to work. The Night of the 8th, till the 9th, some of the Army of Lorrain, who had been commanded, took their Post in a deep Valley near to a Mill, and open'd the Trenches within 7 or 800 paces of the Counterscarp on the Right. Upon this the Enemy sallied out, and gave an Alarm, but did soon retire again.
July 9, 10, 11. Nothing pass'd that was considerable, except that the Trenches were much advanc'd on the Right Hand. Monsieur Flem∣ming, the Camp Masters Baggage, had almost been carried to the Ene∣mies Fort on the Rhine, through the Watermens imprudence, but it was saved by those of Hesse. The 10th is Highness of Bavaria name to the Camp for some Days; His Highness the Duke of Lorrain went to meet him on Horseback, with the Prince of Commercy. The Night of the 11th, till the 12th, those of Saxony took their Post with 8oo Men, near to the Convent of the Nuns, beneath the Town, near the Rhine, and opened the Trench. July 12. The Trench was carried on very far that Night towards the Left, from that place where the other began, and we began to work about a Redoubt, to secure them both. The Hesseans did cast all that Night from beyond the Rhine, with Two Mortar-pieces, Bombs into the City, which caus'd therein a great Fire near to the Castle, to∣wards 10 at Night, which, as may be perceived, consum'd about 8 hou∣ses, and it was put out about Midnight. July 13. The Enemy by Day did ruine that which had been rais'd up by Night at the Redoubts. At the Lorrainers Attack they advanced far that Night in the Vignes towards the Left. There was a Line of Communication drawn also from the Attack on the Left to that on the Right, and they continued to work at the Two Redoubts which had been began. The Enemy made Four false Sallies, but presently retired each time. There were Four Field Pieces conducted into the Appreaches, which are sometimes us'd with success. Those of Saxo∣ny push'd on their Approaches also on the side of the Rhine: They al∣so took their Posts early in the Morning in the Grand Charter-house, which is distanc'd off 450 Paces from the Counterscarp, which they found to be abandon'd by the Enemy, contrary to their Opinion: However, they were met with in some Houses about some 50 paces di∣stance from thence, where they fortified themselves, above all, in the Garden of Stadian, where they had met to the Number of 1000 men. They however attempted nothing: That Night some Pieces of Can∣non of 8 or 6 pound bullets, were drawn near to the Approaches, which were not made use of however before the 10th at Night inclu∣sively. The Enemy fired fiercely that day on those of Saxony; Mon∣sieur, the Prince Palatine, Frederick William, who was come as a Vo∣lunteer in the Camp, was that day kill'd by a Falcon Bullet, at the Head of the Trench, in presence of the Princes his Brothers, the Prince Electoral, and the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, the Bullet having gone through his Head. He was carried from thence
to Franckfort, there to be embalm'd. And because there was a Design of altering the Camp, and to form it as it was to remain all along the Siege, the General Quarter of Lorrain was dislodg'd, and that of Weiaw also, and it was plac'd a little lower, near to Prazzen∣heim. July 14. The Prince of Hanover commanded with 4000 Lunenburg∣ers, in the Approaches of Lorrain, which as it had been agreed on, had not been advanc'd that Night: However, there were many at work, to enlarge them, and to put them in condition of Defence: There was also Two Redoubts perfected, that were on the Right and the Left. The Enemy began to fire fiercely with their Great and Small Shot; and of this last they made whole Vollies all the Night long, es∣pecially from the Counterscarp; yet were there but Two Men kill'd, and Two wounded. They also sometimes gave us Alarms, but al∣ways found our Men in readiness. The Trenches were enlarg'd also on the side of the Saxons, and set in posture of Defence; but no∣thing was advanc'd beyond that; which could not be done neither, be∣fore the coming of the Elector of Bavaria, as I was inform'd by the Prince Elector, who commanded that Night in the Trenches with 1500 men. July 15. That Day we began to trace out the Lines of Circumvalla∣tion, to secure the Camp towards the Field, and to hinder all succour. There were some smart Skirmishes betwixt the Two Horse-Guards; Divers were kill'd on both sides, and amongst the rest of our Men was d'Andlau, Captain in Palfi's Regiment. The Enemy took divers of our Men Prisoners that were gone for Forrage, who had ventur'd above 8 hours Way from the Camp; the Number is not yet known. The Prince of Savoy came from the Camp of Bavaria into this: 'Till now the Trenches could not be carried on at the Electoral Attack, but to 450, and that of Lorrain to 500 Paces distance off the Coun∣terscarp. The last are passably well secur'd: Every Night there are 4000 men lodg'd in the Trenches; the Imperialists are there Two Days together, and a Field-Marshal Lieutenant commands there every night; the Lunenburgers are there every Third Night. I believe, that in so little time there never was so much firing of Artillery from any City as from this; there are every Day above Four or Five Hundred Cannon Shots made: And after all it is to be wondred, that with the great firing there has been yet but Ten Men kill'd. The loss in the Approaches are also very slight, and will not reach in both the At∣tacks to above the Number of 40 persons. Besides, the Enemy have also a considerable Number of Pieces in the Counterscarp. The Night
of the 15th to the 16th, the Prince of Saxe Gobourg was in the Trench, which was also carried on with the loss of but few Men. July 16. This Night the Labour of the precedent Nights was fi∣nish'd, another Redoubt was made, and the Trench was advanc'd a little; The Enemy did incessantly give Alarms, and fired continual∣ly their Cannon and Small Shot; They labour'd also on a small Work on the Left, that they might more commodiously hinder the Approa∣ches. That Night were reckon'd about 30 kill'd and wounded. A Lieutenant who had deserted the City, brought to us the Platform of it, and shew'd us the places where the Enemy had conducted their Mines; He believ'd also that the City was attack't in its weakest part, especially on the Lorrainers side. He further said, That the Garrison consisted of 8000 Men, and that it was resolv'd to defend it self to the last extremity, and that it would make a very great Sally upon us, so soon as we were got a little nearer. July 17. The Saxon Horse, consisting of 6 Regiments, namely the Regiment of Guards, Field Marshal, Baron Ilato, of the Prince Frede∣rick, Promnitz, and a Regiment of the Dragoons under Collonel Mink∣witz, pass'd over the Bridge of Boats, belonging to the Imperialists, because that of Saxony was not yet perfected. They lodg'd themselves in those Posts which had been appointed them. His Electoral High∣ness of Bavaria came also at Night in the Camp; the Foot which he brings is from 5000 to 5500 Men; he pass'd the Rhine, in the Night, and this day on Pontons, a little above the Bridge. The Elector of Bavaria lodg'd in Person in the same Village where is the Elector of Saxony. The work of the Trench was also carried on very far this Night. The Prince of Hanover Commanded there, and there were reckoned 12 kill'd and wounded. July 18. Those of Hesse gave the first time 2000 of their Men for the Approaches, who work'd very well that Night about them, and they ad∣vanc'd within 250 or 300 paces of the Counterscarp. The Enemy fired extraordinarily all that Night, yet it is to be wondered, that the loss of our Men did not exceed the number of 26 kill'd and wounded. July 19. The French was advanced a little another way also. We be∣gan to raise a Battery. The Enemy fired furiously all the Night long: the loss of our Men amounted to 28 kill'd and wounded. The Enemy set fire themselves to an House that was near the Gate. The Saxons Bridge of Boats was finished that day. That Night we began again to work at the Electoral Attack. The Elector of Bavaria pass'd the whole Night in the Trenches, with a design of posting himself near an House at 8 pa∣ces
distant from the Charter-House, which till then had been the place of Arms; those that were commanded for that design gave back a lit∣tle, perceiving the Enemy to advance in great numbers towards them, which caused some confusion, so that our own Men began to shoot from the Approaches on those that were Commanded. His Electoral High∣ness of Bavaria, and the two Camp Marshals, Caprara and Flemming, and General Stenan got off luckily without being wounded, after they had a long time receiv'd the Enemies and our own shot. Some days since a certain Captain was seis'd, who is a French Engineer, who endea∣vour'd to get into the Town, whose Name is  Cormaellan, of Mount Royal. July 20 and 21. These two Nights the Trenches were very much ad∣vanc'd at the Electoral Attack. They were advanc'd to 300 paces of the Counterscarp. There were the first Night 60 kill'd and wounded, and the last, about 50. We continu'd to work at the Battery on the Lorrainer's side, it is to be mounted with 30 Cannons. The Trenches were enlarg'd, and the Lines were carried on both on the Right and the Left, to make a larger Front before the Town; by that we draw nearer to the point of the Counterscarp, from which we have yet 150 paces distant. These two Nights there were reckoned about 40 kill'd and wounded. The Enemy, as he was wont, did continually sire both his great and small Shot towards both the Attacks. They fire not so furiously now on the side of the Champion: there were for divers Nights together, some Deserters of our Camp that went into the City. July 22. Three French Officers stole at open day from our Camp into the Town. The work of the Trenches was a little retarded this Night at both the Attacks, through the violent Rain which fell, however the labour of the two precedent Nights were accom∣plished at the Electoral Attack; and at the Lorrainers Attack, there was a little work done at the great Battery. The first Night we had about Nine kill'd and wounded, and the last Night, about Four∣teen. Those of Hesse did cast all the Night long, from the o∣ther side of the Rhine, Bombs in the Town, out of 4 Mortar-pieces. The Enemy gave that Night a Sign in kindling a Fire on the great Tower; we conjectur'd it was to give Duras notice of the Three Officers getting in, which were believ'd to be considerable Persons. This day we had a Deserter from the Town, who was a Lorrainer by Birth, who confirm'd the relation which the others had given, viz. that the Enemy had resolv'd to defend themselves to the last extremi∣ty; that they had made divers Mines, which are all discover'd; that they wanted nothing; that Wine was brought in abundance to the
Souldiers, even on the Ramparts; that there were always Six Batta∣lions on the Guard. It has been concluded at the Electoral Attack, that every day, 3500 Men shall serve in the Trenches, of which his E∣lectoral Highness of Saxony furnishes a little more than the three fifth parts. At the Lorrainers Attack, 4000 ought to be there every day, which is regulated in this manner, That the Imperialists shall furnish every third day 5000 Men, the Lunenburgers 4000, and the Hessians 3000, of which, those that are design'd for the Lorrainers Attack, incamp already on this side the Rhine. The greatest part of the Ge∣nerals believe that the great Battery will not be ready in 8 days time yet. A French Party, of about 400 Foot, has been seen not far from Bingen; it is thought that they seek to post themselves in the Neighbourhood, to incommode our Forragers. July 23. We advanc'd but little that day, by reason of a great Rain. At the Elector's Attack the Trenches were carried on a little, and the Trevaux were more secur'd: Some Lines also were carried on at the Attack of Lorrain, on the Right and Left, to give a larger Front, they work also on the Battery and on the Ditch; we had in the Lines one killed and three wounded, and at the Battery two killed and five wounded. July 24. Two French Officers were kill'd out of the Camp, that designed to get into the Town; Five more were pursued, but could not be taken; a Party of the Enemies, of 300 Men on Horse-back, were seen on Creutzenach-Road. A Citizen who had been sent by the Governour of the Town with Letters to the Marshal of Duras, brought them to the Duke of Lorrain, the most secret Letters were writ in Characters, conceal'd in a Brass Button which button'd up his Breeches, their Contents are not yet known, there being no body found in the Army that can unravel them. This Night, at the Electo∣ral Attack, the Trenches were carried on towards the Left of the Ci∣tadel with very little loss; two small Pieces were mounted also, with which the Enemies Horse-Guard was gall'd, which upon that retir'd into the Town. The Enemy did Pallisado the small Works, and those Ditches which they had in the Stadian Garden. At the Lorrainers Attack, a Line was drawn on the Right, round the Works, and there was much labouring about the great Battery also. The Let∣ters which have been found on the above-mentioned Citizen, con∣tain an Advice from the Marquess of Ʋxelles to the Marshal Duras, That the Garrison is compos'd but of 6000 Men, amongst which are numbred above 1800 sick and wounded, and that the rest are ex∣treamly fatigated, resting neither Night nor Day, so that he shall be
forc'd to surrender the place to the Germans if he is not speedily reliev'd; desiring, after that, the Marshal Duras, to let him know with the soonest the Kings pleasure, on that subject. July 25. Another Line was traced on the Left, we also work'd very hard at the Lorrainers Battery. July 26 Fifteen large Cannon were plac'd on the Lorrainers Battery, and the said Battery was secur'd with Two Lines newly drawn. July 28. Ten Pieces more were placed on the same Battery, very large, as also proportionably of Amunition. The Pieces were plac'd in the Embracements, and a new Redoubt was traced out on the Right 60 paces distant from the Foot of the Glacis. Thirty Barrels of Powder have been drawn out of two Mines, which have been disco∣ver'd near the great Battery of the Imperialists, by the means of a French Miner who made his escape out of the place to come to us. Our Army was a little lessen'd, by a Detatchment of 6000 Horse, which were sent towards Heidelberg, under General Dunewald's Com∣mand. This Day Marshal Duras came before Heidelberg with 1500 Men, and at Night they Assaulted the Town, and enter'd the Sub∣urbs, endeavouring to Post themselves in the new Church of St. Ja∣cob, but they were vigorously repulsed with the loss of 350 Men. July 29. From the Lorrainers Attack, we began to beat the Coun∣terscarp, and in a short time the Cannon was dismounted, the Em∣bracements were so ruin'd that the Enemy were forc'd to take in the said Pieces on the Neighbouring Bastion, on the Right, whence they fire at this present with 4 Cannons. This Night we laboured hard on the new Redoubt, and a new Line was traced on the Left, the better to get into the Ditch, near the Gate. July 30. They fired extreamly at the Lorrainers Battery this Morn∣ing, and by that means, the Enemy were forc'd to remove further off their Pieces. They made good use of their time however, and after that ours had made their discharge, they fired hard from the Bastion on the Right Hand, on our Battery, and our Approaches. This Night the great Redoubt was put in a good condition on the left, on which the Enemy Sallied about 60 strong, but were soon repulsed with the loss of 9 Men, amongst which was an Officer, we reckon'd also that Night upon many kill'd and wounded. Our Miners began this Night their Counter-mines, two able Spanish Engineers were that Night kill'd. July 31. We fired not so hard from the Lorrain's Battery as we had done the two precedent Days, because of the heat; on the con∣trary,
the Enemy fired more than before. There was no great firing that Night on either side with the Cannon, but the small Shot was the more fierce on the Electoral Attack, while they were taking a new Post. We lost divers of our Men in that Action, who be∣hav'd themselves bravely. Count Reuss, Major Sweinitz, and Captain Altback, were wounded. A Dragoon of the Regiment Laude, who surrender'd himself that Day, told us that the Ground of the Glacis was fill'd with Bombs, cover'd over with Boards, with long Nails, whose points were hid with earth, and that all the angles of the Counterscarp were undermin'd. August 1. Two Towers that were situated on the lest were beaten with our Cannon from the Battery of Lorrain, all the Day long, not without Success. The Enemy did also fire his Cannon-on us from the Works. This Night those of Hesse flung into the Town from beyond the Rhine divers Bombs. The Enemy did also make a vigorous Sally on the Lorrain Approaches, but were repulsed by the Lunen∣burgers, who were that Night on the Guard; we lost above 100 Men in this Action. The Enemy drew a Line also of Communication to the Glacis. We likewise did draw a great Parallel from the Re∣doubt on the Left to that on the Right. August 2. The Cannon began to play again from the Lorrain Bat∣tery by break of Day, on the Works both on the Right and Left, which was continued till Night with good success; there was also slung from Seven Morter-pieces divers Bombs into the Coun∣terscarp. About Noon our Cannon had beaten down the Roof and the best part of the top of the round Tower, which is on the Left of the Cathedral, whence our Men had received great damage. The square Tower near St. Stephen's Church, a little higher than the round Tower, was for the most part ruin'd also. The Ramparts and Works on the Right were also endamag'd. We could plainly see the Enemy work on the Rampart, so soon as we had discharg'd our Cannon, and that they began to entrench themselves there. The Parallel-Line was this Night finished, and those of Hesse mounted Six Pieces more of 24 Pound Buliet; there was nothing else remark∣able that pass'd: Neither did the Enemy fire but their Muskets and small Pieces; ours did cast some Bombs and Carcasses into the Town, so did those of Hesse from beyond the Rhine, which cast divers Bombs in the Enemies out-works. We had that Night Five killed and Twelve wounded on our side. August 3. The Cannon play'd from the Battery of Lorrain that Day, on the great Tower near the Gate Gais, and on the Three
Bastions, St. Alexander, St. Boniface, and St. Martin, to make a breach, but we fired not so fiercely as the Day before. The Enemy fired very vigorously all that Day with their Muskets, and killed and wounded divers of our Men; they also shot some Vollies of Cannon in∣to the Camp, and towards the Approaches, but with no effect. This Night ours encompass'd the Redoubt on the Left with Pallisadoes, and finished the Ditch before the Battery. The Cannon this Night was more quiet on both sides, but the Enemy fired continually their Muskets, we also cast some Bombs into the Town. Colonel Erfa was wounded in the right arm by a piece of our Shells. August 4. We continu'd this Day as we had done yesterday in bat∣tering the three foresaid Bastions, and the great Tower near to the Gate Gau, but not very much; we had Two Deserters, who told us that the Enemies were carrying on a Mine towards the Lorrain Battery. This Night a great Parallel Line was drawn towards the Glacis. From the Imperial Attack we cast all this Night long a great number of Bombs into the Town, to disturb the Ene∣my in their labours, there was also smart firing of small shot on both sides, for all that the Lunenburgers that were that Night on the Guard in the Trenches had but one killed and Ten wounded. August 5. We began again early in the Morning to batter from the Lorrain Battery the three Bastions and the above-mention'd Tower, which was continu'd all Day till Night. The French began about Noon to play off their great Cannon on our Batteries and Ap∣proaches, from a little Fort, which draws near to the top of the Castle, they cast also divers Bombs, by which we had above Forty dead and wounded. We also did cast, not only all Day but all Night also, Bombs on the Fort, and all other places where there was any prospect of indamaging the Enemies Works. The small shot was also increas'd this Day on both sides more than ever. A certain De∣serter from the Town, said that the Enemy had finish'd the Mine, which they had began to conduct towards our Trench and Battery, and that they were ready to store it with Powder. Moreover, at the Imperial Attack have been brought to perfection the Two new Lines, which are about 25 Paces from the Glacis. This Night has been trac'd the great Battery at the Electoral Attack, which contains 887 Paces in its Circumference, and which is to be mounted with 36 Pieces of large Bores. This Battery is made with two inward Angles, in that place which is advanc'd before the last place of Arms. The middle of the Battery beats on the Ravelin of the Citadel; our Cannon is to batter in Flank and Front the Enemies
Defences, which answer to our Attack; after having perfected a Line of Traverse, with double Bastions to cover our Left Flank, we began to open a Ditch and to raise higher the Battery. The design of it consists of 12 Foot thick near the Ditch, 6 at the Berne, 25 at the Platform, and 15 behind. August 6. We began again early in the Morning to Fire our Can∣non, and to cast Bombs from the Imperial Attack, where the Two Generals, Souches and Wallis, with the Prince of Saxen Weissenfels, this Day Commanding, the Enemy have done the same. They made two vigorous Sallies betwixt Twelve and One, under the favour of a great Rain, with 300 Horse and 1500 Foot; they slided along from both the Gates of Altmunster and Gau towards our Men, Attacking the first Line with great fury, of which they easily made themselves Ma∣sters, it being not yet in posture of Defence, nor Lin'd with Small shot. Our Men that were in the more remote Lines were diligent, got out of the Trenches on the Right and Left, and vigorously drove back the Enemy after a large half hours Combat, with great loss; so that for the most part they ran away on their Feet and Hands, what was found of the Enemy at the head of the Trenches were presently cut to pieces, the Soldiers Rage going so far, that they set some Heads that had been cut off on Spikes before the Camp, and cut Leather Thongs out of the Skins of their Backs; which was afterwards for∣bidden by his Highness the Duke of Lorraine; there was great Firing on both sides of Cannons and Bombs during the Combate. The num∣ber of killed and wounded on our side amounts to 300 Men, amongst the Dead are the Aid General and Major of the Granadeers, the Baron Bressee, who was sent some time since to his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg, Captain Sicking Canon of Mentz, as also Lunati Captain of the Granadeers. After this Combat, some of the Enemies wounded Officers that had remain'd on the place, ask'd for Quarter from our Men. His Highness the Duke of Lorrain having been inform'd that the ground from the head of the Trenches to the top of the Glacis was cover'd with a great number of French Bodies Dead and Dying; the last of which made such Cryes and Lamentations as mov'd Compassion. His Highness the Duke of Lorrain sent a Drummer to the French at Mentz, but they laught at it, asking whether we had not something else to desire? which oblig'd our Musketeers to dispatch the wounded Officers. The Governour did this out of fear, that the sight of so many Dead and wounded should imprint some coldness on the rest of the Garrison; wherefore he thought it not fit to Correspond to the Duke of Lorrain's Humanity, chusing rather to leave his Wounded
and Dying Men amongst the Dead without help, than to shew so sad a Spectacle to the Garrison and Towns-men. But through a Christian Charity, all those that have been found to the very foot of the Glacis have been taken up and Buried. The number of the Dead and woun∣ded of the Enemy ought to amount to 500 persons, according to the Deserters reports, and the List which they have brought to us thereof. Amongst the first is said to be a certain Lieutenant Colonel who was highly consider'd amongst them, and divers other Officers of the First Rank. There was but little firing this Night on either side, only ours did cast Bombs into the Town. After this the Enemy made some shew of Sallying forth again, as they did effectively, with but few Men, out of the Counterscarp, doubtless with a design to carry away the Dead and Wounded which they found in great numbers heap'd up to∣gether round the Pallisado's, but they were again repuls'd with the loss of some kill'd and wounded. Some of our Musketeers going out of the Trenches by stealth to strip some of the Dead remaining on the place, were made Prisoners by the Enemy. There has been digg'd up at the Electoral Attack, on the Right of the first Redoubt a large Well, whence a Gallery is to be advanc'd under ground, both to work about some Mines, and to give vent to those which the Enemy may have made under the Glacis. The Ditch of the Battery has been advanc'd some paces this Night, but in the Morning it was found that they had distanc'd themselves too far from the Right Line, and that consequently that work was expos'd to the Enemy, because it might be man'd by them from their Defences. August 7. This Day was but small Firing; on either Side, which has happen'd on our side, because that we were busie in Raising a New Battery, yet the Enemy Fired continually with their Small Shot all Night, and we cast divers Bombs into the Town. The Lunenburgers who were this Night in the Trenches lost some Officers, and private Centries. Some of the Enemies were made Prisoners, that were endeavouring to carry off some of their Dead. A new Line has been drawn on the left of the Imperial Attack; we have labour'd Day and Night about the new Battery; at the Electoral Attack, the Wells have been made deeper which were made for the Mines, conveying out of them the Water which was in them. August 8. This day no more than yesterday has there been but little Firing on both sides, the Reasons on our side were, that the Batteries and the Mines were not yet brought to perfection. A Deserter who came this day to us confirms the great loss that the Enemy has su∣stain'd in the Sally which they made the 6th. pass'd: He has also dis∣cover'd
to us all the Mines of the Enemy, and to what places they had been Conducted. This Night another Redoubt and Battery has been rais'd at the head of the Gallows, and a Line has also been drawn; we cast all night long Bombs and Carcasses into the Town. On the contrary, the Enemy Fired fiercely their small shot from the Ramparts and the Countersarp. They also made a small Sally on the Imperialists, who soon forc'd them to Retreat with the loss of 20 Men, though of our side we had not a few kill'd and wounded that Night. His Electoral Highness of Bavaria pass'd all the Night long in the Trenches, and has caus'd a great Redoubt to be trac'd in a certain place which is very convenient to cover and defend that Battery which has been nam'd St. Emanuel, and which is to be of 50 Paces in length on two sides; the Work of the Battery has been carried on also, and there has been rais'd at the left of the Trench a Traverse, behind which the Guard of Horse of the Electo∣ral Attack is to be Posted. August 9. This Day our Cannon play'd smartly all along, principally on the Tower of the Gate Gau, and in the Night divers Bombs were cast into the Town. The Enemy did likewise continually fire with their small shot all the Night long, and cast also some Bombs into our Camp. We labour'd hard to set in defence the newly erected Battery; the Lines on the Right of the Gibbet were finished also, and new Lines were carried on towards the Glacis of the right and left. We conti∣nued at the Electoral Attack to work on the Battery and Redoubt be∣fore mention'd, and on the Lines of Communication also. August 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14th. These Days there pass'd no great Matters on either side; We at the Imperial Attack joyn'd the Lines that were newly rais'd, we also made some Embraces for 8 Pieces on the New Battery, 6 of which are to batter the Enemies Bastions, and batter in flank that Work which the Enemy newly rais'd near to the Gibbet. There was a Well also made, a little more advanc'd than the First, and by that means we have carried on our Work to the Pallisa∣does of the Counterscarp, where we happily have discovered some of the Enemies Mines; all that Work has cost us but very few Men, no more than to the Lunenburgers who lost not 10 Men, though that on the 13th at Night when they did Duty in the Trenches, they for∣warded much their work by Sapping: The 14th at Night the Great Tower near the Gate Gan was beaten down with the Cannon from our New Battery. Divers Deserters are come into our Camp, but on the other hand, divers of ours, above all, of the Elector of Bavaria's Guards, and divers French went over to the Enemy. On the 10th the above-mention'd Work was continu'd at the Electoral Attack. This
Night the French quitted the House of Stadian, which is out of the Town, and its Garden, after they had burnt it: It was observed in their Retreat, that a small Body descended by the Cover'd way towards the water, 'tis probable to favour the Retreat of the rest. The 11th the St. Emanuel's Redoubt was finish'd, the Ditch was also advanc'd, and we began to raise the Parrapet higher, and to make Platforms, the Miner being already got far under ground, has advanc'd some paces under the Glacis. Two Masters of Fire works being got to us from the Town, Confirm'd that the number of kill'd and wounded encreases much, that the Garrison was much decreas'd, and that the Governour express'd a great impatiency for Succour. That the Besieged did no longer take the Bavarian Attack to be feign'd, seeing that they al∣ready perceiv'd it very much advanc'd towards them, which had made them resolve to work a-new on the Mines of the Citadel, and in re-in∣forcing with more Men the Post thereabouts. The 12th His Electo∣ral Highness's Bridge of Boats was taken away from the Lines of Cir∣cumvallation, which is to be laid a little above the Village Weissenau. His Electoral Highness of Bavaria, besides the ordinary Work∣men, has Commanded a 1000 more to Raise the Battery, whom he causes to be Paid, he remain'd all this Night in the Trenches, because that a Deserter had said that the Enemy would attempt a Sally; He caus'd the Posts to be reinforc'd for that reason, but the Enemy firing continually, did not not disturb the said Labourers by any Sally. The 13th We advanc'd with the Ditch and the Parrapet through these La∣bourers means to that place of the Battery which had been design'd; The Right Flank of it was covered with a treble row of Gabions a∣gainst the Island which the Enemy still possesses on the other side of the Rhine, and we have drawn from the said Flank a Line of Communica∣tion, which joyns the Redoubt call'd St. Margarets. The 14th There was made on the Right of the Battery 18 Embraces; we also design'd to nk the Ditch 14 Foot deeper, and to Raise the Battery by 12. The Work of the sapping towards the Glacis of the two advanced Posts has een continued, and in the Front some cover'd Lines have been finishe to secure our felves the better against the Enemy. His Electo∣ral Higness of Bavaria Commanded also that the Trenches should be Re-inforced, in the apprehension that it being St. Lewis's Day, the French, according to their Custom, might attempt something that Night or the next in honour of their King's Name. Chains have also been laid, and an Estachado made on the Rhine a little above the Town that no succour should get into it by Water.
August 15. Prince Veldents was greatly wounded after Dinner with a Musket shot. We continu'd at the Electoral Attack to Raise the Battery and to make more Embracings, the work of the last has been carried on to 40 Paces on each side, so that on the Right it is advan∣ced to the Glacis. At the Lorrain Attack we have not only begun this Night to draw the Parallel Line, but to Raise a new Battery also, which cost them 40 Men killed and wounded. The Cannon of the Great Lor∣rain Battery play'd not so siercely as before, that we may work with more security in the Mines; yet have they with their small Battery Dismounted the Enemies two Cannons which they had planted on the Gibbet, of which great part has been beaten down, and by that means caus'd the Enemies Horse, that had posted themselves there, to Dislodge. Some French Deserters, among which is found a Horse∣man, who say that the Governour having had Advite that the last night our Men would attempt an Assault on the Counterscarp, he had Commanded thither all the Granadeers with 4 Men of each Company, and that he had caus'd to be carried thither 500 Granadoes, but that they had been Fired about Eleven at Night by one of our Bombs which had fallen there, and had made such a havock that all flew into the Air. The same Deserters add, that there are above 4000 reckon'd to be Wounded and Sick in the Town, and that the Governour had Orders to hold out to this Day, but that afterwards he was to attempt a good Capituiation; that upon that the Governour had forbid any more Firing of the Cannon, nor casting of Bombs without particular Orders: wherefore for this Reason they of the Town had not Fired above 10 Cannon-shot a day, nor cast above 8 Bombs in 8 Days time; above all, to kill no Dog neither within nor without the Town: the Reason was, that they believ'd that a Jewish Woman came in and out frequently under the shape of a Dog. August 16 Last Night about 8 of the Clock the Enemies Cannon began to play very hard, which has been continu'd to this Morning. A certain Deserter who came this day to us, Confirms that there are a great number of Officers and Common Centries wounded in the Town, that our Bombs and Carcasses did a world of damage  the Enemies Defences, especially in the cover'd way, and t hat the Coun∣terscarp had been reinforc'd with M, searing every moment an As∣sault. The two last Redoubts were this Night inclos'd with Pallisa∣does, at the Electoral Attack; 20 Cannons have also been Planted on the Great Battery making the Embracements, 2 pieces of Cannon being Planted against the Champion. All the Night was employ'd in For∣tifying the Parrapet of the Parallel Line at the Lorrain Attack, which
had been drawn the Night before, and in enlarging the Trenches; Digging in the Earth a great Vessel full of Ancient Medals was found. August 17. This Day divers Deserters came into the Camp from the Town, who according to the others Relations confirm, that the continual Labour they were put to had forc'd them to do so, That the Governour did incessantly Encourage the Garrison to a vigorous Desence; assuring them that he would defend himself to the last extremity. That there had been a noise in the Town, that the Ar∣tillery of the Lorrain Attack was removing to the Electoral Attack, because that we were not sufficiently provided with great Cannon to batter the Town. That besides, it had been spread about in the Town to put a stap to the Souldiers Desertion; That the Deserters were very ill treated in the Camp, so far as to refuse them Bread for their subsistence; That they were rifled and ill treated, and that they even put to death in the Camp all Persons that surrendred them∣selves there, and that not one could yet get a free Passage, nor avoid the Besiegers fury. Upon this Report Major General Werner was commanded to cause all the Cannon of the Lorrain Battery to fire at the same time that those of the Electoral Attack should be dis∣charged. The Serenissime Duke of Lorrain having been inform'd of the false Rumours which the French Officers did spread abroad to affrighten the Souldiers, thought fit to undeceive them of that false impression; causing divers Bills to be writ, which were by an inven∣tion shot into the Town, which contain, that all Deserters were to expect a kind Treatment, and like unto that which was us'd towards those who had already pass'd into the Camp, assuring them, that far from ill treating those that would retire, a free Passage was gi∣ven them, and wherewith to go forwards under good Passes. M∣ster, Colonel of the Dragoons of the Troops of the Wic. Wurizbourg, killed himself this morning in his Bed, accidentally touching one of his Pistols which he had laid by him. This night 16 Pieces more of Cannon of large bore have been mounted at the Electoral Attack on the great Battery, opening at the same time the Embrasings. The Work at the Lorrain Attack has not been advanc'd any further, 15 Souldiers were killed, and 23 wounded. August 18. We began at six this morning to batter with 36 Pieces of Cannon from the Electoral's great Battery, the high De∣fences of the Town and Citandel, in the presence of his Electoral Highness of Bavaria, and of many other Generals, and divers Bombs have been also cast into it; which has obliged the Enemy to draw back their Cannon. This was immediately followed at the Lorrain
Battery by the Discharge of 48 Pieces of Cannon, and of 12 Mortar∣pieces, which were repeated divers times, to let the Enemy know we wanted no Artillery. We had begun the night before to fire fu∣riously from the same Attack, and to cast a great number of Bombs and Carcasses into the City. The Deserters who came in to day relate, that they saw some of the Bills that had been shot into the City; that the hopes of a good Treatment, which was promis'd to them in it, had made them take this Resolution of coming, and that divers others would follow their Examples. There was drawn this night at the Electoral Attack the Parallel Lines of Commnica∣tion from the two last Redoubts to the Battery, where we have be∣gun to make a new place of Arms. The Works are advanced a∣long the Glacis at the Lorrain Attack. And whereas the Enemy have set up a Row of Pallisado's behind the Patrapet of the Counter∣scarp, and that they have gathered together a great heap of Sythes and of other Instruments on the left of the Lorrain Trenches, on the apprehension that the Besieged had that we should attack the covert way; it has been thought fit to leave there that Battalion which was there in reserve this day. In the mean time our Miners are day and night busied in discovering the Enemies Furnaces, and to make some in those places where we design'd to open. There was this day nine killed, and 21 wounded in the Works. This day about Noon we learnt, that the French had made themselves Masters of Cocheim, where they had made about 600 Prisoners of War, being the 15th of this month, St. Lewis his Day, after that the Besieged had sustained the fourth Assault. August 19. They continued this day to fire all their Cannon from the two Attacks to ruine the Enemy's Defences, which was not with∣out effect. They raised a little Fort at the Electoral Attack from the other side of the Bridge, a little higher than the Island: They began also that night to raise another Battery, the Work of which cost us many mens lives, and several wounded. The Count of Reus, Major General of the Saxons, found a great many wounded, and Captain Wedel with a Lieutenant, and divers others killed. They made Platforms at the Lorrain Attack near to all the Regiments, who were be fore the Front of the Lines of Circumvallation, to plant their Field-pieces there, and to hinder by that the Surprise of the Ene∣mies, who, according to the News that was spread, ought to be on their March to relieve the City. This day we met with two Deser∣ters, who yet could give no intelligence, but that the Enemy had re∣lieved the Guard of Horse, who till this present time, had been post∣ed
at the Gallows, because they had received very great Damage from the Redoubt which was on the left side of the Trenches of Lor∣rain, that they could not advance any further on the Work. The Enemy had that night sprung a Mine at the Lorrain Attack, which had no great effect, but only that it had ruined some paces of the Gallery which did lead to our Mine, burying two men with it who were found there, and sprung also a Furnace on our left side under our Gallery nigh 18 feet, making two of our Mines useless, yet that did not hinder to carry on our Works, nor kept us from working at four places of the Sap. Another Deserter came to the Camp, who did us better Service than the other two: observing that one had brought a Peasant to speak to an Officer of the Guard before the Tent of his Highness the Duke of Lorrain, he discovered that he was a man who carried all the Intelligence from without into the place; and that he carried it back to the Mareshal Duras and others, all that was fit to be known. He was presently seized, and they found that he had some Letters about him writ in Cyphers: and having con∣fess'd his Crime, there was a Report, that he should be empaled a∣live, after the Hungarian manner; to be made an Example to those who should dare to undertake so dangerous an Enterprise. There will be to morrow 104 pieces of Cannon mounted on the Battery a∣gainst the City besides Mortar Pieces. August 20. The last night the Saxons began to raise a new Battery, to mount there 12 Cartouches, which they had received from their own Country. August 21. A Deserter reported to the Duke of Lorrain, and to the Elector of Bavaria, that there was great plenty in the Garri∣son, and that there was there 5000 fighting men. The Bavarians discharged five new Pieces of Cannon upon the Counterscarp. The same day the Enemy sprung a Mine on the side of the Lunenberg At∣tack, but it had very little effect, having burst on the side, because the Allies had countermined it. An hour after they sent some Mi∣ners to sind it out there, but they were forced to retire, being half dead, by reason of a horrible Smoak that came from it. The French had began another Mine on the left side, but we hoped that that which we had made very near it, would be ready to spring before theirs. The Saxons took a new Post near to the Counterscarp, but yet they suffered a great loss, having had at that time many men kil∣led and wounded. Adjutant Rothkirk was of the number of the first. A Lieutenant in the Regiment of Schomberg was dangerously hurt in his Body; with many others, as Colonel Scot, who was mortally wounded in the Trenches.
August 22. They continued this Day to fire their Cannon at the Gar∣rison, and we wrought all night at the great Parallel Line, but we did not advance very much, by reason of the Rocks that hindred us. The Imperialists and the Hessians wrought all night at the Sap, they took their Post 20 paces from the Pallisade on the left side; and they maintained their Ground in despight of the cortinual firing of the Musqueteers and Granadeers of the Besieged, and from the great quantity of Stones that were shot from their Mortars; yet very sew of the Souldiers were killed or wounded. They made again another great Sally, and the Prince of Commercy was resolved to oppose it with his customary Force, and succeeded; who put himself at the Head of his Granadeers, and beat them back, after they had made their first shot, even into their covert way. He had on that occasion, which was very hot, four Horses killed under him, and the fifth wound∣ed. His Master of the Horse, his Adjutant General, and Baron Charles D'Osterstein, who followed the Prince, had also every one their Horses killed under them. One of his Trumpetters and one of his Grooms were killed with their Horses; yet that did not hin∣der, but the Prince failed not to make two Lodgments in the open∣ings of the Glacis, which the Furnaces had done, and they maintained themselves there, tho' the Besieged made their greatest Efforts, to force them out. We lost 100 men on this occasion, and the Enemy suffered little less in number. And as the great Officers mount the Trenches, as well as the Souldiers, Prince Christian of Sax-Hall was there also killed. To congratulate the Victory that Prince Waldeck had gained of Mareshal d'Humiers, we this day discharged all our Cannon four times. August 23. The Lunenbergers alone relieved the Imperialists, and the Hessians in their Trenches, and advanced their Works on the right side, as they had proceeded on the lest the night before; so that they found themselves very near to the two sides, and with an equal distance to the covert way. The same day we seized on a Re∣formade Golonel, who was suspected to have held Intelligence with the Governour of the Garrison. August 24. Two Thousand Imperialists, and as many of the Hesse∣ans, re-gained the Place of the Lunenbergers, and advanced their Works by the Sapp, within 20 Foot of the Heighth of the Glaci The Enemy sprung again Two Mines, which were very ineffectual, except that we had one Soldier killed, and two wounded. August 25. The Imperialists and the Hessians got again into their Works, continued the Sapp to the very heighth of the Glacis, and
made all necessary preparations to be able to open at the first Com∣mand. There was also carried on this Day the Two Branches of the Trenches which they had begun to advance towards the Two sides, to encompass behind the Redoubt, which the besieged had raised to the Heighth of the Gallows, very nigh to the Palli∣sade. August 26. Four Thousand Lunenbergers mounted alone the Trench, after their usual manner, and advanced in the places of Arms with Faggots, and an Instrument to open the Ground, and with every thing that they had need to attack the Covert Way. They used the same means at the Bavarian Attack, and the Saxon Attack, whose Batteries had fired without ceasing all the Days before against the Defences of the besieged, and had not only ruined them, but had also made very great Breaches in the Ramparts, which facilitated their Appahes: Insomuch, that the Trenches being also carried on above the Glacis, there was great hopes that we should carry the Covert Way in this Attack, in the same manner as the Imperialists had done theirs, when they should come to make an Assault. The Elector of Saxony having received at Franck fort the sad News of Duke Christi∣an of Saxe Hall, who was killed at the Approaches, and being in∣formed, that the Army was advanced on all sides, came back imme∣diately to the Camp of Weissenau, where was his General Quarter, to take again the Command of his Troops which he had given him. August 27. All the Army being disposed for a general Attack at the Covert Way, and the besieged having attempted in vain to dislodge the Besiegers from their Works, begun about Four of the Clock in the Afternoon to give an Assault, with all Success that in Reason they could promise themselves, by the Conduct and Experience of their Generals and their Officers, and from the Valour and Undauntedness of the Soldiers. They began then about Four of the Clock, after the Signal of Three Cannons Discharged, and One Bomb that broke in the Air: They marched openly to the Assault, with that extraordina∣ry Courage and Boldness, that the Enemy, being not able to endure our Onset, immediately gave way, and quitted their Posts and the Covert Way, as well at the Imperials Attack, as that of the Saxons and the Bavarians. In the mean time the Enemy having taken new Posts on both sides, and in Front, their firing was so very great and so lasting, for 3 hours, that it is impossible to apprehend not so much as the least Idea, in relation to what has been done; for there is no Pa∣rallel of the like in any former Siege. We were near 2 hours expo∣sed
without Covert, upon the Height of the Glacis joyned to the Palli∣sado's, without being able to cover our selves, by reason of the conti∣nual firing that was made, and did endure it with the greatest Courage and Valour, till at last the Besieged being broken, and pressed on all sides, were forced to give way to the Besiegers, who took their Post at the very brink of the Ditch, where they fell to work to cover them∣selves. During the time of the greatest Attack the Enemy sprung a Mine, which buried in its Ruines Four Colours, and a great many men. All the Night following was taken up in continual Skirmishes. August 28. The next Day they sprung Two Mines more; but in∣stead of doing hurt, their opening served to lodge those Men who were near the place where the Mine sprung. Mean time there was a continual firing from our Artillery and Mortar-pieces. Our loss was greater at the Imperialists, the Lunenbergers and the Hessians Attacks, than at the Bavarians and Saxons, because the Enemies Resistance was greater there. Here follows a List of the Officers who were killed and wounded in that Assault. Of the Side of the Imperialists. Count Maximilian of Staremberg, Marshal of the Camp, was wounded, but he died after∣wards. Count Souches, General of the Artillery, wounded. Baron Wallis, Lieutenant Marshal of the Camp, killed. The Marquess of Parelli wound∣ed. Count of Furstemberg killed. Count Lamberg had both his Legs taken off with a Cannon Shot, of which he died a little after. The Colonels, Laternach, Wounded. Schomberg, Wounded. Hulster. Wounded. With many others, whose Names are not yet known. Of the Saxon Regiment which is among the Imperialists. Lieutenant Colonel Berghaltz, Wounded. Captain Remitz, Wounded. Captain Tecusler. Wounded. Captain Pforte, Wounded. Major General Geigerstberg, killed.
Of the Regiment of Gardes du Corps of his Highness the Elector of Saxe. Major General Sahle, Wounded. Captain Tittichof, Wounded. Ensign Gersdorf, Wounded. Ensign Glitzing killed. Of the Regiment of Duke Christian. Major General Zeigler, Wounded. Captain Dunhoff, Wounded. Captain Stange, Wounded. Ensign Keiser, Wounded. Of the Regiment of Reus. Captain Clunter, Wounded. Lieutenant Zeigister, Wounded. Lieutenant Ditzwick, Wounded. Ensign Wetzmuth killed. Of the Regiment of Rupser. Captain Pfoster, Wounded, and. His Lieutenant, Wounded. Lieutenant Michel, Wounded. Ensign Reitzwich, Wounded. Of the Regiment of Zinzendorf. Colonel Count of Zinzendorf, Wounded. Count of Trunhoff, Wounded. Lieutenant Colonel Ratel, Wounded. Captain Burgsdorf, Wounded. Lieutenant Reumor, Wounded. Ensign Herling, Wounded. Lieutenant Walckchoffen, killed. Ensign Winchel, mortally wounded.
Of the Regiment of Flemming. Major General Rodowitz, Wounded. Colonel Pistorius, Wounded. Captain Vicethomb, Wounded. Captain Renecke, Killed. Lieutenant Haubwitz. Killed. Ensign Waldan, Killed. Lieutenant Manshyffll, mortally wounded. Of the Regiment of Saxe Gott. The Lieutenant Colnel, Wounded. A Captain, Wounded, and A Corporal, Wounded. Amongst the Lunenbergers, The Prince of Hannover was wounded in his Hand with a Gra∣nade. Baron D'Eltz wounded in the Small of his Back. One of his Pages in the Arm. Major General D'ohr with a Musquet-Shot. Lieutenant Colonel Hulsen, Mortally Wounded. Major Schegel, Mortally Wounded. Major Meynecken, Mortally Wounded. Lieutenant Colonel Truchteben, Lieutenant Colonel Ramstorf. Major Hering, Captain Tanyis, Captain Knige, with many others, all wounded. Of the Regiment of Hesseans. Collonel Gortz, Killed. Captain Valentine, Killed. Captain Mohr, Killed. Captain Grammer, Killed. Colonel Schenk wounded twice. Major Butler wounded twice.
Major Lomenstein wounded in the Foot. Captain Elley wounded in the Calf of his Leg. Captain Busch, Wounded. Captain Schenck, Wounded. Lieutenant Heyemer, Wounded. Of the Troops of Franconia. Captain Sickes, killed Captain Teutsch, killed Captain Ordens, killed With Three other Captains. Among the Bavarians. Monsieur, the Elector, had a Contusion in his Arm. The Marquess of St. Maurice, Colonel of the Regiment of his Highness's Guards, was killed. The Count of Gagersberg wounded. With some other Officers. A great many of the Wounded Died afterwards of their Wounds. Besides, there are about 2000 reckoned to be killed and wounded among the common Souldiers. And the loss of the Besieged was not less considerable, there being among the killed and wounded, whose number was at least 2000, a great many Officers of Note, and the Chief of the Garrison; nor is that to be wondered at, since they gave Quarter but to very sew of those who defended the Co∣vert way, the Engagement being maintain'd with so great Heat and Fury. August 29. The Besieged finding that the Enemy carried it on with the greatest vigour; and having (without doubt) well consi∣dered the scituation of our Camp, the Impossibility to force it, and to throw Succours into the Place, the weakness of the Garrison, the Necessities and Wants of their City, their great Loss that fell upon them of their best Officers and Souldiers, the great number that they had of Sick Persons, and of such who were incapable of Fighting, the Covert way carried off by the Enemy, our Lodg∣ments being out of reach, the Breaches very great and spatious, the Body of the Garrison ready to be seized, and the Remnant of their Forces dismayed, and incapable to hold out another Assault,
caused the White Flag to be hung out on the 29th of this Month at Eight of the Clock in the Morning, and to beat a Parley to capitu∣late. His Highness the Prince Albert of Saxe Coubourg, who com∣manded in the Trenches, on the side of the Imperial Attack, sent a Trumpet to the Besieged, to demand of them what it meant; to which they answered, That the Governour was inclined to give up the Garrison: and if the Duke of Lorrain would be pleased to send the Governour a Lieutenant Colonel, with another Officer, to concert with them about Conditions, He would send to their Camp Hostages of the same Quality. Whereupon Prince Conbourg sent his Aide Ma∣jor to consult with the Duke of Lorrain; and they agreed to the Go∣vernours Desires. But they had obliged the Governour to send first of all his Two Officers: Whereupon the Duke of Lorrain sent into the City the Prince de Commercy, and Lieutenant Colonel Princi; and so there was a Cessation of Arms between both Parties. The Treaty was concluded before Night. It was resolved, that the next Day we should take possession of St. Jacob's Tower, and of the Gau Gate, with 5000 men; and that on the 31st, Sunday morning, the French Garrison should go out of the place with Six Pieces of Cannon, Two Mortars with the Arms of France, and some Waggons laden with their Baggage, with their Colours flying, Drums beating, lighted Matches, and to be guarded to Landau, with a Convoy of 10000 Imperialists. Our Souldiers were much troubled to find that they had made a Treaty with the Incendiaries, for they had all a very great desire to take the City by Storm, to be revenged on the cruel and perfl∣dious French. August 30. We took possession of the aforesaid Places, and all things were preparing for the next Day, the Enemy to depart the place, and we to receive and convoy them. August 31. The time being come that the French Garrison was to leave the place, and to pass through our Army, according to the Capitulations that had been made, the Imperialists drew up their Ar∣my into Ranks at Six of the Clock in the morning, to receive their Enemies. Many of the Imperial Cavalry posted themselves on the Right side of the Gan Gate; On the left side were chiefly to be seen the Gardes du Corps of the Elector of Bavaria, and next to them the Gardes du Corps of the Elector of Saxony, with some other Troops of the Imperial Cavalry and Dragoons: After which the French began to march out of the City at Seven of the Clock in the morning, in this following manner:
First of all there appeared 50 Horsemen with Four Officers, fol∣lowed with 60 Dragoons and 2 Officers. 80 Foot with 10 Officers, 8 Mules, 6 Light Horsemen, 12 Carts and 5 Horses loaden. 50 Foot with 6 Officers, 24 Carts, 26 Horses loaden. 54 Foot and 3 Officers, 80 Horses loaden, and 26 Carts. 54 Foot with 3 Officers, 83 Horses loaden, 17 Carts and a Cha∣riot. 48 Foot with 6 Officers, 37 Horses loaden, and 12 Carts. 49 Foot with 3 Officers, 2 Mules, 22 Carts, 6 Officers, 23 Horses loaden. 49 Foot with 3 Officers, 7 Mules, 87 Horses loaden, 37 Carts. 50 Foot with 3 Officers, 7 Mules, 87 Horses loaden, 37 Carts. 50 Foot with 3 Officers, 2 Light Horsemen, 1 Chariot, 1 Litter, 49 Carts, and 46 Horses loaden. 57 Foot with 4 Officers, 31 Horses loaden, 32 Carts, 9 Mules, 1 Cha∣riot with 2 Ladies, 26 Carts, 26 Horses loaden. 64 Foot with 6 Officers, 63 Horses loaden, 11 Carts. 66 Foot and 5 Officers, 26 Horses loaden, 10 Carts, 1 Coach with six Horses, another Coach with the Colonel of Dragoons, who was wounded, 2 Chariots, 5 Mules, 12 Carts, 3 Light Horsemen, Mr. De Vienbour. 4 Halberdiers and 23 Foot with 5 Officers, 44 Carts, 76 Horses loaden. 32 Foot 7 Officers. 41 Dragoons with 2 Officers. 32 Light Horsemen with 2 Officers. The Marquess of Ʋxelles, Governour of Mayence, with a Train of 40 Horse. 98 Dragoons, 12 Officers, with 2 Standarts. 78 Dragoons, 10 Officers with 2 Standarts. 88 Dragoons, 13 Officers and 2 Standarts, and 9 Officers woun∣ded. 75 Horsemen, 4 Officers, and 2 Standarts. 611 Foot of the Regiment of Dauphin, with 6 Colours, and 40 Officers. 603 Foot of the Regiment of Anjou, 28 Officers, and 6 Co∣lours. 250 Foot, 23 Officers, and 3 Colours, of the Regiment of Bre∣tagne.
267 Foot, of the Regiment of Granadeers, 31 Officers, and 3 Co∣lours. 207 Foot, of the Regiment of Jarsi, 31 Officers and 3 Co∣lours. 379 Foot, of the Regiment of Benois, 32 Officers, and 3 Co∣lours. 246 Foot, of the Regiment of Orleans, 16 Officers, and 3 Co∣lours. 273 Foot, of the Regiment of Maine, 21 Officers, and 3 Co∣lours. 339 Foot, of the Regiment of Cursole, 26 Officers and 3 Co∣lours. 311 Foot, of the Regiment of Bourbignan, 24 Officers, and 3 Colours. 43 Dragoons, of the Regiment of Houte, with 6 Officers. 44 Horsemen with 5 Officers. 76 Foot. 250 Foot Souldiers, who marched about the Baggage. 300 Horses belonging to the Officers. Which amounts to in all, 4572 Foot. 357 Officers. 400 Dragoons. 45 Officers. 287 Horses. 29 Officers. 1000 Foot that marched on the sides of the Carts, of the Hor∣ses, of the Coaches, and of the Horses laden. So that the French who marched out of Mayence, were to the Num∣ber of 6690 Men, with 572 Horses loaded. 334 Carts. 31 Mules. 45 Light Horsemen. 6 Chairs. 2 Coaches. 1 Litter. 36 Colours. 10 Standarts.
Besides these, there were embarked in several Boats which had been sent from Strasburg, with Amunition for the Enemy, 6 pieces of Cannon, 2 Mortars, 2 Haubitz, and 1500 sick People, where some were continually Dying, which they threw over into the Rhine. Our Loss amounted to almost 8000 Men. We may very well see that they carried away a great many things, and a vast number of Goods, besides the Money they had extorted from the Neighbour∣ing Countries. As the Marquess of Ʋxelles was going out of the Garrison, he took his leave of the Duke of Lorrain, of the Elector of Saxony, and of Bavaria, as also of all the rest of the Princes and Generals, who had been very obliging to him. And as the French are very perfidious, and that they could not relye upon their words; the Allies had reserved some French Officers to re∣main here as Hostages, till all the Articles of Agreement had been punctually performed. They assur'd us that the French Garrison did consist of 11000 fighting Men before the Siege: They were constrain'd to surrender the Place because they wanted Powder, for there were found but 600 weight of Powder. The time of their departure out of the Garrison, was from Seven a Clock in the Morn∣ing till Three of the Clock in the Afternoon. After which time, the Allies took possession of the City. Our Bombs had done very little hurt to any of the Convents, except a Nunnery; yet there were a great many Houses whose tops were pierc'd like Sives. They took out of St. Stephens Church many Cart-loads of Dead Bodies of the French, which they threw into the Rhine. There were a great number also that were not Buried, and a great many in Holes and in Convents, which lay not a foot deep in the Earth, which caused a most horrid stinking smell in all those Places. The Castle of the Elector, which the French had turn'd to an Hospital, was fill'd with Dead and Wounded, among which, there were many Sick, who in three days had no kind of Refreshment. The Enemies had wrought Day and Night in fortifying this Garrison, in the time of Nine Months that they were Masters of it; for they were so well advanced, and so Regular, that there remained little or nothing to be done. But above all, the Fort that is upon the Rhine, is a Piece worthy Admiration. The Peasants began to level the ways for our Approaches, and to destroy the Mines. All the En∣gineers who were in that Garrison were either kill'd or wound∣ed. And very few remain'd alive on our side. FINIS.
