J160 R41007 19570117 109121
arms of James II HONI SOI  MAL Y PENSE GOD SAVE THE KING BY THE KING, A DECLARATION. JAMES R. HAving already signified Our Pleasure to call a Parlia∣ment to meet at Our City of Westminster in Novem∣ber next, and Writs of Summons being issued out ac∣cordingly; lest those, whose Right it is to choose Mem∣bers of Parliament, shouldly under any Prejudices and Mistakes through the Artifices of disaffected Per∣ons: We think fit to Declare, That as it is Our Royal Purpose to endeavour a Legal Establishment of an Universal Liberty of Conscience for all Our Subjects; It is also Our Resolution Inviolably to preserve the Church of England by such a Confirmation of the several Acts of Uniformity, that they shall never be al∣tered any other wayes, than by repealing the several Clauses, which inflict Penalties upon Persons not promoted or to be promoted to any Ecclesiastical Benefices or Promotions within the meaning of the said Acts for using and ex∣ercising their Religion contrary to the the Tenor and Purport of the said Acts of Uniformity. And for the further Securing not only of the Church of England but the Protestant Religion in general, We are willing the Roman Catholicks shall remain incapable to be Members of the House of Commons, whereby those Fears and Apprehensions will be removed, which many Persons have had, That the Legislative Authority would be Engrossed by them, and turned against Protestants. We do likewise asure all Our Loving Subjects, That We shall be ready to do every thing else, for their Safety and Advantage, that becomes a King, who will always take Care of His People. And if they desire the Happiness of their Country; We Exhort them to lay by all Animosities, and dispose themselves to think of such Persons to Represent them in Parliament, whose Abilities and Temper render them fit for so Great and Good a Work. And for the preventing of any disorders, Irregularities or undue Proceed∣ings whatsoever, that may happen either before or at the time of Election of Members for the ensuing Parliament, We do hereby strictly Require and Command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers whatsoever, to whom the Execution of any Writ, Summons, Warrant or Precept, for or concerning the Choice of Members for the ensuing Parliament shall belong, That they cause such Writ, Summons, Warrant or Precept, to be duly Pub∣lished and Executed according to the Tenor thereof: And the Members, that shall be Chosen, to be fairly Returned, according to the true Merits of the Choice. Given at Our Court at Whtehall, the One and twentieth day of September, 1688. In the Fourth Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING. HOLY-ROOD-HOUSE, Printed by Mr. P. B. Enginier, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, for his Houshold, Chapel, and Colledge. 1688.
