K27 12304571 59211
K. WILLIAM, or K. LEWIS. Wherein is set forth The INEVITABLE NECESSITY THESE NATIONS LYE UNDER, Of Submitting wholly to One or Other of These KINGS; And that the MATTER in CONTROVERSIE Is not now between K. WILLIAM and K. JAMES, But between K. WILLIAM and K. LEWIS of France, For the Government of These Nations Written out of Cheshire by a Gentleman lately arriv'd there from Ireland. London, Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXXIX.
ADVERTISEMENT. THe Reader may be assured, That the following Pages were Penn'd by one that had sufficient Au∣thority for all the Matters of Fact related therein: And the Author mentions them not with a Design of Aspersing; but, on the contrary, is most heartily sorry they are true; Yet thinks it his Duty to shew his Country their Impend∣ing Evils, that by God's Mercy and their Prudence they may timely divert them. LICENSED, J. FRASER. April 30. 1689.
KING WILLIAM, or KING LEWIS. Wherein is set forth The Inevitable Necessity these Nations lie under, of Submitting wholly to One or Other of these Kings; and that the Matter in Controversie is not now between King WILLIAM and King JAMES the Second, but between King WILLIAM and King LEWIS of France, for the Government of these Kingdoms. AT the first breaking out of these Motions in our Countries, there was nothing more ear∣nestly enquired after, than the Secret League with France, for the Subversion of the Laws and establish'd Religion of England: And there was a misguided Party amongst us, who find∣ing hitherto that no such abominable Contrivance was pub∣lickly proved against the late King James, that therefore he was never guilty of any such evil Machination, and some were so far misled, as from hence to doubt, whether he were guilty of some other Enormities that were objected against him. But to those it may be sufficient to answer, That the then Prince of Orange did not in his Declaration publickly charge King James with any such League; and therefore the World cannot object against King William, that in this Matter he has falsely aspersed him. There is nothing con∣tained in that Declaration (which I suppose is the Summary of what King William has to object publickly against King James's Proceeding) that the most Devoted to King James's Party can possibly deny; it contains nothing but Publick Matter of Fact, transacted before the Face of all the Nati∣ons;
save only in the Matter of the Pretended Pr. of W. which is a thing so ridiculous and despicable, that the Na∣tion has not thought it fit to be taken notice of, or insisted upon. So that granting the Earl of Essex's and King Charles the Second's Death to be unjust Accusations, which have never been otherwise mentioned than as Coffee house Chat, and in some idle Pamphlets published by Private Persons; and granting even the French League to be so too; there remains many and grievous Accusations, certainly true, and sufficient to make us conclude with the incomparable Gro∣tius, That Voluntas Regendi & perdendi Populum consistere ne∣queunt. But what if the League with France be not yet publickly proved? I hope by this time the Eyes of the Na∣tion are so opened, that now there needs no such Ceremoni∣ous Process. King James the Second deserted his People, abdicated his Kingdoms, leaving the Throne Vacant, and his Kingdoms in the first State of Nature, without Govern∣ment or Head; and threw himself into the Arms and Bo∣som of the French King, the most inveterate Enemy to the English Nation and Government both in Church and State: To him he applied for Help and Succour in the Distress he had brought on himself, by observing the Measures set him by France and Rome, for the utter Extirpation of the Prote∣stant Religion in these Kingdoms: And the Ambitious French Monarch presently lays hold on this Opportunity, receives him graciously, and promises all Assistance. Great Preparations are immediately ordered at Brest, for Ireland; and after the English King had received his full Instructions from Lewis the Fourteenth, and was put under the Tutelage of two or three French Generals for managing the War, and French Treasurers and Officers for managing the Reve∣nue, together with Monsieur d'Avaux for giving Instructi∣ons, he embarked for Ireland, with a great Stock of Money and Arms. It was expected, and certainly promised, by several in England that stood very well affected to King James, tho' not of his Religion, That as soon as he should put his Foot
on Irish Ground, he would immediately begin with all Le∣nity and Mercy to his Protestant Subjects, he would wholly cast himself upon them, by turning out Tyrconnel, and com∣mitting the Sword to a Protestant Governour, by admit∣ting Protestants, especially of the Church of England, into all Imploys, both Civil and Military: For this they knew was the only Measures he could reasonably take, for the re∣gaining the Hearts of his Protestant Subjects in England, and of obtaining once more his Deserted Throne. But what difference is there between English and French Politicks? Instead of these Methods, as soon as he arrived at Dublin, he was Addressed by Speeches from some Irish Popish Bi∣shops and Clergy, (particularly by Bishop Terrell, Tyrconnel's Secretary, and Doctor Moor) advising him to consider his Papist Subjects of that Kingdom for all their Sufferings these Thirty last Years, and to restore them to the Churches and Possessions which had been so unjustly usurped from them. (They should have added▪ for the horrid Rebellion they had raised in Forty one, and for the many thousands of Barba∣rous Murders committed by them to maintain the Romish Religion▪) Monsieur d'Avaux also at his Publick Audience as Ambassadour from his Most Christian Majesty, advised him in his Master's Name to the same Favours towards his Catholicks of that Kingdom. Whereupon immediately the few Protestants that remained in Imploys, were commanded to lay them down: Not a Protestant was allowed to sit in Council, or bear Arms; Lord Grauard, Lord Chief Justice Keating, Sir John Davis, Sir Thomas Newcomen, Colonel Rus∣sel, &c. were all laid aside, and no one permitted to hold any Place, but Papists▪ tho' these Gentlemen went as far to serve the King, as made some suspect them for being of his Religion. But a signal Example we have of his Majesties Gratitude to those that serve him, in the late Bishop of Che∣ster, who coming with him out of France, died at Dublin, and was so miserably Poor, as to want Common Necessaries; and being dead, was buried at the Charge of a Charitable Prelate there.
But to proceed: The Protestants, who for two Months before King James came into Ireland had suffered most grie∣vous Violences and Wrongs from the Irish Soldiers, being Pillaged and Robbed of all their Cattel and movable Goods, thought that upon his Majesty's Arrival they should find some Protection▪ or Abatement of their Troubles; but up∣on several Complaints made by them to the King for Inju∣ries received, he would answer them, That he would do for them what he could; but they never received further Satis∣faction or Justice: And particularly, the Lord Galmoy had in the North most barbarously cut off a Gentleman's Head, and made the Gentleman's own Son carry it on a Pike in Triumph before his Regiment: Upon Complaint of this to the King, he seemed mightily displeased at the Bloody In∣humanity; yet the Lord Galmoy, the very next day after the Complaint, carried the Sword before his Majesty to Mass. When the Protestant Bishop of Meath, with a Body of Clergy-men, waited on the King, the Bishop addressed himself to him in this manner: May it please your Majesty, The Clergy of this City of Dublin, with several of the Rural Clergy, that are retired from this Country for Safety, attend your Majesty, to congratulate your Arrival in this Kingdom; and do humbly implore your Royal Protection to them, their Churches, and Religion; desiring that from time to time they may be admitted to make their just Complaints of those Injuries they have lately received: His Majesty's Answer was, That he would protect all Men in their Religions and Properties, and as for the Wrongs that had lately been suffered by several, 'twas impossible, in these Times of Commotions, but such would happen; but he should as far as he could prevent and redress them: However, if I am Invaded in the Kingdom, as I have been in England, I must secure my self as well as I can. What could the King possibly intend by this last Expression? Can it be otherwise, than that as he found the Protestants of England desert him upon the Invasion, and some of them fly over to the Prince's Party, he would prevent the like Trick in Ireland, by cutting them all off, or securing them under close Confinement? Now what reason have Subjects
to trust a King, that will nor trust them? When the Band of Mutual Credit is broken, all Government fails immedi∣ately. But that we may see more plainly, that King James never designs any more to trust his Protestant Subjects, but to oppress them, and utterly to extirpate their Religion from these Nations, I shall here relate a remarkable Passage that was lately between a Protestant Clergy-man of Dublin, and an Irish Lord who came thither with King James out of France. The Clergy-man said to the Lord, That he hoped now the King was come amongst them, he would protect his Protestants, and redress them in those Injuries they had of late groaned un∣der; and not only so, but that his Majesty would be more than ordinary kind and favourable to them, advancing them to Places of Trust and Power, and granting them a Share both in Civil and Military Imployments; for that this was the most probable Method for gaining on his Protestants of England, by whose means only he must expect, if ever, to be resetled in his Throne. To this the Lord (who is one of the best sense amongst them, and coming with the King from France, does certainly know all their designed Measures) made this Return; That his Majesty was naturally Merciful and Compassionate, and that he would, as far as he could, prevent all Injuries to any of his Subjects: But for doing this with the Design you mention, or for his trusting his Protestants, I as∣sure you 'tis far from his Thoughts: Both he and we had ra∣ther he should hazard and lose Forty Crowns, than be obliged to his Protestants for the Possession of his Kingdoms. He can never expect to come in by their means, unless tied and fettered with Conditions, which he cannot, nor shall not observe to them. 'Tis by the Force of the Arms of his good Catholicks, and by Assistance from the Glorious Monarch of France, that he designs to regain his Dominions: And then he comes in free and boundless, like an Absolute Conquerour, and shall after∣wards do what he pleases.
By this we may plainly see, what King James, by Dire∣ction from King Lewis, designs. And if after all this, the Eyes of the Nation are not enlightned, we are all destin'd to Ruine and Misery. But, thanks to God, in a great measure, these Proceedings of King James in Ireland have had their natural Effect on several good Protestants, that before were pretty well inclined to his Government; but by these most unreasonable Methods which he has taken in Ireland, contrary to their expectation, and his own visible Interest, they are clearly taken off, and have abandoned him to be destroyed by the Measures set him by France; and are resolved to stick firm to the Protestant Interest, under Their Majesties King William and Queen Mary, on whose auspici∣ous Government the Protestant Religion, not only of these Kingdoms, but of all Europe, does wholly rely. For should King James succeed in his Designs, we may plainly see what we are to be brought to: And after that, what will follow? We shall be made a Prey to France, whose restless Contrivances have been bringing that about these Twenty Years, for which this seems to be the most conveni∣ent Opportunity that ever presented. Holland must certainly expect to be suddenly destroy'd by that ambitious Monarch; and then I propose it to the Consideration of all thinking Men, whether he will let England be quiet, tho' under the Government of his Dearly beloved Catholick Brother King James? No certainly, he knows well enough, that King James has neither the Conduct nor Power to defend his Do∣minions from his Powerful Arms: He has lately supply'd him with Money, Ammunition, and Arms, in great Quanti∣ties; and is yet making greater Preparations for him at Brest, designing to Land an Army of Forty or Fifty thou∣sand French in England, or some other of these Kingdoms, on purpose to conquer them. And can we think, that he does all this meerly out of a Principle of Generosity and Ho∣nour, for Re establishing his Brother? All the World knows, the French King's Generosity extends no farther than his In∣terest; and in his most glorious Archievements, he has his
secret Designs. What then can he more reasonably intend, than that one day or other England may be brought to a se∣vere Account for these vast Expences; and the Non repay∣ment of them, may be a sufficient Pretence of War, when∣ever he pleases? Moreover, we may plainly see, the French King uses King James in this Juncture meerly as a Stalking-Horse, over whose Back he designs to render himself Ma∣ster of these Kingdoms. By his Covert he has already got strong Footing in Ireland; All there is transacted, even at this time, by King Lewis: King James has only the empty Name; Monsieur d'Avaux gives all Instructions, and was sent there by the French King so to do. The French Officers manage the War against the poor Remains of strugling English there: Only King James's Name is used; but he has no∣thing to do in the whole Affair. And even in the Treasury for Disbursing the Money, 'tis perform'd solely by a Trea∣surer sent out of France; and King James has no more Power in the Matter, than the King of Bantam: And seve∣ral Irish Officers are displaced, to give way for those French Plenipotentiaries. So that already we may reckon his French Majesty sole Master and King of Ireland. If therefore these Measures are taken there, what may we suddenly expect in this Place? The same French Power that has seized on that miserable Kingdom, will soon overspread this, unless we unanimously unite together under their Majesties King Wil∣liam and Queen Mary, for opposing this Deluge of Tyranny that threatens us. And in doing this, we may plainly see, that we oppose not King James; his Name is an empty Sound, used only as a Cheat upon the People: 'Tis the Great Lewis, the Tyrannical Lewis, that implacable cruel Enemy to the Reformed Religion, whom we oppose. He has of late been so puff'd up with these nauseous Flatteries offered him by his Barbarous Clergy, for his glorious Extir∣pation of Heresie, that he will venture half his Kingdoms at this Juncture, to render himself Master of Great Britain and Ireland, that he may practise the same Cruelties here, for bringing us over to the detestable Abominations of Rome. And when the Protestant Religion is suppressed in Holland and
England, there's an end of it over the Face of Europe. In France 'tis already vanish'd, and the Lesser States of Germany will soon be reduced: So that at present the universal Con∣cern of all the Protestant Princes seems ingaged in this Jun∣cture. And as we cannot mistrust God's good Providence in preserving our pure Reformed Religion, notwithstanding all Attempts of Wicked Men; so we cannot doubt of an hearty and unanimous Agreement of all Good Men to the only visible Means for the effecting thereof; which is an intire Adherence to Their Majesties King William and Queen Mary, in whom, as our late Deliverance, so our future Safe∣ty seems wholly wrapt up. Under their Government, if Great Britain will be at unity in it self, Great Britain will be safe and happy: Happy in a Pure Religion, Just Laws and Liberties, and a flourishing Trade. Holland, our Potent Allie, will be able to secure it self, and help us; and in so doing, to confirm the Protestant Interest all over Europe. And all other the Injured Princes of Christendom will be able to take their just Revenges against France, that aspiring Monarch, who, to gratifie his Ambition, has basely abused all the Prin∣ces of Europe. Wherefore their Interest seems also involved in the present Affair, and they are obliged to hinder the French Tyrant from trampling these Nations under foot. I hope I need say no more to make us unite. I shall add but one word to the scrupulous Clergy-men, some of whom do yet seem to hesitate and make a pause. Is it for fear of inju∣ring the Church, that you do thus? (And I see no other Rea∣son you can possibly pretend.) Is it that you fear the Church of England should be undermined by some other Reformers? Consider with your selves, whether we ought to stand upon the Interest of any one Church or Congregation, when the Concern of the Universal Protestant Church is in ha∣zard? Can you expect, if King Lewis (for I will not mention King James, as being only a pretended Name, as he himself, if he had any Consideration, may perceive) Can you expect, I say, that either you, your Churches, or Religion shall be preserved? No certainly, you can∣not, except you are blind. What then remains to be
done? Let us unanimously joyn in our Prayers to Heaven, in behalf of King William and Queen Mary, That God would protect and preserve them, and strengthen their Hands to the accomplishing that great Work which they have so happily begun, and hitherto so successfully carried on with the joint consent of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, wherein all things have hitherto been carried on, for the Advantage of the Church of England, and by God's Blessing and our own Unity will so continue. But if by our own Divisions and Animosities amongst our selves, we give King Lewis a signal Opportunity of destroying us, we shall be the most contemptible, as well as the most mise∣rable Nation upon Earth, and our Ruine will come upon us unpitied. How ridiculous will it appear in the Eyes of the present Generation, and how despicable will it found in the Ears of Posterity, that the English Nation (hitherto re∣puted for its Wisdom and Constancy) should thus happily begin and carry on their own Deliverance and Security, and in the Middle way resign both to a perpetual Overthrow. FINIS.
